Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) models have been developed for many of the unit operations involved in zinc processing, both in the concentrator and in smelting or refining operations. These models are now relatively sophisticated, being capable of accounting for metallurgical effects as well as the underlying multi-phase flow processes, and are therefore powerful tools for optimising process and equipment performance. Examples of unit operation models relevant to the concentrator include flotation, fine grinding and tailings thickeners. Models have also been developed of fluid bed roasters, leach reactors, clarifiers and electrowinning cells as used in a zinc refinery, while smelter processes such as sintering and retorting together with associated equipment such as cyclones and electrostatic precipitators are also amenable to CFD modelling. Although such models exist and have been successfully used in other industries, the application in zinc concentrators and refineries has not so far been widespread. CFD modelling should play an increasingly critical role as operations seek greater gains in recovery because of volatile zinc prices, in energy efficiency because of greenhouse gas issues, and in environmental performance in order to ensure “license to operate”.Given the volatile price of zinc in today’s market, it is increasingly important for mines and smelters to optimise plant to minimise operating costs and maximise throughput. Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) offers an advanced tool to assist in improving the performance of equipment and processes based on diagnosing the fundamental issues limiting an operation rather than a trial and error approach. A trial and error approach at the plant is expensive and risky: trialling improvements in a virtual plant is relatively rapid and risk-free. In addition, the understanding of limiting factors obtained by using a mechanistic physics-based model allows insights into pathways to improvement that might never be gained by simply studying changes in plant performance as modifications are trialled one by one. CFD models are now relatively sophisticated, being capable of accounting for metallurgical effects as well as the underlying multi-phase flow processes, and are therefore powerful tools for optimising process and equipment performance. Examples of CFD models that have been developed for unit operations at concentrators include flotation, fine grinding and tailings thickeners. Models have been developed of fluid bed roasters, leach reactors, clarifiers and electrowinning cells as used in a zinc refinery, while smelter processes such as sintering and retorting together with associated equipment such as cyclones and electrostatic precipitators are also amenable to CFD modelling. It should be emphasised however that CFD should not be applied in isolation from experimental input. This is particularly true when the underlying flow is multi-phase, as is the case in most mineral processing and metal production applications, because of the intrinsic complexity of multi-phase systems. The required experimental inputs are of two different kinds:   It is expected that as operations seek greater gains in recovery, energy efficiency and environmental performance, CFD modelling will play an increasingly critical role. This is particularly the case after all the “easy wins” have been made, because at this stage in process optimisation, in-depth understanding, such as can only be obtained with physics-based modelling, is required to achieve further improvement. Computational fluid dynamics modelling is increasingly being used to improve equipment and processes in the minerals processing and metal production industries ( CFD modelling is based on simulation of fluid flow through process equipment, where the fluid can be liquid, gas, granular solids, or multi-phase mixtures of these. Multi-dimensional modelling of fluid flow is usually a more productive basis for process modelling than say solving solely the thermal equations or species concentrations because so many factors influencing process performance depend intimately on flow-related mechanisms, e.g. Mass transfer. Heat transfer. Surface wear or erosion. Accretion formation. Fuel consumption. Gas and particulate emissions. Product quality. These issues can all have major impacts on financial performance of operations – for example, plant throughput may be limited by rates of heat and/or mass transfer, so by using CFD to understand and rectify the underlying cause of the limitation, it may be possible to raise overall plant throughput. Similarly, maintenance costs may be impacted by wear, erosion or accretion phenomena, and associated downtime can reduce plant availability and hence production. Erosion is directly related to flow past the affected surface, and is strongly dependent on velocity. Similarly, accretion can very often be reduced by modification of flow directly or by changing temperature or chemical conditions adjacent to the surface which can be indirectly controlled by fluid flow conditions. Fuel consumption can have a critical impact on financial performance because of rising fuel costs and because of the need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. CFD modelling can potentially assist in reducing fuel consumption by optimising combustion conditions, by minimising heat losses, and also by assisting in the design of heat recovery processes. Fugitive emissions (e.g. SO CFD determines the fluid flow field by solving the following equations: Continuity equation, which expresses conservation of mass. Navier–Stokes equation, which expresses conservation of momentum. The finite volume method is one of the most commonly used techniques, and is based on dividing the equipment or reactor into many small control volumes: the conservation equations integrated over each volume are enforced for each volume. In effect, flows from one cell to the neighbouring cells serve to couple the equations obtained from one control volume to those for its neighbours. In order to evaluate the integral form of the conservation equations for each volume, including fluxes from one volume to its neighbours, approximations must be made that are equivalent to discretisation in the finite difference method. Because of the strength and complexity of this coupling, together with the very large number of computational volumes needed for accurate models, CFD models require substantial amounts of computer power: three-dimensional CFD models will typically take of order a day to run. For more details the reader is referred to standard texts such as Though CFD modelling is based on solving the equations of fluid flow, it is not limited to hydrodynamic issues – related issues are routinely solved simultaneously with the underlying flow. For example, chemical reactions and distribution of species concentrations are often incorporated into CFD models, as are heat transfer processes (convection and radiation) and the associated temperature distributions. Equations for these other variables can be solved simultaneously with the flow equations, one of the most common being species concentration in which case the equation solved is the advection–diffusion equation which essentially expresses conservation of mass for the species (see for example, Single phase modelling of flows and thermal distributions is becoming routine, however substantial work remains in developing reliable models of multiphase reacting processes. Most operations in minerals and metals processing involve multi-phase flow – slurries, bubbly flows, and particle laden gases, for example. This can complicate the fluid flow calculation considerably, particularly when the volume fraction and/or mass fraction of the dispersed phase is significant. Specific techniques have been developed to deal with such situations, but their application is non-trivial and requires specialised expertise. In general, the need for experimental input is also considerably greater when dealing with multi-phase flows. Techniques for simulating dispersed multi-phase flows fall into two generic categories: particle tracking techniques in which the dispersed phase (particles, droplets, bubbles, etc.) are treated as “particles” whose paths are tracked through the fluid, a technique first developed by Though options for these two classes of technique are provided within commercial CFD packages, additional work is often needed on the sub-models needed to describe the details of the multi-phase physics and chemistry applying to the particular application. Laboratory and plant measurements are often needed to assist the development of these sub-models. For example, for hydrometallurgical processes, embedded sub-models will typically be needed to simulate droplet or bubble break-up and coalescence, particle aggregation, and inhomogeneous reactions (see for example Though such sub-models can be formulated based on our best knowledge of the physics and chemistry, they generally require empirical input to fix parameters in semi-theoretical formulas. As greater accuracy and predictive capability is demanded in the future, a new approach will be needed. Researchers have begun developing next-generation multi-scale methodologies to assist the development of, and ultimately replace the semi-theoretical sub-models for phenomena such as bubble and drop break-up and coalescence. Because of the considerable complexity of these micro-scale phenomena, efforts have started on the development of a multi-scale framework for multi-phase process modelling, with detailed CFD micro-scale models being developed to better understand and quantify micro-scale phenomena ( Major issues in the concentrator are maximising recovery while maintaining grade, minimising energy usage in comminution and pumping, and keeping operating costs due to equipment wear under control. As ore quality in deposits declines, concentrators must find ways to treat lower grade, more complex and finer grained ores, and typical changes being adopted include fine grinding, regrinding, carbon prefloat, modifications to flotation chemistry, and circuit flowsheet optimisation ( Crushing and grinding is best simulated by DEM (discrete element method) tools rather than CFD, and the number of particles that can be simulated is ever increasing, yielding greater insights into optimisation of semi-autogenous mills (SAG) and ball mills ( Flotation cells are a core component of concentrator circuits, but are difficult to design and operate reliably because of the complex interactions between multi-phase hydrodynamics, flotation chemistry and variable feed mineralogy. The earliest multi-dimensional modelling of flotation cells was of columns, where two-dimensionality can be assumed, and where the complexity of rotating parts present in mechanical cells is absent. With development of CFD models of stirred tanks occurring in the 1990s, the scene was set for simulation of mechanical flotation cells ( The model has recently been applied to assist in diagnosing operating issues at the Mt Keith nickel concentrator ( An alternative approach has been taken by Hydrocyclones have been the subject of basic CFD modelling for more than 20 Gravity thickeners play a critical role in the concentrator, though modelling of thickeners has conventionally been confined to one-dimensional modelling of bed consolidation ( Initial concentration of research effort on the conditions upstream of the consolidation zone, namely on the conditions inside the feedwell of the thickener and on the settling zone, has led to some major hydrodynamics-related findings that have underpinned many major improvements to thickener design. These are summarised below. The feedwell should be designed to dissipate as far as possible the directed kinetic energy of the feed stream entering the feedwell, so that the slurry exiting the feedwell spreads uniformly in all directions. Any residual directionality in the flow can lead to by-passing of some of the slurry and non-uniform residence time distribution in the settling zone ( Density currents, flows generated by differences in effective slurry density from one part of the tank to another, can be remarkably strong. The density differences arise from differences in solids concentration, and are most pronounced when the feed has a reasonably high solids concentration, say more than 5%. In such situations, the feed stream can sink quite rapidly out of the feedwell, without mixing into the dilution streams being fed into the well ( To guide these design changes, the CFD model has been extended to include aspects of the flocculation process. Schwarz and Johnston devised a model for flocculant mixing and adsorption onto particles which has been used extensively to assist many sponsor companies improve their thickener design and performance ( In the electrolytic route, zinc concentrate is roasted to eliminate most of the sulphur as sulphur dioxide, and to make impure zinc oxide. This calcine is then leached with sulphuric acid to form zinc sulphate solution. The solution is purified by adding a small amount of zinc powder to precipitate and remove traces of copper, cadmium, cobalt and nickel, and then piped to electrolytic cells, where the zinc is electrochemically deposited on cathodes. The zinc is removed from the cathodes, melted in a furnace and cast into slabs. For various reasons, refineries have not been in the forefront of using CFD for process improvement. The unit operation at the heart of the process, electrowinning, is complex, and for this reason has not been modelled in detail until relatively recently. Simplified two-dimensional models were developed for copper electrowinning by Flow is generated by three main processes in the cell: Natural convection due to zinc concentration gradients. Bubble driven recirculation. Through-flow. The model’s capability to simulate these effects has been carefully validated using detailed data in the literature which has quantified the strong recirculation generated by oxygen bubbles at the anode, as well as a weaker natural convection flow generated by copper depletion at the cathode ( Because gas bubbles are generated at the anode and cathode, the flow is two-phase (gas–liquid) in nature. To simulate the dispersed bubble phase, the model uses the well-accepted Eulerian approach established first by The CFD modelling tool for simulation of electrowinning cells has been developed to apply at a hierarchy of length-scales: 3D modelling of the entire cells of 40-60 anodes and cathodes. 3D modelling of the space between an anode and a cathode. 2D slice modelling of the space between an anode and a cathode. Essentially the same physics and chemistry is solved at each scale, with the modelling hierarchy allowing the investigation of mixing across many metres at the entire cell scale, while also resolving flows at fractions of a millimetre from the cathode plate. Coupling between the simulations at different scales can occur in several ways: for example, flow and mass transfer details resolved very close to the plate surfaces in the two-dimensional simulations can be incorporated in the larger-scale simulations; conversely bulk flows determined at the large scales can be incorporated as boundary conditions in the fine-scale simulations. Another issue of great importance in the tankhouse is the formation of acid mist: both the mechanism of formation and the control of acid mist through ventilation are amenable to investigation using CFD techniques. The roasters used in zinc refineries are typically large fluidised beds in which sulphur is eliminated by reaction with the fluidising air. CFD techniques for simulating fluidised beds are now reasonably well developed, and in most cases the Eulerian–Eulerian multi-fluid approach pioneered by Stirred reactors, of the type used for leaching and purification in zinc refineries, have been the subject of intensive research using CFD, and the agitation conditions can now be simulated with a reasonably high degree of confidence for single phase conditions and some two-phase systems (see pioneering work by Air is sparged into the purification reactors to oxidise ferrous to ferric, which eventually precipitates as iron hydroxide. Air sparged reactors can also be simulated using CFD ( Thickeners and clarifiers play an essential role in the refinery, such as in removing the precipitated iron hydroxides and also silica particles from the neutralised solution. As mentioned above in Section 3 of this paper, application of advanced CFD modelling has had a major impact on thickener performance. As an example, This paper has described examples of CFD models of unit operation used in the processing of zinc. CFD models relevant to the concentrator include flotation, hydrocyclones, fine grinding and tailings thickeners, while unit operations in the refinery that can potentially be improved using CFD techniques include fluid bed roasters, leach reactors, clarifiers and electrowinning cells. Smelter operations such as sintering and retorting together with associated equipment such as cyclones and electrostatic precipitators are also amenable to CFD modelling. CFD models of these unit operations are now relatively sophisticated, being capable of accounting for metallurgical effects as well as the underlying multi-phase flow processes, and are therefore powerful tools for optimising process and equipment performance. Although such models exist and have been successfully used in other industries, the application in zinc concentrators and refineries has not so far been widespread. Cases in which modelling has resulted in benefits include tailing thickeners, neutral leach clarifier, concentrate roaster, but huge potential exists in flotation circuits, electrowinning cells and leach tanks. CFD modelling should play an increasingly critical role as operations seek greater gains in recovery because of volatile zinc prices, in energy efficiency because of greenhouse gas issues, and in environmental performance in order to ensure “license to operate”. The author would like to acknowledge the contributions of collaborators from CSIRO Minerals CFD Group to the research described in this paper, and the support of companies that have sponsored some of the work described.