In order to increase the biocompatibility and bioactivity of chitosan, hydroxyapatite was in situ combined into the spin-coated chitosan layer on the titanium substrate by incubating in modified simulated body fluid (m-SBF). The calcium phosphate/chitosan (CaP/CS) composite prepared in m-SBF showed a homogeneous distribution of spherical nano-clusters. The hydrophilicity of the coatings was increased by performing NaOH post-treatment of CaP/CS composites, which also affected apatite formation. Biocompatibility of the coatings was assessed by investigating the cellular response of human osteoblast-like MG-63 cells with 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay. Cell adhesion and osteogenic properties of the mesoporous CaP/CS composite were evaluated by SEM and ALPase assay, respectively. This in vitro study showed improved cell adhesion and differentiation on nanostructured CaP/CS composites. These results indicate that this CaP/CS composite could be a promising candidate for bone tissue engineering.Calcium phosphate (CaP) is a type of bioactive material that can form a direct bond with bone, and it has been widely used in medicine and dentistry for more than 40 years [ In this study, we describe the role of CS as a film on the growth of CaP and we have used atom probe tomography (APT) for characterization. APT is an analytical technique based on mass spectrometry that provides good sensitivity and unrivaled spatial resolution. Traditionally, APT has been used to characterize hard conducting materials, but the development of fast laser-pulsed atom probes over the past decade has broadened the application in bone-type mineralized tissues [ In this study, we have attempted to prepare CaP/CS composites on the titanium substrate using modified simulated body fluid (m-SBF). We also extensively studied the morphology and distribution of the CaP and CS composite, bonding interactions as well as in vitro biocompatibility and osteogenicity of the synthesized CaP/CS and HA/CS nanocomposites. Biocompatibility of HA/CS was assessed using MG-63 cells by performing cell viability and differentiation test. All chemicals were obtained from Aldrich Chemical Corporation and used without further purification. CS flake with a molecular weight of about 520,000 g mol CS solution was prepared by dissolving CS (1 g) into 1% acetic acid (100 ml) with stirring for 5 h to get a transparent solution. Commercially pure titanium (cp-Ti) of ASTM Grade 2 (Daito Steel Co. Ltd., Japan) was used as a substrate in this study for coating of CS. It was cut into a 10-mm diameter disk with a thickness of 1.2 mm. The disk was polished with 100 to 2000 grit SiC paper and ultrasonically cleansed in ethanol and distilled water. Ultrathin films of chitosan with a thickness of about 20 nm were obtained by spin coating the solution of CS dissolved in 1% acetic acid onto the cp-Ti substrate at a spin speed of 5000 rpm for 20 s. The films were dried for 20 min at 40 °C in a drying oven, and the above process was repeated twice. Finally, the chitosan films were stored in a vacuum oven at 25 °C. Modified SBFs, which had higher concentration of inorganic ions compared to Kokubo's SBF solution, were used to fabricate a precipitated CaP coating [ Morphology of the samples was studied using a field emission electron microscope (FE-SEM, Hitachi-S4700, Japan). Samples for APT investigation were prepared using a dual-beam focused ion beam (FIB) instrument (Helios Nano-Lab 650). APT analyses were conducted using a local electrode atom probe (LEAP 4000X HR, CAMECA™) with a reflection system in voltage-pulsing mode. The experimental parameters were set to maintain a 0.2% detection rate, 20% pulse fraction and 100-kHz pulse repetition. All measurements were performed at 14 kV and 30 K under <10 The biocompatibility and bioactivity evaluation tests were carried out using human osteoblast-like MG-63 cells. Cells were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM, Gibco, USA) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco, USA) at 37 °C in humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO Osteoblastic cells (MG-63) were seeded on cp-Ti, CaP/CS, and HA/CS samples in a 48-well plate at a density of 3 × 10 The MTT assay test was carried out to assess cell viability. Cell viability was assessed by the conversion of yellow 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT reagent) to purple formazan. MG-63 cells were seeded on samples in a 48-well plate at a density of 3 × 10 Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity was determined by the ALP colorimetric assay kit (Abcam, USAMG-63, UK) using cell lysates to assess early differentiation of cells. MG-63 cells were seeded on samples in a 48-well plate at a density of 1 × 10 SPSS 21.0 version (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) was used to analyze the data. Statistical significance of variance was evaluated by one-way ANOVA with post hoc Duncan's multiple range tests (p < 0.05).  The APT technique can be efficiently used to demonstrate the distribution of different atoms at the interface between CaP/CS and Ti substrates. Further, to observe the presence of atomic composition at the surface of nanostructured CaP/CS composite coatings on titanium, XPS spectra of cp-Ti, CaP/CS and HA/CS surfaces were obtained. Wide scan XPS spectra of cp-Ti, CaP/CS and HA/CS surfaces are shown in The cell morphologies of attachment on the surfaces of cp-Ti control, CaP/CS composite, and HA/CS composite were compared using SEM ( MTT values for MG-63 osteoblast-like cells cultured in three groups including cp-Ti control showed clear proliferation trends at 1, 2, and 3 days ( ALPase activity of cells is the most common indicator of expression of osteoblastic differentiation. ALPase activities of cells on the cp-Ti control, CaP/CS, and HA/CS surfaces were measured at 1 day to 21 days, and the results are shown in A biomimetic bone-like nanostructured CaP/CS composite was successfully grown as a film on CS-coated Ti in m-SBF. The CS surface allowed the growth of CaP and contributed to a uniform distribution of the homogenous CaP/CS nanostructure across the surface. Exposure of CaP/CS coatings to NaOH provided better stability and improved oxygen content at the surface. The CaP/CS composites showed better cell viability, adhesion, and differentiation of MG-63 cells compared to the HA/CS composites. These results indicate that the CaP/CS composites prepared on cp-Ti could be potential candidates for application in bone tissue engineering. This research was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the