High concentrations of salt (NaCl) in soils reduce plant growth and have enormous influence on nitrogen dynamics in the soil solution. However, addition of rice straw is expected to mitigate the effect of salinity on nitrogen cycling, therefore positively influencing plant growth. This study describes how rice seedling emergence and early growth in a saline paddy soil can be improved by adding rice straw to the soil and incubating the soil/straw mixtures for two months. I conducted a short-term laboratory incubation and a plant growth experiment to evaluate the benefit of rice straw addition to a saline paddy soil with respect to nitrogen availability and the associated growth response of saline tolerant (BRRI Dhan47) and saline sensitive (BRRI Dhan28) rice seedlings. A naturally saline paddy soil was collected from the coastal area of Bangladesh. The soil was then incubated with rice straw (0%, 25%, 50%, 100%, and 200% of the straw yield) for two months. After that, BRRI Dhan47 and BRRI Dhan28 rice varieties were sown in these incubated soils. Rice seedlings were harvested after 14days of sowing. My results indicated that raw rice straw addition to saline paddy soil decreased the bio-availability of salt. Furthermore, BRRI Dhan28 responded better than the BRRI Dhan47 to increased addition of rice straw to soil. Bulk soil pH declined and nitrogen availability increased with increasing rice straw in addition to saline paddy soil. This study concluded that rice straw can be a meaningful soil amendment to decrease harmful effect of salt and increase nitrogen availability in a saline paddy soil.Salinity is becoming an increasing problem in the world. About 25% of the world’s croplands are affected by salinity ( Rice straw is an organic material available in significant quantities for most rice farmers. Rice straw contains numerous elements essential for plant growth, including nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), potassium (K) sulfur (S), and calcium (Ca). ( A previous study showed that how salinity influences the decomposition of maize straw on the response of soil properties and nutrient dynamics ( The initial soil sample was collected from the naturally saline paddy field at plough depth level (0–15 Dumuria is situated in the tidal floodplain of the Ganges Delta in Bangladesh which is influenced by tidal cycles. The climate is tropical monsoonal with moderately high temperature and heavy rainfall during the Kharif season (April–September) and scanty rainfall with a moderately low temperate during the Rabi season (November–March). Average annual rainfall is 1710 Naturally saline paddy soil resulted from sea-level rise and saltwater intrusion in Bangladesh. The naturally saline paddy soils in Bangladesh were characterized by high concentration of soluble salts and low organic matter content. The naturally saline paddy soil was less than 4 Rice straw was collected from agronomy farm of the Department of Agronomy and Agricultural Extension, University of Rajshahi, Rajshahi 6205, Bangladesh. Collected rice straw was BRRI Dhan28 variety. After collection it was placed in an oven. Before cutting it was taken from oven and then it was cut into tiny sized pieces. This was also placed in a desicator before mixing with collected saline paddy soil. Coffee cup was used for this experiment. Size of coffee cup was diameter 23 After mixing of rice straw within soil, each cup was placed in a growth chamber with a constant temperature of 25 Two saline tolerant (BRRI Dhan47) and saline sensitive (BRRI Dhan28) varieties were used as a testing plant. Seeds were soaked for 30 Pre-germinated seed were placed within the soil in each cup. Each cup contained 8 pre-germinated seed. After that pre-germinated seed were covered with the naturally saline paddy soil. Seedlings were grown in open air in a temperature range from 24 to 35 Seedlings were harvested at 14 Bulk soil/straw mixture was analyzed for nutrients and soil pH after final harvest. The pH of the bulk soil was determined in deionized water using a soil-to-solution ratio of 1:5. Organic carbon of the bulk soil samples was determined by wet oxidation method ( Results were analyzed by a one-way or two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) using Genstat 12th edn for Windows (Lawes Agricultural Trust, UK). Result showed that the key effect of soil salinity has been delayed for the reduction in seedling emergence. The rice straw additions remarkably affect the emergence of paddy rice seedlings ( The plant height was largely affected by the rice straw ( The plant height was largely affected by the rice straw percentage ( The rice straw additions remarkably affect the shoot fresh weight of rice plant ( The shoot dry weight of rice seedling increased due to rice straw addition in both BRRI Dhan28 and BRRI Dhan47 ( Bulk soil organic matter increases with the increase in rice straw addition to soil ( Bulk soil pH decreases with the increase in rice straw addition to soil ( Bulk soil nitrogen increases with the increase in rice straw addition to soil ( In general, bulk soil available phosphorus was higher in less rice straw added treatment and lower in high rice straw added treatment ( Bulk soil potassium decreases with the increase in rice straw addition to soil ( The bulk soil Zn tended to be declined with the addition of rice straw to the saline paddy soil ( Additions of rice straw alleviate salt effect from the saline paddy soil. This finding confirmed from the increased growth response of saline sensitive variety of BRRI Dhan28 with the addition of rice straw. My results showed that the addition of rice straw increases the growth response of BRRI Dhan28 seedlings which was saline sensitive variety. The number of plant emergence did not differ significantly ( The saline sensitive rice variety (BRRI Dhan28) proliferated in its roots and shoots due to addition of rice straw in this saline paddy soil. The rice seedling height for both 7 These finding also confirmed that rice straw addition to this naturally saline paddy soil decreased the bio-availability of salinity proved from the growth response of BRRI Dhan28 seedlings. Also, there may be possibility that the extent of the decomposition of the rice straw was increased when added at the different rates due to incubation at field capacity at 25 Seedling growth and age indicates the critical level of salinity. The number of seedling emergence significantly differed between BRRI Dhan28 and BRRI Dhan47 up to 50% rice straw added treatment. However, seedling emergence did not differ between BRRI Dhan28 and BRRI Dhan47 for 100% and 200% rice straw added treatment ( Plant height at 7 Rice straw amendments to soil reduces soil pH and nitrogen availability within the bulk soil. Initially, soil pH was 8.17. But, due to 200% raw rice straw addition it was down to 8.03. Thus bulk soil pH reduces 0.14 units for the maximum amount of rice straw addition to the saline paddy soil. The reduction of bulk soil pH was started when 25% raw rice straw was added to saline paddy soil. The bulk soil pH becomes decline with the addition of rice straw ( Long-term incubation effects on rice straw application improved N availability. The improved N availability was attributed to N mineralized from the added rice straw. Other researchers speculated that improved N availability upon rice straw application was due to reduced nitrification-denitrification losses ( Soil extractable P increases at 25% rice straw added treatment. After that it tended to be declined with the addition of rice straw ( Rice straw amendment increases growth response of both BRRI Dhan28 and BRRI Dhan47 ( This study demonstrated that rice straw addition to saline paddy soil reduces bio-availability of salinity. This proved from the seedling growth performance of saline sensitive rice variety BRRI Dhan28 on the rice straw added treatment. Our findings also demonstrated that the growth response of BRRI Dhan28 and BRRI Dhan47 did not significantly differ at highest rice straw added treatment. This happened due to reduction in harmful effect of salinity within the saline paddy soil for rice straw amendment. This study also demonstrated that raw rice straw amendment to the saline paddy soil reduces bulk soil pH and increases N availability in this saline paddy soil. The addition of raw rice straw to soil also increased bulk soil organic matter in this saline paddy soil. Thus, this study concluded that rice straw amendment can reduce harmful effect of salinity and increase N availability in saline paddy soil. The author would like to thank the personnel of Soil Resources Development Institute (SRDI), Bangladesh for their constructive suggestion regarding soil samples collection. The author also thankful to Bangladesh Rice Research Institute to provide BRRI Dhan47 and BRRI Dhan28 seed for this experiment.