The influence of aqueous phase pH on the rate of liquid–liquid extraction was investigated using a two impinging-jets contacting device with a high velocity of jet flows. The recommended chemical system of toluene–acetone–water was employed. Applying pH values from its natural value of 5.6–8, a range in which most industrial waters are lain, for the jets colliding force within 70.3–214.6mN, leads a reduction in extraction efficiency and overall volumetric mass transfer coefficient up to about 18.9% and 35.2% respectively. A significant high variation is observed when the aqueous phase pH exceeds the water neutral value toward alkali conditions. These variations can be attributed to the adsorption of hydroxyl ions and lowering interfacial tension. A comparison between the results in this work and those for drop dispersion extraction indicates a high sensitivity in the impinging technique. As expected, increasing jets force improves the performance of the contacting device; however, simultaneously, the retarding effect of pH would be intensified. The variation of interfacial tension with pH was obtained and with the aid of dimensionless numbers, an empirical correlation was developed for the prediction of overall volumetric mass transfer coefficient.Liquid–liquid extraction has become one of the most important processes in chemical engineering and has found a vast application in various chemical and hydrometallurgical plants. A variety of different contactors have been developed for this process. Meanwhile, investigations in this process are often connected with expensive experiments and therefore, studies on the pilot plants and laboratory scale apparatuses are inevitable. To date it is still difficult to describe the rate of mass transfer as a function of process and physical parameters. In a number of so far recommended chemical systems for liquid–liquid extraction investigations In the continuity of our previous works The chemical system of toluene–acetone–water, a recommended system for liquid–liquid extraction studies Experiments were conducted at the ambient temperature of 20 The saturated aqueous phase with acetone concentration of 2% had a natural pH of 5.6. The subsequent pH values were adjusted at 6, 7, 7.3, 7.7 and 8, around the neutral value and the range which is appropriate to the most environmental waters. The values of equilibrium distribution of acetone between the phases at 20 In this work a two impinging jets-contacting device (TIJCD) was employed for the investigations. The experimental setup has been described in our previous work For each experimental run, the desired flow of aqueous and organic phases was fed to the contacting device. In order to establish an impingement zone, just at the middle of the cylindrical vessel, it was necessary to have identical jet forces at the collision zone of the streams; otherwise, the repulsion force of the aqueous flow inhibits the flow of the opposite organic phase. The jets force is given by The observed steady state collision and providing impinging zone was attained after about 20 Acetone concentration in the collected samples was measured using a GC (Shimadzu, 14B) with FID detector, calibrated with reference substances of toluene and acetone (Merck) for gas chromatography. The known concentration of acetone in the calibration samples was within the range of 10.57–20.64 The applied ranges and values of operating conditions are given in The two considered operating parameters are extraction efficiency and overall volumetric mass transfer coefficient. The extraction efficiency could be expressed as: Because the interfacial area between the phases in the TIJCD is not known, the overall volumetric mass–transfer coefficient,  The range of As a relevant parameter to mass transfer coefficient, investigation on the extraction efficiency, defined by Eq. It is noteworthy that a higher tendency in the extraction efficiency could be expected when using higher acidic pH solutions; however, a high pH solution can be a limitation in practical points of view due to higher corrosion potential and unusual values with respect to the neutral pH. Nevertheless, the influence of ions on the recovery of inorganic species and the equilibrium distribution coefficient of the extractable species has been intensively investigated, mainly for hydrometallurgy purposes To have just a rough estimation of the level of retarding effect of pH in the TIJCD, it is helpful to do a comparison with the drop dispersion method and based on the criterion of the percentage of reduction in overall mass transfer coefficient with respect to the contact time of phases (i.e. the percentage of reduction in mass transfer coefficient per unit contact time). Our previous reported results As demonstrated in Due to complicate hydrodynamic situation in the impinging jet device and non-clear contact area, depth of penetration of phases, in addition to the lack of data regarding the contact time, the dimension analysis was employed to obtain the relation between the measured quantities. An appropriate dimensionless numbers, usually used in different liquid–liquid extraction processes Similar to the presented variations in The goodness of fitting can be assessed by coefficient of determination ( The results of this study show clearly that aqueous phase pH causes a significant reduction in the extraction of acetone in the recommended chemical system of toluene–acetone–water, using TIJCD. In this regard, the overall volumetric mass transfer coefficient and the extraction efficiency exhibit a high sensitivity to pH, within the important range of 5.5–8. The observed stronger effect is appropriate when the pH exceeds the water neutral value, indicating the better choice of acidic or neutral water sources to be used in the extraction process with direct impinging system. These behaviours can be attributed to the adsorption of hydroxyl ions and the change in hydrodynamic revolutions due to the reduction in interfacial tension. Meanwhile, the dominant role of jets force in the performance of TIJCD is weakened as the pH increases. On the basis of the experimental data and using dimensionless numbers with the aim of design applications, a correlation was developed to describe the overall volumetric mass transfer coefficient, valid for the operating conditions used in this work. A high coefficient of determination and low relative deviation is relevant, using this model.