Comminution processes are not fully understood today and more research is necessary towards the improvement of existing comminution equipment. Presently, the best suited modeling technique is the Discrete Element Method (DEM) but in its conventional form it is not suitable for simulating industrial comminution processes where size reduction is an important issue, if not the main issue, such as in crushers. Attempts for simulating such mining equipment with DEM have been carried out previously applying empirical models for rock rupture. The foundations of the Discrete Crack Model (DCM) are presented here as a new method for efficiently modeling rock fracture within a DEM work frame. In DCM, random cracks seeds are generated inside the rock specimens and the stress field in the vicinity of the cracks is calculated by the Convex Polygons Stress Approximation (CPSA), the basis of DCM. A rupture criterion is then applied to determine if or when the rock splits. Resulting CPSA stress fields are compared here to those obtained by a more precise but much slower Finite Element Method (FEM) solution. Next, to validate DCM methodology, three illustrative loading cases are analyzed comparatively. It is shown that the failure mechanism predicted by the DCM methodology agrees to similar documented cases in the literature. The proposed approach is applicable both in 2D and 3D.Simulation of comminution process is still not well understood and although much effort has been made in the past, many aspects of the process still remain poorly understood. Authors such as Powell and Morrison The second approach is “Population balance-based model”, which is good at predicting size reduction, production rates, and power drawn. The problem with these kinds of models is that they do not describe the breakage process, and only keep track of the output. It is also difficult to obtain some ore-specific parameters needed for simulation. The third approach is “Energy based model”, used to model vertical and horizontal impact crushers where impacts can be assumed to be independent. Simulation results are in good agreement with real data, but cannot predict output for more complex machines such as the Barmac impact crusher. Finally, the fourth kind of approach are the “Computationally intensive techniques” such as the Discrete Element Method (DEM), which is good for modeling kinematics of granular material. In comminution machinery, kinematics is not enough to describe the process, fracture modeling must be included. New models for this purpose are available but some difficulties exist when applied, such as excessive computation time requirements in physic based models, or extensive experimental data in phenomenological models. Powell and Morrison Two approaches have been used in the past to include the fracture process in DEM simulations. Traditionally, the approach to include fracture is to consider that one body is formed by many elements bonded together. When forces are applied to the body, the bonds must resist a force to hold the particles in place. If the stress limit is exceeded then the bond breaks. The Bonded Particle Model (BPM) developed by Potyondy and Cundall Although these methods, BPM and DGB, give very good results as big problem arises when used for simulating comminution machinery. They require large number of particles to describe one rock, and considering that a crusher or mill handles many tons per hour, the time needed for the simulation is huge. Whittles et al. Djordjevic et al. The Fast Breakage Model (FBM) developed by Potapov et al. FBM uses DEM to determine the forces and energy applied to particles, when a certain level is exceeded the appearance function is used to describe the rock breakage. Lichter et al. Powell and Morrison In this section, we explain the foundations of our proposed approach. Let us consider a rock that contains randomly oriented cracks. These cracks are generated by loads that have been applied to the mineral rock through thousands of years while in place at the original site and those induced by the process used to extract it, normally by rock blasting. When the rocks are comminuted, compression forces are applied to them. These forces create internal stresses which activate existing cracks that grow and therefore rock subsequently undergoes rupture and splits. The above ideas are the basis of the Discrete Crack Model (DCM). We consider that rocks contain random crack seeds that due to the comminution process get activated and eventually cause the rock rupture. In DCM, crack seeds are placed in randomly and which one is activated is detected. Enough crack seeds must be used to assure failure detection. Modern methods such as the Rock Failure Process Analysis (RFPA) use the Finite Elements Method (FEM) to determine the stress field on the rock. The Mohr–Coulomb strength criterion with tensile cutoff is also used to determine if an element fails. When this happens, the stress distribution changes, and at some points the stress can increase so that more failures may occur. When no more failures occur, time is increased and the simulation continues. It is not the intention here to introduce RFPA method, hence only a small description is given. For a detailed discussion see A combined FEM–DEM method proposed by Munjiza A convenient shortcut would be to estimate the rock's stress field without using FEM (i.e. analytically), but this is a really difficult task and some simplifications must be made to achieve acceptable results. Hence in our method, we consider the rock shape exclusively as convex polygons or polyhedrons; concave shapes have stress concentrations that are too difficult to solve. Note that this shape consideration is also required in FBM. Although rocks are anisotropic in nature here they are considered as isotropic for simplification. The last consideration used to simplify the model is that cracks exist in an infinite medium and do not change material properties or interact with each other. These considerations have important implications. As stated previously, when RFPA detects a failed element the stress field is computed again. Such consideration is not used by our model. Cracks do not interact so in a dynamic simulation the stress field is not affected by activated cracks. This implies that the fracture path is derived using the stress field before failure. Zacharopoulos and Kalaitzidis Even if it was possible to determine the exact crack path in rock rupture, the shape of the remaining pieces would be a complex polygon with large number of vertex, increasing computation time for performing contact detection. The best choice according to today's computational power is therefore to obtain a roughly approximated crack path, so rocks can be represented with a small number of vertex and contact detection can be performed fast and efficiently. In this section, we describe the crack activation criteria used in DCM. In the following analysis: compressive stress is positive and Three situations may occur when a crack propagates. If When In the same case of Let us recall that in a standard DEM simulation, four basic stages are performed. The first stage is “Contact Detection” Particle–Particle contact and Particle–Wall contact is determined at current time step, contact detection is the most time consuming stage. The second stage is “Force Calculation” particles in touch have reaction forces in the contact point, the force magnitude is determined according to overlap. The third stage is “Time Integration” where the Newton's Law is used to calculate acceleration, and time integration is carried in order to determine velocity and position in the next time step. The final stage is “Position Update” the model is updated with new positions and the cycle starts again. When DCM is incorporated for rock rupture consideration, three new additional stages are included. The first step in DCM cycle is the ”Stress Calculation”, CPSA method is used to determine the stress field according to the contact forces. The next stage is the “Breakage Determination”, here the stress field is evaluated according to a breakage criterion. Two conditions are evaluated: tensile failure and shear failure. The third and final stage is “Rock Fragmentation” where subdivision is performed according to which mechanism is determined. The newly added stages from DCM allows to simulate rock breakage when performing a DEM simulation. The advantages of DCM are that opposite to phenomenological methods like FBM, breakage is based on physical laws by approximating the stress field. Also the rocks are considered as a single element so simulations with DCM are faster than using Glued Particle method (previously explained in The advantage of using CPSA over FEM is that there is no need for mesh calculation or solving a large set of system equations, so calculation time is much faster. CPSA is similar to an analytical solution in that once the boundary stress is computed the stress inside the rock can be computed at one point or in as many as wanted without the need to solve a grid. Nevertheless CPSA has some disadvantages with respect to FEM. It may generate a larger error than FEM, and it is not possible to directly find the maximum stresses since the stress field is constructed by computing the stress at several selected points. Flamant This analytical solution is used to determine the stress field in a disk as in the case of the conventional Brazilian test for example. As depicted in Timoshenko and Goodier When we change from a disk to a more complex shape like polygons the same principle can be applied, for each force we use the Flamant solution. This will generate a compressive stress at the boundary, the only difference is that the applied force at the perimeter to eliminate the compressive stress is not constant and because of this the stress distribution In order to determine In our work, a much simpler but effective approach is used. When a point force acts on a surface a large stress gradient exist, specially near the force application point. When distributed forces are applied, such gradients are not as high and a soft function solution exists, this is the reason why a coarse mesh may be used to solve it by FEM. It is known that the force that generates In the interpolation process, first It is not necessary to use all the It is important to note that CPSA does not need a mesh. Once As mentioned previously in Without an analytical solution for concentrated forces acting on corners, it is not possible to extend CPSA to 3D. To overcome this problems two approaches can be employed. It can be noted that when Poisson ratio The second approach is to consider Poisson ratio not equal to 0.5. In this case the stress at the faces conforming the wedge or corner does not satisfy the natural boundary conditions. This can be fixed by using the same interpolation principle used in 2D CPSA described in Both approaches can be used with acceptable results. The algorithm is exactly the same as in 2D CPSA, the only difference is that in 2D Flamant solution is used and in 3D Boussinesq–Cerruti solution is used. Convex Polygon Stress Approximation (CPSA) is a new method we propose to approximate the stress field inside a convex polygon for comminution process simulation. It is based on the Flamant solution for linear elastic wedges and an important assumption is made, which is that stress caused by a distributed traction force on the perimeter can be approximated by simple interpolation. It is important to validate the CPSA results to check its validity. Hence in this section CPSA stress results are compared with stress results obtained by Salome-Meca In the FEM models of Here a point load is applied at the top and bottom corners of a diamond shaped rock as shown in The solution shows that the stress is higher at the loaded corners and smaller at the right and left side. For direct comparison, Here a triangle shaped rock is loaded at the top corner and at the base as shown in As expected, stress is higher at the top corner, and lower at the bottom side where the applied force is distributed. As in Case 1 a low stress area is located at both sides. In this area the relative error is large as shown in A rectangular shaped rock is loaded at the top and bottom faces as shown in The stress field in this case is smooth mainly because of the absence of point forces, or stress concentration points. No areas with small stress relative to the maximum exist, so it can be expected that the error with respect to FEM results is small as shown in Cracks propagate according to the surrounding stress field and each activated crack generates changes in the neighborhood of the stress field. The CPSA method only allows us to approximate the stress field when no crack exists, so in this section we demonstrate that although we cannot determine the exact path of the crack, enough information for characterizing the rupture process is obtained. This is based mainly on the fact that activated cracks affect the stress field only on the vicinity and hence the simplification of no interaction between cracks can be used. This implies that we only need to know the stress field before fracture occurs to apply DCM. The rock specimen will split when one of two predefined conditions is reached, that is to say when CPSA allows to evaluate the stress at any point in a way similar to an analytic solution, but still the maximum compressive or tensile stress cannot be directly determined. Hence enough crack seeds must be considered in order to detect correctly which crack is activated. In the following examples for illustrative purposes 1000 random cracks seeds are generated inside each rock. The stress field is calculated by the CPSA method. At each crack, as load increases, the rupture criterion is applied to evaluate potential failure along the crack seeds. Three loading cases are examined. Results are shown in  It is important to compare  As in point to point loading, we can identify the zone of activated cracks. From  At the final stage of loading tensile failure appears. In the same figure there is also evidence of shear cracks in the center of the specimen. This is consistent with the behavior in the Uniaxial Compressive Test (UCT) where two fracture modes can be recognized, as reported by Li et al. Using activated crack seeds allows to identify the fracture mechanism and a general description of the rock fracture. The Brazilian test is a standard laboratory experiment to indirectly determine the tensile strength of brittle materials. Specifications has been established by the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM D 3967-86) and by the International Society for Rock Mechanics (ISRM). The Brazilian test consists of loading a cylindrical rock sample of radius A simulation of Brazilian test using DCM is presented in  We must point out that crack seed density is an important operational parameter in DCM. A compromise exists between accuracy and speed. If not enough crack seeds are placed, there is a higher probability that DCM will fail to detect the true failure point. On the other side, too many cracks will increase computation time. The effect of crack density is part of ongoing research and will be discussed in more detail in future publications. However, for the purpose of illustration, shown in  Thus, DCM is able to determine the main crack path and the secondary damage at the contact points. It can also predict when the breakage occurs. Computation time for this simulation is 5 Munjiza et al. Discrete Crack Model (DCM) is proposed in this work to efficiently model rock fracture within DEM simulations, and it has been shown that enough information to predict rock rupture is obtained when used, making it an appropriate tool for modeling comminution processes. The most significant contribution of the DCM method is that it is based in an efficient analytical solution (CPSA) found on physical rules by approximating the stress field inside an intact convex shaped rock. It has been shown, by comparison with FEM, that CPSA gives a really good approximation at the points of interest, this meaning that all relevant high stress points are computed with low error. CPSA may give larger errors in zones of low stress, but this fact is not important since cracks do not get activated in these zones, so rock rupture simulation fidelity is not affected by this characteristic. Previous work by Tang et al. In the plane to point (Case 2) loading case, at the early loading stages, shear activated cracks appear near the point force application location. These cracks indicate crushing in this zone. At the final stages of loading, tensile cracks appear at the center of the rock specimens and the cracks propagation direction indicate that they have an inclination towards the loading point. In the plane to plane loading case (Case 3) only a few cracks are activated near the loading point, and it is assumed that they are not enough to establish crushing occurring in this zone. When the load increases, shear and tensile cracks appears at the center of the rock. If tensile failure is assumed, cracks should be vertical, and if shear failure is assumed then an inclined crack must split the rock. As stated before, the shear condition is necessary but not enough to initiate shear movement, so both fracture modes can occur. When shear cracks appear near the loading zone, crushing can be assumed, and when they are in the middle of the specimen they are an indication of shear failure. Tensile cracks must always be associated with splitting. For our purpose, which is to model comminution processes, predicting the exact crack path is not important. We must bear in mind that real cracks follow such a complicated path that even if we could exactly determine its resultant geometry, it would be extremely complicated to do so, and conventional contact detection algorithms would be too CPU intensive to be of any practical value. Exact crack path computation is not cost-effective in large scale simulations with today's CPU power for the purpose of comminution simulations. As postulated by Zacharopoulos and Kalaitzidis It is possible to extend DCM to 3D and good results have been achieved. Our current work is focused on integrating DCM in to a 3D DEM software, and results are in the preliminary stages of publishing. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at The following is the Supplementary material related to this article