Significant prior-β grain refinement of as-cast Ti–6Al–4V alloy was achieved through additions of yttrium. Microstructural analysis revealed three mechanisms by which yttrium refines the prior-β grains during solidification: solute yttrium provides constitutional supercooling; yttrium scavenges oxygen and forms Y2O3 particles, which pin grain boundaries suppressing grain growth; Y2O3 particles also act as active nucleation sites. Even finer equiaxed grains were achieved through laser surface remelting suggesting that yttrium additions could be an efficient β-Ti grain refiner for the Ti–6Al–4V alloy processed by additive manufacturing.Ti–6Al–4V (all compositions in wt. %), is the most widely used Ti alloy for a range of applications (e.g. aerospace and biomedical components) due to its high strength-to-weight ratio, good ductility and excellent corrosion resistance. In addition, it is also the main engineering alloy used in additive manufacturing due to its excellent properties for aerospace applications [ Small amounts of boron addition have been extensively investigated for their grain refinement efficiency in Ti and its alloys (e.g. cast Ti–B and Ti–6Al–4V–B) [ There have been some attempts to introduce high-melting point inoculants, such as yttrium to titanium weldments in order to reduce the fusion zone grain size and improve oxidation resistance [ Samples were made by melting compacted powder ingots of approximately 10 g in mass in a small arc furnace and cooled in a water-chilled copper crucible under an argon atmosphere. 99.9% pure yttrium powder and 99.5% premixed Ti–6Al–4V powder were blended in a Turbula shaker mixer for an hour to achieve the designed compositions. To understand the role of yttrium solute as distinct from Y The as-cast optical macrostructure of the Ti–6Al–4V base alloy and yttrium inoculated alloys is shown in To better understand the mechanism of the observed grain refinement, EBSD and EDS maps were carried out on an equiaxed prior β grain in the sample of the TY4 alloy ( Additionally, rapid laser remelting, which is often used as an analogue for additive manufacturing [ The two forms of the Y In contrast, the TYO4 alloy in which Y Some Y The alloy microstructural observations suggest that yttrium additions act in multiple roles. To better understand the mechanisms of grain refinement in this study, When 0.4 wt % yttrium is added to the base alloy under the same solidification conditions, yttrium firstly scavenges oxygen from the alloy and forms Y In the laser remelting process, due to the high cooling rate in the melt pool, additional supercooling is generated ahead of the first β-Ti dendrite, which provides an additional driving force to nucleate more refined β grains ahead of the solid/liquid interface. For the laser remelted sample, the In summary, the addition of yttrium (0.4 wt %) to a Ti–6Al–4V alloy provides substantial grain refinement in the as-cast alloys (from 3.5 mm to 0.45 mm) and further refinement to 46 μm of the prior-β grains after rapid laser remelting. The grain refining mechanisms of yttrium inoculation can be attributed to (1) constitutional supercooling associated with the partitioning of solute yttrium during solidification, (2) heterogeneous nucleation of the β-phase around the Y  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was financially supported by the