Borehole stability analysis is an important challenge for researchers in the field of geotechnical, mining and petroleum engineering. Several borehole instability problems during or after the completion of drilling, have been reported by a number of exploration companies in Australia. Many of these problems are reported in drilling projects in poorly cemented sand formations at depths of up to 200 Numerical studies on poorly cemented sand formation by Hashemi et al. Unconfined compressive strength (UCS) triaxial and thick-walled hollow cylinder (TWHC) tests are among the most useful laboratory experiments In this study a series of newly designed laboratory tests involving real-time monitoring of the development of borehole breakout was conducted. The paper aims to provide a more accurate representation of the actual behavior of poorly cemented sands, which will be invaluable in designing appropriate borehole support systems. The tests were conducted on specimens of poorly cemented sands prepared in the laboratory and the effects of different mixture characteristics (i.e. proportion of sand, cement and water) on their mechanical behavior were studied by conducting compression tests on solid and hollow cylindrical specimens. Exploration boreholes are usually drilled to uncover potential future mine sites. In many cases drilling is undertaken through poorly cemented sand formations. Generally, the boreholes are 250–300 When the drilling string reaches the porous poorly cemented sand layer, the borehole may collapse, should the bonding between sand particles may not be strong enough to provide stability. In addition, occasionally the actuator is unable to restart and rotate the rod if the gap between the drilling rod and the borehole wall is completely filled with sand grains and thus the drilling rods jam in the borehole. According to reports from the drilling company the main factors affecting borehole instability include the low strength of poorly cemented sands which cannot sustain the existing in-situ stress after drilling, and, in few cases, fluid flow due to a confined aquifer near the borehole collapse zone. However, there are other factors that account for borehole instability in exploration boreholes such as erosion and poor drilling practice, and these are not considered in the current study. Specimens that were both of a reasonable diameter and of a borehole wall thickness that satisfies the TWHC theory condition (i.e. A servo-controlled axial loading system of 100 The TWHC specimens, consisting of poorly cemented sands, cannot be retrieved from the cell after the destructive tests due to the development of a large number of macro- and micro-cracks and the debonding of sand particles. To address this issue, the triaxial cell was modified to allow simultaneous capturing of the borehole failure mechanism and the process of sand grain debonding at each time step and at different stress paths. A micro camera with a 225 pixel per inch (ppi) resolution was installed inside the hollow platen to record the process of sand debonding and borehole breakout. The micro camera was connected to a personal computer to record the borehole conditions throughout the test. The steel moulds were designed and manufactured for the tests ( A tool was designed and manufactured to uniformly compact the mixture, as shown in Two sets of cylindrical platens were manufactured from hardened steel and were hardened prior to grinding and lapping. The platens were designed using the commercial finite element analysis software ABAQUS 6.11 and loading steps similar to those applied during test conditions were applied to the model ( To avoid applying the weight of the triaxial cell to the specimen during the test, a wooden base was manufactured to support the weight of the triaxial cell. Thus, there was no need to apply an external pressure on the specimens to hold the triaxial set before transferring it to the loading machine. Pairs of axial and lateral strain gauges were used to measure local deformations on the specimen. Two linear-variable differential transformers (LVDTs) were installed between the top and bottom rams of the loading machine to measure axial displacement externally. The captured image of the micro camera was checked to ensure that the focal length of the lens was on the middle of the specimen hole and the position of the LEDs was controlled to ensure the borehole illumination was suitable for recording. In the first stage of loading the vertical and confining stresses were increased simultaneously up to a certain stress level, which simulates the hydrostatic condition. Then, in the second stage, the sample was subjected to vertical compression at a constant displacement rate of 0.07 The video capture software was synchronised with the data acquisition system to facilitate the observation of the sand particle dislocation process in parallel with the recording of stress and strain measurements. Several sets of synthetic mixtures of poorly cemented sands were prepared and tested with different cement-to-sand ratios (by weight), Based on these sieve analysis results natural silica sands (99.6% of silica) of two different grain size ranges, closely resembling the ones at the drilling site, were selected for preparing the synthetic mixtures in the laboratory. For these sand grains the mean diameter for particle sizes between 0.425 and 1.4 According to Gueguen and Palciauskas Portland cement type II (specific gravity, The cement content, Various curing times have been suggested in previous studies In order to determine the properties of the mixture, various preliminary tests were conducted on solid and TWHC specimens. The results of these tests can be used to compare other drilling fields and ground conditions to those examined in the current study. As mentioned above, two sets of sands, namely fine (0.125–0.355  It should be noted that increasing To study the effect of cement content ( The maximum strength, The effect of Furthermore, the effect of water required for cement hydration was considered by increasing the water content in small increments within the range of 5–12%, covering the dry, optimum, and wet sections of the optimum water diagram. Kongsukprasert and Tatsuoka The Young׳s modulus, The tangent Young׳s modulus of the solid specimens has been plotted against normalised deviator stress ( Lateral strain gauges were used to measure the elastic modulus in the lateral direction perpendicular to the loading axis. Triaxial tests on solid specimens were performed to determine the shear failure properties of the specimens under different stress conditions. As mentioned in the previous section, based on several preliminary laboratory tests on different mixtures, it was decided to perform TWHC tests on specimens with three different  To explain the behaviour of the material by the Coulomb failure criterion, the cohesion,   The main TWHC tests were conducted for three different cement contents and for two different borehole diameters: 10 and 20 As shown in The results show that the confining pressure has a minimal effect on the stiffness as exhibited in the stress–strain curves. This result agrees with After each test, the recorded video was analysed and the first bonding breakage point at the borehole wall was determined.  At lower confining pressures (i.e. 1 and 2   This study has investigated the behaviour TWHC specimens prepared by poorly cemented sands by a series of modified tiaxial and uniaxial laboratory tests. At a given The post-peak stress–strain behaviour of the specimens with lower Solid specimens exhibited strain hardening behaviour and no peak strength was observed in their stress–strain diagram both in axial and lateral directions. Unlike the solid specimens, TWHC did not exhibit strain hardening behaviour after the maximum strength was reached and the peak strength could be determined in the applied stress ranges. In lower confining pressures (i.e. 1 and 2 Real time monitoring of boreholes during the laboratory tests showed that with increasing the confining pressure, the bonding breakage point between sand particles shifted backward on the stress–strain diagram. Also, in the TWHC specimens the volumetric strain curve conjugated the axial strain axis at a higher magnitude which suggests that microcracks were formed on the borehole wall and sand grain dislocation was taking place in TWHC against solid specimens to release the applied stresses. Based on the observations from the real-time camera recording it can be stated that the transition from the volumetric strain contraction to the dilation occurred before the initiation of the borehole breakout. The failure strength of the 20 This work has been supported by the Deep Exploration Technologies Cooperative Research Centre whose activities are funded by the