Laboratory results from the application of the time domain induced polarization method to the study of organic contamination in soil samples are presented. IP effects for uncontaminated and contaminated (gasoline, isopentane, toluene and benzene) clayey soil samples were measured in the laboratory.
                  The data were processed to obtain the sample resistivity, resistance, chargeability, capacity, amplitude and decay constant, in order to establish their interdependency, as well as, the behaviour of the main experimental variable involved, that is, the degree of contamination. The results show that minimum values for the chargeability, decay constant and capacity, are reached for a certain amount of pollutant, and a contamination model is proposed using the equivalent circuit theory applied to IP phenomenon.
                  Thus, a process whereby organic molecules coat clay particle surfaces is proposed and a decrease in the expected membrane polarization effect can explain the interaction between clay minerals and organic molecules.
                  Finally, the capacity allows a better separation between contaminated and uncontaminated areas than that provided by chargeability and decay constant, as it defines a threshold, which does not depend on the pollutant concentration.Oil products constitute one of the main types of organic contaminants in the soil. In order to understand the effects caused by oil contamination the polarization mechanisms in soil/organic mixtures must be understood. Several environmental studies have used geophysical methods to delineate oil-contaminated sites ( The induced polarization method has been recognised as a useful method in the detection of organic liquids electrical response both in field ( In particular, the spectral induced polarization (SIP) method has been used in contamination studies by organic chemical liquids ( Laboratory investigations were carried out over clayey soil samples, of different grain size compositions and contaminated with several organic chemicals. At first, IP effects were analysed in gasoline contaminated soil samples. The processed data were analysed in order to establish the interdependency among the electrical parameters, as well as, the behaviour of the different experimental variables involved, that is, time of impregnation, grain size and contamination degree. The results show similar behaviour for the analysed electrical parameters from two different grain size compositions (fraction Then, several gasoline components (isopentane, toluene and benzene) were used as contaminants in order to investigate their IP response. Finally, from the laboratory results, a contamination model is proposed and equivalent circuit theory is applied to the induced polarization effect. The induced polarization method is based on the nearly direct current, electrical resistivity rock behaviour. Rock resistivity can be measured in field or laboratory conditions and, in this study, resistivity and induced polarization measurements were carried out in laboratory by using cylindrical samples and applying four electrode configurations. Often, a material electrical resistance is expressed in terms of its resistivity. If the resistance between opposite faces of a conducting body of length And its conductivity The electric conduction in most rocks is essentially electrolytic as most mineral grains (except metallic ores and clay minerals) are insulators and, therefore, electric conduction is done through the interstitial water in pores and fissures. The resistivity of porous sedimentary formations is variable and dependant on the degree of saturation and nature of pore electrolytes. The electrical resistance, And Where And multiplying and dividing The ratio between the mean effective length of the conductive tubes and the sample length is the so called tortuosity, The rock sample volume is And from Eqs. Where Where And From Eqs. IP principles and methods have been thoroughly described in the literature ( When an electric current is switched off the potential does not decay to zero instantaneously, Thus, an IP decay curve represents a time varying potential originated by internal currents, in the vicinity of polarizable media. These currents originate from electrical charges reaching equilibrium after an external field is removed. Basically, IP is a current effect caused by several electrochemical mechanisms such as ion diffusion near metallic minerals and, to a less extend, near no metallic minerals, redox reactions between electrolytes and minerals and ion mobility within the electrolyte that fills rock pores. The IP phenomenon can be modelled with equivalent parallel circuits composed by two resistances ( IP decay curves ( Therefore, it seems that IP decay curves can be reconstructed using different type functions and it is likely that their shape depends on the nature of mineralization, soils texture and electrolyte composition ( Bearing in mind the previous discussion, in this work logarithmic functions, Although power functions have been proposed before ( As it was mentioned before, IP effects have been approached by different types of equivalent circuits and several decay functions have been proposed. That is, real systems are very complex and it is clear that further research, beyond the scope of this work, has to be done. The time-domain analysis measures the decaying voltage across Where The integrated area under the decay voltage curve normalized by And from the equivalent circuit ( The integrated signal measurement depends directly on the capacitance The developed laboratory measurement system is a GPIB (General Propose Interface Bus) controlled system ( In order to carry out laboratory measurements a PVC cylindrical tube, with a 3.75 cm diameter, was used as a sample hold. Specially designed ceramic porous electrodes and non-polarizable 3 cm long Ag/AgCl electrodes were used as current and potential electrodes, respectively. The measurements were done immediately after the sample was prepared, lasted 30 min, and a 0.0001 mA current with a 4 s pulse (relaxation time) was used. Several tests were done to evaluate and optimize the system ( The data were processed to obtain the sample resistivity, resistance The resistance A theoretical model ( The fit between the computed and the laboratory data, obtained by minimization of quadratic differences summation between model and laboratory data, is shown in Laboratory studies were done using soil samples obtained in the Aveiro University Campus. The soil was dried in a ventilated stove at a temperature of 40 °C and separation was done into two classes, one with a grain size smaller than 2 mm and another with grain size smaller than 1 mm. The mineral composition of the coarse fraction was studied optically, and the finest fraction (< Thus, physical, chemical and mineralogy analysis shows that: 1) soils have a sandy loam texture due to a small clay fraction (< The characteristics of the water used in this study are given in The first stage of sample preparation was the calculation of the PVC tube capacity (220 cm Uncontaminated samples (fraction At first, each sample was prepared by mixing soil and gasoline and then water was added. Different concentrations of gasoline were used for each grain size (7%, 14% and 21% for fraction < The water and the pollutant partial porosity for each grain size are given in  As it can be seen, resistivity and amplitude (resistance) are directly related with time (  In general, the two parameters have similar behaviour with respect to gasoline concentration, that is, they decrease with increasing gasoline concentration and are relatively constant for the concentration interval 10–20%. Then they increase until pollutant sample saturation is reached. The mean chargeability and decay constant is less grain size dependant and the minimum threshold reached can be regarded as an indicator of the pollutant presence (gasoline). It must be pointed out that for very high gasoline concentrations the curves invert their tendency and start rising again. This is similar to the cases of very low gasoline concentration and, hence, the results can be difficult to interpret. However, cases where such high pollutant concentrations occur should be rare in field situations and, if they do occur, they should be restricted to an area in the close vicinity of a spill. Further laboratory measurements were carried out in order to study the dependency of the chargeability and decay constant parameters with some of the most common gasoline components. The used gasoline components were isopentane, toluene and benzene. Sample preparation was done as before but only the grain size samples <   All parameters show similar behaviour for the different contaminants. Thus, resistivity increase with increasing contaminant concentration ( Each parameter time evolution is smooth and a decrease of resistivity is observed as for the gasoline case. However, for higher concentrations, the resistivity decrease is more pronounced, as it should be expected from Eq. In accordance with this equation porosity, tortuosity and electrolyte resistivity variations will vary rock resistivity. Thus, porosity can change either if there is not a thorough sample homogenisation or by electrolyte diffusion. On the other hand, more complete homogenisation and porosity increase with time favour shorter circuit paths, that is, a decrease in tortuosity. Tortuosity changes can also occur by pollutant agglomeration because of pollutant immiscibility with the electrolyte. Finally, reactions between the pollutant and the electrolyte will vary the resistivity of the later one. However it is difficult to accept this hypothesis as experimental data show that curves behaviour is similar for all pollutants. Therefore, the curve parameters behaviour can be associated with the homogenisation process, a pollutant agglomeration phenomenon or a chemical process concerning the increase of the ions number in the electrolyte. That is, the interaction between the minerals and the organic molecules can alter the redox potential, increasing the dissolved forms of ions (as Fe ions) in aqueous solution ( The chargeability and decay constant do not show any peculiar trend with time, as for gasoline, apart from decreasing when pollutant concentration increases. The overall curves for the pollutants ( Chargeability and decay constant minimum values vary with pollutant, as shown in The mechanisms that cause the polarization effect in soil/organic mixtures are not well known, but can be related with the interaction between clay minerals and organic molecules. In general, rocks consist of minerals (matrix) and pores which form an irregular and tortuous net filled with electrolyte and, theoretically, several interaction ways are possible. It is now proposed to investigate a model that can justify the IP effects produced by organic pollutants in soils. Since the resistivity,  Thus, if Eq. For model (a), rock resistivity does not change with tortuosity and the partial derivative ∂ And If Eq. And using Eqs. From In a sample impregnated with 100 ml of liquid (water And That is, if The experimental work provided the estimation of the right member of Eq. The results show that, with the exception of gasoline, the linear regression coefficients (Δ In As, it is shown in In clayey soils, in particular when minerals belonging to the kaolinite group are dominant, the chargeability decay constant and the capacity behaviour demonstrate that IP time domain measurements can be used in the detection of organic contaminants. Particularly good results have been obtained for pollutant concentrations between 10% and 20%. Nevertheless it is acknowledged that further studies and experiments are needed for other type of soils, where it is possible that different decay functions may be more appropriate. With the developed laboratory measurement system it was possible to obtain resistivity and amplitude measurements with a 20% variation between gasoline and isopentane, toluene and benzene. The variation is lower for chargeability (14%) and decay constant (6%). In spite of stabilization being dependant on physical processes (that is, homogenisation and geometric pollutant redistribution) as well as chemical processes (ion concentration increase on the electrolyte) measurements lasting 30 min demonstrate the stabilization of the system. The two fractions (< Decay curves can be described through several functions but in this case power functions, Minimum chargeability, decay constant and capacity values are reached for pollutant concentrations ranging from 10% to 20%. For lower concentrations the soil clay particles should be responsible for the higher recorded values. For higher concentrations more studies should be carried out in order to understand the process. The interaction between clay minerals and organic molecules can be explained to some extent by a process whereby organic molecules coat clay particles surfaces and, therefore, a decrease in the membrane polarization effect is expected for pollutant concentration in the 10–20% range. The capacity Although there is no sufficient field experience yet, this technique can be used to locate contamination plumes, in conjunction with other geophysical methods. However, more important is its potential use to evaluate and monitor the temporal evolution of contaminated areas previously located by other methods, as pollutant concentration variations are detectable in the experimental model curves herein discussed. The authors wish to thank to Prof. Maria Manuela Abreu for her orientation in sample soil characterization, Prof. Eduardo Silva for the water analysis and Mrs. Maria João Basto for the X-ray Diffraction.