As the ultrafine iron ore concentrate was used to prepare green pellets, the main problem was the serious cracking during the drying process. The fine particles contacted so closely that the porosity of green pellet was only 16.68%, which finally hindered vapor diffusion, and the cracking temperature was only 370 °C. Organic binder replacing parts of bentonite improved the cracking temperature to 500 °C, with comparable mechanical strength. Due to the action of organic binder, fine-grained concentrates were aggregated into large particles, with the porosity of green pellet increased from 16.68% to 23.15%. Furthermore, the average drying rate decreased, which dropped from 0.55 g·kg−1·s−1 to 0.47 g·kg−1·s−1. Consequently, the vapor pressure of the green pellet in the dry front was reduced, which successfully improved the cracking property.The pelletizing process has lower energy consumption and less pollution emission compared with iron ore sintering process. Its superiority made it a significant way for the cleaner production of iron making. Usually, the high-grade iron ore is used to produce pellet. Recently, more and more high-grade iron ores were imported from other countries due to the scarcity of this resource in China. However, the iron ore imported from western Australia typically characterized higher ultrafine particle content and higher specific surface area than the one of same grade in China. How the ultrafine iron ore affecting subsequent process is of great importance for preparing pellets. Some research has been done mainly focused on the process of ultrafine pellet's preheating and roasting. Fan et al. [ If the cracking temperature was improved, the drying time of the green pellets would be shortened and then the productivity of equipment would be enhanced. Hence, how to improve the cracking temperature of green pellets is the key to the stable and efficient production. In this paper, the ultra-fine material of SINO magnetite concentrate (abbreviated form of UMC) coming from west Australia was used to prepare pellets. First, the cracking characteristics of UMC pellets during drying process have been researched. And it proposed that the organic binder [ The main chemical compositions of all the raw materials were given in The particle size distribution of these two magnetite concentrates were measured by Malvern Particle Size Analyzer (Mastersizer 2000), and specific surface area was tested by Blaine Method [ Analyzed the particle morphology of the two magnetite concentrate with scanning electron microscope (Nova NanoSEM230, FEI Electron Optics B.V), the results were shown in Firstly, the ratio and dosage of all the raw materials were calculated. Then mixed them evenly. A disc with diameter of 1000 mm, side height of 150 mm and the inclination angle of 45°, was used for green ball preparation. Throughout the balling process, the rotation speed was fixed at 25 r/min, and the balling duration was controlled 14 min, including 2 min for terminal compaction. After the pelletizing test was done, sieved the green pellets, and reserved the pellets, of which the pellets size was between 12 and 14 mm. Finally, sampled from them to measure the crushing strength, wet dropping number, cracking temperature and drying rate [ 20 green pellets were used for crushing strength analysis using a tester (Tinius Olsen 5 ST), and the average results were regarded as the strength index. In this test, the crushing strength of green pellets should be >15 N·P 20 green pellets were used for drop number test with dropped from the height of 0.5 m to a thick steel plate of 5 mm freely till the pellets were broken, and the average results were regarded as the strength index. In this test, the average wet dropping number of green pellets should be >4 times. Centrifugation method was used to measure the molecular water content of iron ore concentrates. Thirty grams pre-moistening sample was put into the high-speed centrifuge and rotated at the speed of 10,000 r/min for 15 min, the water left in the sample was measured as molecular water content. Viscosity of the bentonite and organic binder were measured through Rotational Method with a rotational viscometer (NDJ-79, Shanghai Jing Hui Co., Ltd., China). The measurement of the green pellets' cracking temperature referred to the dynamic method used by the AC company of the United States. The experiment was taken in a vertical-tube furnace (shown in The drying rate was also measured in the vertical-tube furnace. Weigh 1 kg green pellets and put them into the cup, then set the drying temperature and wind speed. Record the mass change during the drying process and calculate the drying rate. The calculation formula was as follows: The crushing strength of dried pellets was measured in the same way as the green ones. The microstructure of pellets was observed using an optical microscope. Then the images were handled with the software Image J [ In order to reflect the pore characteristics of pellets, the average pore area and the porosity were brought in. They were calculated as follows: The preparation characteristics of green pellets with the UMC and OMC were given in The low cracking temperature can be explained from the characteristics of the particles of UMC. According to In order to improving the properties of UMC green pellets, the organic binder has been used to replace part of the bentonite. Took the dosage of bentonite 1.75% and the organic binder 0% as baseline. Then changed their dosages. Thus, how the changes affected the mechanical strength of UMC pellets have been researched, and the results were given in Apparently, when the bentonite was replaced by the organic binder, the cracking temperature was improved. The wet dropping strength could reach 4.5 times and the cracking temperature raised to 445 °C when the dosage of organic binder was 0.08%. When the dosage of bentonite rose to 0.8%, the appropriate dosage of organic binder decreased to 0.05%. While the cracking temperature further improved to 500 °C. And the index could meet the requirement for production. Obviously, the application of organic binder can help to improve the cracking temperature of green pellets. Two configurations have been designed to research how the organic binder affected the structure of green pellets. One is the 1.75% bentonite configuration (abbreviated form of Configuration I), and the other is the 0.8% bentonite with 0.05% organic binder (abbreviated form of Configuration II). All the green pellets were dried adequately under 60 °C, and were observed with the scanning electron microscope. The results were shown in It can be seen from the The phenomenon caused by the application of organic binder can be also revealed from the changes of grain size composition. Because of the high-molecular polymer and the long chain with many active functional groups, the organic binder can adhere several or dozens of particles to form a big aggregate. As shown in There are several action modes between the active functional groups of organic binder and the particle surface of concentrate, including hydrogen bonds, chemical bonds or chemical reactions [ This ionic polyacrylamide can promote the particles agglomeration from two aspects. The zeta potential was reduced because of the dissolution of ionic polyacrylamide, which increased the ion concentration. Intermolecular force is in direct proportion to zeta potential. The decrease of intermolecular force means that particles agglomeration is more likely to happen [ Therefore, the organic binder's application can change the surface characteristics of the UMC. And that can be easily found in Then researched how organic binder affected the porosity of green pellets with the software Image J, and the results were given in As previously mentioned, the cracking temperature of the green pellets with 1.75% bentonite (configuration I)is 350 °C, and the one with 0.8% bentonite and 0.05% organic binder (configuration II) reaches 480 °C. Therefore, the drying test has been carried out under 350 °C and 480 °C. The results were given in According to the existence form of water, the drying process of green pellets also can be divided into two stages, volatilization of molecular water and capillary water. During the process of molecular water volatilizing, few green pellets cracked. However, the green pellets are more likely to crack when the capillary water highly volatilized. Therefore, how to improve the molecular water content and reduce the proportion of capillary water is the key to reduce the happening of cracking [ According to the research of Rumpf H., there was a positive correlation between the crushing strength and tensile strength for drying pellets [ The crushing strength changes of drying pellets have been measured under 350 °C and 480 °C, respectively. The results were given in Contrasting However, the strength of configuration II was lower than that of configuration I at the same temperature. This phenomenon reflected that the improvement of green pellets' cracking temperature did not stem from the promotion of tensile strength. When the raw materials and producing process were fixed, the available way to improve the cracking temperature is to select an appropriate binder, which can improve adhesive strength between the particles as well as the porosity, and also can reduce the drying rate. However, the effect of binder on the cracking temperature is quite complicated. Both the positive functions and the negative effects exist at the same time. For example, the application of binder may change the green pellets water content. Although the higher water content can increase the porosity, too many pores will lead to the strength reduction. Besides, high water content may also lead to the reduction of the cracking temperature due to the faster drying rate. Therefore, it is necessary to recognize how the binder affects the cracking temperature synthetically. The details were shown in To explain the effects mentioned above, quantitative analysis has beenbrought in. According to the formula of Kozeny-Carman, the inner-pressure(ΔP) during the second stage of the drying process can be calculated as follows [ According to the formula of H. Rumpf, the tensile strength(σ) can be calculated as follows [ Further, the cracking index, which was calculated with the tensile strength and the inner-pressure, was brought in. The calculation method was below. Before the calculation, an assumption has been made that the cracking index of configuration I at 350 °C is 1 as well as the index of configuration II at 480 °C. And the reason why selected the two temperature is that both of them approach the cracking temperature so that they can be regarded as the critical values. Then the indexes were tested at 350 °C, 480 °C and 500 °C, respectively. The results were given in According to  Compared with the OMC, the UMC had more fine particles and larger specific surface area, which meant more compact structure of its pellet. These characteristics made the inner water hard to volatilize and then caused the reduction of the cracking temperature of green pellets. The application of the organic binder helped to improve the cracking temperature. When the dosage of bentonite and organic binder were 0.8% and 0.05%, respectively, the cracking temperature of green pellet reached 500 °C, with 125 °C higher than the one added bentonite only. The existence of polar groups and hydrophilic groups in organic binder was the main factor improving the cracking temperature. The polar groups can promote the agglomeration of tiny particles and improve the porosity of green pellets from 16.68% to 23.15%. The hydrophilic groups increased the molecular water content so that the drying rate was reduced and then made the inner water volatilizing slowly. The research was financially supported by the