Tricaprylmethylammonium chloride (Aliquat-336) diluted with kerosene was used to extract cerium(IV) from nitric acid medium. Various alcohols were used as modifiers to overcome the third phase problem. The different parameters affecting the extraction process including nitric, nitrate, hydrogen ion, extractant and metal concentrations as well as the temperature were separately investigated. The effect of the investigated alcohols on the extraction process was also studied in detail at two different concentrations and correlated to their physical constants. Based on the obtained results, the extraction equilibrium was deduced and the optimum conditions for the extraction of cerium(IV) were proposed. The method was tested and applied to the separation of cerium from the hydrous oxide cake resulting from monazite sand.The mineral monazite is primarily composed of rare earth phosphates especially those of low atomic numbers (cerium group) along with numerous other minor constituents. The formula of this mineral may be written as (Ce,La,Nd,Th)PO Although some text books imply that the rare earth elements and yttrium are all produced by ion exchange, only a few heavy elements are purified commercially by such method. For large-scale production the chosen path is solvent extraction, usually in nitrate solutions ( In the TRUEX process, CMPO is used as an extractant and TBP as a phase modifier. In a previous work, a modified leaching and extraction process of uranium from hydrous oxide cake of Egyptian monazite was developed ( All chemicals and reagents used were analytical reagent grade. Ammonium ceric nitrate, Aliquat-336 and 1-butanol were Merck products. Nitric acid, sodium bromate, 1-hexanol, 1-heptanol and 1-octanol were obtained from BDH. 1-nonanol was supplied from Reanal, while kerosene (non-aromatic) was supplied by Misr Petroleum Ltd. Company. Cerium(IV) was kept in the tetravalent state by dissolving a certain weight of ammonium ceric nitrate giving 1 g Ce/L in 4 M HNO Cerium(IV) in the aqueous phase was spectrophotometrically determined by formaldoxime method ( The extraction procedure was performed by shaking equal volumes (5 ml) of the aqueous and organic phases in stoppered glass tubes for 30 min using a thermostated shaking water bath adjusted at 25 °C. Preliminary experiments showed that a contact time of 15 min is sufficient to reach the extraction equilibrium. To determine the cerium concentration, known aliquot volumes were taken from the aqueous phase before and after extraction for spectrophotometric assay. The distribution ratio, Aliquat-336 dissolved in kerosene was used as extractant for Ce(IV) from nitrate medium. The alcohols used as phase modifier were 1-butanol, 1-hexanol, 1-heptanol, 1-octanol and 1-nonanol. Two concentrations of alcohols used through this work; namely, 10 vol.% and 20 vol.%. The influence of nitric acid concentration on the extraction of 1 g/L Ce(IV) was investigated in the range 0.5–4 M using 0.5 M Aliquat-336 in kerosene containing 10 vol.% of the alcohol modifiers. The relations between the nitric acid concentration in the aqueous phase and the respective extraction percent are represented in The effect of hydrogen ion concentration at 2 M [NO The effect of the variation of Aliquat-336 concentration within the range 0.1–0.7 M on the extraction of Ce(IV) from 2 M nitric acid was studied. It was found that the extraction of Ce(IV) increased by increasing Aliquat-336 concentration in the presence of 10% alcohol. The slopes of log–log linear relationships between the extractant concentrations with the corresponding distribution ratios were found to be around two in the investigated system ( Increasing the nitrate concentration from 2 to 4 M at a given acidity (2 M) using 0.5 M Aliquat-336 in kerosene in presence of the investigated alcohols was found to decrease the extraction of Ce(IV). Plotting the nitrate concentration against the distribution ratio (D) as a log–log relation ( The increasing tendency of the extraction of cerium from 2 M HNO From the above results, it is clear that as the carbon chain number of the modifier increases and the dielectric constant decreases from hexanol to nonanol, the extraction of cerium(IV) increases. The studied parameters in the previous system are also considered here in this system and the results are tabulated instead of represented graphically to avoid repetition. Thus, as nitric acid concentration increased from 0.5 to 4 M, the extraction percent of Ce(IV) by 0.5 M Aliquat-336/kerosene/20 vol.% alcohol increased, The change of extractant concentration was found to increase the extraction percent of Ce(IV) from 2 M HNO On the other hand, the extraction percent and hence the distribution ratio of Ce(IV) were found to be inversely proportional to the increase in the nitrate ion concentration through the range 2–4 M, The effect of phase ratio is also illustrated in Based on the preceding results, the extraction equilibrium of Ce(IV) by Aliquat-336 in kerosene from nitrate medium can be written as: The extraction constant, Thus, the optimum concentration of the alcohol is 20%, giving appropriate solubilization of the extractant in the mixed diluent. Higher distribution ratios are obtained in the presence of 1-butanol compared to 1-hexanol for example, which, however, solubilizes the extractant less effectively than other alcohols. The increase of temperature in the range 15–45 °C decreased the extraction of cerium when extracted by 0.5 M Aliquat-336 in kerosene with the different modifiers from 2 M HNO The plot of ln As shown in Stripping studies were carried out on organic solution consisting of 0.5 M Aliquat-336 in kerosene containing 20% octanol after extraction of 1 g/L Ce(IV) from 2 M HNO The aforementioned results of cerium extraction were used to separate cerium from monazite sand. Egyptian monazite was found to contain uranium, thorium and rare earths in respective concentrations of 0.54, 5.26 and 54.70 wt.% ( In a previous work, a modified leaching and extraction process of uranium from hydrous oxide cake of Egyptian monazite was developed ( As shown schematically in  Ce(IV) can be extracted by Aliquat-336 dissolved in kerosene containing 10% or 20% of alcohol as phase modifier from nitric acid solution. Increasing the acid concentration increased the extraction while the change in H Extraction percent increased with Aliquat-336 concentration and slope analysis in the different investigated systems indicated that two extractant molecules participate in the extracted metal species. Stripping of Ce(IV) from loaded Aliquat-336/kerosene/alcohol solution was successfully performed using diluted nitric acid. After complete digestion of Egyptian monazite sample and separation of uranium and thorium, the rare earths fraction was dissolved in nitric acid. Cerium was oxidized to Ce(IV) by sodium bromate, extracted with Aliquat-336/kerosene/octanol system, stripped by diluted HNO The recovery of 96% of Ce(IV) indicates the efficiency and the applicability of the proposed process for separation of cerium from monazite sand. The author would like to express his deep thanks to Prof. Dr. H.F. Aly and Prof. Dr. J.A. Daoud for their valuable support and continuous guidance through this work.