This paper will present Commissioning and Operation Status of Taganito HPAL Plant Project in the Philippines. The Project will produce 30,000 Ni-tons and 2600 Co-tons per year as Mixed (Ni/Co) Sulfide for export to Sumitomo Metal Mining Co., Ltd. (SMM) Nickel Refinery in Japan as its raw material. The plant is designed taking into consideration the improvements, technical data and operation know-how gained from the successful operation of Coral Bay Nickel Corporation (CBNC) in the Philippines, the sister company of Taganito HPAL Nickel Corporation (THPAL). The Plant Commissioning was completed in June 2014 and reached monthly production corresponding to its nameplate capacity in August 2014. After that, the operation has been stable. This paper will also discuss nickel leaching and removal performance of iron and aluminum in the autoclave at elevated temperatures for more efficient HPAL operation.The objective of Taganito HPAL Project is to produce 30,000 In year 2007, SMM started the bankable feasibility study for this project. In August 2008, THPAL was incorporated and the Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) contract was awarded to a Joint Venture consisting of JGC Corporation (JGC) and Chiyoda Corporation in 2009, then construction of the HPAL Plant was started in November 2010. Mechanical Completion was achieved and plant commissioning was started in June 2013 although construction was suspended for some period due to deterioration of public security in the project area. The plant was inaugurated in September 4, 2013. Finally, after maintaining more than 80% of operation load for two consecutive months, Completion of Work (COW) was declared in June 2014. In terms of plant design, 2-train system is applied for HPAL circuit with consideration on reliability of the process, facility. Generally the technical data, operation know-how and improvements gained in the successful operation of CBNC were reflected in THPAL Plant design. As for the H2S Plant, more economical design was considered, different from CBNC. Furthermore, the continuous HPAL pilot test and large scale test with 40,000 To help ensure the success of this project, commissioning team was organized. Some cadet engineers and operators were sent to CBNC to study actual HPAL operations to develop necessary skills and knowledge to commission the plant. CBNC also provided manpower support to lead the THPAL commissioning and operation. The mined ores of TMC are delivered by trucks to THPAL Plant site and then are processed to produce Mixed (Ni/Co) Sulfides and sent to Nickel Refinery in Japan. Laterite ores are wet-screened in this circuit and transferred to thickener to thicken ore to around 40 The Ore slurry is pre-heated up to 200 The exiting leach slurry is de-pressurized by a series of 3 flash tanks and sent to Pre-Neutralization Circuit. The recovered steam from the flash tanks is recycled back to the pre-heaters to heat the ore slurry prior to injection to the autoclave. The Leach slurry of about 50 Thickeners are used in this circuit to wash the leached slurry with Barren Liquor containing low nickel concentration from Sulfidization Circuit. The resulting Pregnant Liquor overflow is sent to Neutralization circuit. The thickened solids of about 50 The Pregnant Liquor from CCD circuit is neutralized with limestone slurry. The objective is to remove impurities such as iron, aluminum and chromium by precipitating them as hydroxides. The resulting solids are thickened and sent back to CCD circuit and the clear neutralized overflow is sent to Zn Removal circuit. The objective of this circuit is to remove zinc from the Pregnant liquor with H2S gas prior to the Sulfidization Circuit. Zinc is a major impurity of the final MS product as it will have adverse effects in the final refining process in Nickel Refinery in Japan. The precipitated ZnS solids are removed from the Pregnant Liquor using filters. The Zn-free Pregnant Liquor is sent to Sulfidization circuit for the complete precipitation of nickel and cobalt to produce Mixed Sulfides. H2S gas is used to recover over 99% of nickel and cobalt. The barren liquor, which contains 0.04 The leach residue thickened in CCD circuit and excess barren liquor from Sulfidization circuit are combined and treated in Final Neutralization circuit. The objective of this circuit is to remove the heavy metals such as manganese, iron and chromium with limestone slurry and slaked lime slurry. The neutralized slurry is discharged to the Tailings Dam. A certain part of the supernatant in the Tailings Dam is recycled back to the plant to be used in the production of limestone and slaked lime slurry. Excess Supernatant is discharged to the sea. As shown in Generally, several kinds of impurities contained in ore are dissolved in the HPAL process. For example, iron in laterite is dissolved as ferric ion and ferrous ion. In the autoclave, most of the ferric ions form into hematite through hydrolysis under elevated temperatures of more than 200 First, nickel leaching reaction was evaluated. The relationship between nickel content in leach residue and free acid tenor (FAT) in leach slurry at each temperature is shown in Next, high temperature hydrolysis reaction of ferric sulfate in the autoclave was investigated. Autoclave leach slurry sample was taken after depressurization down to atmospheric pressure at flash tank, since the autoclave was not equipped with sampling system to withdraw slurry through a dip tube with heat exchanger. Ferric concentration was determined by subtraction of ferrous concentration measured by titration analysis with K Also, Oxidation–Reduction Potential (ORP) value of leach slurry has a great impact on total iron concentration ( Aluminum hydrolysis behavior at elevated temperature was also reviewed. According to In this study, it was clarified that nickel in the ore was extracted selectively at higher operating temperature in the HPAL autoclave, since iron and aluminum precipitation reaction were enhanced in these conditions. Completion of Works (COW) was achieved in 5 In this report, the effect of HPAL autoclave operating temperature on nickel, iron and aluminum extractions was reviewed. An increase in operating temperature of HPAL improved nickel recovery and lowered operating costs for the plant. The following points summarize the findings. Nickel extraction in laterite was enhanced drastically at the operating temperature of 249 High temperature hydrolysis reaction of iron and aluminum are far from equilibrium state in THPAL autoclave. Iron and aluminum hydrolysis reaction are enhanced drastically at 250 It was clarified that autoclave operation still had potential to improve nickel selective recovery with increase in operating temperature because high temperature hydrolysis reaction of ferric sulfate and aluminum sulfate in the THPAL autoclave did not reach the equilibrium state even at 254 The authors acknowledge the valuable support of their colleagues from different departments and disciplines in THPAL and SMM who have been so supportive since this HPAL project was started.