Fracture toughness of three crystalline Calcite marbles, which are different only in grain size and distribution, is determined under modes I and II and mixed mode I–II loading conditions using Cracked Chevron-Notched Brazilian Disc (CCNBD) and Hollow Centre Cracked Disc (HCCD) specimens. The results show that mode I fracture toughness (K
                     IC
                     ) is correlated negatively with grain size. For each marble, HCCD yields lower values of fracture toughness, compared with CCNBD. This difference is negligible under mode I loading condition; while it becomes larger as loading condition transits from mode I to mode II. Measured values of P-wave velocity (V
                     
                        P
                     ), Brazilian tensile strength (σ
                     
                        tB
                     ) and Schmidt hammer hardness are in direct relation with K
                     IC
                      of the marbles. The obtained results are compared with three fracture criteria, in which the Minimum Strain Energy Density (MSED) criterion has provided better correlations with different critical combinations of modes I and II Stress Intensity Factors.According to the applied stress condition on a cracked body,a crack-tip propagates under the three basic modes, namely: mode I (tensile, opening), mode II (shear, in-plane sliding) and mode III (tearing, out-of-plane sliding) Fracture mechanics approaches are of growing importance in rock engineering subjects. Rock fracture toughness is known as a fundamental parameter in rock fracture mechanics which represents the potential intrinsic ability of rock to withstand a given stress field at the tip of a crack and to resist against progressive crack extension. This parameter can be assessed experimentally by using different testing specimens and loading configurations. But due to its special part in a wide variety of applications in different fields of rock mechanics, measuring accurate and precise value of this parameter always has been of utmost importance. Consequently, investigations on different measurement techniques of rock fracture toughness have been of great concern. In 1995, the International Society for Rock Mechanics (ISRM) suggested the use of Cracked Chevron-Notched Brazilian Disc (CCNBD) specimen in diametrical compression to determine mode I fracture toughness ( Schematic views and geometrical dimensions of CCNBD and HCCD specimens are presented in It is shown that rock characteristics in microscale (e.g. size and shape of the grains, type and density of microcracks, etc.) play a dominant role in physical and mechanical properties of rock. The effect of initial crack density and grain size on uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) The first objective of the present experimental research work is to examine using HCCD specimen in rock fracture toughness tests under modes I, II and mixed mode I–II loading conditions. For this reason, fracture toughness values of three crystalline Calcite marbles, i.e. Neiriz, Baghat and Maron, are measured under these loading conditions, using both CCNBD and HCCD specimens. Comparison between the two specimens, in terms of their preparation and yielded results, provides a realistic evaluation of HCCD specimen. Secondly, this study aims to investigate the effect of grain size distribution on fracture toughness. Therefore, care is taken to select the marbles in a way that they have identical mineralogy, since their only constitutive mineral is Calcite; meanwhile they seem not to have similar distributions of grain size. Comparing fracture toughness values of the marbles can provide a better understanding of how grain size could affect fracture toughness. The two first parts of this section deal with physical/mechanical properties of the marbles and their grain size distributions in microscale. The third part describes the methodology of preparing the specimens, conducting the tests and calculating the fracture toughness values. The three marbles, selected from the construction stones in Iran, are excavated from neighbouring quarries. The marbles are monomineralic, as Calcite is their only constitutive mineral. This factor eliminates the effects of mineralogy on the obtained results. Also, the marbles are brittle enough to guarantee establishment of the Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM) conditions in this study. Physical/mechanical properties of the marbles are measured to verify possible correlations between fracture toughness and these parameters. The measured physical/mechanical parameters of the marbles are reported in Grain size distribution is an important geometric microparameter of rock, which affects its characteristics such as UCS The crystalline Calcite marbles have the same mineralogy but are assumed to be different in grain size distribution. On block sample of each marble, three orthogonal directions, i.e. To ensure that the entire area of the thin sections is covered, images were managed to be captured between designated parallel bands with at least 10% overlay between adjacent images. Using a graphic software, images from each thin section were merged together to reassemble the entire thin section as a mosaic in TIFF format. Reassembled mosaics of the thin sections were imported into a Geographic Information System (GIS) software and geometric scales of each imported mosaic were set in accordance with its corresponding thin section. Boundaries of the Calcites, the only constitutive mineral of the marbles, were drawn so that each mineral could be represented by an individual polygon. At the same time, petrographic studies using a polarising petrographic microscope were employed to benefit from optical properties of Calcite (e.g. extinction) in distinguishing between microcracks and mineral boundaries. For each thin section, values of polygons area were measured (in mm Using Two-Sample Adequate numbers of core samples (length 400 ISRM In order to perform the tests under mode I loading condition, CCNBD and HCCD specimens were placed between the upper and lower flat loading plates as the compressive loading plates were perpendicular to the direction of chevron notch/cracks (i.e. In addition to mode I, fracture toughness tests were performed under mode II and mixed mode I–II loading conditions. This was simply achieved by differing the angle between loading direction and chevron notch/cracks orientation (i.e. For CCNBD specimens, values of pure By applying Straight Through Crack Assumption (STCA), Chang et al. Fracture toughness under various combinations of modes I and II loadings can be calculated for HCCD using the following equations The results of modes I, II and mixed mode I–II fracture toughness tests are presented in this section. Discussion on these results is categorised based on the marble and specimen types. The relation between A core sample from each marble was designated for this part of the study. In order to examine the relation between Based on the measured Pure As mentioned before, two orthogonal directions (i.e. In each case, standard deviation of the measured In view of specimen type only, standard deviation values of all the cases were categorised in two groups. Averaged standard deviation of CCNBD and HCCD is 0.557 and 0.612, respectively. It indicates that CCNBD with V-shaped notch, have provided more reproducible results, compared to HCCD with straight cracks. It is believed that when mode I loading is dominant, the chevron shape provides a relatively long period of stable crack growth under an essentially increasing load, from the initial crack length ( Regardless of specimen and marble type, standard deviation in the results of modes I, II and mixed I–II equals to 0.485, 0.509 and 0.671, respectively. It means that when both modes I and II are in role, reproduction of similar results from a test can be significantly reduced.  In all of the cases in Results of the two specimen types are compared in The Maximum Tangential Stress (MTS) It should be noted that only direction of crack initiation ( The employed microscopic method for quantifying the marbles grain size distribution could be totally suitable for analytical/numerical modelling and other applications in which precise quantification of crystalline rocks grain size distribution is necessary. This microscopic study proved the validity of the primitive assumption, namely: the marbles have the same mineralogy but different grain size distributions. Additionally, it showed that none of the marbles have comparable grain size distributions in their three orthogonal planes, while macroscopic primary evaluations had not detected any sign of anisotropy in the marbles. Since pure The results suggest that pure The correlation between Compared to MTS and MERR criteria, MSED criterion provided better correlations with the obtained results. Also, HCCD results were closer to MSED predictions rather than CCNBD. Consistency of HCCD and CCNBD results tend to descend as loading condition transits from mode I to mode II; so that, under pure mode II results of the two specimens are hardly comparable. It may be concluded that Although common macroscopic examinations failed to detect any anisotropy in the marbles and all of the specimens were prepared under excellent precision and also the four specimens for each testing case were prepared from one core sample, their results ( Under mode I loading, V-shaped (chevron) crack results in the automatic formation of a sharp natural crack in the specimen. This also provides a smaller FPZ, compared to a straight crack. It is often suggested to use pre-cracking for specimens with straight cracks to modify their fracture pattern and to obtain reasonable and reproducible results from them. Considering the difficulties of pre-cracking, introduction of V-shaped cracks instead of straight cracks is preferred. Adoption of chevron cracks instead of straight cracks in HCCD is also expected to enhance the reproducibility of its results under mode I loading. Measuring the marbles mode I fracture toughness using HCCD with chevron cracks constitutes the plan for future research on this topic. It is often proposed to estimate fracture toughness via established experimental relations between this parameter and physical/mechanical properties of rock. In spite of several reported cases in which these relations have provided good estimations of