A re-evaluation of overcoring results from the Borre Probe and the CSIRO HI cell was carried out at the Äspö HRL. The re-analysis revealed a number of measurement-related uncertainties for the two cells, e.g. bonding, temperature effects and identification of elastic parameters. These uncertainties were corrected and the re-analyzed strains were then used to determine the in situ stress field using standard least-squares technique. The results indicate lower stress magnitudes compared to the original interpretations and the results are in good agreement with existing hydraulic fracturing data as well as with theoretical vertical stress. Overall, the re-analysis indicates that the stress field at Äspö HRL is well constrained and relatively consistent with depth.Borehole relief methods of deformation-type have been used to measure the state of stress for about five decades At the Äspö Hard Rock Laboratory (HRL) of the Swedish Nuclear Fuel and Waste Management Co., SKB ( A rock sample is, partially or entirely, isolated and relieved from the stress field in the surrounding rock volume during overcoring Analysis of overcoring strain data includes three main groups of uncertainties: (1) natural; (2) measurement-related; and (3) data-analysis-related These three main groups of uncertainties are generally difficult to quantify numerically for stress calculation, although some uncertainties can be corrected for if the test has been fully documented. It is therefore essential to document all field and laboratory work, such as daily logs, drilling protocols, core mapping with respect to grain size distribution, glue bonding, and air bubbles in the glue, to obtain good quality results. Interpretation of overcoring strain data can be made at three different scales The Borre Probe is a CSIR-type of cell and an improved version of the SSPB-cell (Swedish State Power Board, e.g. Three different versions of the CSIRO HI cell have been used; the 9-gauge cell, the 12-gauge cell with thick hollow-inclusion, and the 12-gauge cell with thin hollow-inclusion (e.g. The determination of stress using the recorded strains from the Borre Probe and the CSIRO HI cells are based on the following relationships: As shown in The initial strain gauge readings are taken at a stable point before flush-water is turned on ( A close examination of the strain gauge response at the initiation of flush-water (which for the Borre Probe normally is 5–10 The poor sampling frequency during the overcoring phase made the analysis of overcoring data from the CSIRO HI cells difficult, especially regarding identification of malfunctioning strain gauges The analysis of strain data from the CSIRO HI cells was therefore extended to include the strain versus time response during overcoring, as well as a careful examination of the recorded strains in each borehole The biaxial test sequence includes both loading and unloading of the overcore sample to reveal its elastic properties. The elastic parameters are determined from the unloading stress path cycles The elastic properties are derived using the theory for an infinitely long, thick-walled hollow cylinder subject to uniform external pressure, and the assumption that plane stress applies (e.g. The calculated in situ rock stresses are directly related to the Young's modulus while the effect of varying Poisson's ratio is more complex and usually less important compared to the effect of Young's modulus (cf. The biaxial tests from the CSIRO HI cell are radially fractured due to too high loads during the biaxial test (15–20 If the temperature at the time of final strain reading is not allowed to reach the temperature at the initial strain reading, the stress field may not be fully relieved. For the Borre Probe measurements, seven out of 27 tests were corrected based on a 2–3°C temperature difference between the post- and pre-reading of strains ( The temperature measuring gauge in the current version of the Borre Probe The CSIRO HI data include strain records up to 10 Boundary yield occurs when friction generated by the drilling heats up both the overcoring annulus and the cell, which leads to softening of the adhesive grout. If yield occurs at the boundary between the cell and the rock in the adhesive grout, and/or if it occurs in the rock substrate, the cell will be exposed to longitudinal and radial expansion. The radial expansion is limited by a proportion of the relaxation related to overcoring relief, the thermal expansion of the rock annulus, and the volume of softened grout extruded from annulus The majority (9 of 12) of boreholes indicates increasing axial strain and rotation of Because the borehole direction influences the axial strain magnitude, the data have been divided two groups with respect to the average orientation of An independent estimate of the distribution of axial strains with depth can be obtained from hydraulic fracturing stress data The CSIRO HI data commonly display high temperatures immediately after the end of drilling (e.g. Based on the identification of boundary yield according to the three indicators above, corrections were applied to data in boreholes 45A, 54A, 92A, 23A, 99A, 10A, 70A, 68A, and 59B. The total effect of boundary yield concerns longitudinal and radial expansion of the cell. If not corrected, the longitudinal expansion will result in overestimation of stress in the borehole direction and in the plane perpendicular to the borehole axis, whereas the radial expansion overestimates of the stresses in the plane perpendicular to the borehole axis. Because the longitudinal expansion of the cell can be visualized by the axial strain magnitudes versus rotation of Thus, the boundary yield correction applied in this study only involves the longitudinal expansion. This correction is based on the measurement point with the minimum average axial strain, which is assumed not to have yielded. The average axial magnitudes for the remaining measurements in that borehole were reduced to that minimum strain value. The applied correction also involves the 45°-/135°-inclined strain gauges, which are corrected with a factor of 0.5 times the axial strain reduction (see The applied correction for boundary yield lowers the stress magnitudes, as shown in The original interpretations of Poisson's ratio from CSIRO HI cores indicate higher values than anticipated, which has been attributed to core fracturing (range 0.21–0.49 with average 0.36 The stress calculations have been conducted at the measuring location scale (single boreholes) using standard least-squares technique, and using the empirical Chauvenet's criterion The re-interpreted results generally agree well with results from inversion of both hydraulic fracturing stress data ( The re-analysis have small impact on the orientation of The applied analysis has showed that the observed differences in results between overcoring and hydraulic fracturing stress data at Äspö HRL, as well as between the different overcoring cells, to a large extent are attributed to measurement-related uncertainties in the overcoring data. Some of the uncertainties are not cell-dependent, but rather the result of poorly conducted tests. Consequently, when corrected for, the stress field can be quite well constrained with depth. Recommendations for future testing are discussed below together with the applied corrections and data-analysis-related uncertainties for the two cells. To avoid measurement-related uncertainties in future field testing following general recommendations are made: (1) the strain analysis should include about 30 The temperature corrections are the smallest correction applied, and have in average increased the stress magnitudes by about 1 The identification of measurements that suffer from boundary yield has been entirely based on the correlation between increasing axial strains versus rotation of The applied correction for boundary yield was only applied to axial and inclined strain gauges based on longitudinal expansion of the cell, because this expansion was much more pronounced than the radial expansion. The elastic parameters obtained from biaxial tests on cores from the CSIRO HI cells are a source of uncertainty. The reported values for Young's modulus have been used because they are similar to those of the Borre Probe. On the other hand, the reported values for Poisson's ratio were discarded because they are much greater than those of the Borre Probe A somewhat surprising result is that some of the original interpretations of the Borre Probe data For the CSIRO HI cell, the main uncertainty is related to neglecting the effect of boundary yield. This has, in this study, been regarded as a measurement-related uncertainty, because the yield can be correlated to the measurement. The most likely reason for this yield is either improper choice of glue and/or rapid drilling, inducing large temperatures in the rock. A large number of overcoring test results from the Äspö HRL has been re-interpreted using a new analysis methodology. The applied analysis has identified a number of measurement-related uncertainties in the Borre Probe and the CSIRO HI data. For the Borre Probe these include temperature corrections, improper gluing of rosettes, and questionable quality of glue mixture. Corresponding uncertainties for the CSIRO HI cells concern choice of glue (leading to boundary yield effects), temperature corrections, poorly conducted biaxial tests, and poor sampling frequency during overcoring. The results of the stress calculation using the re-analyzed and corrected data show a reduction in the magnitudes of horizontal and vertical stresses. Overall, the re-analysis indicates that the stress field at Äspö HRL is well constrained, with good agreement between the re-analyzed overcoring data and hydraulic fracturing data. The NE-2 fracture zone appears to impact on the stress field orientation at Äspö HRL, dividing the rock stress data into an Eastern and Western block based on the average orientation of This work was supported by the Swedish Nuclear Fuel and Waste Management Co. (SKB). My supervisor Ove Stephansson is acknowledged for guidance throughout my Ph.D. work. Review comment by the following persons helped me focus the manuscript: Francois-Henri Cornet (IPGP, France); Maria Ask (Luleå University of Technology, Sweden); C. Derek Martin (University of Alberta, Canada); Jonny Sjöberg (SwedPower Co., Sweden); Lennart Ekman (LE Geokonsult Co., Sweden); and Rolf Christiansson (SKB, Sweden).