α-Tricalcium phosphate (α-TCP) is widely used as a reactant in calcium phosphate cements. This work aims at doping α-TCP with silicon with a twofold objective. On the one hand, to study the effect of Si addition on the stability and reactivity of this polymorph. On the other, to develop Si-doped cements and to evaluate the effect of Si on their in vitro cell response. For this purpose a calcium-deficient hydroxyapatite was sintered at 1250°C with different amounts of silicon oxide. The high temperature polymorph α-TCP was stabilized by the presence of silicon, which inhibited reversion of the β→α transformation, whereas in the Si-free sample α-TCP completely reverted to the β-polymorph. However, the β–α transformation temperature was not affected by the presence of Si. Si–α-TCP and its Si-free counterpart were used as reactants for a calcium phosphate cement. While Si–α-TCP showed faster hydrolysis to calcium-deficient hydroxyapatite, upon complete reaction the crystalline phases, morphology and mechanical properties of both cements were similar. An in vitro cell culture study, in which osteoblast-like cells were exposed to the ions released by both materials, showed a delay in cell proliferation in both cases and stimulation of cell differentiation, more marked for the Si-containing cement. These results can be attributed to strong modification of the ionic concentrations in the culture medium by both materials. Ca-depletion from the medium was observed for both cements, whereas continuous Si release was detected for the Si-containing cement.Calcium phosphate cements (CPC) have been successfully used as synthetic bone grafts for the last three decades due to their excellent biocompatibility, bioactivity and osteoconductivity One of the most common reactants for CPC is α-tricalcium phosphate (α-Ca The interest of doping α-TCP with silicon is twofold. On the one hand, it can stabilize this phase at low temperature, facilitating the fabrication process, which requires high temperature thermal treatments and in many cases fast cooling or quenching to avoid reversion of the reconstructive β The preparation of silicon-containing CPC is a field that is attracting increasing interest. The most common approach is based on the combination of calcium phosphate powder with either calcium silicate powders The aim of this paper was to assess the effect of silicon on the stabilization of the α-TCP phase, and on reversion of the β As a first part of the study the effect of silica addition on the stability of α-TCP was investigated. A commercial HA (CalbioChem, reference No. 391948) with a low level of Mg contamination was selected as starting reactant, since Mg is known to be a β-stabilizer The chemical composition of the HA was measured by inductively coupled plasma (ICP) spectroscopy. Ca, P, Na, K, Si and Fe were analyzed by ICP optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) (Perkin Elmer Optima 3200 RL); Mg, Al, Sr, Mn and Zn by ICP mass spectrometry (ICP-MS, Perkin Elmer Elan 6000). The HA was dissolved in an acidic aqueous solution (2% HCl) at a concentration of 750 The specific surface area (SSA) of the reactants was analyzed by N HA and SiO Differential thermal analysis (DTA) (Netzsch STA-409) was performed at a heating rate of 5 The phase compositions of the reactants and the sintered doped and undoped α-TCP were assessed by high resolution X-ray diffraction (XRD) (PANalytical, X’Pert PRO Alpha-1). The X-ray powder diffraction measurements were obtained by scanning in Bragg–Brentano geometry using Cu The presence of an amorphous phase was evaluated by the external standard method, adding a known amount of a zinc oxide standard (Panreac reference No. 141786–1210) to the Si–α-TCP (prepared with 2.54 Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra from 400 to 4000 In the second part of the work the sample with the highest Si-stabilized α-TCP content (2.54 The setting times of the CPC obtained with Si–α-TCP and α-TCP were measured in triplicate using Gilmore needles. The cohesion of CPC pastes was evaluated by visual inspection after placing the paste in distilled water at 37 Human osteoblast-like Saos-2 cells (ATCC-HTB85) were used as the cell model. The cells were maintained in cell culture flasks in an incubator with a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO The cell culture study was performed by an indirect method in order to assess the effect of ionic exchange between the cements and the culture medium. This method allows discrimination between ion exchange effects and the effect of the cement surface properties (roughness, potential, topography, etc.). Cement discs (15 At each medium exchange and at the end of the culture period samples were collected from the culture medium to determine [P] and [Si] by ICP-OES, and [Ca] and pH were measured by means of a selective electrode (Ilyte: Ca Cell proliferation and cell differentiation were evaluated at 6 Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, an early marker of osteoblast differentiation that is expressed just before matrix mineralization begins The data were analyzed using Student’s  The amount of amorphous phase, determined by the external standard method, was 13.8 The effect of silica addition on the transition temperatures was analyzed by differential thermal analysis. The curves obtained for the HA powder, the SiO The FTIR spectra of Si-stabilized α-TCP prepared with different SiO The initial setting time of Si–CPC was 8–9 The setting reaction was also followed by FTIR ( The microstructures of the Si-doped and undoped cements after 24  The ALP activity of the cells reached a maximum at day 14 in all series and was significantly enhanced in the cells cultured in the presence of Si–CPC or CPC ( In parallel, the concentrations of Ca, P and Si ions in and the pH of the medium were quantified. [Ca] in the control medium was initially 0.8 It is known that the relative stability of the different TCP polymorphs is strongly influenced by the presence of some impurities. For instance, Mg has been shown to increase the β The addition of silicon stabilized the α-phase, which was retained upon slow cooling, as assessed by XRD and DTA ( The minimum amount of Si to effectively stabilize the α-phase is still not clear, since it depends on many factors, such as the Ca/(P In addition to the crystalline phases reported, 13.8 No significant changes were detected in the lattice parameters of the Si-stabilized α-TCP ( Finally, the comparison of the FTIR spectra of Si-containing and Si-free samples confirmed the presence of β-cristobalite in the Si-containing samples ( In the second part of the work, the effect of Si-doping on the hydration behavior and final features of an α-TCP cement was analyzed, in terms of physico-chemical properties and cell response. Si–CPC was shown to have an appropriate handling time for clinical use. The setting kinetics of Si–CPC were faster than those of CPC, as revealed by slightly shorter setting and cohesion times, and the faster transformation to calcium-deficient HA ( No evidence was found that Si was incorporated in the precipitated HA produced by the setting reaction, which is in agreement with other reported works Another objective of the study was to correlate the cell response with ion exchange between the materials and the culture medium, and for this reason the cells were cultured in inserts in the presence of the different materials. The evolution of the Ca, P and Si concentrations in the culture medium surrounding the cells was monitored. The medium in the presence of CPC and Si–CPC had very low [Ca] ( As shown by the present data, cell behavior was strongly affected by changes in the ionic concentrations in the culture medium. The pattern of proliferation was very similar for the cells in the presence of the two cements, being significantly delayed in comparison with cells in the control medium ( Cells in the presence of both CPC and Si–CPC showed an increase in ALP activity compared with the control medium, although the kinetics were not affected ( Interestingly, the Si-containing CPC elicited significantly higher ALP activity by 14 α-TCP was stabilized by the addition of Si in a calcium-deficient HA. Reversion of the β This work was supported by the Certain figures in this article, particularly Figures 1–3, 5, 6, 9 and 10, are difficult to interpret in black and white. The full color images can be found in the on-line version, at doi: