A powder mixture of 55wt% Ni and 45wt% Ti was prepared by mixing in a ball mill. The samples were then compacted at 300, 400, 500 and 700MPa, and sintered at 950°C for 9h under controlled atmosphere (argon) to decrease the oxidation process. The same thing was made for the samples with V and Cr additives. The samples after being sintered were found to consist of two phases (martensite and austenite) at room temperature. It was found that increasing of the compacting pressure (for all samples) increases the hardness, decreases the porosity but has little effect on the transformation temperatures. The sample with 0.3wt% Cr compacted at 700MPa had nearly the same properties (porosity, transformation temperatures and hardness) comparing to reference thermal archwires.The term shape memory alloys (SMA) is applied to that group of metallic materials that demonstrate the ability to return to some previously defined shape or size when subjected to the appropriate thermal procedure. Generally, these materials can be plastically deformed at some relatively low temperature, and upon exposure to some higher temperature will return to their shape prior to the deformation. Materials that exhibit shape memory only upon heating are referred to as having a one-way shape memory. Some materials also undergo a change in shape upon recooling. These materials have a two-way shape memory. The development of modern orthodontics is notably related to the development of biomaterials. NiTi is one of the most important materials used in that field because of its biocompatibility, corrosion resistance, superelasticity and shape memory effect NiTi has unique properties that could be very useful in surgical applications. Thermal shape memory, superelasticity and good damping properties make it possible for such alloys to behave differently compared to ordinary implant metals Thermal (with both martensitic and austenitic phases) and austenitic NiTi archwires (produced by casting) were bought and analyzed for their chemical composition using EDS. Vickers hardness was also measured as an average of 10 readings. The transformation temperatures were obtained for the samples using the differential scanning calorimeter (DSC) by taking 6 Three hundred and fifty grams of Ni–Ti powder mixture (mother; 55 After mixing, four of the mother samples each of 5 Hardness measurements were made by taking the average of 10 random readings. The samples were weighed, the diameter and thickness were measured, hence the apparent density can be calculated, by knowing the theoretical density of the samples, the porosity was calculated. The phases formed during sintering were detected using the XRD technique for the mother as well as for the highest percentages of additives (i.e. 0.3 A reference NiTi archwires (the thermal and austenitic archwires) were analyzed using EDS. The chemical compositions of these two wires are shown in The reference thermal dental archwire has 44.61 An X-ray diffraction test was done for the mother and mother with the highest percentage of additives (0.3 M: martensite (monoclinic); B The particle size range used in this work (for Ti, Ni, Cr and V) was in the range used by others who worked on the same field of shape memory alloys The low compacting rate used (0.5 The phases produced as a result of the sintering process were investigated using the XRD technique. It is seen from  The samples with 0.3 The average hardness measurements of 10 readings have been made for the reference thermal and austenitic NiTi specimens and also for the samples produced, in the work, by powder metallurgy approach. Each point represents the average of 10 readings. The results are represented graphically in Hardness measurements were made for the thermal and austenitic archwires; these values were compared to those of the prepared samples (by the powder metallurgy approach). Since the samples of this work were prepared by this technique, the hardness values were taken as the average of 10 random readings. As the compacting pressure is increased, the measured hardness value will increase. This agrees with the fact that as the compacting pressure is increased, the bonding between the particles becomes better (i.e. better interdiffusion) which in turn leads to more pores elimination. The samples compacted at 700  The porosity percentages of the reference thermal and austenitic NiTi (produced by casting) together with the porosity percentages of the samples prepared by the powder metallurgy approach are based on the density measurements according to Eq. For the mother sample and the samples with additives the theoretical density was considered to be 6.5 The reference thermal and austenitic archwires are of known mass, length and cross-sectional area; therefore, the density is easily calculated. The porosity of the reference archwires is represented graphically in The porosity percentage was maximum for the samples compacted at 300 The transformation temperatures, which are used to determine the temperature range at which the martensitic phase or/and the austenitic one exists, were measured with the DSC at a scan rate of 15 It is seen that the thermal archwire has an The influence of the compacting pressure as well as the Cr and V additions on  The thermal archwires consists of a mixture of two phases at room temperature (martensite and austenite) while the superelastic archwires consists only of one phase (austenite). The sample with 0.3 The samples sintered at 950 The higher the compacting pressure resulted in an increase in the amount of the phases produced by sintering. The higher the compacting pressure resulted in higher hardness and lower porosity. The compacting pressure had small influence on the transformation temperatures. The higher the compacting pressure, the more uniform distribution of the phases produced and furnace cooling might result in the formation of some Ni Much of this work has been done in the Department of Materials and Metallurgical Engineering Department, Al Balqa Applied University.