Evaluating control performance has attracted considerable interest in recent years. A set of performance indices appropriate to monitoring and assessment in flotation cells is presented and discussed in this paper. A graphical, user-friendly and interpretable program for displaying performance indices for operators has been developed. Finally, the testing results from flotation cells in a zinc plant are presented and discussed.A flotation plant consists of a number of flotation cells in series. Each flotation cell has a mechanism for air injection; launders for collecting the froth located at the top of the cell, and structures to funnel the froth towards the launders. Pulp level control in the flotation cells is a complex task because the operating limits are tight and the operating conditions vary ( Most of the control loops used in flotation cells are not operating efficiently. The consequences of this are increased raw material and energy consumption and a deterioration in product quality. Additional costs are also incurred as a result of malfunctions and the short life span of instruments because they are used defectively in control loops. During the last decades considerable effort has been placed on developing suitable indices for evaluating control performance. The evaluation methods can be divided into two categories: stochastic and deterministic methods. The most widely studied stochastic indices are those based on using of minimum variance controller (MVC) calculation as a benchmark. The variance of the process output is compared to the smallest, theoretically achievable variance, as initially discussed by Deterministic indicators are more informative in the case of a sudden load disturbance or a set-point change. Various dimensionless indices for set-point changes have been proposed in the literature, e.g. by It is also essential to detect oscillations in the system, caused by valve friction, bad controller tuning or an oscillating load disturbance. These oscillations can be identified by means of autocorrelation functions or spectral analyses ( A wide variety of commercial performance monitoring tools are nowadays available on the software market. Among the most common ones are the Process doctor The aim of this study is first to present methods that can be used in evaluation of performance of control loops in flotation and then to present a control performance monitoring program that uses these methods. Finally, the testing results from the flotation plant are presented and discussed. Monitoring can be based on calculating the deviations from the set-point values, e.g. the integrals of the error, or on process models, which make the assessment more accurate but, at the same time, more complex. Monitoring based on minimum variance control only requires output data from routine operation. The performance of the control loops are usually considered in three different states: a state with a set-point change, load disturbance rejection, and a normal operating state close to the steady-state conditions. Separate indices can be chosen to describe the control performance in these three different cases. Some indices are suitable for evaluating control performance in the case of a non-varying set-point. The permanent error (PE) between the set point and the measured process value is worth monitoring because it degrades the control loop performance and, in the case of oscillation, it can be difficult to detect the difference from process trend displays. A value of the largest acceptable error between the values of the set-point and the process measurement, denoted here as Oscillations around the set-point can be detected by using the method developed by If the value of the IAE Stochastic variations around the set-point value were selected for detection, e.g. by monitoring the integral of the squared error (ISE), An index denoted as ISU can be used as a measure of how much the control action changes. It is similar to the index ISE. The index will be large if the valve needs to move a considerable amount in order to maintain the set-point, and zero when no control action is necessary. The most popular index is the dimensionless index based on minimum variance control. It describes, how close the actual output variance is compared to the minimum achievable variance, obtained if a minimum variance controller is employed. The reason why we have minimal variance lies in the delay of the plant. The delay The output variance The following indices can be chosen for evaluating the control performance in a set-point change. Monitoring can be performed during a specific time period, the length of which is a multiple of the time constant. A response to a step change in a set-point value, and the key values that have to be determined from the process measurements in order to calculate the indices, are illustrated in Oscillations around the set-point can be observed using the method developed by After a step change in a set-point, there may be some oscillations before the process value settles down to the steady state. An index can be calculated to describe the size of the overshoot related to the step size by measuring the largest amplitude of the oscillation: Long-term differences from the set-point due to continuous oscillations or sluggish controller tuning can be chosen to be monitored by calculating the integral of the time-weighted absolute error (ITAE) In order to characterize the rise time and settling time, Disturbance rejection can be detected by the idle index. The index is defined by The index is bounded to the interval [−1,1]. A positive value of Undesirable performance of a control loop may also result from an inadequate actuator sizing, and not only from poor controller tuning. Therefore an index was developed to monitor the valve capacity. The value of the index describes the time The performance of level control loops can be examined in different ways. Important aspects for controlling the flotation process can be listed as follows: The accuracy of the controller describes the controllers ability to follow the set-point value. Usually error integrals or variances are used to measure this quality. The speed of the controller demonstrates the amount of time the controller takes to change the process value when a set-point changes. Rise time indices are used for this purpose. Disturbance tolerance characterizes the ability of the controller to cope with disturbances that can be measured. Noise sensitivity describes the stability of the controller reactions to sudden spikes or noise in process value measurements. Robustness of the controller describes the ability of the controller to act with wide range of process parameters. The valve capacity evaluates the validity of the actuator sizing. In the monitor program represented in this paper four indices for monitoring the performance of the level control loops in flotation are implemented as described above: a minimum variance index (MV), an ISE-index, a saturation index (SI), and an oscillation index (OCI). The program was developed using Visual Studio 6.0 software and programmed with Visual Basic. The program works as an OPC client and collects data from an OPC server at a specified rate, while calculating the performance indices at certain intervals for each configured loop using Matlab R12. The connection to the OPC server is established through TCP/IP network by giving an IP address of the OPC-server computer. After establishing the connection, the control loops are configured by giving a set-point, a measured value and an output of the control loop. The program then opens Matlab R12, creates matrices, and calculates the performance indices. The monitoring program was tested for the three level control loops of the flotation cells in Outokumpu Zinc plant in Kokkola. The loops discussed in more detail in this paper represent normal, oscillating and saturated controller behavior. The level control of the first of the six flotation cells in series in the zinc purification process has been taken as an example of a control loop describing normal behavior. Based on the output data shown in The level control of the second of the six flotation cells in series has been taken as an example of a control loop describing oscillating behavior. Based on the output data shown in The level control of the last of the six flotation cells in series has been taken as an example of a control loop describing saturated behavior. According to the output data in A monitoring tool for calculating performance indices of the control loops has been presented and discussed in this paper. The simulations and tests demonstrated that the indices were sufficient to provide the necessary information about the control performance. In plant testing, the output from the flotation cells indicated which control loops were well tuned and which were not. The calculated performance indices supported these assumptions. This monitoring tool could be used in flotation plants to monitor the key controllers for improving process control and product quality. In future research, more attention will be paid to prioritize the importance of different control loops and to translate the control performance indices to economical measures.