Nonlinear scattering of ultrasonic waves by closed cracks subject to contact acoustic nonlinearity (CAN) is determined using a 2D Finite Element (FE) coupled with an analytical approach. The FE model, which includes unilateral contact with Coulomb friction to account for contact between crack faces, provides the near-field solution for the interaction between in-plane elastic waves and a crack of different orientations. The numerical solution is then analytically extended in the far-field based on a frequency domain near-to-far field transformation technique, yielding directivity patterns for all linear and nonlinear components of the scattered waves. The proposed method is demonstrated by application to two nonlinear acoustic problems in the case of tone-burst excitations: first, the scattering of higher harmonics resulting from the interaction with a closed crack of various orientations, and second, the scattering of the longitudinal wave resulting from the nonlinear interaction between two shear waves and a closed crack. The analysis of the directivity patterns enables us to identify the characteristics of the nonlinear scattering from a closed crack, which provides essential understanding in order to optimize and apply nonlinear acoustic NDT methods.The detection of damage at early stage of fracture is of primary importance in many technologies, such as nuclear power plants or aeronautics. In the case of micro-cracks or closed cracks, the linear ultrasonic methods are less efficient but it has been proven in the past decade that nonlinear ultrasonics can bring an answer to this challenge. Many of these methods are based on the enrichment of the frequency content of the probing waves when interacting with the damage. The nonlinear effect involved in this interaction is related to contact dynamics and is called Contact Acoustic Nonlinearity (CAN) Numerically, both longitudinal and shear wave propagation through a rough surface were investigated in The purpose of this paper is to propose a generic method to compute the far field solution for the waves scattered by a closed crack when CAN is activated, including converted modes. In particular, the method is developed to provide a solution for the new frequency components generated by the contact dynamics triggered at the crack by the incident wave. Actually, for the development and the application of non-destructive methods based on nonlinear acoustics, it is fundamental to capture these new frequency components. Thus, the study scattering patterns corresponding to scattered higher harmonics is a valuable knowledge. Because no analytical solution is available for the contact dynamics problems, the first step of the method consists in using a 2D FE model to compute the near field solution in the time domain. The crack can be closed by a pre-stress and is modeled by a unilateral contact law with Coulomb friction. Once the solution for the scattered waves in the near field is obtained numerically, it is converted to the frequency domain and then extended in the far field domain using an analytical method. This second step uses Hankel’s functions to compute the far field solution, which allows us to plot the directivity patterns of the scattered wave for different frequencies. This two step approach is similar to the one used by Hunt et al. to compute the linear field radiated from elastic structures in a fluid domain The paper is organized as follows. The two step method is described in Section A two step procedure is proposed for computing the scattered far field resulting from the nonlinear interaction between one or two waves and a source of nonlinearity such as a closed crack. In this particular case, the contact dynamics generates the nonlinearity and therefore is the source of the higher harmonics. The proposed methodology allows us to plot the directivity patterns corresponding to the new generated frequency components. Longitudinal and shear waves can be scattered by the crack and the two modes are considered here. The first step consists in using a FE model to treat the nonlinear interaction between an incident acoustic wave and a closed crack of finite extent, taking into account the contact dynamics. The FE model is solved using the code Plast2 This section aims to describe the FE models used to treat the interaction between waves and a closed crack, including nonlinear effects due to the CAN. The description of the model is generic, giving the modeling principles, with some specific information such as geometrical dimensions or mesh size omitted here. These information will be given case by case in Section An isotropic and homogeneous solid is considered, its mechanical properties are those of aluminum. The Young’s modulus is Spatial discretization is essential in the FE method. In order to have an accurate solution for the new higher frequency components generated by the CAN, the corresponding wavelengths have to be sufficiently discretized. If Finally, the scattered field is defined as the difference between the total field and the incident field (obtained without the crack). Therefore, two simulations have to be run to compute the scattered wave: with and without the crack. The displacements recorded at the selected output nodes for each simulation are subtracted to obtain the near field scattered waves in the time domain: The contact dynamics generated along the crack is modeled by an interface of unilateral contact with Coulomb friction, which gives the relations between contact stresses and displacements at the interface. Three states can be observed simultaneously at different nodes of the interface: separation, slipping contact and sticking contact. The dynamic switching between the different contact states introduce the nonlinearity in the model. These boundary conditions can be referred as the non-smooth contact dynamics The two faces of the crack are denoted by Denoting In Plast2, the contact algorithms are based on the forward Lagrange multipliers method The second step in computing the scattered far field resulting from the interaction between the incident wave and the crack consists of extending the numerical solution for the scattered waves in the outer domain using an analytical approach. Longitudinal and shear waves can be simultaneously scattered by the crack by virtue of mode conversion; the two modes have to be clearly distinguished. They propagate at different velocities and along different directions, as demonstrated later in Section The knowledge of the scattered field on the circle of radius The solution is assumed to be time harmonic, with the time convention In this section, the interaction between a plane wave and a closed crack of different orientations is considered. The higher harmonics generated in the nonlinear scattering can be used for detection purposes. Directivity patterns corresponding to the higher harmonic components of the scattered waves are computed to provide some insight regarding their generation in the solid. The modeling principles introduced in Section The maximal size of the elements is As mentioned in Section  The same effects can be seen in the case of an incident shear wave. Again, the separation of the scattered modes can be achieved for the same reasons, with waves propagating along different directions and at different velocities. The displacement field is shown in This validates the assumption of the mode separation. Thus, the analytical method can be applied to propagate either one of scattered mode after proper time selection. In the next section, the analytical propagation is validated. The analytical propagation is validated by comparison with the FE solution at a same given distance of propagation. The numerical solution is extracted at nodes belonging to circles of radius  The scattered field computed analytically at An incident shear wave is now considered, still with a horizontal crack, and with a pre-stress The analytically propagated solution matches the numerical results, for the first and the third harmonic. This validates the method for the analytical propagation of shear waves. When the crack is not horizontal, it is expected that the interaction with the incident wave leads to mode conversions. The directivity patterns are used to identify the directions of propagation of those converted modes. In the following, only the main displacement component generated by each of these modes is considered:  The differences in the agreement of the directions of propagation with those obtained by considering Snell’s law are related to the product between the wavenumber An incident shear wave is now considered. The directivity patterns computed analytically in the far field at Similarly to the longitudinal wave, there is no mode conversion under normal incidence. For an oblique incidence ( One can see that under normal incidence, the third harmonic is preferentially generated for the tangential displacements as already demonstrated in This example shows how the proposed method enables the study of the higher harmonics generated by the CAN for a crack of arbitrary orientation. The new nonlinear frequency components of the scattered waves provide information that can be useful for closed crack detection purposes. In this section the interaction between two incident shear waves and a closed crack is investigated. Because of nonlinearity, the principle of superposition is no longer satisfied and acoustic waves can interact with each other The method offers some advantages over the more conventional nonlinear harmonic generation technique or nonlinear wave modulation techniques. It provides modal selectivity (the wave resulting of the nonlinear mixing is a different mode to the incident waves), frequency selectivity (the frequency of the scattered wave is equal to the sum of the input frequencies) and directional selectivity (the scattered signal propagates in a different direction from the incident waves). The phenomenon was first demonstrated experimentally by Rollins The method described in Section The incident shear waves are pulses of 5 cycles with a frequency of 1 MHz and amplitude of 10 nm. Note that the same input frequencies are chosen for the sake of simplicity regarding the following analysis, whereas in practical application the frequency selectivity would be enhanced by choosing different input frequencies. A pre-stress The directivity patterns for two incident shear waves and three crack orientations The directivity patterns obtained for Because the crack partially opens during the acoustic excitation, the incident waves are partially reflected as shown in The directivity patterns obtained in the case of a crack tilted by an angle  These examples demonstrate that the use of the FE method coupled to analytical propagation provides understanding of the wave scattering for complex wave propagation problems involving CAN and multiple wave interactions. It very effectively shows the directions of propagation of scattered waves in the case of the non-collinear mixing method. The CAN is a non-classical nonlinearity and involves specific scattering of longitudinal and shear waves, especially in the case of tilted cracks. This method can be used with may help to define and optimize the non-collinear mixing method in the case of different input frequencies. In this paper a method is proposed to derive the directivity patterns for waves scattered after nonlinear interaction with a closed crack, thus giving information about the expected wave fields both in the near and far-field of cracks with contact nonlinearity. The method includes two steps to compute the far field solution. Since the CAN generated from the interaction between the incident wave and the defect cannot be described analytically, the first step of the method consists in computing the near field solution with a FE model. The CAN is modeled using unilateral contact law with Coulomb friction. In the second step, the numerical solution for the scattered waves is propagated analytically in order to obtain the far field solution. This is achieved using a Green’s function formalism in the frequency domain, thus giving the solution for any considered frequency of interest. This makes the method particularly interesting for the study of nonlinear problems involving a closed crack where new frequency components are generated. In the second part of this paper, the method was first applied to the nonlinear scattering of a plane wave by a closed crack of different orientations. The propagation direction of the higher harmonics has been obtained for the incident mode as well as the converted mode, both for an incident longitudinal and an incident shear wave. Then, the method was applied to predict the direction of propagation of the longitudinal wave scattered by the interaction of two incident shear waves, such as proposed for the non-collinear mixing method. The method can be used to determine when the longitudinal wave is generated in case of CAN, as well as its directions of propagation for complex configuration where the crack is tilted. The application of the method can be extended to other problems. Knowledge of the scattering by a closed crack in case nonlinearity can be used to derive an imaging algorithm based on the higher harmonics. For the non-collinear mixing, the method enables one to predict the solution in the case of different incident waves (frequency and angle of incidence). The method could also be used to work with the side-band frequency components generated during the nonlinear wave modulation between a high frequency probing wave and a low frequency pumping wave. Finally, other types of nonlinearity may be considered in the FE model, thus extending the possible applications of the method.