The formation of MgCO3·3H2O in the CO2 mineralization system was investigated using Mg(OH)2 as an intermediate at 20 °C. Liquid and solid analyses were done for qualitative and quantitative composition characterizations of the reacted samples. Results showed that the morphology of Mg(OH)2 had an obvious effect on the growth rate, size and morphology of MgCO3·3H2O. The formation of MgCO3·3H2O might be explained by the dissolution–recrystallization mechanism. Larger bundle-like MgCO3·3H2O which composed of middle-binding rod crystals was obtained from the plate-like Mg(OH)2. These findings could pave the way for controllable crystallization of MgCO3·3H2O in a CO2 mineralization system.The continuous rising level of atmosphere CO In this work, mineralization process was divided into two steps. The first step was the transformation of MgCl Wang et al. There have been loads of literatures reporting the reaction of Mg(OH) In this context, MgCO Chemical reagents, MgCl The experiments were performed in a batch stirred crystallizer (1.5 L). Every experiment contained two procedures: the titration procedure and the CO The composition of the samples was identified by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD, Bruker D8 Advance, Germany) using Cu Kα radiation, and the XRD was operated at 40 KV and 30 mA. The thermal measurements, thermogravimetry (TG) were carried out using a Pyris 1 TGA Thermogravimetric Analyzer (Perkin Elmer, America), the heating rate was 10 °C min The addition method of the reagents in the reaction has a great impact on [OH SEM images ( CO The concentration of Mg First step: Second step: Third step: Fourth step: The pH in the process was also monitored for analyzing solids composition. It could be seen from In the CO The above phase transformation was further investigated by TGA ( In order to quantitatively analyze the transformation from Mg(OH) The variation of solid composition through the reaction time might reveal the transformation rate in CO Particle morphology has been known as one of the most important factors that determine the application of crystals.   Compared Wang et al. reported that the growth of MgCO The scheme of morphology evolution in the two different processes was illustrated in According to the above tests performed with XRD, TG and SEM, the growth rate of MgCO Mineralization process was divided into two steps to overcome the difficulty of controlling mineralization rate and crystal growth of product. Mg(OH) The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the