The low energy requirements to grow microalgae combined with the very fast reproduction gives microalgae unique abilities to utilize them for industrial and environmental applications. However, harvesting these algae still remains energy consuming and, as a consequence, expensive. In this work a new electrocoagulation-flotation set-up with a tubular coaxial reactor, developed by Noah Water Solutions, is investigated for the autonomous harvesting of the green microalgae species Chlorella vulgaris. No pH adjustment or other pretreatments were applied in order to make the method applicable in the field. With this type of electrocoagulation-flotation reactor the algae were on average a factor 100 more concentrated, i.e. starting from the influent microalgae suspension of 0.2 g·L−
                     1 up to 18.5 g·L−
                     1 with iron electrodes and 35.2 g·L−
                     1 with aluminum electrodes. Moreover, with this reactor type only low currents (0.8 A for Fe and 0.3 A for Al) had to be applied, resulting in low energy consumptions (2.0 kWh·kg−
                     1 for Fe and 1.1 kWh·kg−
                     1 for Al). Remaining metal concentration in the harvested algae was low, i.e. 0.6% for the Fe electrodes and 0.3% for the Al electrodes. Combining these results with the autonomous and continuous removal of the concentrated algae makes this tubular electrocoagulation-flotation reactor excellent for harvesting microalgae on industrial scale.The use of microalgae for wastewater treatment is gaining interest since microalgae are able to recover nutrients (N, P) from the wastewater. As a result, the risk of eutrophication of the receiving water bodies diminishes. Moreover, flue gasses can be added to the wastewater as an additional inorganic carbon source [ The main advantages of this technique are that the iron or aluminum ions released at the anode avoid the addition of extra chlorides or sulfates resulting from the traditionally used iron or aluminum salts in coagulation/flocculation. Secondly, the hydrogen formation at the cathode favors an immediate separation between algae and culture medium by flotation. Finally, EC-F has a reduced CO Previous research on the electrocoagulation-flocculation of the microalgae species In this work, a new electrocoagulation-flotation set-up, designed by Noah Water Solutions, for the optimization of the microalgae harvesting process is proposed. Afterwards, this new reactor design is demonstrated by harvesting the microalgae species An inoculum of the microalgae strain The algae harvesting experiments were performed with a tubular electrocoagulation-flotation reactor designed and distributed by Noah Water Solutions (Noah Lab Reactor 2.0, Noah Water Solutions, Belgium; The electrodes were first mechanically brushed with a commercially available metal sponge and rinsed with tap water before installing them in the EC. In order to activate the EC, it was filled with a NaCl salt solution (10 g·L The samples before and after EC-F were analyzed on conductivity (Hach multimeter HQ 30d, Hach Company, US, probe CDC 401 with a detection limit of 0.01 mS·cm Furthermore, the concentrated algae paste, harvested from the flocculation tower, was analyzed on TSS and the Al and Fe content was determined in duplo using inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES, Thermo Scientific, iCAP 7000 Series). For this, 0.5 g of algae paste was mixed with 6 mL of HNO The operating expenses (OPEX) of the electrocoagulation-flotation process were calculated based on two parameters: electrical consumption and consumption of Fe or Al [ Afterwards, this electrical consumption was multiplied with the average industrial electrical cost currently applicable in Flanders, Belgium (i.e. 0.1 €·kWh The Fe or Al consumption of the electrical cell was derived from the applied current and Faraday's first law of electrolysis [ To test the impact of the EC-F process on the viability of the algae cell, one test was executed in which the algae harvested during the experiments with iron were again cultivated. This was done because the applied current during the Fe test is higher than during the Al test (0.8 A vs. 0.3 A). Furthermore, according to literature, use of the Fe electrode leads to a brown-yellow coloration of the microalgae, which might have a negative effect on its viability [ In order to obtain good flotation with this type of continuous electrocoagulation reactor, low currents have to be applied. In a first attempt 0.3 A was applied on the iron electrodes. However, in this test neither coagulation nor flotation was observed after 3 runs. In a second test 0.8 A was applied on the iron electrodes while treating the cultivated algae suspension through the EC. After the first run the effluent's turbidity was higher than that of the influent. Indeed, the total suspended solids (TSS) increased from (195 ± 7) mg·L All the tests were performed without pH adjustments and additional chemicals such as flocculants. From Analysis of the dry weight content showed that the algae were 8.1 times diluted from influent until effluent run II. Algae in the concentrate (18,500 mg·L The growth curves resulting from the cultivation tests are depicted in The  Analysis of the dry weight content showed that the algae were 3.7 times diluted from influent until effluent run III. In between runs, the largest removal took place between run I and run II. The additional algae removal between run II and III was negligible. Algae in the concentrate (35,200 mg·L Investigating the nutrient removal indicated that 19% of the NO The low energy consumption (32 A·m Similar to the experiments with the iron electrode, the experiments with the aluminum electrode demonstrated low energy consumption (12 A·m Treating the algae with Fe electrodes at a current of 0.3 A did not result in coagulation of algae after 3 runs. This indicates that the concentration of Fe to obtain good coagulation and flotation in this setting needs to be higher compared to the required Al concentration, which is in agreement with Barros et al. [ A literature comparison was done in order to evaluate the new reactor setup ( In this work a new electrocoagulation-flotation set-up with a tubular coaxial reactor, supplied by Noah Water Solutions, for the harvesting of the green microalgae species No conflicts, informed consent, or human or animal rights are applicable to this study.  The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: The authors Dries Parmentier and Rik Van Meirhaeghe work at the start-up company Noah Water Solutions who designed and developed the tubular coaxial reactor that was tested in this research. All testing, evaluation of the obtained results and the writing of this manuscript was done in collaboration with the University of Ghent, Belgium guarantying that a qualitative correct judgment was made upon the proposed new reactor design. This work was partly financial supported by  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at