Salicylhydroxamic acid (SHA) is a selective collector used in the separation of oxide minerals by flotation method, and it is commonly combined with Pb(II) to enhance the floatability of targeted minerals. Due to the limitation of analytical technique, a visualized method to depict the adsorption performance of lead species in the flotation of oxide minerals with SHA as collector was scarce. Time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) is a valuable tool for chemical imaging of surfaces and depth profiling. In this work, ToF-SIMS with sputter depth profiling was used to visualize the activation mechanism of Pb(II) in SHA flotation of hemimorphite. Two activation models were proposed and verified. These models involved the adsorption of Pb(II) species onto the hemimorphite surface to improve the reactive sites, thereby enhancing the interaction of SHA. Simultaneously, Pb-SHA complexes in solutions would also adsorb onto the mineral surface, thereby increasing the distribution of lead species.Hemimorphite is an important oxide mineral, but its high-efficiency recovery and utilization have always been an urgent issue to be addressed ( ToF-SIMS is a helpful surface analytical technique with high mass and spatial resolution; it can obtain detailed chemical information and depth profiling as a function of adsorption layer depth ( The main objective of this study is to use TOF-SIMS to characterize and visualize the Pb(II) adsorption in SHA flotation of hemimorphite based on the three-dimensional (3D) distributions of sample components to provide a better understanding of the effect of Pb(II) on SHA adsorption onto the mineral surface. The high purity hemimorphite lump used in this experiment was derived from Yunnan Province, China, and it was cut into rectangular pieces approximately 1 × 1 × 0.5 cm in length, width, and depth, using a fine slow diamond saw. The cut samples were polished with wet silicon carbide paper in the sequence of 600, 800, 1200, 2000, and 4000 meshes, and then polished with 5 μm and 1 μm alumina powder suspensions. All polished sample were first ultrasonically cleaned for 3 min in deionized water and then transferred to 100 mL of aqueous solution. HCl and NaOH stock solutions were employed to regulate the pH of the system to approximately 8.0. The aqueous solution containing hemimorphite pieces was first treated with 3 × 10 ToF-SIMS data of hemimorphite samples were received in ultrahigh vacuum by means of a ToF-SIMS V (ION-TOF GmbH, Munster, Germany) instrument equipped with a Bi liquid metal primary ion source. Spectra were acquired in positive ion mode from 500 × 500 μm area on each sample surface using a pixel density of 256 × 256. ION-TOF SurfaceLab software was used to analyze the required details on the measured samples. The combined utilization of Pb(II) and SHA significantly increased the flotation recovery of oxide minerals, which was attributed to the improved reactive sites for the interaction with SHA and to the adsorption of Pb-SHA complexes (  Pb This study focused on the application of ToF-SIMS for analysis of the distribution of lead species on the hemimorphite surface after treatment with Pb(II) and SHA by sputter depth profiling. The 3D distribution of Pb  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to acknowledge the Projects funded by