Purpose
                  The purpose of the study was to highlight our surgical technique of arthroscopic suture fixation for acute tibial eminence posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) avulsion fractures, clinical and radiographic outcomes, and complication rates.
               
                  Methods
                  This prospective study enrolled patients who had undergone arthroscopic reduction and suture fixation by use of 4 No. 5 Ethibond sutures (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ) for image-proven displaced PCL attachment fractures of the tibial eminence with posterior knee instability of grade II or higher. The mean follow-up period was 36 months (range, 24 to 45 months). Follow-up assessment included 3 different functional scores, KT-1000 arthrometry (MEDmetric, San Diego, CA), and radiographic evaluation.
               
                  Results
                  The mean preoperative Lysholm score in the 36 patients was 35 (range, 26 to 55); the mean postoperative Lysholm score was 95 (range, 80 to 100). The mean preinjury and preoperative Tegner scores in the 36 patients were 7.4 ± 1.6 (range, 5 to 9) and 3.2 ± 1.5 (range, 2 to 5), respectively. The mean postoperative Tegner score was 7.0 ± 1.8 (range, 5 to 9). At the final follow-up, the International Knee Documentation Committee scores were observed to be normal (grade A) or nearly normal (grade B) in 33 patients (91.7%) and abnormal (grade C) in 3 patients (8.3%). All 36 fractures achieved union within 3 months. No significant complications such as arthrofibrosis, loss of initial fixation, or wound infection were noted.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Treatment of tibial PCL avulsion fractures by arthroscopic suture fixation is a successful technique to restore tibial avulsion injuries of the PCL with well-documented radiographic healing, good clinical outcomes, and low complication rates.
               
                  Level of Evidence
                  Level IV, therapeutic case series.Arthroscopically assisted reduction and fixation of posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) avulsion fractures of the tibia were first performed by Martinez-Moreno and Blanco-Blanco. Arthroscopically assisted reduction with an appropriate fixation method is generally preferred to posterior arthrotomy for the following reasons: (1) concomitant lesions, including meniscal tears, can be treated without change in position and (2) less surgical invasion is required because of decreased exposure of the posterior capsule or muscle. Previous case reports have shown that arthroscopic reduction and internal fixation with cannulated screws are preferred if the fracture fragment is large. In this study we prospectively evaluated the surgical outcome and complication rate in 36 patients treated for tibial attachment fracture of the PCL by arthroscopic reduction and fixation with 4 No. 5 Ethibond sutures, followed up for a minimum of 24 months and a mean of 36 months. We hypothesized that our technique for arthroscopic suture fixation of tibial PCL avulsion fractures would be a safe and reliable method with good clinical and radiographic outcomes and minimal complications. In this prospective study, we enrolled 36 patients with imaging evidence of PCL avulsion fractures of the tibial attachment who underwent arthroscopy-assisted surgery between January 2004 and August 2008. The inclusion criteria for the study were a displaced PCL tibial avulsion fracture (>3 mm of upward displacement of the bony fragment) with radiographic evidence of bone fragmentation regardless of fragmentation sizes or degree of comminution and posterior knee instability of grade II or higher. Posterior instability was determined by performing the posterior drawer test, in which knee laxity was measured with a knee ligament arthrometer (KT-1000; MEDmetric, San Diego, CA). Exclusion criteria were as follows: (1) minimally displaced bony fragment (≤3 mm), (2) associated tibial plateau fracture or femur fracture, and (3) inadequate informed consent for enrollment in this study. The associated meniscus tears and cartilage injuries were not excluded from our study, and collateral ligament tears responsive to conservative treatment or surgery were also included. All the patients were given a consent form for institutional review board approval (No. 99-1504B) before their surgery. The patients underwent the same treatment protocol for arthroscopic suture fixation by use of 4 No. 5 Ethibond sutures to treat tibial attachment fractures of the PCL. The posterior drawer test was performed at 90° of knee flexion and was graded according to the extent of posterior translation (grade I indicated by translation, <5 mm; grade II indicated by translation, 5 to 10 mm; and grade III indicated by translation, >10 mm). Bone fragments shown by preoperative radiographs were measured with a ruler. The sizes of small or comminuted fragments were estimated during arthroscopy by use of a 5-mm vertical probe tip. All fragments were fixed with 4 No. 5 Ethibond polyester sutures (Ethicon) through 2 tibial tunnels. The subjects comprised 24 men and 12 women, and their mean age at the time of surgery was 35.6 years (range, 18 to 65 years). Injury mechanisms included 32 motorcycle accident–related injuries, 3 sports-related injuries, and 1 injury caused by a fall. The mean time from injury to surgery was 5 days (range, 1 to 10 days). The mean follow-up period was 36 months (range, 24 to 45 months). Patients were examined under anesthesia before surgery; grades II to III posterior instability was observed in 24 knees, and grade IV instability was observed in 12 knees. The mean estimated fragmentation size was 15 × 17 × 9 mm (range, 10 × 6 × 5 to 30 × 32 × 15 mm). Patients were positioned supine on the operating table. The 2 anterior and 2 posterior arthroscopic portals used were as follows: anteromedial (AM), anterolateral, posteromedial (PM), and posterolateral portals. The parapatellar AM and anterolateral portals are located about 1 cm medial and lateral to the medial and lateral borders of the patellar tendon at the approximate level of the patellar apex. The infrapatellar fat pad, fracture debris, and blood clots were all removed with a shaver or punch to create visual access to the anterior cruciate ligament and PCL. Then, a guide needle was introduced percutaneously through the site of the proposed PM portal to the PM recess, where the arthroscope was inserted. Partial synovectomy was performed with a shaver through the PM portal to open the posterior capsule to expose avulsed bone fragments and the fracture site. The posterolateral portal was created by direct viewing along the posterolateral edge of the femoral condyle and 1 to 2 cm above the joint line, after perforation of the posterior septum behind the PCL. The PCL tibial angled drill guide (Smith & Nephew Endoscopy, Andover, MA) was used to manipulate and anatomically reduce the displaced fracture fragment by direct visualization. A 2-inch longitudinal incision was made just medial and inferior to the tibial tuberosity and then deepened until the tibial metaphysis was exposed subperiosteally. The size of the fracture fragment was measured by comparison with the 5-mm vertical tip of a probe. The PCL tibial angled drill guide was inserted into the AM portal to reach the fracture site of the PCL attachment through the posterior synovial opening; anatomic reduction of the avulsed fragment with the arthroscope placed in the PM portal was performed. One 2.4-mm Kirschner pin was inserted through the guide from the anterior tibial cortex into the avulsed fragment for temporary fixation. The PCL tibial drill guide with another two 3.0-mm Kirschner pins was used to establish 2 bone tunnels from the anterior tibial cortex to the medial border and the lateral border of the PCL avulsion site. Holes were considered correctly drilled upon observation of a 1-cm bridge of the metaphyseal cortex. The posterior openings of tibial tunnels should be created bilaterally and inferiorly to the PCL insertion site to achieve anatomic reduction of the fracture bone. Then, two 26-gauge wire loops were inserted into the knee joint through the medial and lateral tibial bone tunnels ( The suture hook (Linvatec, Largo, FL) loaded with No. 2 polydioxanone (PDS) (Ethicon) was used as a guide suture by passing it through the knee joint by way of the AM portal and then through the lateral wire loop, the posterior part of the PCL, and the medial wire loop. The second guide suture was then passed through the lateral wire loop, the anterior part of the PCL, and the medial wire loop ( During the first postoperative week, each patient was immobilized using a full-extension knee brace. The patients performed full weight-bearing, quadriceps-strengthening, and isometric exercises, along with straight-leg raises. During weeks 2 to 4, the range of motion (ROM) for the 36 patients was 0° to 60° in flexion. At week 8, ROM was 0° to 120° in flexion, and patients performed closed-chain kinetic exercise. During weeks 10 to 12, stationary bicycling and straight-leg stance were encouraged. At 6 months, all the patients could fully resume sports activities ( All the subjects underwent clinical and radiographic assessments during the follow-up. A fracture was considered united if no fracture line was visible on the radiograph or if the fracture was clinically stable. All the patients were evaluated preoperatively; postoperatively at 3 months, 6 months, 9 months, and 1 year; and then annually thereafter. All the patients were examined by an independent observer (S-Y.C.) who was not involved in the surgeries. The Lysholm scoring system was used for follow-up assessment to document subjective symptoms Each radiograph was evaluated by 3 observers (visiting orthopaedic staff) in a blinded fashion to assess interobserver variance. The 3 observers also classified fracture type and union time in the 36 patients. Statistical analysis was used to determine interobserver variance in diagnosis for secondary osteoarthritis, fracture type, and union time. The interobserver variability in the diagnosis of secondary osteoarthritis, fracture type, and time for fracture union evaluated using the κ method was insignificant in all the cases ( The mean preoperative Lysholm score in the 36 patients was 35 (range, 26 to 55), and the mean postoperative Lysholm score was 95 (range, 80 to 100). Lysholm scores significantly differed between the preoperative evaluation and the final follow-up ( The mean preinjury and preoperative Tegner scores for the 36 patients were 7.4 ± 1.6 (range, 5 to 9) and 3.2 ± 1.5 (range, 2 to 5), respectively. The mean postoperative Tegner score was 7.0 ± 1.8 (range, 5 to 9). The improvement in the postoperative values was statistically significant ( Preinjury activity levels for all the patients ranged from strenuous to moderate. At the time of surgery, only 10 of the 36 patients (27.8%) showed light activity levels and 26 of the 36 patients (72.2%) were sedentary. At the final follow-up, 33 of the 36 patients (91.7%) achieved strenuous to moderate activity levels. Of the 36 patients, 3 (8.3%) could perform light activity. Thus activity levels significantly improved after surgery ( Of the 36 patients, 33 (91.7%) subjectively rated their knee function as normal or nearly normal whereas 3 (8.3%) subjectively rated it as abnormal. Of the 36 patients, 94.4% (n = 34) reported no pain during moderate or strenuous activities; 2 patients (5.6%) reported inconsistent and slight pain with moderate or strenuous activities. Before surgery, 30 patients (83.3%) had a 15° difference in flexion deficit between the 2 sides. Ten patients (27.7%) had an extension deficit exceeding 10°. At review, 33 patients (91.7%) whose normal and reconstructed limbs had a 3° or smaller difference in full extension or a 5° or smaller difference in full flexion were rated as normal. Three patients (8.3%) (1 type III and 2 type IV) with 16° and 25° deficits in flexion were rated as abnormal. No patient had a severely abnormal rating (extension deficit >10° or flexion deficit >25°). The KT-1000 arthrometer data at 89 N were available for all 36 patients. At final follow-up, KT-1000 examination showed 0 to 2 mm of anterior-posterior translation in 34 patients (94.4%) and 3 to 5 mm of posterior laxity in 2 patients (5.6%). The mean difference at final follow-up was 0.8 mm (range, 0 to 3 mm). There was no statistically significant difference in the postoperative KT-1000 scores in comparison with the contralateral uninjured limb data ( Within 3 months after surgery, radiologic assessments showed solid union in all 36 fractures. Two patients (5.6%) showed stage I degeneration, according to the Ahlbäck classification, On the functional 1-leg hop test at the final follow-up, 29 patients (80.7%) were able to hop 90% of the distance or greater by using their healthy limbs; 4 patients (11%), 76% to 89% of the distance; and 3 patients (8.3%), 50% to 75% of the distance. Associated injuries included meniscal injury in 5 patients (13.8%) (lateral meniscus in 2 and medial meniscus in 3) treated by partial meniscectomy. Ruptures or avulsions of ligaments were observed in 4 knees, including 2 medial collateral ligament partial ruptures and 2 lateral collateral ligament avulsions in the fibular insertion. Two lateral collateral ligament avulsions were fixed using screws with washers. None of the 36 consecutive patients had popliteal artery or peroneal nerve injuries ( No complication was directly associated with arthroscopy. Two patients had localized stitch abscesses, which subsided after local wound care and oral antibiotic treatment. No deep infection, thrombophlebitis, or vascular injury was noted in the patients. The principal findings of our study showed that PCL avulsion fractures are not rare injuries as previously reported in the English-language literature, and the PCL is vulnerable to damage during dashboard injuries and hyperflexion of the knee. Surgical interventions are indicated if fracture fragments are even minimally displaced after nonunion of PCL avulsion fractures, as observed in 5 patients who were treated nonoperatively by Meyers With advances in arthroscopic techniques and fixation materials, all our patients showing various fragmentation sizes (range, 10 × 6 × 5 to 30 × 32 × 15 mm; mean, 15 × 17 × 9 mm) could be treated with arthroscopically assisted reduction and 4 No. 5 Ethibond sutures for fixation with either resultant radiographic osseous union or stable fibrous union, a stabilized knee joint, early ROM, minimal morbidity, and marked improvements in activity levels. Thus the sizes of the fracture fragments are not determinants of the manner of internal fixation. In our protocols we could simplify the surgical procedure for various fragmentation sizes with satisfactory results. In a study by Zhao et al., Techniques using cannulated screws, In a cadaveric biomechanical study, Sasaki et al. Kim and colleagues The operative technique presented in this study has several advantages. First, the suture fixation technique requires no further surgery for implant removal. Second, the 4 No. 5 Ethibond intraligamentous sutures were sewn into the PCL base rather than into the avulsed bone; thus reduction and fixation of even comminuted fractures can be performed easily. Suture fixation is superior to screw fixation for treating avulsion fractures of the PCL because screw fixation may potentially break the bone fragment. Moreover, multiple sutures can be used for precise repair of bone fragments. The technique not only decreases surgical morbidities and patient discomfort but also reduces overall cost. The unique features of this prospective study are as follows: (1) All arthroscopic surgical techniques were performed by a single surgeon using only 1 fracture fixation method and suture material, and all patients underwent the same rehabilitation program; and (2) all 36 patients received complete follow-up and outcome assessment. For this study, we had conducted an a priori power analysis to ensure that certain conditions were met to correctly reject the null hypothesis (which stated that there was no relation between the variables of interest). This is expressed as Power = 1 – β, where β is the probability of a type II error. In this study, β equaled 0.1 and thus power equaled 0.90. (Power should be at least 0.80.) A high power, at 0.90, indicates that our study was worthwhile. However, acknowledged limitations of this study are the lack of a control group, the limited sample size, and the short observation period. Further studies with larger patient populations and long-term follow-up need to be conducted. Treatment of tibial PCL avulsion fractures by arthroscopic suture fixation is a successful technique to restore tibial avulsion injuries of the PCL with well-documented radiographic healing, good clinical outcomes, and low complication rates. 