Posterior dislocation of the shoulder is uncommon, with an incidence of less than 2% of all glenohumeral dislocations. Fractures of the posterior glenoid rim, tuberosities, and the head are common in traumatic posterior dislocations of the shoulder. We describe 3 cases of missed posterior dislocation after intramedullary nailing of proximal humeral fractures that were not recognized at presentation. A 37-year-old man sustained a closed fracture of the proximal third of the humerus after a fall from a motorcycle. This was treated with antegrade locked humeral nail. When the patient presented to our unit 8 months after the initial injury, motion was reduced, with combined elevation to 75°, abduction of 45°, and no external rotation. Clinically and radiologically, the fracture had united. Radiographs ( A 31-year-old man sustained a metaphyseal fracture of the proximal humerus after a fall from a motorcycle. This was initially treated with a closed antegrade locked humeral nail. Postoperative x-ray images ( The patient complained of persistent pain and restricted motion, and surgical treatment was undertaken through a combined deltopectoral and posterior approach. A coracoid osteotomy was required to aid exposure. Intraoperatively, there was a large reverse Hill-Sachs defect and destruction of the humeral head. Owing to the damage to the humeral head, resurfacing and a McLaughlin procedure to fill the defect in the humeral head were performed ( A 43-year-old man sustained a fracture of the proximal humerus after a fall from a motorcycle. At presentation, the fracture was displaced beyond acceptable limits. Internal fixation was performed with a locked antegrade humeral nail. Two months after the initial injury, motion was restricted, with combined elevation of 45°, 45° abduction, and no external rotation. The axillary view confirmed a locked posterior dislocation with an engaged reverse Hill-Sachs lesion. There were early signs of union of the fracture. The patient complained of night pain and restricted motion, and surgical treatment was performed. A combined deltopectoral and posterior approach was required to reduce the glenohumeral joint, and a McLaughlin procedure was performed. At latest review (18 months postoperatively), motion has improved, with combined elevation to 110°, abduction of 70°, and 10° of external rotation. Posterior dislocation of the shoulder is uncommon. It results from axial loading of the adducted, internally rotated arm from violent muscle contraction, from electrical shock, or convulsions. The association of posterior dislocation and humeral shaft fracture has been described before, but its occurrence is extremely rare. The findings of posterior shoulder dislocation on AP radiographs can be subtle, and a Hawkins et al In the acute setting, the reduced range of motion and loss of external rotation may be difficult to assess. The axillary view radiograph may also be difficult to obtain. With gentle abduction of the shoulder of 20° to 30° with the x-ray tube at the level of the hip and the cassette above the shoulder, an axillary radiograph can be obtained, but pain relief and a physician may be needed to help position the arm. The radiographs should be reviewed by an experienced clinician. If an adequate axillary x-ray image cannot be obtained, CT may be required to exclude posterior dislocation and associated injuries. CT scanning will also provide information on any malrotation of the humeral shaft. In patient 2 the CT scan revealed the fracture had united in internal rotation. Hence, the loss of external rotation was due to a combination of the humerus healing in internal rotation and the locked posterior dislocation preventing external rotation. An important technical point to note during intramedullary fixation of humeral fractures is that traction and rotation of the forearm is often used to aid distal locking. However, this may cause rotation of the distal fragment at the fracture site and result in a rotational abnormality. If a delay occurs between injury and diagnosis, general anesthesia and muscle relaxants will be required to achieve closed reduction. If closed reduction is not possible, open reduction may be achieved through an anterior or posterior approach, or both. The common features in the 3 patients described are high-energy trauma, inadequate initial and postoperative x-ray images, incorrect interpretation of x-ray images, dislocation not identified at presentation, and no further trauma after internal fixation. The patients in our series were young, and the mechanism of injury was similar. All were medium- to high-energy accidents with a direct fall onto the affected shoulder that resulted in a fracture of the proximal humerus and dislocation of the shoulder joint. The humeral fracture was subsequently treated with intramedullary nailing. Once diagnosed, treatment options are varied and have to be customized to the patient's functional disability, amount of humeral head involvement, and chronicity of the injury. Nonoperative treatment can be used if the patient is asymptomatic. If there is destruction of the humeral head, hemiarthroplasty (resurfacing or stemmed) may be performed. This may be combined with a McLaughlin procedure,