The effects of die wall lubricants on the cold compaction of titanium hydride powder are studied. Three commonly-used die wall powder metallurgy lubricants – zinc stearate, Acrawax® C dispersion and Mirror Glaze® – are compared. The influence of each lubricant on the cold compaction behaviour of titanium hydride powder was assessed with respect to the green density and strength, green compact ejection force, and the occurrence of green compact cracking. In addition, green compacts were sintered under vacuum at various sintering temperatures in order to determine the effect of the lubricants on oxygen content, phase compositions, microstructures and hardness of the sintered components. The results indicate that there is an immediate improvement in the cold compaction process when lubrication is used. The results further indicate that the lubricity of the lubricants is similar and most of the monitored variables are insensitive to the die wall lubricant used, the microstructures of the sintered components included. However, the use of Acrawax® dispersion resulted in more instances of green compact cracking, while zinc stearate tended to increase the oxygen content of sintered specimens due to the tentative decomposition of zinc oxide, a residual of the high temperature decomposition of zinc stearate.Titanium (Ti) alloys are lightweight materials which possess a desirable combination of mechanical properties, corrosion resistance and biocompatibility. However, most design engineers avoid prescribing them for components because these alloys are much more costly compared to other engineering alloys. For example, according to Sachdev, Kulkarni, Gang, Yang and Girshov The high cost of titanium-based components can be reduced by changing component production to powder metallurgy The biomedical industry appears to be a possible early adopter of the powder metallurgy cold press and sinter (CP&S) technique, and a number of researchers have experimented using the technique to prepare porous titanium based implants. The longevity of medical implants, after implantation, is enhanced if the elastic modulus of the implants is comparable to that of bone: this helps prevent stress shielding, which leads to resorption of bone and implant loosening Titanium cold press and sinter (CP&S) Powder metallurgy is however relatively new and the consolidation behaviour of the powder is not yet fully understood The processing challenges encountered in the application of CP&S on Ti powder are being addressed, like for other powder metallurgy alloys e.g. iron The most commonly used die wall lubricants are metal stearates (Zn, Li and Mg), Acrawax® C (also, N,N′-Ethylene bis(stearamide or EBS), fluoropolymers, stearic acid, liquid paraffin, and paraffin wax The powder used in this study was 99.65% pure titanium hydride (TiH All powder consolidation activities used a 17.5 The force to eject green compacts from the die was determined by pressing powders using an Instron universal testing machine, operated in the compression mode. The Instron universal testing machine is a laboratory equipment for determining mechanical properties in tension and compression: it is not employed for everyday production of components by powder compaction. Four specimens were pressed for each die wall lubricant, and the ejection force reported as an average. Tests to determine the effect of type of die wall lubricant on green compact cracking, green density, green strength, sintered oxygen content, density, phases, microstructures and hardness used specimens produced in a double action conventional hydraulic Enerpac 100T cold press. Instances of any cracks in green compacts were determined by inspecting eight green compacts under a stereo microscope. Cracks signify instances of green compact delamination. Green densities were estimated from the masses and the dimensions of four green compacts per die wall lubricant, while average green strength was determined using the Brazilian disc test (also the diametrical compression test Green compacts were sintered at 900, 1200 and 1300 The densities of sintered (brown) compacts were determined using Archimedes principle. Phase compositions were determined using a Phillips X-ray diffractometer Model PW3050/60. Patterns were obtained using a copper anode operated at 40  The mean ejection forces for the die wall lubricated samples were statistically similar. This indicated that the lubricants had similar lubricity values. However, the ejection forces varied differently between samples of the same die wall lubricant: the ejection force decreased with the number of compacts pressed for ZnSt, while the force tended to increase after the third compact was pressed for Acrawax® C and Mirror glaze. This appears to suggest that the ZnSt was providing better lubrication with longer compaction runs. It is also possible that the ZnSt after application on the die walls produced a consistent lubricating film run after run. Green compact cracking was observed only for compacts pressed using Acrawax® C, where cracking was observed in just under 40% of the specimens pressed in a conventional hydraulic press ( No result was obtained for the dry pressed condition ( All the compacts produced using the test die wall lubricants had lost edges and their surfaces had scotch marks as a result of the ejection process. The loss of, especially the edges, indicated that the bonding between the powder particles was not strong enough. Good homogeneous bonding imparts high green strength, which improves compactibility, the ability of a powdered material to be compressed to a specified (green) strength   The sintered densities varied between 95 and 97%TD (porosities of between 3 and 5%) for sintering at 900 Densities increased with sintering temperature from 900 to 1200 The major phase formed after sintering the TiH The oxygen content of the sintered compacts was of interest because oxygen lowers the fracture toughness of Ti-based alloys The oxygen content of the brown compacts pressed with ZnSt increased with increasing sintering temperature (  The scanning electron images of sintered specimens were similar at each sintering temperature regardless of the die wall lubricant used. The lamellar structures observed at the edges of the lubricated specimens sintered at 1200 and 1300 Hardness values for the sintered specimens were as shown in The main objective of this work was to determine the effect of different die wall lubricants on the consolidation behaviour of titanium hydride powder. The results of the study can be summarized as follows: Dry compaction of titanium hydride (TiH Zinc stearate, Acrawax® C, and Mirror Glaze when used as die wall lubricants during the cold compaction of TiH Incidences of cracking of TiH Zinc stearate leaves a residue of zinc oxide after sintering at 900 The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the