This paper presents a study of a thermal breakage process used to analyse the thermal stress and crack development that occur when rock is exposed to short-pulse microwave energy. A two-dimensional circular plate, containing two-phase minerals, was used in finite element simulation to calculate thermal stress for the purpose of better understanding thermal fracture behaviour in comminution. It is found that the thermal mismatch between a microwave-absorbing inclusion and a low-absorbing matrix mineral can generate large localized thermal stresses around the inclusion. Fracture initially occurs, not around the grain boundaries between the two minerals, but some distance away, as a result of thermal expansion stress on the matrix mineral. The results also indicate that though grain size is one of the factors causing cracks during heating of granular materials, it is not the only reason. The size and the thermal properties of the matrix mineral can also affect the results of thermal stresses.Breakage is essential in most mineral processing operations to liberate valuable minerals. The comminution process in the mineral processing industry is extremely energy-intensive, accounting for the majority of energy consumption in the mineral recovery process ( Heating to facilitate comminution has been applied in the mineral industry for nearly a century (   The main advantage of using microwave technology is that only the high-absorbing minerals are affected by the applied energy with little energy wasted on the low-absorbing minerals. Although thermal stress and thermal cracking have been studied for many years, numerical studies of the processes of crack initiation, propagation and linkage have not been undertaken to a great extent. Challenges need to be overcome through a fundamental understanding of how microwaves interact with minerals. The entire thermal cracking process is difficult to quantify by laboratory experiments alone. The aim of this paper is to propose a thermal stress damage model that can numerically simulate the thermal cracking processes of initialization, propagation and coalescence. The results of the thermal mismatch between microwave-absorbing material and low-absorbing material on the stress distribution and crack development will be presented. It is well known that dielectric materials can be heated by exposing them to high frequency electromagnetic fields and the amount of thermal energy deposited into an ore material due to microwave heating can be calculated as Eq. The rise in temperature of the ore materials inside a microwave field can be calculated from the average power density described in Eq. In the microwave industry, it is easier to describe the energy using the term ‘power density’ (W/m In order to compare the results with those from other scholars, the term ‘power density’ will be used in this paper. The total strain component in a whole sample is given by Eq. In which The stress can be derived from Eq. A two-dimensional finite element model containing two minerals was constructed, in which a single disc-shaped grain of pyrite was surrounded by a larger disc of calcite. The geometry and materials are shown in The elastic properties of the minerals were measured by the micro-indentation method. From samples of AMARA GeM P843 project, the value of Young's Modulus for calcite is 72.3 The first numerical model, with In order to investigate why the maximum stress location was away from the grain boundary, the thermal expansion coefficient of calcite was set to zero, which removed the effect of the thermal response of the calcite. The results in In another trial, the thermal expansion coefficient of pyrite was set to zero, in order to consider only the effect of the thermal expansion on calcite. Previously published work has revealed that short pulses of a very high power density can dramatically improve the economics of microwave assisted grinding ( Because the constituents of ore often have very different thermal and mechanical properties, such as large differences in thermal expansion coefficients, thermal stresses can far exceed the typical strengths of these materials during heating.  Increasing the power densities to These conclusions can also be observed from The basic concept of microwave energy application in the mineral process is the thermal mismatch between minerals of microwave-absorbing inclusion and low-absorbing matrix, therefore, if the temperature in calcite is higher, much of the energy will be wasted. The curves in On the other hand, if the exposure time remained at In Conclusions in this section are very consistent with the results from Previous work shows that microwaves can thermally fracture materials and enhance mineral liberation, but the actual mechanisms associated with such benefits are difficult to determine and predict. By means of the commercial software ANSYS, the thermal results of microwave heating can be calculated, but the breakage process due to the microwave heating cannot be simulated in this software. A numerical thermal fracture model has been developed at the JKMRC, the SimRock software ( A simulation was performed on a sample with dimensions of Comparing the results in   In mineral processing, particle size plays a very important role. Several different grain sizes were tested. In Keeping the ratio of Additionally, the results of two models were compared. Each pair contained the same sized particle with different sizes of calcite matrix ( In this paper, the thermal cracking process around a single inclusion has been simulated numerically by the finite element method, and the dependence of the failure mechanism on power density and exposure time has been studied. Results demonstrate that microwave energy has potential in mineral processing. From an economic standpoint, a high power density combined with a short heating interval is expected to offer the best energy efficiency. The initial breakage is caused by tensile thermal stresses therefore cracks propagate gradually in a radial direction from the calcite matrix. Cracks in the calcite matrix started close to the pyrite–calcite interface but not right on it. The main factor affecting the location of maximum stress was the thermal expansion of the calcite matrix, which in turn depends on the exposure time. The longer the exposure time, the further away the peak stress is from the interface of the different minerals. The thermal expansion coefficient of the microwave-absorbing mineral (Pyrite) plays a critical role in producing thermal stresses and the location of initial cracking can be affected by the thermal property of the low-absorbing mineral (Calcite). The breakage results are also affected by the proportion of microwave-absorbing minerals and lower-absorbing minerals. Larger pyrite grain sizes increase the peak stress, while larger matrix sizes reduce it. The work described in this paper was performed as part of the project of AMIRA GeM P843 and the funding for the research was provided by