Intramedullary nailing has been the gold standard in the management of lower limb fractures by virtue of advantage of early joint mobilisation and weight bearing. They are being increasingly used in the peri-trochanteric fractures of femur. Biomechanical studies have proved the supremacy of single femoral neck screw construct over two femoral neck screws along with the intramedullary nails in osteoporotic bones due to lower incidence of complications. This randomised clinical trial was conducted to study the clinico-radiological outcome of single and two-femoral neck screw construct in the management of unstable trochanteric fractures in the elderly osteoporotic bones. Although there was no significant difference in the clinical outcome in the two groups, less sliding of the femoral neck screws was noted with two-femoral neck screw configuration. The tip–apex distance was also significantly lower in the two-screw construct compared to that of the single screw construct. This study to our knowledge is the first randomised control clinical trial evaluating the effectiveness of one and two femoral neck screw configuration of intra-medullary nails in the management of unstable trochanteric fractures.Early surgery is of utmost importance in the management of trochanteric fractures, more so in the elderly, as they are fittest on admission. Dynamic hip screw (DHS) has undoubtedly been the implant of choice in these fractures for a very long time. The short Gamma AP nail (Stryker Howmedica) is the prototype of intramedullary nails for these unstable trochanteric fractures, We initiated a randomised clinical trial comparing the single femoral neck screw construct (Gamma AP nail) and two femoral neck screw construct (Ace nail) in the management of unstable trochanteric fractures in elderly (osteoporotic), for differences in their intra-operative use, clinico-radiological outcome and complications. This study to our knowledge is the first randomised control clinical trial evaluating the effectiveness of one and two femoral neck screws in the management of unstable trochanteric fractures. From January 2001 to May 2003, 73 consecutive elderly patients (more than 60 years) operated for unstable trochanteric fractures with intramedullary nail were included in the study ( Standardised antero-posterior and lateral radiographs were obtained on admission, and all fractures were categorised according to the AO/ASIF classification as 31A2.1–3 or 31A3.1–3. Surgery was performed in all cases by the same senior surgeon (SKR). Delay in surgery was 2.3 Weight-bearing within the limits of pain was allowed with walking frame or crutches as soon as possible in all patients. Patients were discharged when comfortably walking. Standardised radiographs were obtained on the first day, or immediately after surgery and on the10th post-operative day after weight-bearing. All patients were strictly advised to start full weight bearing without walking aids after the 4th week postoperatively. A standardised uniform rehabilitation protocol was followed in all patients regardless of the method of fixation used or the progress of fracture union. Patients were reviewed with clinico-radiological assessment at 4 months, 1 and 2 years after operation. Functional state was assessed by the Harris hip score (HHS scaled from 1 to 100). On the post-operative radiographs, the quality of fracture reduction was graded as good, acceptable (5–10° varus/valgus and/or ante- or retroversion), or poor (>10° varus/valgus and/or ante-or retroversion). For assessing the position of the screw, the femoral head was divided into superior, central and inferior thirds on the anteroposterior radiograph and into anterior, central and posterior thirds on the lateral radiograph. The screw was then localised in one of the nine separate zones. The ideal position for the screw in the femoral neck was defined as being central on the lateral radiograph and central or inferior on the antero-posterior radiograph. The tip–apex distance (TAD) was measured, as described in the literature in both groups of patients ( Sixty-six patients had their surgery under spinal anaesthesia ( Fifty-three patients had anatomical reduction while 13 had acceptable and seven had poor reductions on post-operative radiographs ( All patients walked weight bearing from 2.3 Ten patients with minimal hip or thigh pain at 4 months were comfortable at the 1- and 2-year follow-ups. All fractures had united by the 4th month. Sixteen patients had shortening of less than 1 Trochanteric fracture fixation, despite being the most commonly performed operation, is still prone to complications, either intra- or post-operatively. Unstable trochanteric fractures are biomechanically more unfavourable to treat surgically. Intramedullary nailing of these fractures demands pre-operative planning and a meticulous step-wise approach intraoperatively to avoid complications and unsatisfactory results. Besides this, the implant design has been strongly implicated in the pathogenesis of cut-out and implant failure with these intramedullary nails. There have been many experimental studies comparing the efficacy of single against two-femoral neck screws along with these intramedullary nails. Wang et al. concluded that two lag-screw configurations should be avoided in patients who have a high risk of osteoporotic cut-out. A finite element study by Seral et al. comparing the stresses produced by Gamma and proximal femoral nails in the treatment of trochanteric fractures showed increased stress shielding of the proximal femur with the stiffer Gamma nail. In the present study, there were no stress fractures at the tip of the implant. This could be attributed to one of the following facts. Firstly, all were elderly (over 60 years) patients with limited activity levels and expectations from surgery. Secondly, the use of the upper of the two distal locking screws would have helped to distribute the stress over a larger area thus preventing a stress riser effect. Thirdly, the concentrated stresses may have been less than the critical level at which the cortex would have given away. Although fracture reduction was good or acceptable before nailing in almost all patients included in the study, 18% had lost the initial reduction in the process of nailing. Of the nine patients losing good fracture reduction achieved at the beginning of surgery, six had acceptable reductions while the remaining three ended up in poor fracture reductions on the post-operative radiographs. Among the initial acceptable reductions, four fractures had a poor reduction pattern on the post-operative radiographs. Seven poorly reduced fractures incidentally had a TAD of more than 15 In view of the need to place two screws across the neck into the head of the femur, the duration of surgery and blood loss were marginally higher with the Ace nail compared to the Gamma nail. The need to place two screws definitely made it impossible on the surgeon's part to compromise on the lag screw position, which is reflected in the higher number of screws in the ideal position with a significantly lower TAD in the Ace nail group. There were five patients in the Gamma nail group with the screw in the superior half of the head of the femur compared to none in the Ace nail group. In all the Ace nails, the anti-rotation screw was 5–10 The amount of sliding was significantly higher in the Gamma nail group compared to that of the Ace nail group. This could be attributed to the fact that the rate of collapse is different for the two femoral neck screws in the case of the Ace nail, in effect one is preventing the sliding of the other. This gives enhanced rigidity to the Ace nail with two femoral neck screws construct as compared to the Gamma nail. This could also be very well noted in case of the patient undergoing Ace nail fixation in our study having an accidental fall. Both the screws had moved by 10 The rapid improvement in the HHS in almost all the patients uniformly suggests the impact of early weight bearing on the patient's morale. Definitely there was a lot of visible psychological rejuvenation in all our patients once they were put on to their feet immediately after surgery. Although a significant number of patients had hip or thigh pain immediately following mobilisation, this had been totally relieved at the 4th month follow-up. This can possibly be explained by the fact that all patients had such severe osteoporosis that the implants would not be tightly seated in the medullary canal, thus allowing minimal motion. All the patients had improvement in the HHS till 1-year post-operatively. At the last follow-up, although 19 patients had shortening, only three had shortening more than 1 In the present study, there was a statistically significant difference ( There was no case of infection, delayed union or nonunion in this series. All being closed fractures, had united at the 4-month follow-up. This could be possibly due to the semi-closed nailing technique which preserves the fracture hematoma to some extent as well as avoids stripping of the periosteum. None of the implants had failed even at the end of 2-year follow-up and hence there was no need for implant removal in any of the patients except for the one with cut-out. Even the patient with Gamma nail cut-out had union of the fracture in severe varus 3 months following implant removal. But this patient with low activity level had no major complaints requiring corrective osteotomy. To our knowledge, this is the first clinical study comparing the efficacy and safety of the single femoral neck screw configuration with two femoral neck screw configuration of intramedullary nail in the management of unstable trochanteric fracture in the elderly osteoporotic bone. Sliding of the screws was less with the two femoral neck screw construct as compared to single femoral neck screw configuration, thus making it more rigid. Although the single femoral neck screw construct is less rigid, by virtue of significantly greater sliding of the femoral neck screw and proportionately increased shortening, the present study shows that it does not affect the ultimate functional outcome. Thus, this study shows that the osteoporosis of the proximal femur does not have a bearing on the choice of single or two-femoral neck screws along with intra-medullary nails in the management of trochanteric fractures with respect to clinical outcome.