The behaviour of phosphate during the precipitation of sodium jarosite and potassium jarosite was investigated. At 97, 98 or 150°C, single-phase PO4-bearing sodium jarosite or potassium jarosite precipitated from Fe(SO4)1.5 solutions containing less than about 4g/L PO4. Higher PO4 concentrations resulted in the co-precipitation of other phosphate species. Phosphate is preferentially precipitated relative to sulphate under all conditions. The products formed from solutions having a constant PO4 concentration and containing >0.15M Fe(SO4)1.5 consisted of PO4-bearing sodium jarosite. The precipitates from more dilute Fe(SO4)1.5 solutions consisted of an amorphous phase plus sodium jarosite. Different behaviours were observed when the Fe(SO4)1.5
                     /PO4 ratio of the solutions was kept constant; these precipitates were only PO4-bearing sodium jarosite. At temperatures <170°C, in the presence of 1.8g/L PO4, only PO4-bearing sodium jarosite was detected. At 98°C, PO4-bearing sodium jarosite was produced over the pH range from 1.0 to 2.0. At 150°C, PO4-containing potassium jarosite was produced, but all the precipitates were contaminated with an unknown phosphate species. The precipitates made in predominantly chloride media were similar to those formed under comparable conditions in the all-sulphate systems. Single phase PO4-containing sodium jarosite or potassium jarosite precipitated from chloride solutions containing <3g/L PO4, but the precipitates formed from more concentrated PO4 solutions were contaminated with other phosphate species. Detailed mineralogical studies indicated a limited degree of PO4 solid solution in both sodium jarosite and potassium jarosite, with PO4 contents of 5–6% being achieved. It seems that the PO4
                     3− anion substitutes for SO4
                     2− in the jarosite structure, and that the limited extent of substitution is mostly limited by the different charges on the PO4
                     3− and SO4
                     2− anions.Jarosite-type compounds [MFe In addition to rejecting iron, jarosite precipitation is also useful for the elimination of sulphate and various other impurities ( Phosphorus is a trace element in many ores and concentrates and the phosphorus commonly occurs as phosphate in apatite, Ca Low concentrations of phosphate, together with significantly higher concentrations of dissolved ferric ion, can be encountered in various hydrometallurgical operations. Although the iron is often rejected from such processing solutions by jarosite precipitation, the deportment of phosphate during jarosite precipitation has not been systematically defined. To better understand the behaviour of phosphate during jarosite precipitation, systematic series of laboratory experiments were carried out under the general conditions likely to be encountered in hydrometallurgical processes, and the results of those studies are summarized in this paper. All the experiments were carried out using reagent grade chemicals and the procedures reported previously ( All the precipitates were analyzed chemically; the solids were dissolved in HCl and the elements of concern were determined using either inductively coupled plasma (ICP) spectroscopy or atomic absorption (AA) analysis with matrix-matched standards. Most of the precipitates were also subjected to X-ray diffraction analysis using a Rigaku rotating anode diffractometer with CuKα As will be seen later, a number of phosphate species can precipitate depending on the solution concentration, especially the PO  Generally similar behaviour is noted at elevated temperatures, as is shown in  Similar experiments were carried out at 150 In all the above experiments, the amount of precipitate varied in a complex manner with increasing phosphate concentration. For the 0.3 X-ray diffraction analysis of the various precipitates discussed above indicated that several phosphate species could be present, depending on the phosphate concentration. The precipitates made at 97 X-ray diffraction analysis of the various precipitates made at 97 The above X-ray diffraction results suggest that phosphate-bearing jarosite-type compounds are formed from solutions containing less than about 4 X-ray diffraction analyses of the phosphate-bearing sodium jarosite and potassium jarosite precipitates discussed above (cf. The above results suggest that minor amounts of phosphate substitute for sulphate in the structure of jarosite-type compounds precipitated from solutions containing less than about 4 Similar X-ray maps for K, Fe, S, P and O were generated for a potassium jarosite precipitate made at 97 Although the products made from relatively dilute phosphate solutions are single-phase, the precipitates formed from more concentrated phosphate solutions are commonly contaminated with various discrete phosphate phases. Depending on the synthesis conditions, particularly the ferric ion concentration, pH and temperature, phosphate concentrations in excess of about 4    In the figures presented above, increasing Fe(SO The amount of precipitate formed in the experiments summarized in Temperature has a significant effect on the rate of precipitation of jarosite-type compounds and on the amount of precipitate formed ( A similar series of experiments was carried out using solutions containing 0.2 The jarosite precipitation reaction generates sulphuric acid (Eq. High temperatures promote the precipitation of jarosite-type compounds and allow the reaction to occur at lower pH values. This aspect is illustrated in Jarosite precipitation can be effected from predominantly chloride media, provided that an independent sulphate source is available and the pH range is adjusted appropriately ( As was the situation for the syntheses carried out in all-sulphate media, the precipitates made from chloride solutions containing 3.0 Similar experiments were carried out to precipitate sodium jarosite at 97 Various experiments were also carried out to ascertain the behaviour of phosphate during the precipitation of potassium–sodium jarosite at 97 and 150 The behaviour of phosphate during the precipitation of jarosite-type compounds from Na The precipitates made from the more dilute phosphate solutions were characterized using SEM-EDX analysis, X-ray mapping, detailed X-ray diffraction analysis and quantitative electron microprobe analysis. Collectively, the results showed a limited degree of phosphate solid solution in both sodium jarosite and potassium jarosite, with phosphate contents up to about 6% PO Increasing Fe(SO Increasing synthesis temperatures to about 100 The synthesis experiments carried out at 98 The authors wish to thank CANMET staff members Al Kuiper for assistance with the synthesis experiments and Derek Smith for the X-ray diffraction analyses.