This review presents the recent achievements on carbon additives incorporated in ZrB2 ceramics, improved properties, and their advancements. Monolithic ZrB2 ceramics have broad potential applications, but their critical drawbacks such as poor damage tolerance, and weak oxidation and ablation resistance confines their applicability. It is an important issue to resolve these shortages in physiochemical properties by engineering the composite ingredients and process design of the ceramic counterparts for an extensive production and applications, which are especially essential in high–tech industries and products. Carbon additives have exceptional characteristics including low density, low cost, and excellent thermo–mechanical stability. These materials have been incorporated in ZrB2 ceramics to enhance their efficiency and form practical composite ceramics. Although addition of the secondary carbonaceous phases is generally supposed to improve the mechanical properties of ZrB2 composites, it may also result in a decrease in other aspects of performance, comparing with monolithic ZrB2 ceramics. In this work, we reviewed the methods and strategies for the preparation of carbon modulated ZrB2 ceramic composites. Moreover, the advantages, disadvantages, and the productivity of the introduced composite ceramics have been explored and featured.There are a few natural elements with high melting points exceeding 3000 °C, including carbon (C) and metals such as rhenium (Re), osmium (Os), tungsten (W) and tantalum (Ta). In addition, the manufactured components possessing such a property are not so many. Among them, ultrahigh temperature ceramics (UHTCs) feature prominently, which are comprised of thorium dioxide (ThO Carbon additives with special characteristics, This review article describes the effects of carbonaceous additives on the properties of ZrB ZrB In addition to its high melting point, ZrB There has been growing interest in ZrB The use of monolithic ZrB Producing ZrB Zirconium diboride ceramics can be synthesized via direct reaction of boron and Zr metal, based on the following reaction: The reaction is favorably achieved at 1700 °C and easily initiated with a relatively low activation energy. Recently, several successful attempts have been reported based on self–propagating high temperature synthesis (SHS) of zirconium diboride and traditional synthesis using the basic elements Zirconium dioxide considered as an appropriate source of zirconium in the synthesis of ZrB Elemental boron can be used as both a reductant and boron source to produce ZrB The reaction product contains a notable amount of B Carbothermic reduction is generally a controllable process and requires relatively inexpensive raw materials The above mentioned reactions occur simultaneously and need excess amounts of boron due to consumption of boron to form B The reaction of Eq. Boro/carbothermic reduction synthesis has been recently developed in order to produce in situ ZrB Boron replacement in ZrO Because the oxidation of Al and Mg is highly exothermic, the synthesis process can be performed via SHS method. In addition, if the excess metal and B Ultrafine ZrB The metallothermic reduction process can be considered as one of the most promising routes for mass production of ZrB Although solution synthesis method has been widely used for the preparation of ceramic materials, there are a few successful works for the ZrB Besides the aforementioned common synthetic routes, zirconium diboride and ZrB Generally, the improvement of properties such as densification of ZrB Carbon is an abundant nonmetallic element and can be found almost everywhere. Atoms of carbon can bond together in different arrangements so that the materials made of solely carbon can present variable forms, termed as allotropes of carbon. While two familiar forms of carbon, graphite and diamond, have been used in variable applications for a long time, its relatively new allotropes Carbon is known to be an effective sintering additive for many non–oxide ceramics, in particular for SiC production where it deactivates the presence of SiO Carbon black is a generic term for an important family of additives used generally for the reinforcement of rubbers and improvement of electric conductivity of composites. It is one of the most stable chemical substances. Furthermore, it imparts special properties to composites of which it is a part of. It is also the most widely used nanomaterial with its relevant dimensions ranging from ten to a few hundred nanometers Nano–sized carbon black in the porous condensable agglomerate form has been broadly applied in structural modification of the advanced materials and composites Farahbakhsh et al. prepared a hot pressed ZrB The densification mechanism can be suggested according to the below equations, where carbon reacts with ZrO The residual ZrO Similarly, the silica impurity on the surface of main SiC particles may also react with carbon black to produce newly–formed SiC phases: The conversion of oxide impurities on the surface of ZrB Carbon fiber found its practical usage in electronics soon after discovery in 1880, when Thomas Edison patented the use of carbon fibers as filaments in electric lamps. Since then, it has found a broad range of applications including advanced composites fabrication. Low fracture toughness and thermal shock resistance of ZrB For the first time, Tang et al. introduced carbon fibers into the ZrB Although addition of carbon fiber with original diameter of 5 µm improved many properties of ZrB In another study conducted by Barcena et al., the fabrication of thin films by tape casting was applied to obtain a layer that could be integrated into a complex system After debinding, two densification methods were studied and compared (pressureless sintering at 2050 °C and 2150 °C and hot–pressing at 1900 °C). In addition, consolidation by hot–pressing was more effective than pressureless sintering in terms of final relative density and flatness of the specimens. Higher thermal conductivities and improved toughness can be expected for nanofiber additions, as compared to the matrix alone Shahedi Asl et al. studied the influences of four processing variables (hot pressing temperature, dwell time, applied pressure and composition) on the densification behavior of carbon fiber/ZrB Balak Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) with cylindrical nanostructure and novel properties are allotropes of carbon, which possess many structures, different in length and thickness, type of helicity, and number of layers. Due to their extraordinary thermal conductivity, mechanical, and electrical properties, CNTs have found variable applications particularly as additives in many composites In recent years, CNTs are widely used for strengthening various matrixes of ceramic composites, especially to improve the fracture toughness Yadhukulakrishnan et al. successfully used SPS technique to sinter fine–grained ZrB In another attempt to enhance the properties of this type of ceramic, Shahedi Asl and co–workers produced ZrB Graphite has been historically used in pencil industry. In 18th century, graphite was demonstrated to be an allotrope of carbon. Graphite is very soft and slippery; hence, it is applied as a lubricant in industrial machinery. It consists of sheets of carbon atoms and its softness and slipperiness arises from the way that carbon atoms are arranged in a hexagonal or honey comb pattern. Carbon atoms are strongly bonded to their neighboring carbons in graphite, while the bindings between the sheets are very weak To study the effect of graphite addition in UHTCs, Zhi et al. fabricated a ZrB At the same HP conditions, Zhou et al. studied the effect of graphite flake orientation on microstructure and mechanical properties of ZrB In another effort, Hou et al. introduced dense ZrB Continuous advancements in incorporating graphite into ZrB Graphene is a two–dimensional (2D) sheet of hexagonally arranged carbon atoms. Its extended lattice is the basic building block of other carbon allotropes. It can be stacked to make 3D graphite, rolled to form 1D nanotube, and wrapped to form 0D fullerene The densification of 2–6 vol% graphene reinforced ZrB In another study, Shahedi Asl et al. fabricated a 5 wt% graphene reinforced ZrB Similar to the aforementioned procedure, Zhang et al. fabricated a graphene that reinforced ZrB Poor sinterability and low mechanical reliability of ZrB The coming section explores modified properties of carbonaceous incorporated ZrB Graphite flakes are widely used in advanced technologies including electrodes, electric motors, coatings, batteries, and aerospace and propulsion materials. The reliability of brittle materials can be improved by the introduction of graphite for the reason that graphite can deflect the crack propagation path and release the residual stress. Previous studies show that a pronounced increment in thermal shock resistance (carried out by sudden high temperature stress) can be achieved with the controlled introduction of graphite flake into ZrB Insertion of graphite in zirconium based ceramics does not necessarily improve the expected physiochemical properties of all products. Recent studies express that the flexural strength of ZrB Incorporating carbonac additives with ZrB Ultrahigh temperature ceramics, of moderate physiochemical properties, are an emerging field for numerous advanced practical applications. The excellent high temperature properties and oxidation resistance of ZrB An important issue for the usage and incorporation of ZrB In this review, we have demonstrated and tabulated the effects of various carbon additives (carbon black, carbon fibers and nanotubes, pyrolysis–induced carbon, graphite, and graphene) on the various properties of ZrB