Step changes in technology, including adoption of new process configurations and chemistry, require modelling and experimental work for establishing process feasibility and process optimisation. In this work the results of such modelling and experimentation as applied to purification via zinc dust cementation of a zinc-bearing leachate are presented. The novelty of the process, developed by Intec Ltd, lies in the use of a mixed halide leachant over the traditional sulphide leach. The process has the advantages of operation at low temperatures and atmospheric pressure, and regeneration and recycle of leachant. Thermodynamic modelling results demonstrated that feasible removal of major and trace metals via cementation is possible down to levels suitable for electrowinning. A challenge in this respect is accounting for the competing evolution of hydrogen. Experimental work provided guidance in identifying the optimal quantity and method of zinc dust addition required to achieve removal, and will be used to guide the development of a suitable operational strategy for the plant. Comment is offered on opportunities for selective recovery of valuable metal species.Sulphuric acid has traditionally been the leachant used in the extraction of zinc from base metal sulphide concentrates, with processes being relatively well documented in the open literature. Other reactants which may be used include ammonia, nitric acid, caustic soda and chlorides ( The Intec zinc recovery process uses a mixed chloride/bromide solution to leach zinc from zinc sulphide ores and concentrates. The Intec process has a number of environmental and cost benefits over traditional processes. Firstly, use of a The process train consists of three circuits, being leaching, leachate purification and electrowinning. The leachate purification train includes precipitation and cementation to effect metals removal down to levels suitable for electrowinning. The purification of the leachate is required to both improve final product quality and current efficiency in electrowinning. In the electrowinning step, a woven cloth membrane attached to the anode is continuously permeated with the spent catholyte where there is formation of the halogen species This electrolyte is a powerful lixiviant with an oxidising potential of 1000 This paper presents the results of work which has been conducted with the aim of understanding and optimising the cementation purification step of the process. A review is presented of the theory of cementation, and the challenges associated with the development of thermodynamic models which describe the cementation reactions are discussed. The results from models which have been developed for these systems are compared to those obtained from experimental work, and together the models and experimental results are used to provide insights into the optimisation of the cementation step, which will ultimately be used to guide process development. Cementation refers to the use of a solid metal to recover another metal species from a solution via a simple redox reaction. The aim of cementation in the Intec process is to reduce impurities to low levels (<1 Zinc metal has a relatively high reducing potential which makes it suitable for cementation. The zinc metal is oxidised and the metal species which are to be removed from solution, including Ag, Cu, Pb, Ni and Co, are reduced, according to the reactions as illustrated for silver: Theoretically the metals would be expected to be removed following their electrode potential order: Ag The complexity of the solutions which are produced from the leaching step have resulted in the detailed science governing purification by cementation with Zn powder not being well understood for either chloride or sulphate systems. Factors such as quantity and reactivity of the Zn powder, the concentration of metal ions present, agitation, pH and temperature all affect cementation. In practice, therefore, cementation is generally conducted with limited understanding of the fundamental reactions, and the way in which zinc dust is added is optimised through trial and error for specific plants and specific concentrates. This observation reinforces the need for fundamental analysis to ensure the development of optimum zinc dust addition regimes. In this paper we explore such a fundamental analysis through a combination of thermodynamic modelling and experimental work. Thermodynamic models were developed in order to provide an indication of the degree of metals removal which is theoretically achievable via cementation. A number of considerations need to be taken into account when attempting to thermodynamically model a concentrated, complex system, and match these results to behaviour observed in experimental work. These considerations include the impact of complexation on cementation, the availability and selection of thermodynamic data and the choice of modelling platform ( The majority of thermodynamic data available in the literature has been developed for binary or simple solutions which display behaviour which is close to ideality. In solutions with multiple components in high concentrations, various cationic, neutral and anionic complexes are formed through dissolution, precipitation, acid-base pairs, oxidation-reduction reactions and complexation reactions which occur during the interaction of water with minerals in aqueous systems. In chloride media specifically, most transition metals tend to form aqueous chloro-complexes. The formation of such complexes results in the behaviour being different to that predicted from pure system thermodynamics. In addition, many reactions which can be ignored at 25  In addition to complexation considerations, in concentrated solutions the activities of the metals are significantly different to the more easily measurable concentrations, on which thermodynamic analyses are generally based. Many aspects of solution behaviour, including pH, reduction potential and reaction behaviour are governed by activities, resulting in significant challenges being associated with calculating the actual properties of aqueous systems on the basis of ideal/standard thermodynamic data ( The choice of software modelling platform is important for two reasons. Firstly, it must be ensured that the underlying software routines required to conduct the necessary calculations are appropriate for the systems being studied. Secondly, a critical assessment needs to be made of the data which are used for the modelling. Two software products were trialled in this work to determine their ability to predict system behaviour, being HSC Chemistry and the CSIRO Monash University Thermodynamic modelling software package, Chemix. HSC Chemistry was chosen for initial modelling work due to its ease of use, particularly with respect to the ease with which data could be checked and entered. One of the key concerns associated with using modelling software surrounds consistency of data—both in terms of reliability of the data source, and the accuracy with which it is entered into the software ( Despite the importance of high temperature thermodynamic quantities in many applications, the availability of data for high temperature aqueous reactions is relatively low compared with the volume of data available at 25 Theoretically, it should be impossible to cement/deposit any metals which have reduction potentials lower than H Given that thermodynamic models predict only equilibrium behaviour and cannot take into account kinetic effects, some form of manipulation of the models is required in order to account for the overvoltage and to be able to use the models to obtain information on system behaviour. To do this the potential of the H The aims of the experimental work presented in this paper were to: Determine the optimum amount and method of zinc dust addition required for cementation. Compare the results with those from the thermodynamic models to provide an improved understanding of the system. Determine the potential for selective recovery of metals. These are discussed in turn below. A synthetic leach liquor composition was developed on the basis of preliminary laboratory work and past experience. This is shown in The cementation reactions were conducted in a 10 Experiments were conducted by heating the liquor shown in Four methods of zinc dust addition were investigated in order to determine both the optimum amount and method of zinc dust addition: Adding zinc dust in small amounts (approximately 5% of the stoichiometric amount of zinc dust for complete cementation was added in each step until the total amount was 115% of the stoichiometric amount). In a one step addition. In 3 aliquots of approximately 105%, 50% and 105% of the stoichiometric amount of zinc required for complete cementation of the metals, added in 20 Using a recycle configuration. Zinc was added in aliquots of 5.2% of the theoretical stoichiometric amount of zinc dust required for complete cementation of all metals, up to a total of 115% of the theoretical stoichiometric amount. This approach did not achieve the desired cementation, removing almost all of the Ag (down to 2 An analysis of the residual solid after cementation and filtration indicated limited zinc remaining in the solid, suggesting that the majority of the added zinc dust entered solution. As zinc is added into solution and is oxidised, the Ag and Cu are removed by cementation. Any further zinc which is added is consumed in the decomposition of water to produce hydrogen gas at an Thermodynamic models of these tests showed that the production of metals was inhibited initially, during which time zinc was consumed without a significant production of solid metal. This was found to be a consequence of “couples” of the dissolved metal species, with zinc being consumed in reducing the higher oxidation state to a lower state before any metal production was achieved. Small additions of zinc dust were not able to effect the required cementation. However, it was identified that zinc can inhibit the hydrogen evolution reaction ( Experimentally, additions of between 100% and 200% of the stoichiometric amount of zinc demonstrated that increasingly lower potentials were achieved along with increasing metals removal, although even at 200% addition only 58% of the Cd was removed ( Two reasons for the significant excess requirement to achieve cementation are offered. Firstly, solid analyses showed a significant amount of the zinc in these experiments reports to the solid phase. It is suggested that this is either as a result of the surface of the zinc dust being deactivated or coated by the metal species cementing or precipitating onto the surface of the solid particles, or to the formation of an unreactive zinc hydroxychloride complex (such as simonkolleite, Zn The minimum amount of Zn required to effect complete cementation was ultimately determined to be 260% of the theoretical stoichiometric amount, and this was used for further test work. The excess zinc requirement is of concern in relation to the economics of the process. If the excess zinc reported to the solution and was consumed through hydrogen evolution as observed above, this would not be a significant problem as it would be recovered during electrowinning. However, given that the solid analyses demonstrated that up to 40% of the total zinc added reported to the filter cake, a significant cost and waste management concern potentially exists. The third set of experiments aimed at looking at the addition of zinc dust in 3 aliquots of approximately 105%, 50% and 105% of the theoretical stoichiometric amount of zinc required for complete cementation of the metals, at 20 The first 105% of Zn dust caused the Eh to drop rapidly to −480 The trends followed by these experiments are reflected in the thermodynamic models which include the modification for hydrogen evolution. These results suggest some potential for the selective recovery of metals for resale. Further tests run to determine whether separation of silver and copper was feasible were unsuccessful. This was attributed to two factors. Firstly, the reduction potentials of Ag and Cu are very close and thus achieving complete separation is difficult. Secondly, the total amount of Cu in solution is 12 times that of Ag, which implies that only a small amount of zinc dust is required to cement out the Ag before the Cu starts to be cemented from solution. The economics of additional equipment, process control requirements and further downstream processing for selective separation are yet to be evaluated to determine whether this warrants further pursuit. An attempt was made to determine whether the amount of zinc dust required for cementation could be reduced by conducting a two stage cementation, using a recycle configuration. This work was motivated by the observation of how much zinc was entering the cementation product, and it was decided to see this could be utilised through a recycle configuration and in so doing reduce the total amount of zinc dust required for complete cementation. The first stage was used for the removal of the majority of the metals, with the second step representing a polishing step. Fresh zinc was added in the polishing step and the solids recovered from this polishing were used for cementation in the first step. Tests were run with 125% and 175% of the stoichiometric amount of zinc dust required for metals removal ( Whilst this configuration appears to be effective in cementation in the first two batches, by the third and fourth batches, a buildup of metals reduces the effectiveness of removal of Cd and Co. Recycle thus shows some potential for reducing the Zn dust requirement, and further investigation is required to determine the optimum recycle configuration and number of times the cemented solid may be returned to the process. This work presented in this paper has used a combination of thermodynamic models and experimental work in advancing the understanding of the processes which control cementation of metals from a leach solution. Addition of the zinc in small aliquots did not achieve the desired purification, an observation which was attributed primarily to hydrogen evolution. Purification of leachates via cementation was demonstrated to be feasible, providing a sufficient excess of zinc dust is used, and that it is added in large batches. Addition of zinc dust in large batches reduces the rate of hydrogen evolution and zinc is available to achieve potentials required for cementation of the remaining metals. A significant excess of zinc dust was, however, required to achieve purification, which potentially results in a significant cost implication. Further work will concentrate on reducing this zinc dust requirement, including limiting the loss of zinc dust to the solid filter cake to manage the cost and waste management implications. Future work will also look at determining the applicability of results to other leach solution compositions. Some potential for selective recovery of metal species from the solutions was identified in this work, although the economics and control requirements to effect selective recovery need to be further assessed. This work was funded by a Linkage grant from the Australian Research Council in conjunction with Intec Ltd. Intec Ltd also contributed human and physical resources to this project.