Compressor selection is one of the primary functions in operation of natural gas pipelines, and a major concern of the task is to minimize operating costs. This study presents a comparison of three automation techniques for compressor selection: mixed integer linear programming, genetic algorithms, and expert systems. In compressor selection, dispatchers often turn on/off compressor units based on the status of the pipeline and the anticipated customer demand. Since a novice dispatcher often performs this task on a trial-and-error basis without any guarantee of optimal operations, it is desirable to develop a decision support system that can select compressors based on the available data. This study presents a comparison of three automation techniques for incorporation into a decision support system. Based on parameter values for one section of the gas pipeline at the St. Louis East area in Saskatchewan, Canada, a comparison of the strengths and weaknesses of the three automation techniques as well as the recommendations they gave are discussed.A pipeline network system is the most cost effective way for moving fluid products over long distances. It is also the most common method for transmitting natural gas from a producer to customer areas. One of the key objectives in natural gas pipeline operations is to ensure customer satisfaction by maintaining the pressure of gas in the pipeline system. Operators accomplish this by selecting among the compressors and turning them on or off. An optimal choice of compressor usage can significantly impact operating costs, and automated decision support for this task of compressor selection has often been tackled using the simulation approach The paper is organized as follows. Section Linear programming (LP) is a mathematical programming technique, in which the objective function and problem constraints are linearly defined, and the relationships among them are also linear. In general, LP solves problems using a simple linear branch-and-bound algorithm with the objective of minimizing the overall operating costs. The results generated by linear programming are usually acceptable if the problem data are known with certainty. The results can be of real value but some problems may require the results to be presented in integer values. For example, in the compressor selection task, the decision variables involve turning a compressor on and off, which can be denoted as 0 or 1. This type of problem requires the mixed integer linear programming (MILP) technique, which integrates linear programming with integer programming approaches. The MILP approach involves expressing the objective function mathematically and defining constraints to represent the relationships among the parameters involved. A sample parameter is demand for natural gas in different periods of time. The variables in MILP are constrained to be integer numbers, and not fractional values. An introduction on the MILP technique can be found in The MILP approach has been adopted for solving problems in diverse process industries. Vasquez-Alvarez and Pinto The genetic algorithm (GA) approach is an efficient heuristic search technique that conducts searches in parallel from several points in a search space, thereby reducing the chance of the search being stuck in a local optimum. GAs work well in time-constrained problems because the optimal solution improves in every generation instead of being the result of a lengthy solution process. Moreover, since GAs use only the value of the objective function and not information such as derivatives, they can be applied to both non-linear and linear problems without increasing the complexity. Details on the GA approach can be found in Genetic algorithms have been applied to a variety of optimization and control problems, and some of their applications in energy engineering are described as follows. Goldberg The expert system approach uses primarily captured human heuristics for providing the basis for building automation solutions. Human expertise can include facts and theoretical understanding of the problem, as well as the heuristic knowledge or rules that experts have accumulated from their problem solving experience. The captured expertise is represented in the knowledge base of the system. More details on the ES approach can be found in Expert systems have been applied to different areas of process engineering such as design, monitoring and control, scheduling and planning. Some applications of expert system in process industries are described as follows. Beach and Knight This project on optimization of compressor selection was part of a study on automation of natural gas pipeline operations conducted jointly between the University of Regina and a gas pipeline company in Saskatchewan. The objective of the study was to optimize compressor scheduling and the study focused on a section of the Saskatchewan gas pipeline around the St. Louis East compressor station in the province of Saskatchewan, Canada. A schematic of the St. Louis East system is shown in The system consists of two compressor stations, Melfort and St. Louis. These compressor stations supply natural gas to two customer locations, Nipawin and Hudson Bay. In St. Louis, there are three compressor units; two of them are compressor units driven by electrical motors and the other is a compressor unit driven by a gas-driven engines. For abbreviation, hereafter, we will call them gas and electrical compressors. In Melfort, there are two gas compressors. An electrical compressor unit provides 250 The industrial customer maintains the same rate of natural gas consumption at any time of the day. The dehydrator customer demands two set amounts of natural gas at different periods of time. For example, between 8:00 and 10:00 am, the demand is 240 The graphs showing supply and demand of gas in the pipelines are generated during operations by the simulator program of the gas pipeline transmission company. The display includes a compressor discharge pressure curve versus customer station pressure curve as shown in A novice dispatcher may make unnecessary start/stop decisions due to lack of experience. A minimum of four months is required to train new dispatchers to operate the system. However, it takes a number of years for them to gain proficiency in operating the system smoothly and cost effectively. The problem of compressor scheduling can be decomposed into the two sub-problems of demand prediction and schedule optimization, as shown in The complexity of the optimization problem is analyzed as follows. There are five controllable compressors operating in a time span of 6 The different optimization approaches will be presented and compared in Sections The problem of compressor schedule optimization has been previously tackled using the expert system approach and reported in The reason for the small number of rules in the expert system is that they were formulated based on human expertise. A close examination of these rules revealed some interesting and implicit heuristics. For example, the rules involve only either addition or substraction of compressors but not both at the same time. Since it is unlikely that BHP requirements would oscillate between two ranges of values in a short time frame of 3 This section describes formulation of a mathematical model for the problem. The model was developed based on the following assumptions Each compressor must be shut-down for maintenance after it has been operating for 1000 Customer demand must be satisfied in every period and the amount of the demand is converted from the load of St. Louis and Melfort flow to BHP requirement. A compressor usually requires 1–2 days service for maintenance. This is not modeled since our time horizon is only 6 A compressor should be operating for a period of no less than 3 The customer demand must be known with certainty for 6-h periods. The location of compressors does not affect the transmission efficiency of gas from the St. Louis and Melfort stations to Nipawin or Hudson Bay. The decision variables, objective function, and constraints are described as follows. The decision variables determine the status of compressors, and represent the model’s suggestions on whether to turn on or off compressors in the natural gas pipeline system. The St. Louis East system consists of gas and electrical compressors. The decision variables for this model are denoted as The objective function in the model selects a set of compressors based on optimality of its operating costs for a specified number of operating periods. In this case, six operating periods are considered because this duration gives the dispatcher sufficient time for effectively controlling the volume of natural gas in the pipeline system. The decision variables determine the results of the objective function and constraints. The objective function represents the total operating costs within a specified time horizon, which is the sum of the fuel costs, maintenance cost for each compressor, the start-up cost when a compressor is restarted after downtime, penalty cost for not operating a compressor continuously for a certain period of time, and penalty cost for over supply. The formulae to calculate these costs are defined before the objective function can be finalized, and are presented as follows. This is the cost associated with the amount of energy used in operating each compressor within a given time horizon. In general, compressors have different rates of energy consumption. For example, an electrical compressor utilizes more energy in turning on/off than a gas compressor. As a result, the fuel cost for operating an electrical compressor is normally higher than that of a gas compressor. The fuel cost of a compressor can be calculated with Eq. The maintenance cost refers to the regular cost for maintaining each compressor. Each compressor can only be operated for a limited number of hours, after which it must be shut-down for maintenance. For example, in the St. Louis East natural gas pipeline system, the total operating hours for each compressor may not exceed 1000 When a compressor is turned on, there is a cost that results from the energy spent on restarting operations. The start-up cost for gas and electrical compressor can be calculated using Eq. Shut-down cost is the cost incorporated in the model to avoid deterioration of each compressor. Each compressor should be selected so that the number of times of turning on/off is minimized to reduce component deterioration. After a compressor is turned on, it should be continuously operating for as long as possible, which is assumed to be a minimum of 3 The over-supply cost refers to the compressor operation that has been carried out unnecessarily. In practice, the operator uses linepack, a total volume of natural gas in the pipeline, as an indicator for demand of customers. If this demand is exceeded because of over compression, there will be unnecessary operating costs associated with this operation. The over-supply cost can be expressed by Eq. After formulating Eqs. The objective function defined in Eq. The primary objective of natural gas network operations is to deliver natural gas to customers according to their demand. During operations, the dispatcher turns on or off compressors in order to increase pressure in the pipelines so that natural gas can be transported from the compressor stations to the customer locations. The capacity of a compressor is defined in terms of BHP and is used for increasing pressure in the pipeline system. The BHP requirement can be derived from the horsepower requirement chart as shown in The MILP approach has been adapted for the compressor selection task for optimization of natural gas pipeline network operations. In addition to the equations specified in Section The status of a compressor can either be on or off, thus the values of The first step in developing a genetic algorithm is to encode the problem space of operational schedules. The entire operational schedule was encoded in a single chromosome. There are five controllable compressors operating in a time span of 6 The binary coding reduces the number of constraints from three in the MILP approach to one in the genetic algorithm approach. The reason for this reduction is explained as follows. In the pipeline problem, compressor states have discrete values of 0 or 1, which can be represented as binary bits in a chromosome. However, since discrete parameter values cannot be directly represented in the linear programming approach, a number of extra inequality constraints, i.e. Eqs. The objective function for the GA approach is based on that for the MILP approach, which is specified as the sum of cost for fuel, start-up, maintenance, and shut-down. However, as the genetic algorithms do not handle constraints separately, the non-covered penalty expressed in Eq. For example, using the same notations as in Section Let The genetic algorithm was implemented in the Genetic Algorithm and Direct Search Toolbox (trademark of The Mathworks). This GA study employed the operators of roulette-wheel selection, single-point crossover, single-bit mutation, and elite replacement. We varied the mutation rate and population size. However, the results did not show any clear correlation between the GA parameters and the optimal cost obtained (see Only the results of best experiment instance are presented hereafter. The following parameters are used in the genetic algorithm process: Number of chromosomes in each generation: 30. Crossover rate: 0.08. Mutation rate: 0.01. The algorithm stops when one of the following criteria is met: The maximum number of generations of 300 is reached. There is no improvement in the objective function for a sequence of 100 consecutive generations. There is no improvement in the objective function during an interval of 50 In our experiments, the GA was run with the same configuration 10 times. The mean and standard deviation of the total cost are 1911.4 and 39.82. The GA always stalled, or showed no improvement, before the maximum number of 300 generations was reached. The penalty coefficient for a solution that does not satisfy customer demand was set to be 1,000,000; this large number ensures that an invalid solution will never be chosen as the optimal solution. The genetic algorithm stopped in less than a minute. The diversity during execution shown in To compare performance of the MILP, ES, and GA models, the three approaches were applied to the St. Louis East test case. Optimization of compressor selection in the gas pipeline operations is based on several parameters, including the number and types of compressors in the pipeline system, and the number of periods to be optimized. The compressors at the St. Louis East gas pipeline system can provide different capacities of BHP for adjusting the gas pressure in the pipeline for gas transmission from the two compressor stations to the two customer locations of Nipawin and Hudson Bay. The operating costs for each compressor, which include the costs for fuel, maintenance, start-up, and shut-down, can vary depending on the operating season and gas price. We carried out 10 different experiments with different initial conditions. The results are summarized in Only one of the experiments is analyzed in more details in the rest of the section. Aside from the customer demand expressed as the BHP requirements, the data were taken from a typical day’s operation of the pipeline system. The customer demand is hypothetically determined to establish different possible scenarios that the pipeline system can encounter in its daily operation. The parameter values of interest to the models are specified as follows: Horsepower of gas unit 1 ( The initial value of gas compressor unit 1 ( Fuel cost of gas compressor ( Penalty cost for each unit of gas wasted due to over-supply (PC Customer demand in period 1 ( Based on the above inputs, the three automation approaches selected the combinations of compressors listed in As can be seen in  The component cost presented in In terms of start-up costs, the MILP is the most efficient. As the MILP model does not use electrical compressor E1 at all in the entire duration, it incurs less start-up cost. In the ES solution, each compressor was turned on exactly once during the shift. The GA model gives the worst performance as it turns on the compressor E2 twice (in periods 1 and 4) during the optimization duration. The reason for the bad performance of GA for the start-up cost can be explained as follows. Since the GA concentrated too much on satisfying the hard constraint, it somewhat ignored the less important constraint of reducing the start-up costs. Another reason could be that the quality of the GA solution depends heavily on the GA parameters such as initial random population, mutation rate, number of chromosomes per population, etc., but the parameters used in the experiments were probably not the optimal ones. The expert system was cost effective in terms of shut-down cost since this cost is set up in a way that encourages compressors to run as much as possible, i.e. not only as long as possible after being started but also start the compressors as often as possible. This paper presents applications of the MILP and GA techniques for solving the problem of compressor selection in natural pipeline operations. Unlike the ES technology, which is based on a qualitative understanding of the problem and relied primarily on heuristics for making decisions, the MILP and GA models rely on a quantitative approach and considered operating costs as its criterion or objective for minimization. The comparison results showed that first the MILP, then the GA model, provided cost effective solutions in terms of the overall operation costs. Their solutions support a narrower gap between supply and demand in the comfort zone than the result given by the ES. Although the MILP model apparently generates the most cost effective solution compared to the GA and ES approaches, the current objective function has a number of implicit assumptions that should be taken into consideration when interpreting the results. Eq. In terms of expressiveness, the ES approach can include both qualitative and quantitative considerations. While the ES technology does not conduct a robust and comprehensive search through the search space like the MILP and GA approaches, the search space that it considers can take into account qualitative factors not expressible in numerical formulations. For example, the heuristics incorporated in the ES knowledge base can include circumstantial, maintenance, or safety considerations based on the operators’ past experience with the compressors. These considerations may be highly uncertain and not expressible in mathematical formulations, but they can affect the operators’ rankings or preferences on which compressors to use more frequently or in particular situations. A weakness in the ES approach is difficulty in updating the knowledge base. Since all the expertise is embedded in the rules, any updates on the pipeline system would involve rewriting at least part if not the entire knowledge base. By contrast, to re-run the MILP and GA models with a new objective function is straightforward. Hence in terms of its ability to consider both the qualitative and quantitative aspects of the problem, the expert system approach is superior, but in terms of ease of updates or maintainability, the expert system approach is less attractive. Currently for the GA, we used the Matlab toolbox for the study, with which a repair algorithm was not easy to implement. As future work, we will do our own coding and therefore can add a repairing algorithm for repairing infeasible solutions. A simple repairing algorithm could be as follows. Until the demand is met, keep turning on more compressors, which are selected at random. In the case study, the capacity of each compressor is regarded as its full capacity. However, in practice there may be impact of operating engine-driven compressors at part-load. The efficiency of part-load operation has not been taken into account in the optimization model because of its complexity. The implication of the part-load impact is left for future work of this project. The authors would like to acknowledge the generous support of a Strategic Grant from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada.