Warm, or ferritic, rolling is gaining in popularity amongst steelmakers as a means of cutting the cost of steel production and opening up the window of hot band properties. Some of the more unique, but important, metallurgical aspects of the process are reviewed. In particular, it is shown that the effect of changing the rolling temperature from the cold to the warm range on the properties of rolled and annealed sheet is far greater in low carbon (LC) than in interstitial-free (IF) steels. The former contain much lower densities of shear bands than the latter when warm rolled (WR) under the same conditions. This is attributed to the higher rate sensitivities and other physical properties of the low carbon (LC) grades, which arise in turn from the additional dynamic strain ageing (DSA) that accompanies an increase in strain rate. The IF grades have finer grain sizes when annealed after rolling above 500°C than the LC grades, apparently because of the much higher incidence of shear bands in the former materials in this temperature range. The conventional {111}⊥ ND “deep drawing” textures of cold-rolled and annealed IF grades are also present after WR and annealing. By contrast, the ND texture is absent in WR and annealed LC steels. This is attributed to the absence of shear bands in WR LC steels and therefore to the absence of the {111} nuclei that appear to be formed in the vicinity of these bands. Conversely, it is the presence of shear bands in WR IF steels that makes possible the replacement of cold rolling in these materials.Steelmakers have recently begun to take an interest in warm (ferritic) rolling, as it has the potential to broaden the product range and decrease the cost of hot-rolled strip. These advantages can affect all stages of the rolling process, beginning with reheating, followed by warm rolling, pickling, and cold rolling. Some of the benefits that can be realized during each of these stages of processing are listed in While the benefits catalogued in It has been known for some time Recent experiments The presence of these microstructural features in warm-rolled IF steels has been directly linked to the nucleation of the desirable {1 In order to investigate the effects described above, three steels were examined, with the compositions displayed in The steels were initially hot rolled down to a thickness of 11 The occurrence of shear banding in the LC material at 700°C is depicted in The above behaviour contrasted sharply with that of the IF material. Here the nature of the bands was unaffected by the rolling temperature, so that the example of banding illustrated in The deformation textures determined in the investigation described above are illustrated in the form of orientation distribution functions (ODFs) in Ref. Some examples of the textures measured after annealing at 700°C are displayed in It is clear from the results described above that the temperature dependence of the deformed state in the two LC grades differs sharply from that of the IF material. In particular, the influence of rolling temperature is far greater in the LC grades. The possible reasons for this are examined below in terms of shear band nature and density, the characteristics of the texture, and of the effect of the above parameters on It was evident from The principal feature of the results summarized here was the marked sharpness of the warm-rolled (700°C) texture in the LC steels. This was shown in Ref. The sharpness of the rolling texture has an important influence on the nucleation of new grains during annealing, and in particular on the orientations of the grains that form. In this way, it has a significant effect on the annealing texture. As indicated above for the deformation textures, the influence of rolling temperature on the annealing textures is far greater for the LC grades than for the IF material. In the latter, the desirable ND fibre (〈1 The differences in the annealing textures will now be linked to the differences in shear band density and nature described above. Such an interpretation is based on the following hypotheses: that the strong Goss component observed in the LC annealing textures after rolling at 70°C (which is absent in the other material and in the warm-rolled and annealed LC steels) is caused by the nucleation of this component in the vicinity of intense, i.e. severe shear bands; that the ND fibre observed in the LC annealing textures after rolling at 70°C and in the IF steel under all conditions (which is absent in the warm-rolled and annealed LC steels) is attributable to nucleation in the vicinity of shear bands of moderate intensity; that the near-absence of shear bands evident in the structure of warm-rolled LC steels is responsible for the near-absence of the Goss and ND fibre in these materials after annealing.  DSA is well known to occur in the presence of solute C or N when steels are tensile tested, e.g. at In order for this diagram to apply to rolling conditions, it must be understood that the lower curve applies to the strain rate of the bulk material, which is deforming homogeneously. By contrast, the upper (high strain rate) curve pertains to the material in a potential shear band. In the temperature range where In the temperature ranges where The dependence of the rate sensitivity on temperature discernible in a general way in If no alloying additions have been made to the steel, then the equilibrium amount of C that is expected to be in solution in the WR temperature range (600–800°C) is 100–500 The view that the presence of in-grain shear bands, such as those of The proposed link between the presence of moderate shear bands and nucleation of the desirable ND fibre component postulated here can be of technological use if the former can be made to appear at will. Their presence, in turn, appears to be associated, either with the complete absence of DSA, as in fully stabilized steels (e.g. the IF grades), or with manipulation of the temperature range for DSA effects by the addition of suitable alloying elements to conventional LC steels. Alloy development along the latter lines may thus be a fruitful line of research for further improvement of the properties of formable sheet steels. The results of one such study are described in Ref. Two important topics that are not considered here due to space limitations are: (i) the production of soft steels by warm rolling, and (ii) overcoming the effects of friction and near-surface shear on texture and The following conclusions can be drawn from the investigations described above. The rolling temperature (cold vs. warm) has a considerable influence on the shear band density in LC steels, but not at all in IF steels. The shear bands formed in cold-rolled LC steels are also more intense than those that develop in IF steels. The The presence in warm-rolled and annealed IF steels and the absence in the similarly processed LC steels of the 〈1 The considerable differences in shear banding behaviour can be ascribed to the effects of C in solution in LC grades. At low rolling temperatures, carbon causes intense banding because its presence is responsible for the observed negative rate sensitivities and for the abnormally high and unstable dislocation densities attributable to the occurrence of DSA. At relatively high (i.e. warm) rolling temperatures, DSA conditions no longer apply, and so the presence of C has the opposite effect, i.e. it is responsible for the Finally, the absence of solute C (or N) in fully stabilized steels prevents them from displaying DSA behaviour. As a result, they do not contain the unusually high dislocation densities responsible for severe shear banding at cold rolling temperatures. In a similar manner, their warm rolling rate sensitivities are not high enough to prevent the desirable type of shear banding that is required for ND fibre nucleation from taking place. The author is grateful to the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, the Canadian Steel Industry Research Association and BHP Research for financial support of the experimental parts of this investigation.