Despite the fact that the thermal decomposition of polytetrafluoroethylene has been extensively studied over the past six decades, some inconsistencies regarding the kinetic parameters, e.g. the order of the reaction, remain. Representative kinetic data are essential for practical purposes such as reactor design and scaling. In general the literature data refer to homogeneous bulk heating, whereas the case of the non-homogeneous heating of a single particle has not received attention. Data (reaction rate and pre-exponential factor) applicable to this latter case were experimentally determined from isothermal thermogravimetric analyses of the depolymerisation reaction of PTFE. The kinetic data obtained on coarse granules (800–1000μm) are reported here. The rate law is consistent with a shrinking particle kinetic model, with chemical kinetics controlling phase-boundary movement. The mass loss rate is directly proportional to surface area. A rate law applicable to this case, and useable for geometries of arbitrary shape, is derived.It has long been known that the thermal decomposition of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) predominantly yields tetrafluoroethylene (TFE), hexafluoropropylene (HFP), and octafluorocyclobutane (OFCB) Doyle, for example, in an early paper presenting an integral method for obtaining kinetic parameters from thermogravimetric (TG) data All the cases above implicitly attempted to achieve homogenous bulk heating of the sample, with good contact with the sample holder. For industrial cases such as ours Isothermal TGA mass loss data of 800–1000 Each granule was placed loosely in the sample pan, with the only contact being the bottom of the particle where it touched the pan. Heating can thus as a first approximation be assumed to be partially conductive and, because of the low thermal conductivity of the polymer, to have a large radiative component—from the hot surfaces of the sides of the pan and the body of the micro-reactor. In order to determine the order of the reaction and rate constant, a rate law of the form Values of As is evident from the table, the reaction order does not vary significantly, nor systematically, from temperature to temperature, and an average value of 0.54 is obtained. The Arrhenius plot ( The data in The reaction order we determined seems directly relatable to a phase-boundary controlled process. The average value for the reaction order suggests a particle shape somewhere between a sphere and a cylinder Following the approach taken by, for example, Levenspiel For the specific case of a sphere, the area is simply 4 Separation of variables and integration between the indicated limits ( Let Division of Eq. The unreacted mass fraction It follows that This is similar in functional dependence to the shrinking sphere model given by Levenspiel This is the form given by Galwey and Brown Note that the units of A similar treatment for a cylindrical particle, with the aspect ratio Comparison of Eqs. Consideration of the data presented in Substituting the The standard deviation of the pre-exponential factor A selection of published kinetic parameters is listed in Interestingly, in the case of Conesa and Font It is clear that sample geometry and non-homogeneous heating play a crucial role in interpreting the decomposition kinetics of PTFE. At least some of the inconsistencies and contradiction in the published data are attributable to this. The larger particle size used in this study is undoubtedly responsible for the fact that an interpretable exponent was obtained in our case. The majority of studies in the literature seem to refer to very finely divided samples in which homogeneous heating was obtained, and most often a reaction order was assumed rather than fitted. We have shown that certainly for coarser samples, geometric effects are important. For more complex geometries ( From our data, however, it is not possible to decouple heat transfer and chemical effects unambiguously, although the postulate that the rate limiting step in the movement of the outer phase boundary is controlled by chemical reaction rate rather than simple heat transfer, seems reasonable. Larger samples with well-defined geometries, which can be cross-sectioned to reveal thermal penetration depth during heating, would be needed for this. Work on this, and more detailed results of a microscopic study of the depolymerization process, will be reported at greater length. Isothermal TG analysis of unfilled PTFE The authors would like to thank NECSA's Messrs Danie Moolman and B.M. Vilakazi for performing the thermogravimetric analyses, and Dr. Kobus Wagenaar and Dr. Andries ‘Cassie’ Carstens for extremely useful discussions.