Molybdenum is widely used for the production of ferro-molybdenum, which is required for the manufacturing of alloyed steel. The use of molybdenum oxide containing copper for steel making has deleterious effects on the mechanical properties of produced alloyed steel. Therefore, a process has been proposed for simultaneous up-gradation of molybdenum oxide and recovery of copper using controlled sulphuric acid leaching and cementation by scrap iron. The molybdenum oxide containing 70.00% MoO3, 2.49% Cu2O, 1.97% Fe2O3 and 11.22% SiO2 obtained after roasting of molybdenite concentrate was used for the experimental purpose. Major impurities such as copper and iron were leached out from molybdenum oxide using 1.5% H2SO4 while maintaining a solid to liquid (S/L) ratio of 1 with a mixing time of 10 min at room temperature (22 °C). Partially leached molybdenum was precipitated by holding it for 30 min at pH 1.78. Subsequently, copper present in the leach liquor was recovered as metallic copper by a cementation process using scrap iron splinter and addition of 7% (v/v) concentrated sulphuric acid into the leach liquor. By the proposed leaching and cementation process, the molybdenum oxide could be upgraded to 80% (recovery 99.50%) and copper could be recovered as metal powder. The 0.5 to 1% loss of molybdenum could also be reclaimed by the treatment of generated waste liquid using solvent extraction or ion-exchange processes.Generally molybdenum metal is produced from its high grade sulphide ore, molybdenite, through oxidative roasting, purification of calcine, and hydrogen reduction of molybdenum oxide (MoO A project was sponsored by Korean industry to upgrade molybdenum oxide. The objective of the present work is to remove the impurities such as copper, iron and other trace elements from the sample containing 70% molybdenum oxide. The use of molybdenum oxide containing copper for steel making has deleterious effects on the mechanical properties of the alloyed steel produced. Therefore, the up-graded molybdenum oxide is required in steel manufacturing industry. The permitted percentage of copper impurities in up-graded molybdenum oxide is less than 0.5%. The copper and iron were leached out from molybdenum oxide using sulphuric acid. Several analytical techniques viz. XRD, ICP, AAS etc. were applied for the characterisation and analyses of MoO MoO Leaching experiments were carried out in a conical flask using a shaking machine at atmospheric conditions. The leach liquor was filtered using Whatsman filter paper no. 42. The solid molybdenum oxide samples were used in 2.5 to 100 g scale. The S:L ratio varied from 1:1 to 1:20. The temperature variation studies were carried out from room temperature (22 °C) to elevated temperature (65 °C). The leached residue was washed three times to remove all dissolved impurities. Then, the residues were dried to remove the water content. The analysis of leach and wash liquor were made after the required dilution with 5% HCl. The satisfactorily material balance was obtained during the course of studies. Cementation of copper from sulphate leach liquor was carried out in a beaker. A measured amount of leach liquor was taken in a beaker. The leach liquor was analysed for copper and iron. Its acidity was maintained by adding required sulphuric acid. The cleaned and weighed amount of scrap iron splinter was immersed into liquor with slow stirring. After the cementation of copper, the solution was filtered and analysed for copper and iron. Purification and up-gradation of molybdenum oxide sample was carried out by leaching of the un-desired materials using sulphuric acid. From the leached liquor, copper was recovered by cementation using iron splinter. The roasted molybdenite concentrates as molybdenum oxide supplied by industry and the upgraded molybdenum oxide samples were characterised in term of qualitative and quantitative analysis using XRD, ICP, AAS and SEM–EDX. Molybdenite concentrate is roasted up to required time in optimized high temperature in industry to convert as molybdenum oxide. The comparative XRD of both the samples are presented in The experiments were carried out for leaching of the impurities in high sulphuric acid concentration (20–40%) varying S:L ratio. The results presented in To see the effect of temperature, the studies were also carried out in 5 g scale at two different temperatures i.e. 45 and 65 °C varying the S/L ratio 1:5 to 1:20 and the results are presented in Based on the above experimental results, the leaching experiment was conducted in very low acidic range of sulphuric acid leachant (0.5 to 7.5%) at room temperature and fixed S/L ratio 1 ( The effect of mixing time was also studied by varying it from 5 to 40 min. The leaching experiments were carried out with 2% sulphuric acid and S/L ratio of 1 at room temperature (22 °C). The copper leaching was found 99.09% in 5 min. The copper leaching was found to be increase with increase in time. At the mixing time 10 min, 99.54% copper was found to be leached. Further increase in mixing time had no significant change in the leaching of copper. The results presented in Some batch experiments were carried out under similar experimental conditions by varying the acid concentration in the range 0.5 to 1.5%. Acceptable results were found at acid concentration in the range 0.5 to 1.5% to leach out the impurities and for the up-gradation of molybdenum oxide up to 80%. With the leachant of lower acid concentration the leaching of molybdenum was found very less. Simultaneously, the maximum leaching of copper was also observed, as the copper content in the molybdenum oxide is less in comparison to molybdenum. The optimum condition was found in the range of sulphuric acid concentration 0.5–1.5%, S/L ratio 1 and mixing time 10 min at room temperature (22 °C). The kinetic studies were carried out with suitable sulphuric acid concentration of 1.5% and S/L ratio of 1 at room temperature. The results presented in The model “Chemical reaction control dense constant size cylindrical particles” was found to be fitted for this leaching kinetics. The equation is as follows: The basis of selecting equation for model is the highest value of Based on the results presented in After leaching of the copper impurities from molybdenum oxide, the cementation studies for the recovery of copper from the obtained leach liquor were carried out. Cementation process is generally applied either for leach liquor purification or recovering metal values from the solutions. The reactions involve simple electrochemical precipitation of a noble metal from solutions of its salts on a more electropositive metal. These types of reactions are heterogeneous in nature, involving the direct nucleation and growth of metal in elemental form upon a suitable substrate or precipitant metal. Cementation process has been successfully used by several countries for the recovery of copper from leach solutions using iron as the precipitant metal. Even today, copper cementation using scrap iron is extensively used worldwide for commercial operations. The cementation reaction occurs as follows ( The experiment for the cementation of copper from the obtained leach liquor containing 20 g/L copper was carried out using scrap iron sheet/splinter. The 100 ml of leach liquor was taken. The pH of the leach liquor was adjusted below 0.9 ( The studies have been carried out to up-grade the molybdenum oxide to be used in steel alloyed manufacturing industry. The copper was leached out from molybdenum oxide and recovered by cementation in sulphate medium using scrap iron sheets/splinters. Using this process, molybdenum oxide could be up-graded up to 80% with 99.50% recovery of molybdenum. The required composition of molybdenum oxide (80% Mo and copper less than 0.50%) was obtained by the leaching of impurities from the roasted molybdenite concentrate (molybdenum oxide) with 1.5% H Authors are grateful to the persons who helped directly or indirectly during the course of investigation.