A Pb and Zn separation method from salts (Na, K, and Cl) in a simulated multicomponent gas generated by the incineration fly ash melting is studied. The heavy metals are separated using a two-stage dust collection technique. A standard reagents mixture is volatilized by heating in a lab-scale reactor to generate the simulated multicomponent gas. The volatilized salts in the gas are condensed and collected by a filter at a high temperature (600–800°C), allowing Pb and Zn to pass through the filter as gaseous species. The gaseous heavy metals are condensed by lowering their temperature to 100°C and collected. The metal separation is promoted by elevating the temperature used in the first-stage dust collection to 800°C and maintaining a reductive atmosphere in the reactor. Subsequently, a sequential chemical extraction is performed on the obtained materials to evaluate the metals leaching characteristics from the materials. In the separated salts to be landfilled, a portion of toxic metals such as Pb, Cd, As, and Cr remain as water-soluble compounds. The separated Pb and Zn, to be extracted and recovered with precipitation for the metal enrichment, can be extracted using water, acid (pH 3), or CH3COONH4 solution (1M).In Japan, the melting technique has become one of the popular treatment options available for solid waste management systems. In waste melting processes, waste products are melted at 1300–1750 Among the multicomponent waste products, incineration fly ash (IFA) contains higher concentrations of heavy metals than bottom ash (BA). IFA is preferred in the recovery of metals, particularly Pb and Zn, but metal concentrations are relatively low in IFA for metal recovery For the metal separation, we focus on a separation technique based on volatility that is well known in pyrometallurgy In Japan, Mikuni et al. In this study, the two-stage dust collection technique was applied to a simulated multicomponent gas generated by the IFA melting in order to separate Pb and Zn from the salts. Our objective is to investigate the efficiency of the metal separation and leaching characteristics of the metals from the collected dusts. Using a lab-scale reactor, a mixture of standard reagents was heated to generate the simulated multicomponent gas and the elements in the gas were collected in two stages, thereby changing the temperature and atmosphere used in the first-stage dust collection. Because of toxicities, Cd, As, and Cr should not contaminate the first dust to be disposed in landfills, and they should be collected as the second dust. Therefore, the behavior of Cd, As, and Cr was also significant and investigated in this study. To generate the simulated multicomponent gas in the experiment, a test sample comprising volatile elements was heated in the reactor. Theoretical behavior of the elements contained in IFA was simulated by a thermodynamic equilibrium calculation to predict the volatile elements among the elements present in IFA and determine the chemical compositions of the test sample. The thermodynamic calculation was performed using the FactSage 5.2 software (GTT Technologies)  A schematic diagram of the lab-scale reactor consisting of a gas tank, flow meters, a quartz tube, a porcelain tube, an electric tubular furnace, glass attachments, and a gas absorber is shown in The sample was loaded in a crucible, and then placed in the low temperature area in the quartz tube (see From the dust collected by the filter, the metals were leached in a conical flask by means of a sequential chemical extraction to determine both the concentrations and leaching characteristics of the metals. The extraction procedure was designed in accordance with the authors’ previous study The rinsate from the tubes and impinger solution were directly analyzed by AAS or the Hg(SCN) In order to determine the experimental conditions in the two-stage dust collection process, it is important to understand the factors affecting the efficiency of the metal separation and leaching characteristics of the metals from the dusts. These factors were investigated and the appropriate conditions were considered on the basis of the theoretical behavior of the metals, and the experimental conditions were determined. Metal-separation efficiency can be affected by the temperature used in the first-stage dust collection because the vapor pressures of the metals increase with temperature. The leaching characteristics of the metals are different depending on their speciation, of which formation is affected by the atmosphere. As explained in Section In this temperature range under the oxidative atmosphere, Pb, Zn, Cr, and As were predicted to be present as a gaseous chloride, oxide, or oxychloride, whereas Cd was predicted to exist as a liquid chloride ( Before discussing the efficiency of the metal separation, the experimental accuracy is determined from mass balances, defined as the ratios of the element mass in the total output products to those in the input product (ideal value is 100). The ratios are shown in  Here, As a result, the experimental conditions have no significant effects on the distributions of Na, K, and Cr, and most of these metals were collected as the first dust. On the other hand, the distributions of Pb, Zn, Cd, As, and Cl were strongly affected by the experimental conditions as the   In the three stage dust collection performed by Mikuni et al. The first dust, whose main components are Na, K, and Cl, should be disposed in a landfill but a portion of the toxic metals (Pb, Cd, As, and Cr) transferred to the dust. In Japan, the amounts of toxic metals extracted from the dust into water are evaluated when landfilling the dust. Therefore, the water leachability of the toxic metals in the first dust is discussed. Irrespective of the temperature used in the first-stage dust collection, over 90% of Cd in the first dust was water-soluble ( Pb and Zn in the second dust should be extracted with solvents and recovered with precipitation as hydroxides, sulfides, or metallic phases. To determine the appropriate extracting solvents, the leaching characteristics of Pb and Zn from the second dust into different solvents are discussed. The second dust also contained Cd, As, and Cr together with Pb and Zn. The mixture of Pb, Zn, and Cd can be fed into the furnaces in the non-ferrous refinery plants, but As and Cr should not. Therefore, the separation of As and Cr from Pb, Zn, and Cd is important in the extraction process for the second dust. The leaching characteristics of Cd, As, and Cr from the second dust are discussed. In the reductive atmosphere, the high transfer rates of Cd and As to the second dust were observed, and the leaching characteristics in this case are explained. Metal enrichment in waste-melting processes is important in establishing the metal recovery systems of waste products. As described here, a separation technique of the heavy metals from the salts in the multicomponent gas by the two-stage dust collection was studied. The metal separation was promoted by elevating the temperature used in the first-stage dust collection to 800