Three-liquid-phase extraction system (TES) composed of an organic solvent-rich top phase, a polymer-rich middle phase and a salt-rich bottom phase has been considered to be a promising method of isolation and separation of multi-component. In this paper, we tried to use TES to treat multi-metal solutions including Ti(IV), Fe(III) and Mg(II) for the first time. Different combinations of organic extractant–polymer–inorganic salt were evaluated. And the effects of solution acidity, complexing agents and additives on the metal ions partitioning were investigated. The results indicated that Mg(II) was concentrated in the salt-rich bottom phase, whereas Ti(IV) and Fe(III) were quantitatively extracted into the trialkylphosphine oxide (TRPO) (or di-2-ethyl-hexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA))-rich top phase. And the addition of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) enabled Fe(III) to distribute into the polyethylene glycol with molecular mass 2000 (PEG 2000)-rich middle phase. The transfer of Fe(III) greatly improved the selectivity of the top phase for Ti(IV) and made a significant impact on the separation of Ti(IV), Fe(III) and Mg(II).A vast majority of industrial effluents and waste water, such as etching or picking baths, electroplating rinse liquors, leaching solution generated during hydrometallurgy mining water, spent photographic solutions and so forth may carry iron, manganese, chromium and a host of non-ferrous metals such as copper, nickel, zinc, titanium, magnesium, aluminum Three-liquid-phase extraction system (TES) composed of an organic solvent-rich top phase, a polymer-rich middle phase and a salt-rich bottom phase shows possible much higher selectivity than the usual water–oil liquid–liquid system and aqueous-two-phase system (ATPS), providing phases with a wide range of polarities and chemical properties to suit different purposes In the present paper, an innovative application of TES in the separation of three metal species, Ti(IV), Fe(III) and Mg(II), which are commonly associated in ilmenite, titanium slag and red mud, was first reported. According to the fact that Ti(IV) is extracted efficiently by trialkylphosphine oxide (TRPO) The organic extractant, tri-n-butyl phosphate (TBP), was supplied by Beijing Beihua Fine Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. Other organic extractants used, including trialkylphosphine oxide (TRPO, 93%), C19–C23 secondary alkyl primary amine (N1923, 98%), trialkylamine (N235, 98%), di-2-ethyl-hexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA, 98%), were purchased from Shanghai Laiyashi Chemical Co., Ltd. PEG with average molecular weight of 2000 (PEG 2000) and 10,000 (PEG 10,000) were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd., China. Pluronic L62, L121 and F127 which are difunctional block copolymer surfactants terminating in hydroxyl groups were received from BASF. Stock solution of Ti(IV), Fe(III) and Mg(II) sulfates was prepared with dilute sulfuric acid from reagent grade (Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd.) materials. The concentrations of Ti(IV), Fe(III) and Mg(II) in the solution were maintained at 6 Prescribed volumes of stock solution of Ti(IV), Fe(III), Mg(II) and phase-forming components were placed in graduated centrifuge tubes. The selected phase-forming reagents were listed in After separation, phase volumes were measured and the concentrations of Ti(IV), Fe(III), Mg(II) in middle and bottom phase were analyzed by an OPTIMA 5300DV inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES, PekinElmer, USA) at the wavelength of 335 To evaluate the extraction of Ti(IV), Fe(III) and Mg(II) using the TESs, the extraction percentages ( Distribution ratio ( Furthermore, separation factor ( Preliminary experiments of the effect of pH value on the formation of TES indicated that it is not easy for (NH  As can be seen from Four organic extractants, which were N235, N1923, D2EHPA and TBP, were used as substitute for TRPO in the formation of TESs. N1923 led to fully gel when it was involved in a mixture containing 15 The results were given in Extraction of titanium with D2EHPA is probably governed by a cation exchange mechanism with D2EHPA (represented as the dimer H Because the stability constants associated with the two titanyl sulfato complexes are much smaller than that of the titanium–D2EHPA complex, the equilibria TRPO is a solvating reagent, and therefore favors complexation with neutral TiOSO Sodium sulfate and PEG 10,000 were used as phase-forming substances. They offered a glimpse at the effect of another inorganic salt and PEG with higher molecular weight 10,000 on the phase separation behavior of TES and the partitioning behavior of Ti(IV), Fe(III) and Mg(II). Four different TESs were designed as follows: (1) 25 It is observed that substitution of (NH Besides, compared (1) with 20 N,N-dimethylfomamide, N-methyl pyrrolidone, L62, L121 and F127 were tried as middle phase modifiers because they could be miscible with PEG 2000 and enriched into the middle phase. It was prospected that N,N-dimethylfomamide and N-methyl pyrrolidone coordinate with Fe(III) via amide ligand and transfer Fe(III) to the middle phase, and these pluronic surfactants alter the hydrophilic–lipophilic balance of the middle phases and subsequently facilitate the loading of metal ions. The chemical structures of these modifiers are shown in It is observed that the upper two phases turned into a viscous emulsion in the presence of a small amount of L121 or F127. It is most probably because the long hydrophobic PPO blocks of the two copolymers are strongly attracted to TRPO and the interaction between the hydrophilic blocks and PEG 2000 is also intensive. The TESs containing 25 The use of complexing ions in the aqueous phase for liquid–liquid extraction of metal ions has evoked wide interest in recent years. In order to improve the selectivity of the three metal ions in the present TES, effect of the addition of 5 Unfortunately, the use of NH Though the inactivity of the PEG-rich phase in metal extraction makes single-step separation of Ti(IV), Fe(III) and Mg(II) impossible, analysis of the influence of complexing agents on the partition behavior of metals may enlighten the establishment of the optimum condition for the extraction and separation of Ti(IV) and Fe(III). It can be clearly seen from It is worth noting that in comparison with NH The extraction percentages of Ti(IV), Fe(III) and Mg(II) were displayed as a function of the amount of NaF, NaI, and NaNO Another reasonable way to recover metal ions using solvent extraction technique is to apply organic molecules as complexing agents, which give a metal ion a hydrophobic exterior. Extraction of Ti(IV), Fe(III) and Mg(II) using water soluble complexing agents such as CH Obviously, EDTA showed good behavior compared to all the other organic additives through lifting the metal ions’ affinity to PEG 2000-rich phase. Fe(III)–EDTA complexes could be more easily extracted by PEG 2000. Nearly 23% Fe(III) appeared in the middle phase of the TES containing 25 In regard to the selective extraction of metal ions, appreciable differences in the extraction percentages by the top phase for Ti(IV) versus Fe(III) were observed when sulfosalicylic acid was used as complexing agent, allowing TRPO to selective separation of the two metals. But single-step separation of Ti(IV), Fe(III) and Mg(II) could not be realized notwithstanding due to little affinity of the metal ions for the middle phase. For the same reason, CH Different organic extractants, polymers and inorganic salts were employed in preliminary screening tests carried out to determine which of these chemicals could combine to form stable organic extractant–polymer–salt triphasic systems. The utility of the TESs on partition of Ti(IV), Fe(III) and Mg(II) were assessed. From the results, TRPO and D2EHPA are considered to be excellent top phase-forming candidates owing to their good physicochemical properties. The selectivity of metal ions was found to depend on the pH value of the aqueous solution, the valence of metal ions, the presence of complexing agents, the hydrophobicity difference among phases, the extracted metal species and extraction mechanism. The most important observation in the present work is the improvement in affinity of Fe(III) for the PEG-rich phase and Further research is underway to continue our survey of using the TRPO–PEG 2000 and D2EHPA–PEG 2000 based TESs with the complexing agent EDTA to simultaneously separate Ti(IV), Fe(III) and Mg(II) at a large extent. The authors thank the