In Part 1 of this paper, gold(III) and Sn(II) were recovered from the chloride leach solution of anode slimes by extraction with Cyanex 272 and stripping with (NH4)2S2O3 and NaOH solutions for gold(III) and Sn(II), sequentially. In this work, solvent extraction experiments were conducted to recover Ag(I) and Cu(II) from the Au(III) free raffinate containing Ni(II), Sn(II) and Zn(II) using two systems. In the first system, Cu(II) and Ag(I) were sequentially separated using LIX 63 and Alamine 336, respectively. Dilute HCl and NH4SCN were used as the stripping agents for Cu(II) and Ag(I), respectively. In the second system, Cyanex 301 co-extracted Ag(I), Cu(II) and Sn(II) from the Au(III) free raffinate. Aqua regia at different dilutions stripped these three metal ions from the loaded Cyanex 301. First, Cu(II) was selectively stripped from the loaded Cyanex 301 by employing ten times diluted aqua regia. Second, most of Ag(I) was selectively stripped over Sn(II) by five times diluted aqua regia. A process flowsheet for the separation and recovery of noble and base metals from the chloride leach solution of anode slime using extraction and stripping has been proposed.Copper, gold and silver are valuable metals, which are widely used in electronics industries ( In our previous work, Au(III) was successfully separated by Cyanex 272 and LIX 63 from the hydrochloric acid solution containing Pt(IV) and Pd(II) ( First, gold(III) and Sn(II) were recovered from the chloride leach solution of anode slimes by extraction with Cyanex 272, leaving Ag(I), Cu(II), Ni(II), and Zn(II) in the raffinate. Batch simulation experiments on the two stage counter-current extraction led to complete extraction of Au(III) and 98% extraction of Sn(II). Pure Au(III) solution was recovered from the loaded Cyanex 272 by selective stripping of Au(III) with (NH In this work, separation of Ag(I) and Cu(II) was investigate from the Au(III) free raffinate using solvent extraction. For this purpose, the extraction behavior of Ag(I) in chloride solutions in the absence of other metal ions was investigated by employing several extractants. Two solvent extraction systems were tried in order to recover Ag(I) and Cu(II) from the Au(III) free raffinate. First, Cyanex 301 was used to study the separation behavior of Ag(I), Cu(II), Ni(II), Sn(II) and Zn(II) ions present in the Au(III) free raffinate. The co-extracted Ag(I), Cu(II) and Sn(II) into the Cyanex 301 were separated by selective stripping with diluted aqua regia. In the other system, Cu(II) was first separated by extraction with LIX 63 and then Ag(I) was extracted by Alamine 336. The stripping of Cu(II) and/or Ag(I) from the loaded organic was also investigated. By comparing these two extraction systems, a process has been proposed to recover Ag(I) and Cu(II) with high purity from the Au(III) free raffinate by extraction and stripping. The synthetic chloride leach solution of anode slime was prepared by dissolving a required amount of HAuCl The structures of all the organic reagents are shown in Appendix 1. Acidic extractants, like D2EHPA (95%), PC88A (95%) and Cyanex 301 (70%) were purchased from Daihachi Chem. Industries, Japan and Cytec Industries, Canada, respectively. Neutral extractants like TBP (98%), MIBK (98.5%), Cyanex 923 (92%), TOPO (99%) and TOP (99%) were purchased from Yakuri Pure Chemical Co., Ltd. Daejung Chemical & Metals Co., Ltd. and Samchun Pure Chemical Co. Ltd., respectively. As basic extractants (amines), Alamine 336 (95%, BASF Co., USA), Aliquat 336 (100%, BASF Co., USA), Alamine 300 (97%, Samchun Pure Chemical Co.) and Alamine 308 (95–100%, BASF Co., USA) were employed and kerosene was used as a diluent. All the reagents were employed in the experiments without further purification. In the extraction and stripping experiments, equal volumes (10 mL) of aqueous and organic phases (unless otherwise stated) were mixed in 50 mL bottle with screwed cap. In the extraction and most of the stripping experiments, the mixtures were shaken about 30 min (  Equilibrium constant is a function of the activity of the species involved in a chemical reaction. Therefore, ionic strength of the solution and water activity affect the speciation of copper chloro-complexes in strong hydrochloric acid solution ( The concentration of Cu(II) and Sn(II) in the Au(III) free raffinate was 2520 and 8.3 mg L   Various amines and an ammonium salt tested in this work showed fairly good extraction performance for Ag(I). The extraction percentage of Ag(I) from 5 M HCl increased with the increase of the concentration of Alamine 300, Alamine 308, Alamine 336 and Aliquat 336 from 0.1 to 0.5 M ( After the separation of Cu(II) by LIX 63, most of Ag(I), Zn(II) and some of Ni(II) remained in the raffinate together with a small amount of Cu(II) and Sn(II) (   Stripping experiments were designed to selectively recover the Ag(I) from the loaded Alamine 336. First the loaded organic was obtained by batch simulation experiments of two stage counter current extraction with 0.2 M Alamine 336. The concentration of metal ions in the loaded organic phase is shown in According to the results described in previous sections, Cu(II) and Ag(I) were sequentially extracted by LIX 63 and by Alamine 336, respectively. In order to investigate the possibility of selectively extracting Ag(I), some more extraction experiments were carried out with Ag(I)/HCl solutions using different extractants. Despite the fact that Ag(I) exists as anionic species in concentrated hydrochloric acid solutions, acidic, neutral and basic extractants in kerosene were tested as organic phase. For this purpose, Cyanex 301, D2EHPA, and PC 88A were used as acidic extractants, while Cyanex 923, MIBK, TBP, TOP and TOPO were used as neutral extractants. Since the solubility of AgCl depends on HCl concentration (Appendix 2), the initial concentration of Ag(I) in each HCl concentration was measured in every experiment. Since the solubility of Ag(I) depends on HCl concentration (Appendix 2), extraction experiments of Ag(I)/HCl by Cyanex 301 were performed by varying HCl and Cyanex 301 concentration in the ranges 0.5 to 9 M and 0.05 to 0.5 M, respectively. In order to verify the solvent extraction reaction of Ag(I) by Cyanex 301, a slope analysis method was applied to the data obtained at 9 M HCl solutions. The plots of log It has been reported that it is difficult to strip the Pd(II) loaded into Cyanex 301/kerosene phase(  According to previous research ( In order to increase the acidity of the stripping solution, aqua regia (AR) of different dilutions with distilled water was employed as a stripping solution. Therefore, the effect of stripping time was investigated at the dilution ratio of V Since all of the Cu(II) in the loaded Cyanex 301/kerosene phase was stripped at V From the extraction and stripping results on the recovery of valuable metals from the synthetic leaching solution of anode slime, a proposed process is represented in Extraction of the leaching solution of an anode slime by Cyanex 272 resulted in selective extraction of Au(III) and Sn(II). The raffinate contained Ag(I), Cu(II), Ni(II), Sn(II) and Zn(II). Preliminary experiments on the extraction of Ag(I) dissolved in HCl indicated that Cyanex 301 could completely extract Ag(I) in the HCl concentration range from 0.5 to 9 M HCl. Tertiary amines (Alamine 300, Alamine 308, and Alamine 336) were also capable of extracting most of the Ag(I) from the hydrochloric acid solution. Two systems of LIX 63-Alamine 336 and Cyanex 301 were tested for the recovery of Ag(I) and Cu(II) from the Au(III) free raffinate. In the system of LIX 63-Alamine 336, above 99% of Cu(II) could be extracted by LIX 63 and the Cu(II) in the loaded LIX 63 was stripped by HCl solution. Afterwards, most of Ag(I) was separated by extraction with Alamine 336 from which Ag(I) can be stripped using NH Extraction of the Au(III) free raffinate with Cyanex 301 led to the co-extraction of Ag(I), Cu(II) and Sn(II). Since the extraction behavior of these three metals by Cyanex 301 was similar to each other, selective stripping was tried by employing diluted aqua regia. First only Cu(II) was stripped by employing 10 times diluted aqua regia. Secondly, Ag(I) was selectively stripped over Sn(II) by 5 times diluted aqua regia from the stripped Cyanex 301 phase. A process flowsheet was proposed to treat the hydrochloric acid leach solutions of anode slime containing mainly Ag(I), Au(III), Cu(II) and Sn(II). This work was supported by the Global Excellent Technology Innovation of the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at