Since its inception into the United States in 1984 the popularity of extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL) has grown tremendously, with over 200,000 procedures performed annually. A 44-year-old man with a history of congenital hypospadias, ureteral strictures, and recurrent nephrolithiasis presented with a 7-hour history of abdominal and flank pain associated with nausea and vomiting. The patient had undergone ESWL (see On admission, physical examination revealed tenderness in the right lower quadrant with rebound and rigidity. An upright abdominal radiograph revealed free air. CT of the abdomen confirmed intraperitoneal air, questionable retroperitoneal air, and focal submucosal emphysema of the cecum ( At laparotomy a distinct transition zone of hyperemia and edema ( Pathologic findings showed that unlike the peritonitis the muscle was not infiltrated by neutrophils and the mucosa was viable except in the area of perforation. There was no evidence of preexisting diverticulum at the perforation site and the damage was related to ESWL. Postoperative recovery was unremarkable. A PubMed Medline (National Library of Medicine) search, Ovid Medline, and Google searches were performed using various combinations of these keywords: “lithotripsy,” “bowel perforation,” “mucosal damage,” “adverse effects,” “erosions,” “hemorrhage,” “nephrolithiasis,” “ureterolithiasis,” “colonic perforation,” “pancreatitis,” “prone,” “position,” and “kidney stones.” More than 311 articles were identified; those that had the primary intent of describing adverse effects secondary to ESWL were initially reviewed. Reports including gastrointestinal damage or perforation from urologic procedures other than ESWL were excluded. Reports including gastrointestinal damage occurring after the treatment of cholelithiasis were also excluded because of the relative extinction of gallstone lithotripsy. To review the principles of ESWL and its similar adverse effects in surrounding parenchyma, this database includes animal models, in vitro experimentation, and reports of the evolution of lithotripsy in the treatment of lithiasis. Ultimately 42 papers (1982 to 2002) were entered into the database; 30 papers referenced gastrointestinal injury as a complication of lithotripsy, and only 2 specifically searched for the incidence of adverse gastrointestinal effects. Eighteen articles were case reports and the remaining 10 were reviews involving gastrointestinal damage as a result of lithotripsy. After the selected articles were reviewed a database was created using Microsoft Access (Microsoft Corp). The tables of data contained in this review are derived from this database. Statistical analysis was performed within the Access program. In reviewing the literature, the lack of information on gastrointestinal damage as a complication of lithotripsy was apparent. A total of 3,423 patients were included in this review. Overall only 62 of 3,423 (1.81%) patients experienced a documented gastrointestinal complication. Of the 62 patients 28 had symptomatic gastrointestinal damage ( Of 28 symptomatic gastrointestinal tract injuries 18 were case reports providing data for age and gender, and the average age of the patient was 55.33 years (range 29 to 76 years). It was interesting to note that all nine cases of gastrointestinal tract perforations were in male patients. When data were available, other injuries were also dominated by male patients with a 2:1 ratio in the same age group ( Six of the nine cases of intestinal perforation occurred in the small bowel (four ileum, one jejunum, and one nonspecific), and three perforations were found in the colon (one transverse, one cecum, and one sigmoid). Injuries associated with perforations included omental ecchymoses and pericolonic edema. Apart from a single gastrointestinal endoscopy study of 40 patients undergoing ESWL (reporting an 80% incidence of gastric and duodenal erosions), a single additional case of gastrojejunal dehiscence was described occurring at the stapled anastomotic site. The majority of information concerning the clinical presentations of gastrointestinal tract injuries came from 18 case reports, including the one from our institution. Two of the nine gastrointestinal perforations were in patients who had had previous abdominal operation; one patient had a previous Billroth II procedure Nine of nine patients with perforations presented with signs and symptoms of an acute abdomen after ESWL. Severe abdominal pain was the most common finding, with the diagnosis of perforation ranging from 2 hours to 7 days after the procedure. Of the perforations free air was one of the most common findings on diagnostic imaging; x-rays were reported in six patients with five of six revealing free air. CT of the abdomen or pelvis was diagnostic in four of four patients with suspected perforation. Two of the nine patients with perforations reported minor complications during treatment; one patient had a repeated loss of focus of the stone because of poor compliance In the case reports involving intestinal perforations electromagnetic energy was used in six of nine cases ( The average number of shocks delivered in the cases of intestinal perforation were 3,625 (range 1,500 to 5,000), using an average of 7.14 kV (range 6 to 9) of energy. Eight of nine patients were treated with an increased number of shock waves; two cases reached the upper limits and six exceeded the guidelines recommended by the FDA for that particular machine ( It was noteworthy that seven of the nine perforations occurred in the prone or semiprone position, with only one occurring with the patient in the supine position, and one patient receiving shock waves in both the supine and prone positions. The first reported use of electrically generated focused shock waves to fragment stones within a human kidney without any incision, puncture or other bodily invasion was performed by Dr Christian Chaussy in February 1980 at the University of Munich. The deleterious effects of ESWL can best be explained by defining how the lithotripter works, the use of so-called shock waves and their effects on calculi, and the effects on surrounding parenchymal tissue. The lithotripter is a device that generates shock waves by one of three methods: electrohydraulic, electromagnetic, or piezoelectric generators. The electrohydraulic, or point source, generators use underwater spark discharge, which focuses high-intensity sound waves (shock waves) to a geometric focal point. The electromagnetic, or extended source, generators create a shock wave from magnetic repulsion between a high voltage current from a magnetic coil and an oppositely charged metallic membrane. The shock wave is then focused with an acoustic lens or parabolic reflector to treat the intended target. Piezoelectric generators, also an extended source generator, apply high voltage to a hemispheric dish with numerous piezoelectric crystals, which expand and create shock waves. The shape of the dish allows focusing on the target. The lithotripters currently in greatest use since their inception to the United States in 1984 are the Dornier MedTech models, which have become the gold standard for ESWL (40% and 42% worldwide and US market shares, respectively). Although there are several adverse effects previously noted, this review focuses only on the damage incurred to adjacent GI tissues (ie, small and large bowel, gastric mucosa). These adverse effects have been debated. Chaussy and colleagues Conflicting studies were published; literature reaffirming the safety of ESWL and the absence of major GI complications The exact mechanism is still unknown, but there are several theories postulated that may explain the etiology of GI injury after ESWL. It was believed that gas in the form of micro- or macroscopic bubbles was required in the tissue to elicit a deleterious effect. One mechanism used to explain lung damage—a variation of the well-known spallation effect—might also be used to explain mucosal insult. Spallation occurs when a shock wave induces a rapid ejection of liquid into a lower density space (air) when a pressure release interface is present (air and water). When the sound field strikes the interface, its compressive portion cannot be sustained and a rapid release of pressure into the less dense medium results. The effect could result in mechanic damage to the involved tissues. Because of the long pulse durations used in therapeutic ultrasonographic exposures another possible mechanism for localized gastrointestinal damage is heat. Miller and Thomas Inertial cavitation is believed to be the most plausible theory: ultrasonic energy conversion through an isolated gas bubble or nucleation site results in implosive collapse, enabling cavitation to induce mechanical damage. Dalecki and colleagues The hazardous potential of cavitation is not only of a physical nature but also of a chemical nature because of the generation of free radicals, eg, OH, H, and O A statistically significant reduction in the mean number of treatment sessions per patient, mean number of shock waves per session, and mean shock voltage per session has previously been shown in the supine patient relative to those in the prone patient. The similarity of acoustic impedance between water and the human body, combined with the relative contrast of the air-filled colon, allow disruption of a stone. In the supine position shock waves entering the body traverse homogenous muscle tissue, reaching the stone without interference and destroying with a 20% attenuation of its power It is interesting to note that studies of cavitation in electrohydraulic shock wave lithotripters indicate that the greatest cavitation activity occurs not at the geometric focus, F2, but at a site proximal to F2 by 1 to 3 cm; but in clinical practice stones are aligned with F2. Stone comminution may be achieved more rapidly without greater tissue damage by a simple shift in stone alignment. In conclusion serious gastrointestinal tract injuries have been reported as a complication of ESWL. We believe that these adverse effects are from specific variables such as an increase in the number of shock waves delivered and patient position. The majority of gastrointestinal perforations secondary to ESWL were a result of the patient being placed in the prone position and requiring shock waves that exceed the FDA recommended numbers. Gastrointestinal tract injury is not being effectively screened, and it is possible that many injuries remain undetected. The exact pathophysiology is not yet clear, but several proposed mechanisms for gastrointestinal tract injury have been reported. Larger prospective studies are necessary to determine the actual incidence of gastrointestinal damage secondary to lithotripsy, to determine its clinical impact on patients electing to undergo this procedure, and to reinforce the need for the guidelines recommended by the FDA. Study conception and design: Maker Acquisition of data: Layke Analysis and interpretation of data: Layke Drafting of manuscript: Maker, Layke Critical revision: Maker Supervision: Maker