Nowadays, nanofluids are being considered as an efficient heat transfer fluid in various thermal applications. Refrigerant-based nanofluids, termed as “nanorefrigerants”, have the potential to improve the heat transfer performances of refrigeration and air-conditioning systems. This study analyzed the thermophysical properties and their effects on the coefficient of performance (COP) resulted by addition of 5vol.% Al2O3 nanoparticles into R-134a refrigerant at temperatures of 283–308K. The analysis has been done for a uniform mass flux through a horizontal smooth tube using established correlations. The results indicate that the thermal conductivity, dynamic viscosity, and density of Al2O3/R-134a nanorefrigerant increased about 28.58%, 13.68%, and 11%, respectively compared to the base refrigerant (R-134a) for the same temperature. On the other hand, specific heat of nanorefrigerant is slightly lower than that of R-134a. Moreover, Al2O3/R-134a nanorefrigerant shows the highest COP of 15%, 3.2%, and 2.6% for thermal conductivity, density, and specific heat, respectively compared to R-134a refrigerant. Therefore, application of nanoparticles in refrigeration and air-conditioning systems is promising to improve the performances of the systems.heat transfer surface area (m bubble departure diameter (m) boiling number convection number specific heat capacity (J/kg coefficient of performance tube diameter (m) enhancement factor gravitational acceleration (m/s mass flux (kg/m heat transfer coefficient (W/m latent heat (kJ/kg) heat transfer coefficient (W/m thermal conductivity (W/m orifice constant tube length (m) temperature lift (K) mass flow rate (kg/s) Nusselt number pressure (Pa) Prandtl number heat flux (W/m heat output (W) radius of the tube (m) radius of the nanoparticles (m) Reynolds number suppression factor thickness of interfacial layer (m) temperature (K) volumetric flow rate (m total work (W) mass quality Martinelli parameter particle volume concentration (%) density (kg/m dynamic viscosity (N surface tension (N/m) condenser pool boiling downstream evaporator input interfacial layer/nanolayer no pressure losses nanorefrigerant nanoparticle refrigerant saturation single phase upstream   A nanorefrigerant is one kind of nanofluid for which the base fluid is a refrigerant. Like other nanofluids, it is a mixture of refrigerant and solid particles. Nanorefrigerant is being considered as a potential to enhance the thermal performance of refrigeration and air-conditioning systems because of the higher thermal conductivity of nanoparticles. Three main benefits have been reported when using nanorefrigerants in a refrigerator Thermophysical properties are the performance parameters that need to be analyzed in order to select the most suitable option for the energy conversion systems. Thermal conductivity is affected by temperature and density. High thermal conductivity of the refrigerant is crucial in order to gain the maximum output from the system High COP and environmental friendliness are considered as the major selection criteria of a refrigerant. There are some studies available about the pool boiling The properties of Al Thermal conductivity of Al The thickness and the thermal conductivity of the interfacial layer are calculated from Eqs. COP is equal to heat output divided by total work input. Eq. Eq. In this equation, The Reynolds number was calculated using, Referring to Eq. Substituting the above equations, the final relationship between COP and thermal conductivity for refrigerant and nanorefrigerant are expressed in forms of Eqs. The viscosity of nanorefrigerant was calculated using Brinkman model Klein et al. Pressure drop of refrigerant in the compressor was calculated using Hagen–Poiseuille equation Replacing pressure drop in Eq. The density of nanofluid was calculated using Pak and Cho Performance of the system is dependent on the mass flow rate of the refrigerant. This was suggested by Bukac et al. The single-phase orifice equation To obtain the relationship between COP and density, the mass flow rate through a short tube in Eq. For a given particle volume fraction, specific heat of a nanorefrigerant can be calculated using the correlation suggested by Pak and Cho Substituting Prandtl numbers in Eqs.     The change in density with respect to refrigerant’s temperature has been shown in The effect of density on the COP at different temperatures has been shown in The specific heat of both Al  In the present study, thermophysical properties of Al Thermal conductivity of the Al Both viscosity and density were found to be augmented for Al Specific heat capacities of refrigerant and nanorefrigerant were also increased with increasing temperature. However, specific heat of nanorefrigerant was found to be slightly lower than the pure refrigerant. Nevertheless, 2.6% higher COP was observed for nanorefrigerant due to its specific heat capacity. We hope that this study will shed light on the effect of using nanorefrigerants on the performance of the refrigeration systems and encourage more future investigations in this area. More study and experimental work are required to check the improvement of the performance and the efficiency of the refrigeration systems using nanorefrigerants. None declared. “The authors are thankful to