High gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) has been an effective method for the concentration or removal of fine para-magnetic particles from suspension, but its powerful magnetic capture to magnetic particles results in the mechanical entrainment of non-magnetic particles in magnetic product, and thus reduces the separation selectivity. HGMS in centrifugal field (CHGMS) is proposed to improve the separation selectivity, and in this investigation a cyclic pilot-scale CHGMS separator was used to concentrate fine ilmenites from slurry. The theoretical descriptions on this CHGMS process indicate that the introduction of centrifugal field in the HGMS field has a promoting effect on the magnetic capture of matrix to magnetic particles and significantly improves the HGMS performance, and a minimum critical magnetic field force is required for the capture of magnetic particles in the centrifugal field. These theoretical descriptions were experimentally verified and the dependence of CHGMS performance on the key parameters such as centrifugal acceleration was determined. This CHGMS method has achieved a significantly improved separation selectivity and performance to the fine ilmenite, and thus provided a potential prospect in the development of CHGMS technology.High gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) has been used in a variety of technical processes, such as for biochemical separation and pollutants purification ( In a HGMS process, the forces acting upon a para-magnetic particle are mainly magnetic, hydrodynamic and gravitational, but the magnetic force has its dominant control on the overall behavior of the particle and thus produces a significant effect on the HGMS performance. The strong magnetic force upon magnetic particles results in the mechanical entrainment of non-magnetic particles in magnetic product, and thus reduces the separation selectivity of magnetic force and the quality of magnetic product ( Thus, it can be seen that the separation selectivity has been a major problem encountered in the development of various HGMS methods and it deserves in-depth innovation. Therefore, HGMS in centrifugal field (CHGMS) was proposed to achieve an improved HGMS performance, and in 2015 an electromagnetic CHGMS separator was reported for pilot-scale concentration of fine iron particles from slurry with 78.70%wt. particles smaller than 43 From When the separator is operated, firstly the separating cylinder is filled with flowing water from feed box above the driving mechanism, and the water level in the cylinder is maintained constant with water continuously flowing out of overflow pipe. Then, the driving mechanism drives the matrix to rotate in the cylinder and a centrifugal field is built up in magnetic field. Slurry is fed into the feed box and flows into the matrix via the driving mechanism. Magnetic particles are captured onto the matrix under the combined actions of magnetic force, centrifugal force and hydrodynamic drag, while non-magnetic particles flow out of the matrix to produce a non-magnetic product. When a batch of feed is finished, the matrix is slowed down and is lifted out of magnetic field, and the magnetic particles are washed down to produce a magnetic product. The main parameters of this cyclic pilot-scale CHGMS separator are listed in  The friction force is resulted from the magnetic force and hydrodynamic force acting onto the magnetic particle, and it is written as: As discussed later in the article, a low centrifugal acceleration is required in the process. In this case, slurry flows in a laminar form in the matrix, and the hydrodynamic drag is calculated: The para-magnetic particle is captured onto the wire if only the following relation is met: Combining Eqs. And, Eq. From Eq. By setting And, the minimum critical magnetic force required for the effective capture is written as: By incorporating It is clear from Eq. It is well established that in a HGMS process, the capture probability of matrix to para-magnetic particles improves with increase in the magnetic wire layers in the matrix for the particles passing through ( As shown in The dwelling time of slurry or particles in the matrix is estimated as: Combining Eqs. Thus, the passing times for particles passing through the magnetic wire layer is significantly increased with the increasing rotation speed of matrix and it is further expressed as: It is supposed that the capture probability for a particle passing through a single magnetic wire layer in the matrix is If If the theoretical maximum recovery for magnetic particles in the material is For a given CHGMS separator, Eq. From Eq. Thus, it is clear that in a rotating matrix as shown in The separation selectivity of matrix for magnetic particles may be described ( From Eq. A typical ilmenite ore was used for the CHGMS investigations. The material is less than 0.25 The material is particularly taken from Xichang Mining Co., Ltd. of Chongqing Iron and Steel Group in China. This kind of ilmenite presents one of the most typically para-magnetic minerals, as it holds more than 90% of the titanium reserve of China and over 35% of the world ( An appropriate feed mass weight for the cyclic pilot-scale CHGMS separator is firstly determined, at a high ( The TiO Before the separation investigations, the feed mass weight fit for this cyclic pilot-scale CHGMS separator was firstly determined at a relatively high ( Theoretically, the coarser magnetic wire captures more magnetic particles as it has a lager capture surface. However, as can be seen from With an appropriate feed mass weight of 200 It can be seen from There is a natural crystal size distribution for ilmenite minerals in the material, so that its fineness determines the liberation extent of the minerals from nonmagnetic particles such as augite and feldspar as mentioned before. It is clear the finer is the material, the more adequate is the liberation, and a high TiO Controlling the material fineness at around 80% below 0.074 The wire diameter of matrix determines the magnetic field gradient on matrix surface and thus its capture force upon magnetic particles ( As theoretically depicted in Eqs. Thus, it is clear that the feed volume flowrate significantly affects the CHGMS performance. The TiO It is noted that the most appropriate feed volume flow rate is also related to the feed particle size, as it contributes to the magnetic force acting onto magnetic particles. From To achieve a general evaluation for this innovative method, it is used to form a technological process for the material, fully in accordance with its industrial production process with pulsating HGMS method, as illustrated in Combining Thus it is clear that the CHGMS method has a superior separation selectivity and performance to the widely applied pulsating HGMS method. It is once again noted that this pilot-scale CHGMS separator has a limited magnetic wire layers (3–4) in the matrix, which is much less to those of pilot-scale and industrial pulsating HGMS separators as specified in The introduction of centrifugal force in high gradient magnetic field achieves an enhanced HGMS performance. There is a minimum critical magnetic field force for the capture of a para-magnetic particle in centrifugal field, which is related to the acceleration of applied centrifugal field and the property of material such as magnetic susceptibility, particle size and density; the magnetic wire layers for particles passing through the matrix in the CHGMS method may be significantly increased, thereby improving the capture probability and recovery for magnetic particles. And, this innovative HGMS method achieves an improved separation selectivity, due to the combined action of magnetic force, centrifugal force and hydrodynamic drag upon para-magnetic particles. These theoretical descriptions were verified with the pilot-scale CHGMS separator in separating fine ilmenite ore, and its performance dependence on the key parameters of the separator such as centrifugal acceleration and particle size was experimentally determined. Compared with the widely applied pulsating HGMS method, this CHGMS method achieved a significantly improved separation performance for this fine ilmenite ore. Although a typically fine ilmenite ore was selected for the separation investigations, this CHGMS method has provided a potential prospect in the development of CHGMS technology, and it may be applicable for a variety of para-magnetic ores. We sincerely acknowledge the fundings to this research work from the