The objective of this work was to determine the effect of Leptospirillum ferrooxidans on the floatability of chalcopyrite, sphalerite, and pyrrhotite by using xanthate as a collector. The tests were carried out in the absence and presence of bacteria in relation to the type of ore and contact time with bacteria. The results indicate that the chalcopyrite flotation rate significantly increased in the presence of L. ferrooxidans due to the formation of hydrophobic species. The bacteria function as a weak depressant for pyrrhotite after a conditioning time ⩾60min. The behaviour of sphalerite remains without changes due to its low susceptibility to oxidation. It was concluded that L. ferrooxidans brings about superficial changes mainly due to the oxidation of minerals.Within the ore-processing industry, sulphide ore flotation has had an important role for more than 80 years. This separation method exploits the differences in surface characteristics of solids suspended in an aqueous medium by means of adjusting and controlling their surface energies and interfacial tensions ( Currently, in countries with ample ore resources such as Mexico, the benefit of complex sulphide ores is each day becoming more and more important due to the gradual depletion of high grade deposits; thus making important the development of flotation and lixiviation schemes in order to beneficiate and process complex ores, which are represented by polymetallic sulphide associations. Along with the industrial necessity to develop new technologies which are applied to the processing of ores, designing methods which adhere to strict environmental regulations is unavoidable. Pyrrhotite (Fe Industrial application of bacteria in lixiviation has brought about a new research perspective in regards to ores, generating lines of investigation which try to develop environmentally friendly technology for processing ores in ways which are different from traditional separation methods. Bioflotation is a relatively new method for processing ores; defined as “the selective separation of commercial gangue ores, through interactions with microorganisms.” ( Studies about the application of bacteria in the flotation of sulphide ores are scarce; the major part of them concern pyrite depression and, in a lesser amount, the separations of galena/sphalerite and pyrite/arsenopyrite mixtures as well as the evaluation of bacteria in the floatability of individual ores (galena, molybdenite, chalcocite, arsenopyrite) ( It is widely accepted that most flotation systems can be described by means of a first-order reaction rate equation (Eq. The constant Experiments were carried out by using high-purity ores (⩾90%), chosen by hand. The chalcopyrite and pyrrhotite came from the San Martín mine located in Zacatecas (Mexico). The sphalerite came from the Plomosas district in Chihuahua (Mexico); its chemical composition is detailed in  A 5-g sample of each ore was suspended in 300 Two grams of ore were conditioned for 10 In order to determine the variability of the data from microflotation experiments, five tests were performed using biomodified chalcopyrite ( The tests were carried out by dispersing 5 The results presented in The results in The effect of interaction time or contact with bacteria on chalcopyrite recovery is presented in In spite of the ever existent controversies over the exact composition of the oxidation products of sulphide ores, it is accepted that the formation of elemental sulphur, in acidic solutions and moderately oxidizing potentials, is the most obvious mechanism for explaining the increase in hydrophobicity of chalcopyrite ( The changes in the chalcopyrite surface, brought about by biomodification, can be shown by means of the zeta potential ( The The surface charge of S° is negative, exactly as is shown in On the other hand, with the pH of 9 in which the flotation was carried out, the zeta potential increased proportionally with bacteria-ore contact time ( According to Pourbaix diagrams ( Due to the acid pH of the solution, it was considered that the effect of the increased floatability which was observed could be brought about only by the acidity of the solution; thus tests were carried out in the absence and presences of bacteria. The results of  The effect of the interaction time of The adsorption of bacteria over the sphalerite and its effect on the zeta potential is shown in The general behaviour has its origin in the fact that sphalerite is a refractory ore, resistant to oxidation (dissolution) in an aqueous acid medium. This is due to the fact that it is a semiconductor with low electrical conductivity (  The effect of Longer contact time with bacteria ( The zeta potential of the biomodified pyrrhotite as a function of interaction time is shown in Chalcopyrite floatability graphed as a function of pyrrhotite floatability in the absence and presence of Sphalerite floatability vs. pyrrhotite floatability in the absence and presence of bacteria is shown in The analysis of the results of the biomodification of chalcopyrite, sphalerite, and pyrrhotite indicate that the effect of The bacteria function as a weak depressant for pyrrhotite after a conditioning time ⩾60 It was demonstrated that changes in chalcopyrite floatability are a consequence of the bacteria and not the acid pH of the solution. The authors thank SEP-CONACYT-Mexico for financial support in order to carry out this work through the 48639R project. The authors also thank C. Cuagliotti for his help.