The recent advance of particle size engineering in nanometer ranges has widened the formulation opportunities of relatively water-insoluble drugs. However, the ‘nanoformulation’ suffers from a lack of systematic understanding about the requirements of polymeric stabilizers. Furthermore, the polymers that can be used for the preparation of nanocrystals are so limited that finding a proper stabilizer for a given formulation is often difficult. In this study, amino acid copolymers whose properties can systematically be tailored are developed, and their morphological and compositional effects are investigated. Copolymers containing lysine (K) as their hydrophilic segments, and phenylalanine (F) or leucine (L) as their hydrophobic segments successfully produce stable nanocrystals (200–300nm) in water, while copolymers of K and alanine (A) could not generate nanosized particles. Not the morphology but the hydrophobicity of copolymers seems to be a critical parameter in the preparation of drug nanocrystals by wet comminution. The effective stabilization performance of copolymers requires the hydrophobic moiety content to be higher than 15mol%. Comminution for only 5min is long enough for nanocrystal preparation, and the crystallinity of drug is found intact after the processing.Reducing the particle size of an active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) has opened new formulation opportunities in various dosage forms. Particularly, the bioavailability of relatively insoluble drugs, which is often limited by poor dissolution rates, benefits from the development of the ‘nanoformulation’ techniques ( The technology of particle size reduction to nanometers has significantly advanced over the last several decades. Comminution, high pressure homogenization, impinging jet, electrospraying, liquid-based methods, and supercritical fluid processes are the technologies that are currently available or being actively developed for nanoparticle preparation ( Stabilizers usually cover the surface of nanoparticles producing ionic or steric stabilization ( When a polymeric stabilizer is used in a wet comminution process, its physical adsorption onto the surface of drug particles and subsequent steric stabilization are important processes. However, they are not simple processes. Polymer diffusion, convection, adsorption, and desorption can occur simultaneously with the mechanical fracturing of crystal ( It is unrealistic to find a single polymer that properly works for all different wet comminution processes. Different formulation imposes different requirements on polymeric stabilizers. Furthermore, differences in the surface characteristics of drug crystals would require different properties of polymers. However, the properties of polymers critical in nanocrystal processing cannot easily be tuned for a specific formulation, due to the limited number of available polymers. Only a few polymers generally recognized as safe and effective (GRAS) can be employed ( Although numerous nanocrystal formulations are under active development worldwide, efforts for developing a new class of materials for the stabilization of nanocrystals are still insufficient. To resolve the current limitations of nanocrystal processing, novel polymeric stabilizers should have flexibility in engineering their properties from synthetic point of view. Considering biocompatibility and diversity in the selection of monomers, amino acid copolymers are excellent candidates for this purpose ( More importantly, tailoring amino acid copolymers will provide systematic understanding of the effect of their chain composition and morphology. This will be our initial step to reveal what are the critical physical properties of polymers for wet comminution processes. In this study, random and block copolymers based on lysine (K), phenylalanine (F), leucine (L), and alanine (A) were prepared via ring opening polymerization and were used for nanocrystal preparation ( Triphosgene (98.0%), As an API for wet comminution, Naproxen (GMP) produced by Merck & Co. was used. The physical properties of crystalline Naproxen particles (purity   Calculated amounts of amino acid NCAs were placed in an 100 The polymerization was continued for 72 The protection groups of copolymers (CBZ groups in API particles were mixed in a 1.3 The particle size distribution was measured in water using an Electrophoretic Light Scattering Spectrophotometer, ELS-8000 (Otsuka, 632.8 DSC experiments were performed using a DSC-7 (Perkin Elmer) in nitrogen atmosphere. The samples were scanned from 50 to 200 For the atomic force microscopy (AFM), a PSIA XE-100 with TESP or TESP7 etched single crystal silicone probes was used (20–100 Amino acids were successfully copolymerized into block and random copolymers ( The molecular weights, degrees of polymerization (DP), and compositions of copolymers were measured by Wet comminution in the presence of polymeric stabilizers can produce effective size reduction ( The hydrophilic moiety of copolymers is K segment. Because of its hydrophilic nature, the segment will tend to locate itself toward water instead of hydrophobic drug surface. Thus, it can provide effective steric or ionic stabilization for drug nanoparticles. However, like the conventional surfactants of small molecular weights, it may excessively help the dissolution of hydrophobic drugs, resulting in the destruction of crystalline structures. The destruction produces micelle-like structures in liquid formulations. This possible series of events will be examined in the stability study of nanocrystals below. While K was used as the hydrophilic moiety of copolymers, three other amino acids, F, L, and A, were used as hydrophobic moieties. The use of different amino acids imparts a different hydrophobicity to amino acid copolymers. If all other factors such as the K content, polymer morphology, etc., remain the same, the hydrophobicity of copolymers increases in the order of K-r-A, K-r-L, and K-r-F (  A longer comminution time than 5  As the content of hydrophobic moieties increases, the adsorption of copolymers is expected to be enhanced. It is an interesting and valuable subject to figure out the minimum content of hydrophobic amino acids required to trigger the adsorption of copolymers. Additionally, the morphology of copolymers, i.e., the distribution of hydrophobic moiety along a polymer chain, could be an important factor. To estimate the effect of the morphology, block and random copolymers having the same mole fraction of hydrophobic amino acids are compared.  In random copolymers, the hydrophobic amino acids are randomly distributed, but in diblock copolymers, they are localized in one segment. As a consequence, multiple attachments of polymer chains onto hydrophobic surface could be easier in random copolymer adsorptions than in diblock copolymer cases. However, the mean particle size results of The effect of molecular weight was not critical either (the details are not given in It should be mentioned that the differences among the three data points above 500 The nanoparticles prepared in the presence of amino acid copolymers were visualized using atomic force microscopy (AFM) and a typical micrograph is provided in Retaining the crystallinity of drug particles during processing is beneficial to the stability of drugs. Wet comminution could sometimes significantly damage the crystallinity of particles, and so possible changes in the crystallinity of the drugs by wet comminution were checked by DSC. After the preparation of nanoparticles by wet comminution with the aid of polymers, nanoparticles could slowly aggregate back into microparticles with a desorption process of polymers. Also, crystal growth via the Osward ripening ( In this study, both the type of amino acids and their composition are the major factors determining particle size reduction. The hydrophobicity of polymers depends on the two factors. Thus, it is the case that the hydrophobicity of polymers is more important than the chain morphologies of polymers such as block and random copolymers. Interestingly, the particle size results of Hydrophobicity mainly influences the physical adsorption of polymers onto hydrophobic drug surfaces, while chain morphology mainly affects the adsorption conformation and resulting steric repulsion of polymers. As a result, this study indicates that the physical adsorption of polymers is the primary determining factor in the effective wet comminution and steric stabilization of drug nanocrystals. In fact, wet comminution continually provides mechanical fracture energy to drug crystals and creates fresh fracture surfaces (or cleavages), which will tend to fuse together unless quickly stabilized. Actual size reduction by fracturing could occur only with the The amphiphilic copolymers in solid dispersion systems behave differently from those in emulsion systems ( Amphiphilic amino acid copolymers having molecular weights of 5000–25,000 The authors thank Dr. Kang at KIST for their valuable guidance for this work. Financial support from the Korea Institute of Industrial Technology Evaluation and Planning (project no. 10010884) is gratefully acknowledged. Ahn thanks the Hyperstructured Organic Materials Research Center (HOMRC) for their financial support.