The use of uneconomic virtual transactions in day-ahead electricity markets with the intent to benefit related financial positions constitutes cross-product manipulation, and has emerged as a policy concern in recent years. Developing analytical frameworks and models to explain the means for achieving sustained day-ahead price manipulation is a challenge. This paper presents a two-stage equilibrium model of day-ahead price manipulation to enhance the value of financial transmission rights (FTRs). We cast the problem as a Stackelberg game between manipulating traders in the day-ahead market (leaders) and generating firms, grid operator and traders without FTRs in the day-ahead and real-time markets (followers). The model accounts for features specific to electricity systems, like intertemporal constraints of power generating units and real-time uncertainty, and considers imperfect competition as a condition allowing manipulation in equilibrium. We simulate hourly financial trading and operations decisions in a small test system for 24 hours. Results suggest that cross-product manipulation is sustained in equilibrium only when both physical and financial participants engage in Cournot competition. Further, as a result of loop flows, price separation between FTR source and sink may be induced by virtual transactions at network locations that are not on the FTR path.generating firm hour node power plant transmission path trader day-ahead scenario real-time scenario set of hours set of nodes set of FTR sink nodes set of FTR source nodes set of power plants set of power plants owned by firm set of power plants at node set of traders set of traders without FTR positions set of manipulating traders with FTR positions intercept of day-ahead (real-time) inverse demand at node slope of inverse demand at node marginal cost of generation for plant start-up cost of plant FTR position of trader min power output (capacity) of plant power transfer distribution factor at node ramp-down (ramp-up) limit of plant reference price for virtual bids at node collateral of trader transmission capacity on path arbitrage sales to node commitment cost of plant electric demand at node energy price at node virtual energy purchases (sales) of trader at node sales of plant commitment status of plant transmission price at node transmission services to node arbitrage sales to node commitment cost of plant electric demand at node energy price at node sales of plant commitment status adjustment of plant transmission price at node transmission services to node Virtual transactions are purely financial positions that allow market participants to exploit arbitrage opportunities arising when day-ahead electricity prices are predictably higher or lower than expected real-time prices. Specifically, virtual demand (supply) bids allow purchase (sale) of energy in the day-ahead market at a network location, and are settled with a countervailing offer (bid) at the real-time price. Virtual bids clear with physical bids and may set the day-ahead locational marginal price. Empirical evidence suggests that profitable virtual transactions improve price convergence between day-ahead and real-time energy prices ( Mechanisms and conditions that allow physical load and generation resources to exercise market power in electricity markets are well understood ( We consider a game in quantities with risk neutral power generators, a grid operator (ISO), and traders in the day-ahead and real-time energy markets. Each generating firm owns and operates power plants at a network location, but may sell power to other locations. Firms choose the level of hourly day-ahead and real-time power sales from each plant to customers at each node to maximize daily profits in the two-settlement energy market. The ISO provides transmission services to power suppliers, and arbitrages differences in nodal prices by buying MW of power from one node and selling it to another ( The lower level of the game consists of the optimization problems of the generating firms, ISO and traders without FTR positions in the day-ahead and real-time markets. We consider a setting where generating firms and traders without FTRs act competitively, as well as a regime where each player acts à la Cournot with regard to other firms’ sales, but is price-taking with respect to transmission prices. The ISO is modeled as a price-taker. Electricity demand is elastic and determined endogenously assuming an affine specification: (i) As noted above, sales by plant (ii) (iii) The Eq. (iv) Balancing of supply and demand at each hour and node follows from eq. Day-ahead demand for electricity is also elastic and assumed linear: (i) Note that (ii) The day-ahead problem faced by each trader The trader chooses hourly virtual demand (DEC) and supply (INC) positions at each node, and profits from arbitrage opportunities created by price differences between day-ahead and real-time markets. Eq. (iii) The day-ahead problem of the Importantly, since the day-ahead market only creates a financial obligation to buy or sell power in real-time, no power actually flows on transmission line (iv) Finally, the market clearing condition for day-ahead transmission services is similar to the one defined for the real-time market, and given by: When making optimal decisions in the day-ahead market, manipulating trader We simulate financial trading and operations decisions in the energy markets for 24 h on a small electric network with three nodes (A, B and C) connected by lines with equal reactance ( Parameter values are presented in We examine five scenarios that differ with respect to the assumed behavior of market participants and FTR path. Key equilibrium outcomes and metrics for comparison across scenarios are presented in  In addition to the forward premium, we compare equilibrium outcomes across scenarios based on the average procurement cost of electricity, consumer surplus and social welfare in the network. The average procurement cost of electricity is the total cost of purchasing power in the energy markets divided by total energy consumption in the network. Social welfare is measured by the sum of surpluses for all market participants ( If real-time demand is  In In order to examine the effects of cross-product manipulation on equilibrium outcomes, we compare Our last set of results ( The use of uneconomic virtual transactions in day-ahead electricity markets with the intent to benefit related financial positions has emerged as a policy concern in recent years. Developing analytical frameworks and models to explain the means for achieving day-ahead price manipulation that persists over time, rather than being an isolated incident, is a challenge. We contribute to the literature by presenting a two-stage, complementarity-based equilibrium model of day-ahead electricity price manipulation to enhance the value of financial transmission rights under real-time uncertainty. We cast the problem as a Stackelberg game between one or more manipulating traders in the day-ahead market (leaders) and generating firms, ISO and traders without FTRs in the day-ahead and real-time markets (followers). FTR positions of the manipulating traders are exogenous in the game. The model builds on our past work in a two-node setting ( Our analysis has important policy implications. First, day-ahead price manipulation through uneconomic financial positions can be sustained at network locations where As a second policy implication, our analysis shows that the ability to increase price separation between FTR source and sink is a requirement for the exercise of cross-product manipulation. Importantly, price separation may be induced by virtual transactions clearing at network locations that are not on the FTR path. As a case in point, PJM established a FTR forfeiture rule to prevent market participants from intentionally misusing virtual transactions to increase source-sink price separation, and thus FTR payouts ( This research was supported by