It is hereby reported a simple, effective and sustainable method for the recovery of precious metals from end-of-life vehicle shredder residue and/or automobile shredder residue based on a hybrid ball-milling and microbubble froth flotation process. A ball-milling treatment of automobile shredder residue along a mixture of Fe/Ca/CaO nanoparticles had as main result the entrapment of precious metals and in subsidiary an improvement of the floatability of the various size fraction particles (1.0, 0.425, and 0.25 mm, respectively). Therefore, a separation of the settled fraction (poor in precious metals) and the floating fraction yielded a recovery of approximately 83–89% precious metals in the latter. Scanning electron microscopy-energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy maps of gold (Au), silver (Ag), platinum (Pt), palladium (Pd), Iridium (Ir), and copper (Cu) confirmed that result.Precious metals (PM) are found in modern end-of-life vehicles (ELV), including printed circuit boards in audio systems, electronic displays and navigation systems, onboard computer monitors, powertrain control modules, engine control units, emission controls, oxygen sensors, and other engine functions ( Automobile recycling generates approximately five million tons of ASR annually worldwide (about 5% of the world's industrial waste); most of this residue ends up in landfill or is converted thermally ( The potential routes for the recovery of PM from printed circuit boards and other e-wastes have been reviewed extensively in recent years ( While the field of PM recovery from “usual” WEEE/e-waste (Waste Electric and Electronic Equipment) is a well-documented and dynamic field of study ( Therefore, although ASR contains a certain amount of PM, it is still simply disposed of in landfill. One of the starting points of this study was observation of the influence of cementation processes of recent PM recovery from e-waste ( All laboratory procedures met the QA/QC requirements (SINAL 0286), including the application of triplicate experiments. ASR, often referred to as “light” ASR (or “fluff”), contains an extremely inhomogeneous mixture of plastics but larger fractions of non-ferrous metals, glass and lot of sand and dirt. In the present study, samples of heavy ASR (size about 5 mm) were collected at three different times during the day from an ELV treatment plant in Pohang City, South Korea. The metallic and non-metallic contents were assessed rapidly and proven to be in the normal range for modern ASR ( A dispersed mixture of Fe/Ca/CaO nanoparticles was prepared using a solvent-free planetary ball-milling procedure. Granular particles of metallic Ca (99%, 2–2.5 mm particle size distribution, 0.43–0.48 m The ASR was ball-milled as finely as possible, so that the individual grains were much smaller than 100 μm. To obtain this, 10 g of each individual ASR size fraction (1.0, 0.425, and 0.125 mm) was introduced into a 250 mL stainless steel pot along with five stainless steel balls (20 mm diameter) and ball-milled for 1 h using a planetary ball-mill (Retsch PM-400) operating at 500 rpm and a rotation-to-revolution ratio of 1: 2 (doubling thus, the inverse rotation force compared with the direction of orbital motion). The optimal treatment conditions were established based on previous studies ( The flotation glass reactor used is a 10 cm tall cylinder with an internal diameter of 14 cm and a working volume of ca. 1.0 L. A ceramic microbubble diffuser plate (pore diameter of 10–16 μm) was installed at the bottom of the reactor and connected to a mini air pump (MP-Σ300, Sibata, Japan). For the reference study, a ceramic normal bubble diffuser plate (pore diameter of 100 μm) was also considered. An automatic overhead stirrer (WiseStir, Daihan Scientific Co., Ltd.) was installed to mix the heterogeneous aqueous ASR mixture during bubbling. For the froth flotation experiments, 1 L of distilled water was used and 1 g of Fe/Ca/CaO nanoparticles collector/modifiers was introduced to the flotation reactor. A frothing agent, known as the “frother”, 4-methyl-2-pentanol (methyl-isobutyl-carbinol (MIBC), 1 mL), was also introduced to promote the formation of stable integrated microbubbles and froth at the surface. The concentration of the Fe/Ca/CaO nanoparticle collector/binder and frother were selected based on the results of a previous optimization study ( The total precious metal (Ag, Au, Pt, Pd, Rh, Ru, Ir, and Cu) concentrations in the ASR residues before and after ball-milling and froth flotation (floating and settled ASR residues) were measured using the method described by Before operating the froth flotation, the ASR must be reduced to fine particles by ball-milling so that the various minerals exist as physically separated granules. During grinding, the metal particles turn to a spherical shape due to their high malleability and ductility. In addition, non-metallic particles, such as plastics and glass fibers, are non-spherically shaped due to brittle fracture (  Froth flotation consists of the passing of normal and microbubbles of air through an ASR sample slurry (each size, milled or not) and stirred ( As listed in The PM concentrations in ball-milled ASR with and without the addition of Fe/Ca/CaO nanoparticle additives were measured after froth flotation in both the floating and settled fractions ( To better explain why the treatment with Fe/Ca/CaO nanoparticles and the separation by froth flotation afforded the excellent recovery of PM from ASR residues, SEM–EDS elemental mapping, elemental spectra and semi-quantitative analyses of the 0.250 mm ASR fractions were performed before and after Fe/Ca/CaO nanoparticles froth flotation (in both the floated and settled fractions) for several PM (Au, Ag, Pt, Pd, Ir, and Cu). In the initial ELV, PM had a clear location within the electronic parts. Following the shredding process that transforms ELV in ASR, the PM are essentially dispersed homogeneously in the shredded material. The dispersion is enhanced by ball-milling. On the other hand, considering that PM come from localized parts of the ELV, it is safe to assume that not all the ASR particles will have the same PM content. Some ASR particles do have PM adsorbed onto their surface and eventually present inside their core, and other ASR particles will have a smaller content (if any) of PM. In this state, it can be assumed that the PM are absorbed onto ASR particles through a surface coordination process ( Integration of ASR ball-milling with a nano-Fe/Ca/CaO system, and froth flotation can make the whole process economically attractive and environmental friendly due to the separation of a fraction with a remarkably high content of value-added precious metals that can be recovered through a simple digestion procedure. This process is a simple and sustainable three-step procedure: ball-milling of ASR samples, froth flotation separation in a reactor (by mixing ASR with water, nano-Fe/Ca/CaO and a frother), and recovery of precious metals through acid treatment. The procedure results in the separation of at least half (in weight) of a sterile ASR sample, allowing the concentration of precious metals in the remaining fraction to be separated easily by froth filtration. The proposed process might contribute to a more sustainable and cost-effective management for other industrial wastes such as E-waste scrap and spent catalyst. Moreover, future scale-up experiments are currently underway in order to improving its marketability. The authors are grateful to the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Details about the compositions of ASR residue different size fractions after sieving (Fig. S1). 0.250mm ASR sample SEM-EDS elemental maps before/after nano-Fe/Ca/CaO - froth flotation (floating/settled fractions) for Au, Pt, Pd, Ag, Ir, and Cu. The color intensity from low to high is 0-100 (Fig. S2). Main inorganic chemical compositions in different size ASR fractions (Table S1). Supplementary data related to this article can be found at