This study was conducted to establish the potential of bagasse, the fibrous by-product of sugarcane milling operation, as a precursor for preparing adsorbents for gold–thiourea complex. It was also of interest to identify the carbon properties, which promotes adsorption. Bagasse was activated in this study by physical (gasification) and chemical techniques. It was found bagasse is more amenable to activation by physical techniques producing activated carbon with surface areas exceeding 1000 m2/g. Among the chemical activating agents, it was found that ZnCl2 was most effective in developing the surface structure of bagasse. Gold–thiourea adsorption was found to be favoured in carbon exhibiting high surface area. Finer pore sizes are developed with higher surface area. As such the extent to which the surface area could improve adsorption was limited by steric hindrance in the finer pore size. It was found that steric hindrance affected gold–thiourea adsorption in mean pore sizes less 20 Å. The effect was particularly significant when the carbon pH was greater than 7.0, where the alkaline nature of the carbon may have shifted the Tu/Au ratio to higher values such that the formation of the larger AuTu2
                     + and AuTu3
                     + are promoted. The greater development of physically activated bagasse favoured gold–thiourea adsorption. The optimum adsorption capacity by the physically activated bagasse was approximately 318 mgAu/g of adsorbent (ash free), achieved after 25 h of gasification in 15% CO2. This was comparable to adsorption capacities obtained from commercial activated carbon and resins of 197–321 mgAu/g adsorbent (ash free). These results are encouraging and confirm the potential of activated bagasse as gold–thiourea adsorbent.The extraction of gold from its host mineral is based on the use of lixiviants, which include cyanide (in alkaline medium), chlorine and thiourea (in acidic medium). Cyanide is currently used in most commercial operations because of its low cost and process simplicity. However it is disadvantaged by slow dissolution kinetics, poor selectivity and severe environmental constraints, related to tailings disposal, water quality and the environmental impacts ( Bagasse is the fibrous by-product resulting from the milling of sugarcane. Each milling season, large quantities of bagasse are generated. In Australia, this biomass is primarily used inefficiently as fuel for the mill boilers for electricity and steam generation. A small amount is also sold as animal fodder. The excess bagasse poses various problems including costs of storage, spontaneous combustion and environmental hazards from water run off. Conversion of bagasse to activated carbon has the potential to address these issues and it represents an opportunity to add value to this by-product. Thus the objective of this study was to establish the potential of bagasse as precursor for preparing activated carbon for gold adsorption. The influence of the physical and chemical properties of the developed activated carbon (arising from the activation techniques) on the gold–thiourea adsorption capacity are also compared and discussed. Activation of bagasse by physical technique involves a two-step process. Bagasse is initially carbonised followed by development of the extended surface area and porous structure by gasification with CO Carbonisation was achieved using a low temperature method based on the addition of H Chemical activation of bagasse also consists of two parts. The first part involves the impregnation of the fibre with an activating agent that aids in the thermal decomposition of the fibre. Bagasse to chemical ratio of 4:3 was used. This was then followed by pyrolysis under anaerobic conditions at 500 °C. After the activation was complete, the carbons were cooled under N The ash content, moisture and pH were determined using ASTM tests D 2866-94, D 2867-95 and D 3838-80 respectively ( Adsorption tests were conducted using synthetic AuTu The adsorption capacities of bagasse activated with carbon dioxide and steam are shown in  Increasing the ash content, as shown in  In  The gold–thiourea adsorption capacity of chemically activated bagasse and the effect of various activating agents on adsorption are reported in Comparison of adsorption capacities of the carbons prepared by the two activation methods in this study indicates physically activated bagasse promotes higher adsorption. The optimum adsorption capacity attained by the physically activated bagasse is approximately 318 mg The adsorption capacities of various commercial activated carbons and resins are compared in The following conclusions were drawn from this study: Bagasse appears to have the potential to be a good precursor for gold–thiourea adsorption. Activation by physical method appears to be the more effective technique in developing the structure of bagasse leading to surface areas exceeding 1000 m The optimum adsorption capacity for the physically activated bagasse was approximately 318 mg ZnCl The adsorption capacity for ZnCl Gold–thiourea adsorptions are influenced by both, the physical and chemical properties of the carbon and the number of thiourea ligands coordinated with the gold atom (altering the size of the complex). Higher surface area promotes adsorption. The finer pore structure developed with the higher surface area limits the extent to which adsorption can be improved by increasing the surface area. Steric hindrance in mean pore size of less than 20 Å affects the adsorption, particularly when the pH of the carbon surface exceeds 7.0, where it is anticipated that the ratio of Tu/Au complex is higher.