The aim of the study was to investigate the effect of amorphous silica on the phase formation and study the physical characteristics of forsterite refractory prepared from quartz and MgO powder. Various samples were subjected to sintering temperature around 1100°C and development of forsterite phase was characterized using Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction (XRD), and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The result indicate that the addition of rice husk ash (RHA) significantly affect the formation of forsterite phase. As the amount of RHA increased, it led to a better reaction between amorphous silica and periclase, later that will transform into forsterite phase at a temperature around 1100°C. Formation of forsterite resulted in decrease of density, porosity, and thermal conductivity, while the opposite was observed for Cold Crushing Strength. Formation of forsterite phase was identified by XRD analysis of the sample. Based on the characteristics, the samples were considered as an insulator and of the potential use as refractory devices.Crystalline magnesium silicate with chemical formula Mg In the last few decades forsterite refractories were prepared by different minerals such as serpentine, olivine etc. Forsterite has been synthesized by different methods such as solid-state reaction, self-propagation high temperature synthesis, and sol–gel route Abundant availability and high content of silica made RH an appropriate material for utilization in forsterite refractory manufacturing. The objective of this work is to evaluate the potential of rice husk silica as an alternative to commonly used silica for production of high strength forsterite refractory material for thermal insulation purpose using solid-state reaction. This ingredient and the process used for preparation of forsterite refractory aims to manufacture forsterite refractory at a low cost. RHA, a burnt by-product of RH is produced in rice mills by burning at around 500 In the present work different types of samples were prepared containing rice husk ash, MgO, and quartz in different proportions, shown in Various techniques were used to investigate the structural, mechanical, physical, thermal and morphological change which occurred in forsterite phase, when quartz was replaced by RHA. The phase contribution was decided by XRD. The molecular structure of the fired powder was studied using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (BRUKER, TENSOR 27-3772) between 4000 and 400 XRD patterns of the various samples, that contain different amount of RHA and sintered at 1100  The physical properties of the sintered samples at 1100 Cold Crushing Strength of the refractory samples, having different amounts of RHA was measured at room temperature after firing at 1100 The surface morphologies of the sintered samples, having different amount of RHA were analyzed using SEM. The micrographs shown in Energy dispersive spectroscopy or EDX analysis of sample-1 & 4 are shown in The measured thermal conductivity of various samples at temperatures 200 In this investigation, forsterite refractory was successfully prepared using RHA as a source of silica. Formation of forsterite phase was increased by using RHA in place of quartz as confirmed by XRD studies. Due to the reaction between periclase and silica, forsterite phase was formed and this forsterite phase formation leads to decrease in porosity, thermal conductivity and increased in compressive strength. Density was also decreased below the theoretical density of forsterite mineral. Process and raw materials used in the present study were more cost effective than other processes and virgin raw materials. Based on the physical characteristics of the prepared samples, this refractory can be envisaged as a thermal insulator, suggesting the potential use of the forsterite refractory as a lining for different parts of steel furnaces as well as the heating zone of cement rotary kilns. We are grateful to the Staff, Faculties, H.O.D of Department of Ceramic Engineering and Director of IIT-BHU, Varanasi, India for providing the proper facilities to accomplish this work.