Determined by the unique S-Mo-S sandwich layer structure, molybdenite is so chemical inert and hydrophobic that it is quite refractory in hydrometallurgical route. To improve Mo leaching by changing mineral structure of molybdenite prior to leaching might be a potential alternative. In this work, a mineral phase reconstruction (MPR) method is presented to treat molybdenite. The transformation of molybdenum-bearing sulfides by this method and leaching performance of MPR product were investigated. Results show that molybdenite can be reconstructed to a ternary sulfide FexMo6S8 by smelting with iron. The ternary sulfide can be leached much faster and more complete than molybdenite under the same conditions. Moreover, laboratory research and commercial practice show that sulfur of molybdenite being totally oxidized to sulfate. But as for the ternary sulfide, sulfur was converted into elemental state. An autocatalytic reaction kinetic equation was applied to fit the experimental data of MPR products leaching with HNO3-H2SO4 mixed solution. The apparent activation energy was calculated to be 76kJ·mol−1 indicating the process being chemical reaction controlled. The reaction is of the 1.5 and 0.6 order related to HNO3 and H2SO4 concentration respectively. Finally, a kinetic equation is established for the leaching reaction.Molybdenum, as an important strategic metal, is widespread applied in the fields of steel and petrochemical industry, aerospace engineering and national defense. In the earth, molybdenite (MoS Hydrometallurgical route is a promising alternative for molybdenum extraction. However, molybdenite is one of the most refractory sulfide ores in hydrometallurgy operations because of its chemical inertness, surface hydrophobicity In principle, crystal structure and reactivity of a compound decide the behavior during the leaching process. So, converting the structure of MoS Molybdenite, with its layered structure is commonly used as a dry lubricant for various applications, including steel parts. However, at 700 Natural molybdenite was purchased from a domestic concentration plant. The MoS Iron powder reduced and natural molybdenite (with a certain mass ratio of Fe to MoS Atmospheric comparative leaching was conducted with 2  Obviously, Fe Aiming to evaluate the effect of the MPR treatment on molybdenum leaching quantitatively, comparative leaching experiments of the MPR product and molybdenite were conducted in H As shown in The XRD patterns of leaching residue of molybdenite and the MPR product are shown in In contrast ( After leaching Mo present in the pregnant leach liquor in the form of H The treatments of pregnant leach liquor (of either molybdenite or MPR product) include roughly the following processes: the solvent extraction is applied to separate and enrich Mo; the Mo in loaded organic solutions can be stripped by ammonia; the loaded strip liquor is acidified with HNO Based on the result that the MPR product showed a better leaching performance during atmospheric leaching than molybdenite, the kinetics of the MPR leaching process was studied in detail, by varying the most crucial parameters during leaching in HNO As shown in Additionally, the characteristic “S-shaped” trend of the curve shown in In the catalytic reaction, NO The influence of solution temperature on the dissolution of the MPR product was studied at temperatures of 65, 70, 75 and 80 A general form rate expression of autocatalytic reaction can be represented as follows: Separation of variables and integration of Eq. In general, As we know, reaction fraction Eq. Arrhenius equation Take the logarithm of both sides of Eq. The ln[ The experiments were carried out at various initial HNO Seen from the following reactions, the stoichiometric mole of nitric acid is about 12 times of MPR product, implying that concentration of nitric acid should greatly affect leaching process. The ln[ The experiments were conducted using four different H The results demonstrate that an increase in concentration of H A kinetic equation can now be formed for the leaching process, based on Eq. A straight line, with slope of The results of this study show that molybdenite can be successfully reconstructed to a ternary sulfide (Fe Based on experimental leaching data, an autocatalytic reaction kinetics was confirmed. Curves of leaching fraction vs. time showed a characteristic “S-shaped” trend with an induction time as one would expect from an autocatalytic reaction path. The apparent activation energy was calculated as 76 Finally, an overall kinetic equation was established for the leaching process. This work was financially supported by the