The effect of sodium doping (3–8 mol%) on the structural, thermal and superconducting properties of (Pb0.5,Cd0.5)Sr2(Y0.6,Ca0.4)Cu2O7−
                     
                        δ
                      has been studied. For 5 mol% NaNO3 doping, relatively pure superconducting phase was formed without SrCuO2 and Sr5Pb3CuO12 impurities as observed in both 3% and 8% doped as well as undoped superconductors. The cell parameters and cell volumes are also found to be minimum for the 5% doped superconductor, but were slightly larger than for the undoped superconductor. Highest T
                     c of 55 K was also observed for 5% doped sodium containing sample and the T
                     c enhancement was 15 K above the sodium free superconductor. The effect of calcium content on the T
                     c enhancement by 5% sodium addition was investigated for (Pb0.5Cd0.5)Sr2(Y1−
                     
                        x
                     Ca
                        x
                     )Cu2O7−
                     
                        δ
                      (x=0.3, 0.5) superconductors. The sodium free superconductors show only onset of superconductivity (T
                     c,onset), which increases from 23 to 49 K with increasing calcium content. The resistivity behaviour before T
                     c changes from semiconducting to metallic nature. Addition of sodium leads to the observation of zero resistance (T
                     c,zero) at 25 K only for x=0.5 sample, which is however lower than the T
                     c,zero of 30 K exhibited by the superconductor with x=0.4 calcium content. The lowering of melting point and denser microstructure with larger grains were observed upon 5% sodium doping on (Pb0.5,Cd0.5)Sr2(Y0.6,Ca0.4)Cu2O7−
                     
                        δ
                      superconductor.Sodium nitrate (NaNO Materials with the 1212-type structure are believed to have potential of becoming 90 or 110 K class superconductors owing to their close structural relationship with YBa The samples were synthesized by the conventional solid state reaction method using high purity PbO, SrCO The powders from bulk samples were examined with a high resolution Guinier X-ray powder diffractometer using monochromatic CuKα radiation with The XRD patterns of undoped and sodium doped (3–8 mol%) (Pb The variation of resistance with temperature of the sodium free (Pb Addition of silver has also been found to enhance the superconducting transition temperature of (Pb,M)-1212 superconductors (M=Cu or Cd) and the The DTA measurements were conducted at temperatures below 1200°C. The DTA traces of the samples without and with 5 mol% NaNO The microstructural changes upon NaNO By the addition of sodium nitrate and optimization of calcium content, the superconducting properties of (Pb This work was partially supported by COSIST, SAP and Superconductivity Programmes of UGC, Government of India. One of the authors (BL) acknowledge CSIR, New Delhi, Government of India, for financial assistance in the form of Senior Research Fellowship. The author gratefully acknowledges Prof. G. Shanmugam for his help in the preparation of the manuscript.