Thiosulphate leaching of silver is a proposed alternative to cyanide or thiourea leaching for certain types of refractory silver ores and secondary sources. Traditional method for the recovery of rare metals from various sources by hydrometallurgy is leaching followed by cementation onto zinc powder and electrowinning. Silver cementation is an inexpensive and simple way to deposit thin metal films. Cementation of silver onto zinc powder treated by mechanical activation from thiosulphate solutions was studied by measuring of Ag+ ions concentration in this work. The high energy attrition and planetary ball milling in methanol was applied for the mechanical activation of zinc powder. The changes of the particle size distribution and surface area of cementator, occurring during mechanical treatment have been registered. The observed changes in the physico-chemical properties illustrate the possibility of the applied activation to modify the surface and/or volume properties of zinc powder and its further application in well-known hydrometallurgical process of cementation. The study was also focused on the changes in the concentration of zinc and pH as a function of reaction time as well as on the morphology of cementation products on zinc powder.Silver is a precious metal well known for its singular beauty as well as for its utilization in electronic technology, photography and medical purposes. The most popular electrolytes for rare metals plating are the cyanide-based rare metals plating baths. The current use of cyanidation techniques to leach rare metals from its various sources is undesirable from an environmental point of view. In recent years, cyanide leaching has been banned in many regions due to environmental concerns ( Thiosulphate leaching of rare metals is a proposed alternative to cyanide or thiourea leaching for certain types of refractory silver ores and secondary sources ( Silver cementation is an inexpensive and simple way to deposit thin films with a thickness usually not more than 0.1–0.3 µm. The advantages of this method are low concentration and good stability of solutions, simple composition, and the opportunity to deposit films with a uniform thickness on complex-shaped parts without a special installation. According to the electrochemical theory of cementation, the reaction: Several scientists have tried to verify metals cementation by various techniques, such as effect of surface-active substances on the process of cementation ( Mechanical activation belongs to innovative processes to improve technological methods by creating of new surfaces and structural defects of solid state, what plays an important role in the process of cementation ( It is the aim of this study to verify the possibilities of mechanical activation to influence the silver cementation from sodium thiosulphate solutions by mechanically activated zinc powder. A stock solution was prepared using 99.27 g of sodium thiosulphate (Na Mechanical activation of zinc powder was performed in a planetary ball mill, PULVERISETTE 6 (Fritsch, Germany) equipped with a tungsten carbide grinding chamber under the following conditions: volume of grinding chamber The cementation tests for silver from sodium thiosulphate solution were carried out in a reaction vessel maintained at constant temperature (25 °C) and equipped with a stirring motor. First, 450 ml of the pregnant solution was placed in the enclosed vessel maintaining the stirring speed constant (200 revolutions per minute) and a pre-determined amount of zinc powder (0.45 g) was added to the solution. During the runs, 5 cm The specific surface area ( Mechanical activation has induced significant changes of the surface as well as the bulk structure of zinc powder. The dependence of surface area and average particles size of mechanically activated zinc on the time of milling is depicted in The longer time of mechanical treatment leads to separation of zinc particles what is accompanied by the increase in the specific surface value The influence of mechanical activation of zinc powder on the cementation of silver from thiosulphate solution is depicted in Whereas the recovery of reaction is moreover 100% in all cases, the high recovery of silver in shorter period of cementation has been considerably influenced by mechanical activation in planetary mill. The value of specific surface area and particles size distribution indicates the behaviour of the process. The highest recovery of silver has been achieved by zinc powder mechanically treated for 1 h. In this case it is clear visible, that the cementation runs very fast at the beginning of the process and then slower cementation behaviour occurred. This can be explained by the small residue of silver Ag  This can be accounted by several reactions. One of them is partly reduction of water occurring during process of cementation: The rate of cementation was found to decrease with a decrease in pH. This is due to the increased competition between silver ions and hydrogen ions for discharge sites on the metal surface at higher concentrations of hydrogen ions. Owing to the following reaction between zinc and hydrogen ions: The Zn(OH)  For zinc hydroxide and zinc oxide films on the surface of zinc powder small metal-hydroxide and metal-oxide adsorption peaks exist as broad peaks at 540–555, 670, 890–900, 944–976 cm SEM was used to examine cementation reaction products obtained in the presence or absence of mechanical activation in planetary and attrition mill for 60 min. All experiments were proceeded after 15 min of cementation, when the recovery of reaction was up to 85% for untreated zinc powder and almost 100% for zinc powder activated in planetary and attrition mill respectively. The morphology of pure zinc powder is presented in The presence of the crystal form of cemented silver on the cementator surface has been also declared by XRD analysis. While the EDAX analysis and FTIR spectra measurements clearly demonstrated the presence of sulphur and sulphate species, the XRD analysis shows only the characteristic reflections for the presence of zinc powder, precipitated silver and zinc oxide, no sulphate or sulphur form has been detected. It can be explained by the presence of these species on the surface of cementator in the amorphous form. The results obtained from this investigation show the potential of cementation of silver by zinc powder as a method of silver recovery from thiosulphate solutions. The mechanical activation in planetary or attrition mill influences the mechanical properties of cementator. The favourable effect on the kinetics and recovery of silver cementation has been observed. SEM investigation confirms the changes induced by milling of zinc powder as well as soft changes in morphology of deposited layer of precipitated silver and the products of the side reactions after cementation. The formation of crystal silver as well as the products of side reactions during the cementation has been declared by FTIR, SEM-EDAX and XRD analysis. The support through the DAAD (Deutscher Akademischer Austausch Dienst), the Slovak Research and Development Agency APVV (project 0347 - 06), the Slovak Grant Agency VEGA (project 2/0035/08) and the Center of Excellence of Slovak Academy of Sciences (project NANOSMART) is gratefully acknowledgement. The authors also wish to acknowledge Birgit Gerke for the SEM-EDAX analysis.