Glenoid rim fractures are recognized as a risk factor for recurrent instability after anterior shoulder dislocation. In addition to traditional open treatments of bony Bankart lesions, several arthroscopic techniques of fixation and reconstruction recently have been described. We present a technique of arthroscopic nonrigid fixation for large glenoid rim fractures, as an alternative to existing procedures.Computed tomography scans can help to identify best trajectory for button fixation and ensure that the fracture is large enough to take the button Keep pump pressure low to prevent fluid extravasation Keep the posterior portal medial and superior against the acromion to optimize angle for fracture fixation—this keeps the drill guide parallel to the glenoid and perpendicular to the fracture Preplan where to put Bankart anchors. Place these before removing the cannulated drill to protect suture buttons Minimize debridement of the capsulolabral complex, as the injury with glenoid fracture/dislocation tends to occur through bone Reduce fracture fragment using hook guide and Bankart elevators before drilling tunnel Glenoid rim fractures can occur with anterior shoulder dislocations, contributing to recurrent instability. Recently, anatomic glenoid reconstruction with distal tibial allograft has been described using arthroscopic transglenoid suture fixation. The preoperative clinical assessment begins with a standard history surrounding the mechanism of injury, previous episodes of instability, and documentation of any previous surgical interventions. This is followed by a physical examination, including tests of instability (e.g. apprehension, relocation, load-and-shift, and sulcus tests). Rotator cuff integrity is examined, and the Beighton score is assessed. Routine imaging includes anteroposterior, axillary, and scapular Y-views of the affected shoulder, in addition to a computed tomography scan with 3-dimensional reconstruction to optimally define the glenoid fracture, residual glenoid bone stock, and any Hill–Sachs lesion. A 3-dimensional printed model can assist with preoperative planning ( The patient is positioned in the lateral decubitus position on a standard operating table using a beanbag positioner, allowing the torso to rotate 30° posteriorly so the glenoid is parallel to the floor. The skin is prepared with chlorhexidine solution. The affected arm is free draped and placed in a pneumatic limb positioner (Spider 2; Smith & Nephew, Memphis, TN). The arm is then abducted to 60° in balanced suspension. Skin landmarks are drawn on the patient, including the clavicle, acromioclavicular joint, acromion, and scapular spine. A posterior portal is established through a standard technique, after which diagnostic arthroscopy is performed. Anteroinferior and anterosuperior portals are created under direct visualization using an outside-in technique and maintained with arthroscopic cannulas ( Viewing from the anterosuperior portal, the glenoid fracture fragment is identified, probed, and debrided. A liberator knife is used to mobilize the fracture fragment. Subsequently, the bony surfaces within the fracture are prepared using a rasp, to expose bleeding cancellous bone. The fragment is then provisionally reduced to the anteroinferior glenoid. If satisfied with the bone quality and provisional reduction, the surgeon prepares for fracture fixation. A bullet drill guide (Glenoid Drill Guide; Smith & Nephew) is inserted through the posterior portal, and its main arm is used to hold the fragment anatomically reduced ( At this point, suture tails from a round ENDOBUTTON (Smith & Nephew) are placed through the monofilament and shuttled anterior-to-posterior through the transglenoid tunnel, exiting through the posterior portal ( After appropriate release of the torn capsulolabral complex, a standard Bankart repair is performed using a 1.8-mm suture anchor positioned just superior to the fracture fragment (Q-Fix; Smith & Nephew). At the conclusion of our procedure, we visually confirm concentric reduction of the humeral head within the glenoid fossa ( The shoulder is immobilized in a sling, and the patient is given detailed postoperative rehabilitation instructions ( This Technical Note adds to the existing literature through its detailed description of an arthroscopic transglenoid suture fixation technique for displaced glenoid rim fractures. Similar techniques have, to our knowledge, only been presented twice in the existing orthopaedic literature, and our report provides additional detail on preferred positioning, fragment preparation, maintenance of reduction, sequence of ENDOBUTTON fixation, and capsulolabral repair. Although we have had no complications from this procedure to date, its overall risk profile remains unknown. In addition to the general risks of shoulder arthroscopy, theoretical risks include nonunion, reoperation for hardware removal, and recurrent instability. Overall, we acknowledge that further research is required to fully understand the learning curve, best applications, and long-term outcomes of this technique. However, we have been pleased with our early results. In the rapidly evolving field of shoulder instability, we believe this procedure offers several advantages through its arthroscopic approach and anatomic repair, meriting consideration when treating large glenoid rim fractures. 