Complex three and four-part proximal humeral fractures in elderly patients are often not amenable to open reduction and internal fixation and have traditionally been treated with hemiarthroplasty. This treatment in the elderly population has yielded mixed clinical results with respect to functional outcomes. Reverse shoulder arthroplasty has emerged as a possible treatment option for comminuted proximal humeral fractures in this age group. The purpose of the study was to perform a prospective evaluation of patient outcomes comparing hemiarthroplasty versus reverse shoulder arthroplasty for the treatment of comminuted proximal humeral fractures in elderly patients. From September 2007 to March 2010 fifty-three consecutive elderly patients (average age 74.4) underwent an arthroplasty for a complex proximal humeral fracture. Indications for arthroplasty were four-part fractures, three-part fractures with severe greater tuberosity comminution, and fractures that involved an articular split of the humeral head. The initial twenty-six patients in the series underwent hemiarthroplasty (HA group), followed by the subsequent twenty-seven patients in the series undergoing reverse shoulder arthroplasty (RSA group). A total of forty-seven patients (23 in HA group, and 24 in RSA group) were available for follow up at a minimum of two years (avg. follow up 2.4 years). Patients were followed clinically (American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons [ASES] score, Simple Shoulder test [SST], patient reported satisfaction) and radiographically with standardized x-rays. Post-operative range of motion was assessed with digital video of a standardized active range of motion protocol and these videos were analyzed in a blinded fashion by three observers. Final average outcome scores were lower in the HA group (ASES 62, SST 5.8) compared to the RSA group (ASES 77, SST 7.4 [P=.0001, P=.0062]) and patient reported satisfaction was also lower in the HA group (61%) compared to the RSA group (91%). Radiographic healing of the tuberosities occurred in 61% of the HA group patients compared to 83% of the RSA group patients. Final average values in forward elevation (HA 100 In this series, reverse shoulder arthroplasty resulted in better clinical outcomes, higher tuberosity healing rates, better forward elevation, and a lower rate of revision surgery when compared to hemiarthroplasty for the treatment of comminuted proximal humeral fractures in the elderly.