The pore wettability of porous minerals plays an important role in their floatability. This paper proposed a method to reduce the pore wetting of porous active carbons using NaOL solutions with different concentrations. The in-situ pore wetting percentage of active carbon after NaOL treatments was measured by the LF-NMR and its influence on the floatability was revealed by particles-bubble attachment tests. The action mechanism of NaOL on active carbon surface was analyzed by the contact angle, zeta potential and FTIR tests. The pore wetting percentage of active carbon were gradually decreased with the increase of concentration of NaOL solutions. NaOL could interact with hydrophilic group of active carbon surfaces through electrostatic interaction, which improved its hydrophobicity and the droplet penetrating into the pores was prevented. NaOL could reduce the pore wetting of active carbon to enhance its floatability, which provides a potential guidance for improving porous mineral flotation.The wettability on the surface of minerals has an important influence on its floatability. An initial contact angle is formed at the solid-liquid interface when a droplet falls on the mineral surface [ The wetting process of pores in minerals can be understood as the gradual infiltration of liquids from irregular surface structures into internal pores. The wetting of the pores is often closely related to the contact time of the water phase, and it can be said that these minerals have dynamic wetting during the flotation process [ To effectively reduce the negative influences of pore wetting on floatability of mineral particles during the pre-wetting/pre-conditioning process, a novel flotation method called zero-conditioning flotation has been proposed in literatures [ This paper proposed a method to reduce pore wetting of porous minerals using NaOL. The wetting percentage of their pores was measured at different wetting times by LF-NMR device after the cylindrical active carbons were treated by NaOL solutions with different concentrations. The T The porous cylindrical active carbons were purchased from PURE AQUATIC (Guangzhou, China). The destiny of the cylindrical active carbons was about 0.9217 g/cm The A The measured setup of the contact angle and penetration time of samples was displayed in The cylindrical active carbons were milled by rod mill and were treated by the NaOL solutions with 0 and 10,000 mg/L concentrations for 10 min using the magnetic stirrer with a speed of 1000 r/min. Then, the treated samples were placed in a vacuum oven at 50 °C for 4 h. Finally, a suspensions containing 0.05–0.1 wt% active carbon powder particles at pH 3, 5, 7, and 9 were sonicated for 2 min. The upper portion of the suspension after settling for 24 h was taken for zeta potential tests by ZetaPlus PALS (Brookhaven, USA) [ The samples used in the zeta potential tests were also used to measure the FITR spectra. The samples were mixed with KBr and then pressed into a plate to perform the FTIR measurements. In this investigation, an FTIR spectrometer (Bruker, Germany) with a 4 cm The cylindrical active carbons were milled by rod mill and then screened to obtain the 0.25–0.125 mm particles. Then, 0.25–0.125 mm active carbon powder particles were treated by the NaOL solutions with 0 and 10,000 mg/L concentrations and the treated processes were the same as that of the section zeta potential tests. The setup of particles-bubble attachment tests is shown in the The cylindrical active carbons do not contain macropores, so the water wetting process of macropores is not be analyzed in this investigation. In order to more clearly compare the differences in wetting rate of micropores, transition pores, mesopores, and total pores samples after treatment with different concentrations of NaOL solutions, the parameter T The contact angle and penetration time of droplet on the outer and internal surfaces of the samples after treatment with different concentrations of NaOL solutions, as shown in As the concentration of NaOL solutions was increased from 0 to 10,000 mg/L, the contact angle of outer surface of the samples was increased from 64° to 125° while that of internal surface of the samples was increased from 64° to 95°. The outer and internal surface properties of the samples treated by NaOL solutions with the same concentration were very different. The contact angle of outer surface of the samples remained almost unchanged when the concentration of NaOL solutions was larger than 1000 mg/L. It indicates that the outer surface of the samples has been fully covered by the NaOL at the 1000 mg/L concentrations. The hydrophobicity of the samples can not be improved by continuing to increase the dosage of NaOL. But the contact angle of internal surface of the samples was not changed when the concentration of NaOL solutions was lower than 1000 mg/L. Subsequently, continuing to increase the concentration of NaOL solutions improved the contact angle of internal surface of the samples. It indicates that there is not enough NaOL dosage to penetrate into the internal surface of the sample and further improve its hydrophobicity when the concentration of NaOL solutions is low. As the concentration of NaOL solutions increased, the NaOL can penetrate into the internal surface of the sample to improve its hydrophobicity. In addition, the penetration time of water droplet on the outer surface of the sample at same concentration of NaOL solutions was larger than that on the internal surface of the sample. Especially when the concentration of NaOL solutions exceeded 1000 mg/L, the differences in their penetration time were very large, which was mainly related to hydrophobilicity of outer and internal surfaces of the samples. Interestingly, the variation of penetrate time of water droplet on the outer and internal surfaces of the sample were also similarly with that of T In order to investigate the mechanism of NaOL affecting the pore wetting process of active carbon, the zeta potential of the samples after treatment with 0 and 10,000 mg/L concentrations of NaOL solutions was analyzed, as shown in The zeta potential results only shows that NaOL can be adsorbed onto the active carbon through electrostatic interaction, but it cannot fully explain whether there are still chemical changes during this adsorption process. Thus, the FTIR spectrums of the samples after 0 and 10,000 mg/L NaOL solutions treatment were analyzed, as shown in   As the concentration of the NaOL solutions increased, the wetting percentages of micropores, transition pores and mesopores in the sample all decreased and their T The NaOL, as an anionic reagent absorbed to the surface of active carbon through electrostatic interaction, which allowed the hydrophilic group of NaOL to interact with the sample and exposed its hydrophobic group to the outside. Thus, the hydrophobicity of outer and internal surface of the sample treated by NaOL solutions was improved and the quick penetration process of water droplet into the pores of the sample was prevented. However, the contact angle and penetration time of outer surface of the sample after the NaOL solutions treatment of the same concentration were much larger than that of the internal surface, which was mainly related to modified degree of outer and internal surfaces by NaOL. The PCI values of the particles treated by 0 and 10,000 mg/L NaOL solutions gradually decreased with the increase of wetting percentage of total pores. However, the PCI value of the particles treated by 10,000 mg/L NaOL solution at any wetting time was larger than that of the particles treated by 0 mg/L NaOL solution. The surface hydrophobicity of the particles after the NaOL treatment was improved to decrease the wetting percentage of total pores, which was beneficial to reduce the thickness of the hydration film of the particle surface. Thus, NaOL could improve the surface floatability of the particles by reducing the pore wetting percentage. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.