Inhibitive performance of some synthesized thiophenol derivatives on corrosion behavior of mild steel in 0.1M HCl solution was investigated by means of electrochemical techniques, quantum chemical and optical microscopy. The increase in concentration and immersion time shows a positive effect on inhibition efficiency while temperature has a negative effect. Inhibitor molecules directly adsorb at surface on the basis of donor–acceptor interactions between the π-electrons of benzene, sulfur and nitrogen atoms and the vacant d-orbitals of iron atoms. According to the thermodynamic parameters, present inhibitors adsorb physically. Optical microscopy examinations demonstrate a decrease in corrosion attacks in presence of inhibitors.Inhibitor is a keyword in the case of corrosion prevention by changing the chemistry of corrosive media. Many industrial divisions such as acid cleaning bath, water cooling system, various refinery units, pipelines, chemical operations, steam generators, ballast tanks, oil and gas production units are involved with inhibitors due to high corrosion rates in these parts. Regarding their vast applications, one could obviously obtain special importance of inhibitors in various industries. Hence, many researchers are trying to introduce new organic compounds which are more efficient, cost effective with easy access It is believed that inhibitors efficiency basically refers to their molecular structure In addition to traditional techniques such as electrochemical and gravimetric measurements, recently, quantum chemical method has been employed in inhibitors study. Invaluable quantum chemical parameters such as higher occupied molecular orbital (HOMO), lower unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and dipole momentum ( The choice of inhibitors ( All the experiments were performed on mild steel with the chemical composition (in wt.%) presented as follows: 0.16% C, 0.1% Si, 0.4% Mn, 0.02% S, 0.13% P and Fe balance. The working electrode, with 2.5 Inhibitors 2-aminophenyl disulfide (2-APD) and 4-aminophenyl disulfide (4-APD) were synthesized according to the previously reported procedure Melting point 88–91 Melting point 76–79 The electrochemical tests have been performed using Gill AC laboratory potentiostat (ACM instrument). Electrochemical measurements have been carried out in a conventional three-electrode cell configuration in which mild steel was used as working electrode, saturated calomel electrode (SCE) and a platinum wire as reference and auxiliary electrodes, respectively. Before each test, the working electrode was immersed for 45 In order to investigate the effect of inhibitors on corrosion morphology, optical microscope has been employed. The specimen surface was mechanically polished down to 0.05 The molecular structures of the 2-ATP, 4-ATP, 2-APD and 4-APD have been geometrically optimized by DFT method using B3LYP level and 3–21G  It should be noticed that in some curves, anodic branch does not show a complete linear Tafel behavior, especially anodic branch of the curves obtained from bulk solution. But, almost all the cathodic branches show linear behavior at potentials lower than 100 In this method, if both anodic and cathodic Tafel lines show linear behavior, by extrapolating of lines to corrosion potential and calculating their slope, cathodic and anodic Tafel slopes can be calculated and also corrosion current density is measured from the cross-point of the two lines. In addition, it is possible to calculate the corrosion potential, corrosion current density and anodic and cathodic Tafel slopes if there is at least one branch under activation control. For this purpose, the branch that shows linear behavior is considered. In this study, cathodic branch shows linear behavior at potentials lower than 100 Afterward, by linear extrapolating the calculated anodic data to more negative potentials with respect to corrosion potential, the anodic Tafel slope can be calculated. In addition, the current density and potential at the intercept of two extrapolated lines shows corrosion current density and corrosion potential, respectively. Assessment of Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) has been employed in order to investigate the surface layer created by inhibitors. The effect of inhibitor concentration on the impedance behavior of mild steel in 0.1 The extracted impedance parameters analyzed by EIS analyzer software from EIS plots, are listed in In above expressions, Considering the EIS results and comparing them with the polarization results at various concentrations of inhibitors, it is clear that 2-ATP and 4-ATP efficiencies are nearly independent of concentration. LPR method is another useful and fast method for inhibitors study. The effect of inhibitors concentration on LPR value at 25 The influence of various temperatures on the specimen corrosion rate has been studied in absence and presence of different inhibitors at 200 By calculating the slope of ln( Basic thermodynamic information on interaction between inhibitor molecules and metal surface can be provided by adsorption isotherm Gibbs–Helmholtz equation can be used to calculate the heat of adsorption process ( In which, The entropy of adsorption process ( Invaluable information about the mechanism of corrosion inhibition can be provided by the calculated values of thermodynamic parameters for the adsorption of inhibitors; see The positive signs of Corrosion attack morphologies in absence and presence of different inhibitors have been investigated by employing optical microscopy and presented in To investigate the effect of immersion time on inhibitor behavior, potentiodynamic polarization tests have been carried out in absence and presence of 200 Nyquist plots and their fitted curves after 24 Quantum chemical study has been carried out for investigating the relationship between the molecular structure of present inhibitors and their inhibition effect. Geometric structures and electronic properties of 2-ATP, 4-ATP, 2-APD and 4-APD have been calculated by DFT method using B3LYP level and 3–21G Quantum chemical indices containing In this study, inhibitive performance of some thiophenol derivatives on corrosion behavior of mild steel in 0.1 All compounds have good inhibitive effect with noticeable efficiencies and could be listed in order of 2-APD Investigating effect of inhibitors concentration on their efficiency shows that 2-ATP and 4-ATP have corrosion current densities nearly independent of their concentrations while in the case of 2-APD and 4-APD, it increases with increasing their concentration especially in net anodic current densities. Evaluating temperature effect on efficiency of investigated compounds at 200 Exploring the effect of time on inhibitors behavior by EIS technique reveals the decrease in corrosion rate and declares a new concept in study of inhibitors with appearance of Gerischer element in equivalent circuit. Adsorption of present inhibitors obeys Langmuir rule and thermodynamic data extracted by this rule is showing physical adsorption. Optical microscopy obviously shows the corrosion attack morphology in absence and presence of inhibitors in 0.1 Quantum chemical study reveals that the benzene ring, S and N atoms can be suitable sites for adsorption onto surface. This is pronounced for S and N because of having lone pair of electrons. The authors appreciate the financial support from Ferdowsi University of Mashhad provision of laboratory facilities during the period that this research was conducted and Dr. H.A. Moradi and Dr. G.h. Farhadipour for their invaluable helps.