Microwave heating has been widely used because of its advantages of higher heating rate, energy efficiency and clean utilization. This paper describes the study carried out on the characteristics of microwave melting of metallic copper powders, and a quantitative description of the heating curve of the copper powders in microwave field is given. The changes in microscopic structure and densification during the process of heating to melting of copper powder with microwave is assessed. The result demonstrated that copper powders could be quickly heated to melting. Heating rate for powdered copper of particle size 25 μm is 25.6 °C/min. Microwave heating efficiency and the heating rate were found to be higher with the decrease in the particle size and increase in microwave power. And also the heating rate had a linear relationship with the reciprocal of the particle size. Microstructure and density indicates that the densification process accelerates when the temperature is above 900 °C, and all the copper particles are heated to melting and shrinkage. At lower temperature the migration of the matter for copper particles is mainly internal diffusion. While the temperature above 1083 °C, among copper particles will be form metallurgical bonding, and the melting process complete quickly.Microwave is a part of electromagnetic wave with a frequency range from 300 MHz to 300 GHz, and the corresponding wavelength varies from 1 mm to 1 m. At present, microwave has been widely used in different fields Microwave heating has more advantages than traditional sintering in the preparation of materials where high uniformity in phase structure, higher density and microstructure with better properties can be obtained In our previous work, an investigation on the preparation of copper-tungsten alloy using microwave vacuum infiltration sintering was done, and the results were encouraging Commercial copper powders (purity higher than 99.7%) of different particle sizes were purchased from Shanghai Longxin Chemical Industry Co. Ltd., China, and used in the experiments. The copper particle size was measured by laser particle size analyzer (Mastersizer 2000), and the particle sizes used in this study were around 25 μm, 38 μm and 74 μm. The copper powder melting experiments were conducted by using a 3 kW microwave high temperature furnace, with the frequency of 2.45 GHz. The microstructure of sintered copper powder samples was observed after surface polishing by metallographic microscopy (Axio Vert.A1, provided by Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH, GERMANY), and the neck growth of copper powder sintering was observed by scanning electron microscopy (JSM-5610LV, JEOL, Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). The density of sintered samples was measured using Archimedes principle. Prior to carrying out the experiments, a known amount of copper powders were weighted. Copper powder was transferred to a 100 ml alumina crucible and was placed in the microwave high temperature furnace. The polycrystalline mullite fiber was used as insulation material because of its high thermal insulation and microwave penetration performance. Argon which acts as protective gas was filled into the furnace cavity after vacuum processing. Then a power of 1.3 kW–1.8 kW of microwave was applied for the heating of powdered copper. In the present experiments, heating and melting of copper powder by microwave was done without using any microwave absorbing matters as auxiliary. In order to ensure the accuracy of measurement, an infrared detector was used for measuring temperature. The samples of copper powder were collected after sintering at different temperatures of 900 °C,1060 °C, 1083 °C and 1090 °C. The change in the microstructure and density of powdered copper during heating under microwave irradiation was analyzed. A schematic illustration of microwave assisted melting of copper powder is shown in In order to assess the melting characteristics of powdered copper in microwave field, the temperature rise curve of copper powder with the particle size of 74 μm was measured. From In addition, the effect of microwave power on the melting characteristics has been investigated. The temperature rise of powdered copper of particle size 74 μm under 1.3 kW and 1.8 kW microwave radiation power was measured and the corresponding curve was analyzed ( It is well known that bulk metal cannot be directly heated by microwave because of reflect the incident waves. However, metallic powders with sufficiently smaller size can be heated effectively by microwave irradiation The present work additionally attempted to investigate the effect of particle size on the microwave heating characteristics of copper powder.  In the present work, the changes of microscopic structure and densification in the process of microwave heating copper powder to melting has been analyzed. For the quantitative characterization of microwave sintered copper powder, the density of samples at various temperatures was measured. The loosely packed density of copper powder was 2.13 g/cm The micro structural change of copper powder sintered at different temperature (900 °C, 1060 °C, 1083°Cand 1090 °C) by microwave heating is shown in Marinel et al. The neck growth kinetics during microwave sintering of copper was also studied. Two-sphere model which consists of two equalized spheres in contact can be used to analyze the neck growth kinetics during microwave melting. The model proposes initial stage of sintering represented by the equation expressed as follow Thus the plot of ln( Demirskyi et al. In the present work, the characteristics of microwave heating metallic copper powders, changes of microstructure and density during melting, and kinetics of microwave sintering of copper powders were investigated. Some of results can be concluded as follows: Microwave heating can be used for melting metallic copper powder without using any auxiliary microwave absorbing materials, and the molten copper can be heated to more than 1200 °C. With the increase of microwave power level, the heating rate increases. Reduction in particle size also facilitates the microwave heating efficiency and heating rate, and heating rate have a linear relationship with the reciprocal of the particle size. The microstructure and density measurement shows that till the temperature of 900 °C, the variation in the sample densification is small and gradual. While at higher temperatures the densification process accelerated. The migration of the matter is mainly based on the internal diffusion of the particles when the temperature is below 1060 °C. While the temperature above 1083 °C, metallurgical bonding is formed among copper particles, and quickly complete the melting process. This work was financially supported by the