The paper presents an extension to the spheropolyhedra method for the simulation of granular materials comprising particles of general shapes with bonding. A bonding, cement, or cohesion model for particles sharing common faces is introduced. The bonding force is elastic and has a strain-based breaking threshold for modelling fracture. An initial study is conducted based on the Brazilian tensile test to check how the parameters of the proposed model affect the principal variables measured in this test. Afterwards, solid cubic blocks are then subjected to a triaxial test to explore the mathematical macroscopic failure model. It is found that the peak strength envelope is the product of the superposition of frictional and fracture failure mechanisms. The fracture failure is mainly produced by an avalanche of broken cohesive bonds. The intensity of the avalanche exhibits a power law distribution, as reported in previous studies. The method allows for random divisions of solid bodies without any pre-existing internal voids. It offers a natural, effective tool to model, simulate and study fragmentation processes in 3D.Fragmentation processes have important applications in many fields, including civil and mining engineering, and powder technology. There are innumerable unresolved problems related to fragmentation phenomenon; for example, how to reduce the energy required to obtain a desired rock fragment size or how to minimise the amount of powder resulting by blasting. One simple approach applied to the study of fragmentation processes is to consider clusters of particles joined by bonding or cohesive forces. These cohesive forces may have many different physical origins, but their effect is the same: opposing the relative displacement between particles, up to a certain threshold value. Examples of these kinds of cohesive forces are mineral cementation, capillarity forces present in unsaturated soils, and van der Waals forces for fine particles like clays. Models developed to describe fragmentation tend to be very specific to the problems under investigation. Fractures and comminution have been studied by means of statistical models Discrete element-based models have some advantages over continuum-based models, mainly because the fracture propagation is discrete in nature. In some FEM schemes, the initial point of the fracture must be artificially introduced, and subsequently the propagation is simulated. In contrast, the initiation crack point in DEM simulations is defined by the broken bonds between the discrete particles, without any external intervention. Moreover, the DEM simulation allows the relationship between the local force thresholds and the macroscopic strength parameters of the sample to be explored. Most DEM codes are built in 2D, with polygons representing the grains. In codes with discs or spheres, bonding is modelled as a set of In an earlier study This paper is organised as follows: in Section The spheropolyhedra method was initially introduced by Pournin The best advantage of the spheropolyhedra technique is that it allows for an easy and efficient definition of contact laws between the particles. This is due to the smoothing of the edges of all geometric features by circles (in 2D) or spheres (in 3D). Regarding the contact between two generic particles For simplicity, lets denominate the set of all the geometric features of a particle as Since both particles are dilated by their sphero-radii Here, the advantage of the spheropolyhedra technique becomes evident since this definition is similar to the one for the contact law of two spheres Now, suppose that the minimum distance for the sets The previous normal force is defined for a pair of geometric features. The net elastic force is the addition of all these forces for each possible pair of geometric features. However, for general polyhedra, it is only necessary to consider the interactions between vertices and faces and the interaction between edges and edges. The net elastic force is expressed as, In the spheropolyhedra formalism, a sphere is just a set containing one vertex positioned at the center of the sphere. The sphero-radius is equal to the radius of the sphere and the interaction considers only the vertex–vertex interaction, Likewise, frictional forces are simply introduced by means of the Cundall–Strack spring method Here, Another (viscous) force is introduced here to account for the proper stability of the simulation. This is defined according to Finally, all these forces are added to obtain the net force over a particle. Afterwards, Newtonʼs second law is solved for which here the Verlet algorithm is employed Recently, the Voronoi construction in 3D was also included into the model in To model bonding, an elastic force is assumed to act between two adjacent spheropolyhedra sharing a common face. The most common force used is the Eulerʼs beam Both strains are computed at a common point, which is set at the equilibrium position at the beginning of the simulation. This point is chosen to be the face centroid. Since faces are polygons, each face can be considered to be a plane and the common centroid coordinates on these planes are retained in memory. By the movement and rotation of the faces, the centroid position is different when computed on one face or on the other, and by this relative displacement the strains are obtained. With spherical elements To model fracture, these forces must have a validity range, a threshold value after which they cease to exist. In the present case, all strains are added into one single quantity to be compared with the fixed threshold value One common test used to measure the tensile strength of brittle materials is the Brazilian tensile test The sample is built from an original 2D triangular mesh of a circle. The circle is then extruded in the direction perpendicular to its plane in order to produce a cylinder divided into prism elements. After the compression, shown in The simulated force exerted on the loading plates is shown in Tensile strength is an intensive quantity and therefore it should only depend on the bonding, elastic and threshold parameters. Our construction (a 2D mesh extruded into 3D) guaranties that Another important quantity is the primary slope of the force evolution ( It is useful at this point to invoke Buckingham The True Triaxial Test (TTT) is useful to determine the macroscopic failure model of bonded, cohesive, or cohesionless granular materials In Some important quantities commonly used to analyse the results of true triaxial tests are defined as follows: the mean ( The TTT offers another possibility to measure the elastic properties of the simulated material before doing fracture simulations. With a simple compression test, the Poisson ratio With the same test, the compressive modulus, On the other hand, In a similar way as we did for the Brazilian test, it can be said that As a final step to validate the method to measure the elastic properties, a cantilever beam was simulated as shown in By keeping The stress path applied in the following TTT simulations in order to “break” the sample is the Achieving a Simulations with different initial pressures are carried out. The results are shown in It is well known that, for a purely frictional cohesionless material, the mathematical representation (failure model) that best fits the observed data will be a straight line in the The predicted macroscopic volumetric behaviour resembles the one a brittle material would exhibit. As seen in Applying the In The results also show a peak strength even for the case of zero confining pressure. In this case, the walls are barely touching the sample, but still some work needs to be done in order to break the bonds. This work comes from the shearing processes producing a non-zero peak strength even for the unconfined test. This, as well as the curve shape of the peak strength envelope, is a common feature, usually observed in rocks The empirical failure criterion model of Hoek–Brown  As outlined in the literature In It has been reported that the distribution of burst produced over a given time span follows a power law To have a random distribution of broken bonds, a random distribution of breaking thresholds is also needed. Eq. In this paper, a method to model bonded (or cohesive) granular materials formed by discrete particles of arbitrary shapes has been proposed. The model is the combination of the spheropolyhedra approach to model collision of polyhedral particles with a set of cohesive elements joining particles sharing a common face. In the presented simulations close packings of particles are generated by random meshes such as the Voronoi tessellation. Simulations with the Brazilian tensile test demonstrate the capabilities of the presented model, which reproduces some typical features observed in this test. In particular, the vertically-orientated crack and the sudden drop in the contact force that indicates the onset of the global failure of the disc are observed. The primary slope and tensile strength can be controlled by the parameters of our model. The tensile strength depends mainly on the fixed strain threshold for breakage as well as the microscopic cohesive constants, while the elastic behaviour given by the primary slope is affected mainly by the contact spring law for collision. Cubic blocks made of Voronoi particles were simulated in a virtual true triaxial test TTT. With it more elastic properties were observed. We concluded that the compressive modulus depends on the collision law while the tensile modulus depends on the cohesive force. In contrast, Poissonʼs ratio is a complex function of both elastic and cohesive parameters. After the elastic properties were measured, a cantilever simulation was done to validate our model with the well-known Eulerʼs beam theory of elasticity given a fair agreement between the proposed model and the classical theory. Triaxial test simulations were also carried out to observe the macroscopic mathematical failure envelope. For low pressures, a peak Hoek–Brown strength envelope is observed. As the pressure increases, this envelope becomes the frictional failure envelope. It has also been found that the peak strength is made up by superimposed contributions of both frictional and bonding failure phenomena. On the other hand, the residual state is mostly produced purely by the friction effects. This additive nature of peak strength has been reported elsewhere in 2D simulations with disks only Finally, a relationship between the sudden increment in the number of broken bonds with the initiation of failure has been found. This avalanche effect is usually modelled by a power law distribution, which is supported by the present results. For instance, after sampling all of the realisations considered, a power law exponent of In conclusion, the model allows simulations of solid bodies with no internal voids, in contrast to previous studies in which bodies are made of clumps of spheres. The model includes parameters representing the elastic response of the material, as well as breaking thresholds to control its strength. In the series of test presented in this paper, the model has been shown to reproduce many well-known features of failure and damage processes such as the power law distribution of broken elements. The presented examples demonstrate how the model can be used to study complex fragmentation processes in 3D that, so far, have been simulated with spherical clusters only. We thank F. Alonso-Marroquin for useful discussions. The software used for all the simulations presented in this paper is based on the open source library MechSys (URL: