Bacterial infection are serious complications for biomedical implants in the orthopedic and dental fields, and the ideal implants should combine good antibacterial ability and bioactivity. In this paper, we have fabricated the strontium/copper substituted hydroxyapatite (SrCuHA) coating on the commercially pure titanium (CP-Ti) and studied their effect on antibacterial and in vitro cytocompatible properties. Cu was incorporated into HA in order to improve its antimicrobial properties. Sr was added as a second binary element to improve the biocompatibility. The structural and morphological characteristics of the SrCuHA coatings were investigated using various analytical techniques. The presence of Sr2+ and Cu2+ in solution led to reduced roughness of the coating and finer nucleus size formed. The results highlight that Sr2+ and Cu2+ were homogenously incorporated into HA lattice to form SrCuHA coatings. Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) was used for the leach out analysis of the samples. A low contact angle value revealed the hydrophilic nature. In vitro electrochemical corrosion studies indicated that the SrCuHA coating sustain in the stimulated body-fluid (SBF), exhibiting superior corrosion resistance with a lower corrosion penetration rate than the bare CP-Ti substrate. The SrCuHA coatings can kill Escherichia coli to a certain extent during the first few days, which might be due to the Cu substitution in the coating. An enhancement of in vitro osteoblast adhesion, proliferation, and alkaline phosphatase activity was observed, which could lead to the optimistic orthopedic and dental applications.Although titanium (Ti) and its alloys are universally used as bone-replacement for dental and orthopedic applications they demonstrate merely limited caustic stability and osseointegration under different circumstances, and implant-related infection and loosing pose the main postoperative complications However, the application of pure HA presents several disadvantages, including lack of antibacterial activity that affects its long term stability and engenders implant failures One of the secondary chemicals appropriate for Cu-substituted HA in bone-related implants is strontium (Sr). Sr (ionic radius 0.12 Several methods are in practice for the development of HA coatings onto the implant surfaces As there are no previous reports available on (Sr, Cu) co-doped HA coating on alkali-treated Ti using electrodeposition method, an attempt is made in the current work to get enhanced corrosion protection and the mechanical and biological properties of the composite coating. Commercially pure titanium (CP-Ti, purity >99.98%) was selected as the substrate material in this paper as it is usually used in femoral implants as the receiving substrate for HA coatings. Square sheet, 10 All analytical grade chemicals were purchased from Aladdin (Shanghai, China). Ca(NO The morphological features of thin films were visualized using a JEOL JSM-7500F field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Japan) coupled with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS, GENESIS 2000 XMS, Japan). The samples were sputter coated with gold before examination. The crystalline phase structure of the samples were characterized X-ray diffraction (XRD, DX-1000, Dandong, China). Ni-filtered Cu Ka radiation was used (35 The HA coating on CP-Ti, the HA coating on alkali-treated CP-Ti and the SrCuHA coating on alkali-treated CP-Ti, were evaluated for its adhesion strength by pull-out tests using an Electronic Universl Test Machine (AG-10TA, Shimadzu) according to ASTM F 1044-05 standard To detect Sr and Cu release, SrCuHA coatings were statically soaked in a 24-well plate in 2 Water contact angle of the specimens were conducted at room temperature using a contact angle meter. The measurements were made through sessile drop method (about 2 Potentiodynamic polarization of SrCuHA coatings on OH-Ti samples were carried out in Kokubo’s solution   MC3T3 osteoblast cells (provided by Professor Xiaoyu Li of West China School of Medicine) were cultured in eagles minimum essential medium (α-MEM, Invitrogen), supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS, Invitrogen), 10 The cell proliferation of MC3T3-E1 cells on SrCuHA was studied using MTT assay (on day 1, 3, and 5) and cellular adhesion assay (on day 1), according to previously described procedures Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity is an early marker of MC3T3-E1 differentiation. To determine the activity of ALP, the primary MC3T3-E1 were seeded on the SrCuHA composite coatings and the pure CP-Ti in 24-well plates at a density of 2×10 All the experiments were performed for the as-developed coating in triplicate and repeated five times (mean ± standard deviation) (SD). Statistical analysis was performed using analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey's multiple comparison tests. The difference observed between samples was considered to be significant at p<0.05. The XRD patterns of SrCuHA coatings show similar diffraction peaks representing the HA formation which indicates that the coated samples exhibit a similar crystallographic nature ( Substitution of both the two ions (Sr, Cu) in HA structure haven’t caused any significant change in the diffraction pattern except a little decrease in the intensity in the XRD pattern. The decrease in the peak intensity and broadening may be due to the substitution of ions into the HA, which is further supported by the existence of ions in the SrCuHA structures. Hence, the low crystallinity and the peak broadening in the SrCuHA compared with pristine HA are attributed due to the ion substitution effect into the HA structure The FTIR absorption spectra of (a) HA and (b) SrCuHA powders are reported in  As shown in The EDAX spectrum in The Adhesion strength of the coating on CP-Ti specimen is of utmost importance for an implant to function properly in physiological conditions. In this work, the adhesion strength of the HA and SrCuHA coatings on CP-Ti substrate was evaluated. The dissolution of mineral ions in SrCuHA coated CP-Ti was evaluated from the ICP-MS analysis by soaking the composite coated CP-Ti in PBS solution and the results are shown in Wettability is a fundamental and significant performance of implant surfaces, which influence the cell-biomaterial interactions, and studies have indicated that hydrophilic surfaces induce better mineral deposition and osteoblastic cell growth compared with hydrophobic surfaces The surface wettability is resolved by the comprehensive effects of the surface chemistry and geometry of surface microstructure. The quantity of dissolved oxygen in water and the existence of metallic impurity on the passivated surface can lead to the growth of oxide layer with time on the surface by desorbing the H-atom Corrosion is one of the foremost problems of CP-Ti to use it as medical implant material and therefore the corrosion resistance researches of this material gain significance. The maximum shift of Since the antibiotics may not be effective for the infection on the surface of the CP-Ti coated with HA, the antibacterial agent like Cu is doped in HA coating. The results of the quantitative antibacterial tests were showed in Regarding the antibacterial activity, although some reduction in the colony count is observed, the material could hardly be defined an antibacterial. Generally a material is defined antibacterial if the inactivation rate is at least 99%; this does not happen in this case, as the rate is just below 91%. So the material could have good surface wettability and corrosion resistance compared to unmodified HA but the antibacterial behavior is not ideal. Obviously, further work is going on to appropriately improve doping amount of Cu and we are trying to produce enhanced antimicrobial activity. Several recent studies research antimicrobial activity and cytocompatibility of Cu-doped hydroxyapatite In this study, the biological properties of the SrCuHA coating on CP-Ti specimens were analyzed by measuring their ability by soaking them in SBF solution for 7 days as illustrated in It was reported that the crucial event for bone bonding is the cell attachment onto the ceramics surface followed by the osteoblastic differentiation The Since an early marker for osteogenic differentiation, ALP regulates the organic or inorganic phosphate metabolism via hydrolyzation of phosphate esters, and acts as a plasma membrane transporter for inorganic phosphates Taken together, it may, therefore, be concluded that the obtained SrCuHA coating doped with the lower content of Sr The target coating surface does not release any toxic ions that could injure the cells involved in osteogenesis. Gbureck et al. Recent investigations have shown that Sr may improve the solubility of HA and further promote apatite formation. Apatite crystals can simulate the native extracellular matrix (ECM) of bone, thereby promoting osteogenesis Furthermore, the wettability of bio-coatings has a big effect on cell attachment, spreading and cytoskeleton organization. It is reported that improved surface wettability or hydrophilicity has been related to increased protein adsorption Obviously, further investigations at cellular and subcellular level concentrating on underlying mechanism are needed. Additionally, comparisons of SrCuHA coatings with current known and successful biomaterials must be performed to conclude the advantages. Besides, An implant with a multifunctional surface, which combines the long term anticorrosion potential, antibacterial properties, biocompatibility and bioactivity, is one of the most ideal biomaterial for hard tissue replacement. The present work demonstrated the development of SrCuHA coating on CP-Ti, which can meet out the requirement for the multifunctional performances. The FT-IR, XRD, SEM, EDX, and ICP results confirmed the formation of SrCuHA coatings on CP-Ti. Obtained coatings were totally crack-free and compact, which led to decrease in corrosion current densities of CP-Ti in physiological solutions. The antimicrobial ratio of the SrCuHA coating was just below 91%, so the antibacterial behavior is not ideal. Additionally, the This work was supported by the second batch support program of youth notch talent of Hebei Province, China, the