In Part 1 of this paper, two synergistic solvent extraction systems consisting of Versatic 10/LIX63/TBP and Versatic 10/4PC were assessed in batch tests for the separation and purification of nickel and cobalt from synthetic laterite leach solution after iron removal. In Part 2, semi- and fully-continuous tests are reported for the Versatic 10/LIX63/TBP system, with conditions optimised for separating nickel and cobalt from manganese, magnesium and calcium.
                  Semi-continuous extraction tests were conducted using the synergistic organic system consisting of 0.50M Versatic 10, 0.45M LIX63 and 1.0M TBP in Shellsol D70. With a pH profile of 5.5/6.1/6.5 for the three stages EX1/EX2/EX3 at 40°C, the nickel and cobalt extractions were 99.9% with only 5mg/L nickel and <1mg/L cobalt left in the raffinate. With two stages of scrubbing and a pH profile of 5.4/5.0 at 40°C, about 2mg/L manganese and less than 1mg/L magnesium and calcium were left in the scrubbed organic solution. With two stripping stages and an O/A ratio of 10 at 40°C using 50g/L H2SO4 as strip solution, the stripping efficiencies of nickel and cobalt were over 95%.
                  A fully-continuous pilot plant was operated for 280h. With an O/A ratio of about 2 and a pH profile of 5.5/5.8/6.0/6.3 for the four stages EX1/EX2/EX3/EX4 at 40°C, both nickel and cobalt were almost completely extracted. The nickel and cobalt concentration in the raffinate was lower than detection limit of 0.2mg/L. The manganese, magnesium and calcium concentrations in the loaded organic solution were 34, 8 and 1mg/L, respectively. Using a pH profile of 5.4/5.0 for SC1/SC2 at an O/A ratio of 10 and 40°C, the manganese scrubbing efficiency was over 96% and the concentrations of manganese and magnesium in the scrubbed organic solution were <5mg/L and that of calcium 1mg/L. Using three strip stages and a strip solution containing 50g/L H2SO4 and 55g/L Ni at an O/A ratio of 10 and 40°C, over 98% Ni and 99% Co were stripped with only 64mg/L Ni in the stripped organic solution. The nickel concentration in the loaded strip liquor was 86g/L, giving a ΔNi of 31g/L. The loaded strip liquor contained less than 1g/L acid.Existing nickel laterite processes can be divided into three generic categories depending on the downstream processing route: mixed sulphide precipitation (MSP) ( The Bulong process was the first commercialised DSX process. It used Cyanex 272 in the first solvent extraction (SX) circuit to separate cobalt, zinc, copper and manganese from nickel, magnesium and calcium, and Versatic 10 in the second SX circuit to separate nickel from magnesium and calcium. The Bulong process worked, albeit with some problems ( A synergistic solvent extraction (SSX) system was developed using Versatic 10 acid (2-methyl-2-ethylheptanoic acid), LIX63 (5,8-diethyl-7-hydroxy-6-dodecanone oxime) and TBP (tri-butyl phosphate) for the effective and efficient separation and purification of nickel and cobalt from the main impurities, manganese, magnesium, calcium and chloride ( In Part 1 of this paper, two SSX systems were tested and compared in terms of metal extraction, scrubbing and stripping for the separation of nickel and cobalt from manganese, magnesium and calcium. The two SSX systems tested were Versatic 10/LIX63/TBP and Versatic 10/4PC (n-decyl 4-pyridinecarboxylate ester). The Versatic 10/LIX63/TBP system outperformed the V10/4PC system in terms of metal extraction, scrubbing and stripping and was selected for further tests. In Part 2 of this paper, the test results from semi-continuous and fully-continuous tests using the Versatic 10/LIX63/TBP SSX system and a synthetic laterite leach solution are presented. A synthetic laterite leach solution, with composition specified by Rio Tinto was prepared by dissolving AR or technical grade sulphates of nickel, cobalt, copper, zinc, manganese, magnesium, iron(III), iron(II), aluminium and chromium(III), chlorides of sodium and calcium, and sodium silicate in tap water. The solution was then subjected to an iron precipitation step with lime at pH 5.0 and 60 In the previous batch tests, an optimum composition of the organic solution containing 0.5 An SX mini rig (0.2 The SX pilot plant consisted of up to nine water-jacketed mixer settlers (with individual effective volumes of 0.5 In order to determine if gypsum formation could potentially occur in the DSX process, two tanks were used to pre-saturate the aqueous feed solution with calcium chloride. In the first tank the feed solution was mixed with small amount of CaCl The two phases of the solution mixture samples taken were separated through a Whatman 1PS filter paper. The aqueous phase of each sample was then filtered through a 0.45 The primary objective of the semi-continuous extraction tests was to maximise nickel and cobalt extraction in the organic solution or to minimise nickel and cobalt loss in the raffinate. At the same time, the co-extraction of manganese, magnesium and calcium was minimised for ease of scrubbing. A typical metal concentration distribution in the organic solution in the three extraction stages is shown in It is clear that the nickel concentrations in the raffinates were lower with higher pH in EX3, while the manganese concentrations in the loaded organic solution were lower with lower pH in EX1 ( In this set of tests, the aqueous and organic (A/O) flowrate ratios of 1:1.8, 1:2.0 and 1:2.2 were tested using a pH profile of 5.6/6.0/6.4 (EX1/EX2/EX3) to investigate the effect of A/O flowrate ratios on the metal extraction behaviour. The nickel extractions for the different A/O ratios tested were more than 99% and the nickel concentrations in the raffinate were in the range of 1-3 The manganese concentration in the loaded organic solutions was lowest with an A/O ratio of 1:1.8 (88 Three and four extraction stages with slightly different pH profiles were tested ( The metal concentrations and recoveries for the four tests with different extraction stages and different pH profiles are also listed in The goal of the semi-continuous scrubbing tests was to scrub the co-extracted manganese, magnesium and calcium from the loaded organic solution so that high grade nickel and cobalt products could be obtained from downstream processes. The loaded organic solution had been produced in a separated batch test, with a composition as shown in The objectives of the semi-continuous stripping tests were to obtain loaded strip liquors suitable for downstream processing (e.g. nickel/cobalt separation via SX and nickel electrowinning or hydrogen reduction), and to generate stripped organic solutions containing low residual metals suitable for recycling to the extraction stages. With two stripping stages, 2 The strip efficiency of cobalt was 96% with only 5 The concentrations of other elements in the stripped organic solution were low or below detection limits ( The ΔNi (the difference of the nickel concentrations in the loaded strip liquor and the spent electrolyte for nickel electrowinning) was 21–24 The manganese concentration in the scrubbed organic solution was high (10 The synthetic feed solution contained over 8 The objectives of the fully-continuous tests were to: (a) further optimise the operating conditions for extraction, scrubbing and stripping in a fully counter-current operation mode based on the data obtained in the semi-continuous tests; (b) demonstrate that the synergistic system was robust; and (c) to accumulate data for plant design and operation. The pilot plant was operated for over 280 In other operations using DSX, such as Bulong, gypsum formation caused serious operation problems ( In the previous work ( Batch tests with varying concentrations of NaOH, ammonia and sodium carbonate solutions were conducted to assess the potential for crud formation. Various mixing and solution dispersion devices were also tested without success. Crud was always formed with direct NaOH solution injection to the mixer, and more crud formed when higher NaOH concentrations were used. Little cruds were observed when ammonia solution or sodium carbonate solution was used. Sodium carbonate solutions would be a suitable reagent which would avoid treating tailings for NH The assay results for chloride concentrations in different solutions are given in In all the tests conducted, the cobalt extraction was over 99.9%, with only < The effect of number of stages and pH profile on the extraction of nickel and cobalt, and the separation of nickel and cobalt from manganese and magnesium are shown in The pH of the two scrubbing stages was controlled using diluted sodium hydroxide solution. The pH profile was varied to maximise scrubbing efficiencies of manganese, magnesium and calcium. The scrub solution was made by diluting the aqueous feed solution 10-fold and mixing with a portion of the loaded strip liquor to give a total nickel concentration in the range of 1.2–1.3 With a pH profile of 5.4/5.0 for SC1/SC2, in most cases, the manganese scrubbing efficiency was over 95% and the concentrations of manganese in the scrubbed organic solution were below 4 All the organic solution samples were filtered through Whatman 1PS filter paper. Therefore, any aqueous entrainment in the organic solution was not reflected in the organic assays. During the pilot plant operation, it was found that the manganese and magnesium concentrations in the loaded strip liquor were much higher than expected. For example, the manganese concentrations in the scrubbed organic solution were found in the range of 1–4 To confirm that entrainment was the cause of the manganese and magnesium contamination, the scrubbed organic samples were divided into two parts: one part was filtered with Whatman 1PS filter paper and the other part was not filtered. The results are shown in The main objective was to maximise metal stripping efficiencies while minimising the residual metal concentrations in the stripped organic solution and keeping the residual acid in the loaded strip liquor as low as possible. A strip solution containing 50  With three strip stages, over 96–98% of nickel and 99% of cobalt were stripped and the residual nickel concentration in the stripped organic solution was in the range of 64–100 The synergistic system consisting of 0.5 Fully-continuous pilot plant operation was conducted successfully for over 280 No gypsum precipitation was observed, even though the feed solution was deliberately saturated with calcium. The potential precipitation of basic magnesium sulphates in the extraction stages caused by direct addition of NaOH to the mixer was avoided by the use of saponification of the majority of the organic system with 30% NaOH (w/w) solution, and by utilising pH adjustment with Na It was noted that aqueous entrainment of manganese, magnesium and calcium was excessive and should be reduced by using diluted loaded strip liquor as scrubbing solution instead of the combination of diluting feed solution and loaded strip liquor. The authors would like to thank Dr Matthew Jeffrey for reviewing this paper and providing valuable comments. Shell Chemicals provided the Shellsol diluents and Versatic 10 acid and Cognis Australia the LIX63 reagent. The support of the Parker CRC for Integrated Hydrometallurgy Solutions (established and supported under the Australian Government's Cooperative Research Centres Program) is gratefully acknowledged. The authors would like to thank CSIRO Minerals Down Under National Research Flagship and Rio Tinto management for the permission to publish this paper.