We consider the problem of network security for distributed filtering under false data injection attacks over a wireless sensor network. To resist the hostile attacks from a malicious attacker who can inject false data into communication channels according to a certain probability, we design a protector for each sensor based on the online innovation information from its neighboring sensors to decide whether to use the received data at each time. To guarantee the Gaussianity of the innovations, we use a stochastic rule to transform the threshold detection. We also provide a sufficient condition for the stability of the estimator equipped with the proposed protector under hostile attacks. Moreover, we find a critical attack probability above which the steady-state estimation error covariance will exceed a pre-set value. Finally, we compare the estimation performances among several protection strategies, and explore the relationship between the system parameters and the protection effect.Over the past decades, as multi-dimensional complex systems integrated the comprehensive cyber structures, physical networks and control processes, Cyber Physical Systems (CPS) have been gradually embedded into various critical infrastructures ranging from smart cities to intelligent manufactures. However, with the development of CPS applications, a variety of network security incidents occur frequently, especially some large-scale ones such as distributed denial of service attacks, network worms and botnets, and false data injection attacks, causing great economical loss and facility damages. Consequently, the issue of ensuring the security of CPS has become unprecedentedly important. Specifically, sensor networks as a communication layer of CPS are vulnerable to hostile attacks due to the intrinsic interconnections among the sensors. It is therefore necessary to design effective protection against hostile attacks. Many efforts have been devoted to the studies of sensor networks security, especially regarding estimation and control issues ( In the existing literature, the main attacks to estimation and control problems can generally be classified into three types. (1) In the false data injection attack model, the attacker changes the data integrity of packets by modifying their payloads. The aforementioned studies have proposed several protection methods in order to reduce the damages caused by the adversary, whereas most of them use centralized state estimation. To the best of our knowledge, few studies were directed to the protection of distributed state estimation under hostile attacks. It is well known that distributed structures in state estimation are more vulnerable to various attacks and more frangible in security due to the intrinsic coupling among the sensors. If hostile attacks are not detected, their serious effects will be broadcasted over the whole network. Since the communication layer of CPS is generally with distributed structure, those recent frequent security incidents have caused huge economic losses and bad social impact. Therefore, it is urgent to study defense measures for distributed state estimation under hostile attacks. In this paper, we consider the problem of distributed estimation for sensor networks under false data injection attacks. Inspired by the event-triggered schemes ( The protection scheme is shown in The main results of this paper are summarized as follows:  The attack model and protection model are designed respectively. The attacker injects a bias into the transmitted data between each pair of sensors according to a fixed probability at each time step. The protector judges the suspicious received data, which does not influence the Gaussianity of the sensor innovation sequences. An optimal estimator is developed by minimizing the state estimation error covariance under false data injection attacks. A sufficient condition is established for guaranteeing the convergence of the estimation error covariance, and a critical attack probability is obtained such that the steady-state estimation error covariance is lower than a pre-set value. Protection effects and influencing factors of the protector are analyzed with simulations. The theoretical results in the theorems are also illustrated by simulations.  Consider a discrete linear time-invariant system described by The sensor network is modeled as a directed graph In our previous works (  The purpose of the transmission of innovation is to detect whether the data from the neighbors has been tampered. Since the quantity of the innovation is generally minor, the change of the attacked innovation is much more easily detected compared with the other quantities like the estimates, which reduces the difficulty of the detection.  Consider the scenario that an attacker injects a bias into the transmitted data between each pair of sensors. More specifically, the attacker randomly injects false data  Generally, the transmitted data including both the estimate and the innovation are packaged together, and these two types of data are not marked, the attacker is difficult to distinguish the innovation from the estimate. Thus, the attacker injects false data into the innovation and the estimate together. When the edge  In the existing literature, the false data injection attack model has three scenarios: (1) the injected bias is a time-varying signal, which slowly converges to some constant vector ( In Sections Here, a protector with a stochastic protection rule based on real time innovation is proposed to keep the Gaussianity of the estimates. Specifically, at each time step  In the stochastic decision rule Now, we design a distributed estimator with the protector for each sensor as follows: Apart from the physical network topology, define a dynamic communication network to describe the protection decision of each edge as Finally, define In this section, we investigate the Gaussianity of the innovations, and design an optimal gain First, we make two assumptions.  The graph is strongly connected.   Then, we prove that the Gaussianity of the sensor’s innovations is preserved by the proposed protector. The information set of the    See The above result shows that the innovation is Gaussian distributed, so the method in When In the following, we analyze the convergence properties of the estimator with the protector under false data injection attacks. Note that, due to the introduction of the random variables Define Recall that Define the modified algebraic Riccati equation for the proposed estimator as    See Now, we have obtained an upper bound of the estimation error covariance of the proposed estimator. Obviously, if To analyze the convergence properties of  For any    See  If  Note that  The condition in In the previous subsection, we have designed a protector for each sensor, and found a sufficient condition, i.e. In this subsection, for a given estimation error covariance    See  Note that In addition, In this section, we present simulation examples to illustrate the performance of the proposed estimator with the protector under false data injection attacks, with a comparison to illustrate the attack effect and the performance of the protector. Further, we will explore the influence of the parameter Consider a sensor network with In addition, set the attack probability on each edge to be     In the following, we further explore the relation of the protector parameter In this paper, we have investigated a protection scheme for distributed filtering over the wireless sensor networks under false data injection attacks. The protector of a sensor decides whether the received data from its neighboring sensors should be used for the next estimate update. We proved that the proposed protector based on a stochastic rule does not destroy the Gaussianity of the estimates. We also provided a sufficient condition for the sensors equipped with the proposed protector to guarantee the convergence of the state estimation error covariances under hostile attacks. To observe the estimation performances under hostile attacks, we obtained a critical attack probability corresponding to a given steady-state estimation error covariance. Our simulation results verified the effectiveness of the proposed protector against hostile attacks. Finally, we investigated the relationship between the parameter The authors would like to thank the associate editor and the reviewer for their comments and suggestions which helped to improve the presentation of the paper. For convenience of computation, we omit the labeling of the sensor. Firstly, the information set of the (i) Then, Eq. (ii) As a result, when Thus, the proof is completed. When Under Next, we verify the above results for arbitrary initial conditions. At first, under the zero initial condition, we prove that The initial conditions of Under the above condition, one obtains Next, we prove that First, based on Thus, Now rewrite the upper bound of the estimation error covariance as Next, we derive the minimum attack probability Thus, the proof is completed.