Understanding adsorption behavior of methane in shale is important for predicting the gas reserve and evaluating reservoir potential. This paper presents the methane adsorption behavior of three gas shale samples of Gondwana and KG basin of India. Adsorption experiments are conducted on as-received samples at a temperature of 40°C to a maximum equilibrium pressure of approximately 9.5MPa. The methane adsorption data are applied to test the applicability of Langmuir isotherm model. It was observed that the experimental adsorption data for Parbatpur and KG shale samples did not follow the Langmuir isotherm model, with deviation from the model value more than 10%. Although the experimental adsorption data of Salanpur sample broadly followed the Langmuir model, the deviation from the model value was more than 5%, implying the Langmuir model is not very accurate. Pore characterization study was also carried out to understand the pore structure of the shale samples. The pore characterization suggested that porosity of Indian gas shales are dominated by meso- and macro-pores.With rise in energy demand, conventional natural gas resources are getting depleted. In order to meet the increased energy demand, unconventional resources like gas shale are being explored. Commercial production of gas shale has been successful in the USA. Shale gas currently contributes to approximately 17% of the total domestic gas production in the USA ( Shales are fine-grained sedimentary deposits. The shale consists of both organic carbon and inorganic minerals. Natural gas found in shale is referred to as shale gas. The shale gas typically consists mostly of methane (>94%), lesser amounts of higher hydrocarbons (ethane, propane and butane) and traces of CO Since a significant fraction of the gas in shale is stored by adsorption mechanism, understanding adsorption behavior of gas shale is important in developing gas-in-place estimates as well as predicting the production rate from a shale reservoir ( Langmuir isotherm model has been used to describe methane adsorption data on coals and some gas shales. Although Langmuir isotherm has been used to describe methane adsorption on shales, there have been contrasting observations with respect to applicability of Langmuir model and the accuracy of the model. Lu et al. studied methane adsorption on Devonian shale from the Appalachian basin in the USA and observed that the adsorption isotherm followed the Langmuir isotherm model ( The literature review suggests that although for many shale samples the methane adsorption data followed the Langmuir model, but for a small number of samples the adsorption behavior did not follow the Langmuir model. There has been very limited work done on adsorption of methane on Indian shales. Therefore it is of interest to study the methane adsorption behavior of shales from Indian basins. Since Langmuir isotherms are also commonly used for methane adsorption on shales, it is also important to study the applicability of Langmuir isotherm model on Indian shales. A Langmuir adsorption isotherm model typically follows a Type I curve. In a Type I isotherm, at lower pressures, the adsorbed volume is proportional to the gas pressure and the curve is linear. While for higher pressures, the curve becomes concave to the pressure axis ( Experiments were carried out using an adsorption isotherm (AI) setup based on the volumetric method. Detailed descriptions of the experimental setup, sample preparation and operating conditions have been discussed below. Adsorption experiments were conducted at a temperature of 40 The samples have been prepared as per the ASTM (American Standard for Testing Materials) standard D2013. The samples are prepared by crushing the preserved cores/blocks from field. The resulting crushed shales are sieved to obtain the desired sample size ranging from 150 to 425 It is a well-known fact that shales have low adsorption capacity. Further, adsorption of methane has a tendency of decreasing with increase in moisture. Therefore, the adsorption experiments for shales were not carried out at equilibrium moisture condition and rather prepared in as-received basis. In case of as-received basis of sample preparation, core/block samples collected directly from the field is crushed according to the above mentioned sizes and are fed to the AI setup without applying any pretreatment.  The adsorption isotherm experiment is carried out in two stages. In the first stage, void volume is determined using a non-adsorbing gas (helium) and in the second stage actual adsorption steps are carried out using the desired adsorbate gas such as methane. The prepared sample is filled in the SC and the SC is closed by tightening the nuts. Swagelok SNOOP (Liquid Leak Detector) is applied on the fittings to ensure that there is no leakage. The RC is charged with helium keeping the valve 1 (between the RC and SC) closed. In the first step, helium is filled in the RC to a pressure of approximately 1 After completion of the helium steps, keeping the valve 1 closed, helium gas is vented out from the RC. The RC is repeatedly flushed with methane at low pressure and vented to the atmosphere. Flushing and venting of methane is atleast 3 The compressibility factor for pure methane was calculated from the Peng-Robinson equation of state ( Low pressure nitrogen adsorption analysis (LPA) was performed at −196 The compositional analysis of the shale samples were carried out by estimating the total organic content (TOC) and elemental composition (carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen and sulphur content). The TOC was analyzed using Analytik Jena Multi N/C instrument. For analysis, 0.1 The elemental composition was analyzed using EuroEA Elemental Analyser. The elemental composition results are reported in weight per cent. Powdered samples in the range of 20–25 Mercury intrusion test using the Micrometrics AutoPore IV 9500 V1.06 porosimeter was performed for studying the porosity and pore-size distribution of the shale samples. The mercury intrusion porosimeter (MICP) is based on the Archimedes principle of displacement. Samples were prepared in the size range of 1000–1410 Helium pycnometer was used to estimate the skeletal density of the shale samples. From the difference of bulk density (from the MICP) and skeletal density, porosity values were calculated. The experimental adsorption data for Parbatpur, KG and Salanpur samples are shown in In order to check the repeatability of the adsorption data, experiment for one of the shale samples (i.e. Salanpur shale) was repeated. Similar experimental conditions ( The TOC and porosity was determined using TOC analyzer and Hg porosimeter respectively. The low pressure adsorption of nitrogen is used to characterize the pores of the shale samples. The low pressure nitrogen adsorption isotherms of the shale samples are shown in BET plots (plot between 1/[ The low pressure N The The pore volume results obtained from the N Mercury intrusion tests were carried out to characterize the pores of the shale samples. The cumulative and incremental mercury intrusion plots of the shale samples are presented in Pore size data from the MICP was analyzed as previously done by Gan et al. and Mosher et al. to obtain the pore size distribution of the shale samples ( The adsorption data for Parbatpur, KG, and Salanpur samples were analyzed using the conventional Langmuir isotherm equation. For testing the applicability of Langmuir isotherm equation, the ratio of equilibrium pressure and cumulative adsorbed volume at that pressure ( The Using the Langmuir parameters obtained from the adsorption data, the Langmuir isotherms are plotted and are superimposed on the experimental adsorption data to get a comparison between the two and to ascertain the degree of fit. The experimental as well as the Langmuir methane adsorption isotherm for the Parbatpur, KG and Salanpur shale sample are shown in For Parbatpur sample, most of the experimental data points are not falling on the Langmuir isotherm and are either below or above the Langmuir isotherm. The ARE value for the Langmuir model is calculated to be 13.1% suggesting that Langmuir model is not predicting the adsorption values accurately. For the KG sample, most of the experimental adsorption data points are not falling on the Langmuir isotherm. Up to a pressure of 7.22 From the plots ( The adsorption data on Indian shale samples are further analyzed with respect to relative pressure of methane ( In the present work, gas adsorption behavior of shale samples from Gondwana Basin, and Krishna-Godavari Basin of India were studied. Adsorption isotherm experiment and pore characterization studies were carried out. The applicability of Langmuir model on shale samples was studied. The Langmuir adsorption isotherm model is not very accurately describing the methane adsorption data on the studied shale samples from India. The methane isotherm is showing an increasing trend at higher pressures (up to 10