Sweet sorghum is a hardy crop that can be grown on marginal land and can provide both food and energy in an integrated food and energy system. Lignocellulose rich sweet sorghum bagasse (solid left over after starch and juice extraction) can be converted to bioethanol using a variety of technologies. The largest barrier to commercial production of fuel ethanol from lignocellulosic material remains the high processing costs associated with enzymatic hydrolysis and the use of acids and bases in the pretreatment step. In this paper, sweet sorghum bagasse was pretreated and hydrolysed in a single step using microwave irradiation. A total sugar yield of 820 g kg−
                     1 was obtained in a 50 g kg−
                     1 sulphuric acid solution in water, with a power input of 43.2 kJ g−
                     1 of dry biomass (i.e. 20 min at 180 W power setting). An ethanol yield based on total sugar of 480 g kg−
                     1 was obtained after 24 h of fermentation using a mixed culture of organisms. These results show the potential for producing as much as 0.252 m3 tonne−
                     1 or 33 m3 ha−
                     1 ethanol using only the lignocellulose part of the stalks, which is high enough to make the process economically attractive.Biomass still remains the best carbon source to replace fuels and chemicals currently produced from crude oil and coal Sweet sorghum ( Sweet sorghum bagasse (Hunni green) was obtained from sweet sorghum harvested after six months growth by the Agricol Research Company in Potchefstroom, North West province, South Africa (26°41′36″S, 27°05′35″E). The sweet sorghum plants (whole plants) were transported on the same day of harvest to a roller press and pressed to remove the sugar rich juice from the stalks until no more liquid was obtained. The plant material left after pressing was sun dried to 10% moisture content, milled and screened to a particle size of ±1.5 mm. The dried plant material, referred to in this study as sweet sorghum bagasse, was packed in air-tight bags and then stored at room temperature until used in the experiments. An initial compositional analysis of the sweet sorghum bagasse used for experiments was done by the Agricultural Research Council (ARC) – Analytical Services (Pretoria, RSA) and the results are presented in  Commercial The experimental procedure followed for the pretreatment, hydrolysis and fermentation of sweet sorghum bagasse is illustrated in Dried and milled bagasse was pretreated and hydrolysed in a single step. Sulphuric acid (H Sweet sorghum bagasse was pretreated with dilute sulphuric acid in a domestic microwave oven. The influence of acid concentration and power input on total sugar yield (g sugar per g bagasse) is shown in The amount of hexose and pentose sugars liberated from the plant material at the different power inputs and a constant sulphuric acid concentration of 50 g kg Low concentrations of sulphuric acid (10 and 30 g kg Banerji and co-workers Hemicellulose is a not crystalline and consists of branched polymer chains of pentose, hexose and acetylated sugars. The units found most often in the hemicellulose of plant materials are xylose, arabinose, mannose, glucose and galactose. Hemicellulose is difficult to break down into its monomeric sugars due to the branched nature of the polymer chains. Microwave irradiation works through the passage of non-ionising radiation in the range of 2.5 GHz through a liquid or solid medium. In the case of this study, the radiation passed through the acid in water solution as well as the solid biomass. The radiation is absorbed by the water molecules, causing dielectric heating of the acid in water solution while some of the radiation is absorbed by the molecules of the biomass causing increased vibration of the bonding between molecules. From a purely engineering perspective, it is believed that linear molecules should vibrate more vigorously than branched molecules since linear molecules should theoretically have more possibility to move freely than branched molecules. No cellubiose, but large quantities of glucose was observed for the different pretreatment dosages of sulphuric acid, leading to the conclusion that the dielectric heating effect of the solution as well as the increased vibrations caused by the irradiation was sufficient to break the hydrogen bonds to decrease the crystallinity as well as break the β-(1,4) glycosidic bonds of the cellulose and decompose the cellubiose into glucose molecules. The hemicellulose of each plant material differs, with xylan being the main component of soft grasses while soft woods contain mostly glucomannans A total hexose sugar yield of 366 g kg The effect of acid concentration on the physical structure of the plant material can be seen in the SEM images in The SEM image (B) in The difference in absorbance between the two spectra in The peak at 2350 cm The FT-IR spectra thus confirmed the lowering in crystallinity of the cellulose and subsequent conversion to glucose as well as the fact that hemicellulose was not completely liberated from the plant structure. The liquid fraction after microwave pretreatment was not hydrolysed further with enzymes, but directly fermented to ethanol. A mixed culture with An ethanol yield as high as 480 g kg The results of this study indicate that simple microwave technology can be used to convert grass type biomass to sugars without the use of expensive enzymes. Sulphuric acid concentration is important to ensure that residual sugars in the biomass are not degraded during the treatment. Co-fermentation of pentose and hexose fermenting organisms resulted in a high ethanol yield. The final ethanol yield per hectare of sweet sorghum bagasse planted will determine the ethanol yield per hectare that can be obtained in any particular agricultural area of the world. Sweet sorghum grown on marginal land can produce biomass as high as 35 metric tonne ha