Powder metallurgy (PM) represents an alternative to conventional casting processes for the production of wear-resistant materials. PM hard alloys for wear-protection applications feature both higher strength and fracture toughness compared to cast hard alloys due to their more finely grained microstructure. However, densification by hot-isostatic pressing (HIP), the conventional PM-compaction method, is relatively expensive and thus partially counteracts low-cost processing. To increase the economic efficiency of the processing route, supersolidus liquid-phase sintering (SLPS) was investigated. In addition, expensive Ni- and Co-base hard alloys were substituted by boron-rich Fe-base hard-facing alloys.
                  In this study, three ultrahigh-boron hard-facing alloy powders were densified by SLPS and HIP. The sintering temperatures were optimized by means of sintering experiments that were supported by thermodynamic calculations. Both densification states were investigated and compared with respect to the microstructure and the tribological and mechanical properties of the compacted hard-facing alloys. It was shown that the mechanical and tribological properties are strongly influenced by the microstructure. Although the microstructure is affected by the chemical composition, it can also be adapted by the densification process. SLPS-densified hard-facing alloys have a coarse microstructure that imparts not only a high wear resistance but also a detrimental effect on the mechanical properties.White cast irons are widely used for wear protection applications in the mining, mineral processing, and cement industries owing to their high hardness, high wear resistance, low price, and easy production Only a few authors have dealt with boron additions higher than 1 The addition of a small amount of boron to PM steels has been reported to have a major effect on the densification behavior during supersolidus liquid-phase sintering (SLPS) The aim of the present paper is to study the densification behavior of three ultrahigh-boron, high-carbon gas-atomized Fe-base powders by means of supersolidus liquid-phase sintering and hot-isostatic pressing. The SLPS process was used to achieve fast densification due to the presence of low-melting, boron-rich eutectics. In addition, Weber et al. mentioned the possibility of influencing the size and shape of the hard phases in a ledeburitic cold-work tool steel by means of SLPS processing with the aim of adjusting the diameter of the hard phase to the wear system Three ultrahigh-boron, high-carbon steels were used as gas-atomized powders. Two of these were commercially available hypereutectic high-boron steels, X200CrNiBMo10-4-3-3 and X360NiBCrCu4-2, and the third was a self-developed hypoeutectic high-boron steel X60CrB2-2. The chemical composition of the bulk samples after HIP was measured by optical emission spark spectroscopy (QSG750 spectrometer OBLF) ( Determination of the optimized sintering and HIP temperatures was supported by thermodynamic equilibrium calculations using the Calphad method. Software package Thermo-Calc version R (Thermo-Calc AB, Stockholm, Sweden) and database TCFE6.2 were used to calculate the solidification path, phase diagrams, and the chemical composition of each phase in the equilibrium state. The calculations were performed with a phase set reduced to LIQUID, BCC_A2, FCC_A1, CEMENTITE, M7C3, M2B_tetr, Cr2B_orth, M23C6, and M6C. Thermal analysis was performed to confirm the Thermo-Calc results concerning the sintering window. Differential thermal analysis (DTA) was performed by heating small amounts of gas-atomized steel powder (∼100 The optimized sintering temperatures were investigated experimentally by sintering at different temperatures above the solidus temperature ( Besides SLPS-densification, the gas-atomized powders were compacted by hot-isostatic pressing (HIP) for 2 To achieve a martensitic microstructure, the HIP- and SLPS-densified specimens were austenitized at 850–1050 Microstructural examinations were carried out using optical and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Specimens were sectioned, ground on abrasive paper, and polished with a 1 Macro- and microhardness measurements were carried out on the cross-section of the respective specimen using a Vickers indenter and a load of 294.3 The mechanical properties were analyzed by four-point bending tests using specimens with a length of 70 The microstructure of the steel powders in the gas-atomized state is shown in The steel powder particles were analyzed with regard to particle size and distribution using laser diffraction. The probability density functions of the steel powders are given in Thermodynamic calculations were performed to obtain an initial assessment regarding the sintering window. The melting sequence and the amount of liquid phase formed were calculated as a function of the temperature. However, these thermodynamic calculations describe the behavior in the equilibrium state, which is not the case in reality. DTA measurements were performed to estimate the differences between the calculated thermodynamic values and their experimental counterparts. As shown in Sintering curves for alloys X200CrNiBMo10-4-3-3, X360NiBCrCu4-2, and X60CrB2-2 are depicted in On reaching The microstructure of the compacted steel powders in the SLPS, HIPed, and heat-treated state are depicted in In the case of steel X360NiBCrCu4-2 in the SLPS state, the lamellar-to-globular hard phases of type M The hypoeutectic steel X60CrB2-2 in the SLPS and heat-treated state is characterized by globular metal cells that are surrounded by a Fe-rich M The mechanical and tribological properties of Fe-base alloys can be adjusted by a heat treatment. In the case presented, quenching and tempering were performed to increase the strength and hardness of the metal matrix. Tempering curves of the hypereutectic steels are depicted in Steel X360NiBCrCu4-2 has a lower post-quenching hardness of 768 Hypoeutectic steel X60CrB2-2 was austenitized at Owing to their high metalloid content in conjunction with a large amount of hard-phase-forming elements, the hard alloys investigated in this work are suitable for wear-protection applications. A high wear resistance requires a high matrix hardness as well as a large amount of hard phases dispersed in the metal matrix. The hardness of the hard phases was measured by the Vickers indentation method, and the volume fraction of the hard phases was calculated by the Calphad method ( The wear resistance of the steels was investigated by means of a pin-on-paper test using abrasives SiO The highest wear resistance was exhibited by steel X200CrNiBMo10-4-3-3 in the SLPS and HIPed state. In the SLPS state, hypoeutectic steel X60CrB2-2 had a higher wear resistance compared to hypereutectic steel X360NiBCrCu4-2. In the HIPed state, steels X60CrB2-2 and X360NiBCrCu4-2 exhibited inverse behavior of the wear resistance. The bending strength of the hard-facing alloys in the quenched and tempered state was characterized by means of a four-point bending test. The results are listed in The fracture surface of the hard alloys after the four-point bending test is depicted in SLPS requires the formation of a sufficient amount of liquid phase in order to reach a dense microstructure The first liquid phase forms above Owing to measuring errors when using thermocouples, an almost constant amount of liquid phase must be formed over a wide range of temperatures. The amount of formed liquid phase should be selected in dependence on strong capillary forces, decomposition of the powder particles, and prevention of material distortion by viscous material flow. On the basis of these requirements, appropriate steels for SLPS-densification are hypoeutectic alloys with a sufficient amount of low-melting eutectics such as Fe-rich M As shown in The hardness, toughness, and content of retained austenite in the metal matrix influence the tribological and mechanical properties. After SLPS- and HIP-densification, additional quenching and tempering are necessary to adjust the material's properties to achieve a high hardness and a sufficient toughness and thus a high wear resistance. The highest post-quenching hardness of 950 The lowest hardness was measured in hypoeutectic steel X60CrB2-2, irrespective of the chosen austenitizing and tempering temperatures. However, the hardness increased with increasing austenitizing temperature. This can be explained by the higher solute carbon content in the γ-Fe phase. As shown in A comparison of the tempering curves of alloys X60CrB2-2 and X360NiBCrCu4-2 shows a stronger decrease in hardness for the hypoeutectic steel with increasing tempering temperature. The greater loss of hardness can be attributed to a lower volume fraction of hard phases, and the metal matrix becomes noticeably softer. To achieve the required hardness and sufficient toughness, low tempering temperatures of 200 Alloy X200CrNiBMo10-4-3-3 is characterized by an additional increase in hardness for a tempering temperature above 400 Hard alloys are used to produce wear-resistant coatings on substrate materials. In the case presented, the investigated alloys contained a larger amount of hard phases finely distributed in the metal matrix, thus protecting the metal matrix against grooving, scratching, and chipping by the abrasives. Key factors influencing the resistance to abrasive wear are the type, size, and amounts of the hard phases. As shown in In addition, not only the volume fraction of hard phases promotes sufficient wear resistance, as shown by the results of hard-facing alloy X360NiBCrCu4-2. This alloy contained the largest amounts of hard phases; however, their hardness was lower than that of the abrasives and thus insufficient, so that these hard phases M With the exceptions of the alloy X360NiBCrCu4-2, a higher abrasive wear resistance in the SLPS state compared to the HIPed state was measured. This is attributed to the smaller particle size of the hard phases dissolved in the metal matrix in the HIPed state for alloys X200CrNiBMo10-4-3-3 and X60CrB2-2. Sufficient wear resistance requires a minimum diameter of the hard phase, which should be equal to the scratch width of the acting abrasives. If not, the hard phase will be removed together with the metal matrix by a chipping mechanism. Therefore, the higher wear resistance of specimens in the SLPS state can be discussed in terms of a larger hard phase diameter. The coarser microstructure acts more effectively against larger abrasives and therefore prevents removal of the metal matrix and the hard phases by chipping. The results of the four-point bending test clearly show that the amount of hard phases, their distribution, size, and hardness affect the mechanical strength under a bending load. The highest bending strength was exhibited by hypoeutectic alloy X60CrB2-2 in the HIPed state, in which the hard phases possess a globular shape. The lower bending strength in the SLPS state can be attributed to a network-like structure of the hard phases of the type M In the case of the hypereutectic steels, lower bending strengths were measured due to the presence of a large amount of hard phases in the metal matrix. Furthermore, alloy X200CrNiBMo10-4-3-3 exhibited a lower bending strength in the HIPed state compared to the SPLS state. This is attributed to an inadequate densification state, and thus crack propagation mainly occurs along the former particle surfaces ( This work has shown that the densification route influences the microstructure and therefore the mechanical and tribological properties of hard-facing alloys. The results of the four-point bending test, in particular, indicate a more ductile fracture of the hypoeutectic steels in the HIPed state. Compared to specimens with SLPS-densification, fracturing was shifted to higher bending stresses due to spheroidization of the hard phases, which is associated with an increase in the size of the mean free path across the metal matrix between two adjacent hard phases. Further research is focusing on the spheroidization of hard phases and the development of wear-resistant hypoeutectic steels with a high mechanical strength based on an alloying strategy and a material-adapted heat treatment. Spheroidization and a more uniform distribution of hard phases can be achieved by injecting the melt with small amounts of hard-phase-forming elements that act as crystallization nuclei for low-melting hard phases. Furthermore, the melting behavior of hard-facing alloys can be influenced by alloy designing to achieve a dense and fine-grained microstructure by means of SLPS-densification. It may be possible to increase spheroidization of the hard phases after SLPS-densification by high-temperature annealing. Preliminary tests confirm spheroidization of the hard phases with simultaneous development of a fine-grained microstructure after extended annealing at the austenitization temperature ( The present paper focuses on the microstructural evolution and the mechanical as well as tribological properties of three ultrahigh-boron, high-carbon steels that were densified by means of SLPS and HIP processing. The main results are: Hypereutectic as well as hypoeutectic Fe–C–B steels can be fully densified by SLPS and HIP processing. Sintering experiments at temperatures slightly higher than SLPS processing produced specimens with a density close to the bulk value. The amount of liquid phase, which is necessary for fast densification without material distortion, was estimated by means of thermodynamic calculations and sintering experiments. Hypereutectic alloys exhibited a narrower interval between Sintering temperatures 50–70 In contrast to literature data, a larger amount of liquid phase of 30–50 Steel X200CrNiBMo10-4-3-3 exhibited a secondary hardness peak due to the presence of the elements chromium and molybdenum. In the case of steels X60CrB2-2 and X360NiBCrCu4-2, the hardness decreased on increasing the tempering temperature. Specimens in the SLPS state had a higher wear resistance than HIP-densified specimens. This is attributed to a larger hard particle size that counteracts chipping and ploughing by abrasives more effectively. The highest bending strength found for hypoeutectic steel X60CrB2-2 in the HIPed state. This is attributed to the globular shape of the hard phase of type M