Reactive oily bubble, defined as air bubbles covered with a thin layer of kerosene containing collectors, was used to float a major rare earth mineral, bastnaesite from rare earth ores. Both fatty acid and hydroxamic acid were used to generate reactive oily bubbles. The flotation of bastnaesite with reactive oily bubble was investigated by zeta potential, zeta potential distribution and induction time measurement and micro-flotation tests. The results showed a quicker attachment to bastnaesite and a stronger collecting power of reactive oily bubbles containing 100ppm fatty acid than conventional air bubbles, resulting in an enhanced bastnaesite recovery. The flotation recovery of bastnaesite by reactive oily bubbles containing hydroxamic acid is lower than that by conventional air bubble flotation where the bastnaesite was pre-conditioned by hydroxamic acid in aqueous phase. During induction time measurement, no attachment is observed between bastnaesite particles and reactive oily bubbles containing hydroxamic acid, illustrating the importance of collector type in reactive oily bubble flotation technology. These findings suggest the superior performance of reactive oily bubble technique than conventional bastnaesite flotation method only when proper collector is used to generate the reactive oily bubbles.Rare earth elements (shortened as RE) are a group of elements with atomic numbers ranging from 57 to 71. Yttrium with atomic number 39 is included as a rare earth element because it often occurs with other rare earth minerals in nature, and has similar chemical properties. Based on the difference in solubility of rare earth sulfates, the rare earth elements are often divided into three groups: light, medium, and heavy rare earth elements. The light rare earth elements are La, Ce, Pr and Nd. Bastnaesite, (Ce, La) CO Bastnaesite is often accompanied by calcium and barium minerals such as barite and fluorite. These accompanying minerals of much finer particle sizes are easy to form clay minerals, known as argillization in geology. For instance, the argillization of Sichuan Mianning rare earth ore can be up to 13.31–20.35%. The bastnaesite content in the rock is typically within 15%, and it is normally recovered by flotation. Although the specific gravity of Mianning bastnaesite is significantly higher than other minerals (quartz, feldspar, mica etc.), its floatability and specific gravity are quite close to the accompanying calcium and barium minerals such as barite and fluorite. Such a complex property dramatically affects the mining and separation of bastnaesite, leading to complicated process flow sheets ( Conventional froth floatation has been widely applied to the beneficiation of basetnaesite due to the fact that it is possible to process a wide range of fine particles. The most commonly used collectors for bastnaesite flotation are fatty acids and hydroxamic acids ( It has been shown in a previous study that the reactive oily bubble improves not only the collecting power but also the selectivity in sulphide mineral flotation with a reduced dosage of collector ( Kerosene (Fisher Scientific) was used as the model oil, while reagent grade HCl and NaOH (Fisher Scientific) were used as pH modifiers. Ultra-high purity KCl (>99.999%, Fisher Scientific) was used as supporting electrolytes to prepare KCl solutions. The bastnaesite concentrate used in this study was from Baotou deposit, China. To remove the potential collector and other impurities on the surface of bastnaesite concentrate, the bastnaesite sample was washed with HCl solutions of pH 3, and rinsed with reagent grade ethanol (Fisher Scientific) followed by de-ionized water. The sample was then vacuum-dried for 6 Room-temperature scanning electron microscope (SEM) experiments were performed at Alberta Center for Surface and Engineering Science (ACSES). The bastnaesite samples were examined using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) Vega-3 (Tescan) with an EDX detector (Oxford Instruments). The X-ray diffraction measurement was performed using a RIGAKU Rotating anode XRD system (Rigaku RU-200B). The power of X-ray tube was set at 40 Zeta potential distributions were measured using a Zetaphoremeter III (SEPHY/CAD) equipped with a laser-illumination, a digital-video-viewing system and a rectangular electrophoresis cell containing a pair of hydrogenated palladium electrodes. The details on the experimental procedures can be found elsewhere ( Kerosene in water emulsions and bastnaesite suspensions were prepared for zeta potential distribution measurement. A water-in-kerosene emulsion was prepared by placing 5 drops of kerosene in 80 Induction time of bubble-particle attachment was used to evaluate the efficiency of particle-bubble attachment and hence flotation performance. As a critical parameter, a shorter induction time corresponds to a higher flotation recovery ( To confirm the feasibility of using reactive oily bubble to float bastnaesite particles, a custom built micro-flotation cell was used to conduct flotation test in this study. The micro-flotation cell was separated into two parts by a fritted disk. The bottom chamber of the micro-flotation cell was filled with the kerosene containing 100 As seen in The SEM-EDX results in As shown in Due to the difficulties in making micrometer size reactive oily bubbles for zeta potential measurement, the zeta potential of kerosene emulsion containing 100 The zeta potential distribution measurement was used to investigate the interactions of bastnaesite with reactive oily bubbles. The zeta potential distribution measurement has been proven to be a great success in studying the interactions between the particles, droplets, and droplets-particles ( As shown in When the bastnaesite suspensions and fatty acids-containing kerosene emulsions were mixed together under the same physicochemical condition, the measured zeta potential distribution showed only one wide distribution peak located between the zeta potential distribution peaks of individual bastnaesite suspensions and fatty acids-containing kerosene emulsions. This observation suggests strong attraction between the (fatty acid) reactive oil droplets and bastnaesite particles at both particle ratios of 1:1 and 2:1. The distribution peak of the mixture is located closer to the peak of reactive oily bubble, indicating possible partial spreading of reactive oily droplets on bastnaesite particles. With an increased ratio of the reactive oily bubble to bastnaesite particles from 1:1 to 2:1, the zeta potential peak moved further towards the peak of reactively oily bubble, confirming a strong attraction force between the two, and further, that the bastnaesite particles were covered by reactive oily droplets as shown by the schematics in insert of Bastnaesite is known to be floatable over a wide pH range from pH 5-9.5 by conventional froth flotation using both fatty acid and hydroxamic acid as collector. Over the pH range from 6.5 to 11, the flotation recovery of bastnaesite is up to 91% when fatty acid is used as collector. The results in  When hydroxamic acid is used as collector in the conventional bastnaesite flotation, the flotation recovery of bastnaesite reaches 80% when the pH value is higher than 5 ( At pH 6 without collector addition, bastnaesite does not attach to air bubbles and oily bubbles without collector even at contact time of 10 The bastnaesite flotation using hydroxamic acid in the reactive oily bubbles was also studied by determining the induction time of bubble-particle attachment. The results in Micro-flotation tests were conducted to recover bastnaesite using different methods as discussed in this paper. The results in However, when hydroxamic acid was used, as shown in The results clearly show that the reactive oily bubble method greatly improves the bastnaesite recovery when fatty acid is used as collector. The recovery of bastnaesite using fatty acid reactive oily bubble is comparable to the bastnaesite recovery using conventional flotation when hydroxamic acid is used as collector. The use of fatty acid in reactive oily bubble method has potential to avoid the high temperature process, to lower the collector consumption, and to increase the collecting power of collector due to a higher localized concentration of collector molecules at the oil/water interface. However, the reactive oily bubble flotation technology cannot be applied to bastnaesite flotation when hydroxamic acid is used as collectors. Further investigation on the failure mechanism is required. The results of zeta potential distribution and induction time measurements suggest the attachment of bastnaesite particles to fatty acid reactive oily bubble at pH 6, but not to hydroxamic acid reactive oily bubble. The micro-flotation results confirmed a significant increase in bastnaesite recovery when fatty acid reactive oily bubble is used in flotation, showing the advantage of using reactive oily bubble over the conventional flotation methods. However, the use of hydroxamic acid in the reactive oily bubble is detrimental to the bastnaesite flotation. These findings suggest that reactive oily bubbles can be employed to improve the bastnaesite flotation, but the selection of appropriate collector is critically important. Financial supports for this work from