The geometric properties of Pb-MnO2 composite electrodes are studied, and a general formula is presented for the length of the triple phase boundary (TPB) on two dimensional (2D) composite electrodes using sphere packing and cutting simulations. The difference in the geometrical properties of 2D (or compact) and 3D (or porous) electrodes is discussed. It is found that the length of the TPB is the only reasonable property of a 2D electrode that follows a 1/r particle radius relationship. Subsequently, sphere packing cuts are used to derive a statistical electrode surface that is the basis for the earlier proposed simulations of different electrochemical mechanisms. It is shown that two of the proposed mechanisms (conductivity and a two-step-two-material kinetic mechanism) can explain the current increase at Pb-MnO2 anodes compared to standard lead anodes.
                  The results show that although MnO2 has low conductivity, when combined with Pb as the metal matrix, the behaviour of the composite is not purely ohmic but is also affected by activation overpotentials, increasing the current density close to the TPB. Current density is inversely proportional to the radius of the catalyst particles, matching with earlier experimental results. Contrary to earlier SECM experiments, mass transport of sulphuric acid is not likely to have any influence, as confirmed with simulations.
                  A hypothetical two-step-two-material mechanism with intermediate H2O2 that reacts on both the Pb matrix and MnO2 catalyst is studied. It was found that assuming quasi-reversible generation of H2O2 followed by its chemical decomposition on MnO2, results are obtained that agree with the experiments. If the quasi-reversible formation of H2O2 occurs near the peroxide decomposition catalyst, current increases, leading to an active TPB and to the current density that scales with 1/r. It is further emphasised that both the Pb matrix and MnO2 catalyst are necessary and their optimum ratio depends on the used current density. Yet, additional experimental evidence is needed to support the postulated mechanism.During metal electrowinning (EW) from sulphate based electrolytes the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) occurs on the anode. The major metals that are electrowon from sulphate media are zinc, copper, nickel and cobalt In metal EW, when using traditional lead based anodes, the overpotential of the OER is in the range of 500…800 The overpotential of the OER can be lowered using composite anodes In our previous paper An expression for the total length of the boundary between catalyst particle and matrix metal was derived using cut statistics The mechanisms of the OER proposed in ref. The mechanisms were studied with scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM) and conductive atomic force microscopy (CAFM), targeting the activity of the interface between the metal matrix and the MnO This communication has two goals: First, to generate random composite electrode surfaces and to verify the TPBL model; furthermore, to derive an expression for the active surface area of electrodes with protruding catalyst particles, in order to discriminate edge effects of the TPB from the surface area of the active particles. Second goal was to simulate three processes that may cause edge effects on the electrode. Thereby it should be possible to deduce which of the processes is the most probable. The composite Pb-MnO Usually this approach is applied only to transient diffusion, but here it is used at steady-state to quantify edge effects resulting from the overlap of concentration and potential fields. Since both steady-state diffusion and electrical conduction are of the form of the Laplace equation, the approach is extended to solve the secondary current distribution, including the resistivity of the catalyst particles and the Pb matrix. It was assumed that the accuracy of the approximations made is sufficient to show trends in the current distribution as a function of the particle size, and allows to discriminate between the proposed mechanisms. In addition to simulating different reaction mechanisms on Pb-MnO All simulations were done with MATLAB 2015a (Mathworks, Natick, USA). The independent domain calculations were done in COMSOL 3.5a (COMSOL Inc, Burlington, USA) interfaced with MATLAB 2010a. A complete list of the used symbols within the article is found in The mass fractions of the MnO To simulate a pressed composite material, a Matlab code was developed employing a cube with periodic boundary conditions. The cube was filled with 10,000 rigid spheres of same size placed at random initial positions; the size of the cube depended on the mass fraction. The initial overlapping was removed during an iterative procedure. First, collision detection was done using a linked cell algorithm and, second, the forces between the particles were summed to result in the total force on each particle. The absolute value of the repulsive force For the time integration a velocity Verlet integrator To give a maximum statistical randomness each simulated composite cube was split randomly along all three orthogonal planes (XY, XZ, YZ), 3333 times for each plane, creating a cut-circle distribution in a square (see The remaining Voronoi areas were analysed by determining for each area the cutting radius, The method of the diffusion domain approach is similar to the modelling of partially blocked electrodes by Compton et al. The calculation of the total current of a composite requires ca. 2000 simulations. The procedure is illustrated in As it is common for unknown convection profiles, the equation of convective diffusion is approximated with the plain diffusion equation, assuming a Nernst diffusion layer of the thickness δ. This approximation is also used in the diffusion domain approach simulations and applied here with a diffusion layer thickness δ This section describes the boundary value problems that are solved to calculate the total current of a composite electrode according to Eq. The OER is assumed to proceed via the electrochemical oxide path with the 1st step rate determining; the reaction mechanism and the derivation of its rate are given in the supplementary material. To investigate the effect of the low conductivity of MnO The potential ϕ The potential is coupled with the boundary condition Eq. The boundary between lead and the electrolyte is assumed to be insulating The symmetry condition at the centre axis and the insulation condition at the domain boundary reads Finally, the electric potential in the solution “far” from the electrode is zero: And the potential applied to the bottom of the simulation domain is The conductivity of sulphuric acid (2 This model describes the accumulation and transport of sulphuric acid, as sketched in The model also assumes that the rate of oxygen evolution is reduced by an increased proton concentration, which is reflected in its apparent reaction order of −1: The simulated domain with modified boundary conditions, Eqs. The reaction rate on the MnO Again, it is assumed that no reaction occurs on the Pb matrix: On the symmetry axis and on the domain boundary the gradient is zero: At the limit of the simulation domain the concentration of sulphuric acid is set to its bulk value: In order to account for non-ideality, a measured average diffusion coefficient of sulphuric acid of This model describes the reactions of the hydrogen peroxide and diffusion in the cylindrical domain. It is assumed that PbSO In order to study the influence of the decomposition reaction (20) on the generation of hydrogen peroxide, reaction (20) was assumed to be quasi-reversible. It was also assumed that no decomposition of H As the purpose of the simulation was to see if the decomposition of H The second step, hydrogen peroxide decomposition, is treated as a heterogeneous, first order irreversible reaction with the rate constant The resulting boundary value problem is represented in The decomposition of H Symmetry and domain boundary conditions are Additionally, an insulating boundary condition in the bulk solution was chosen because at steady-state, all H For the simulation the following parameter values were chosen: The model presented in The number of particles,  The active surface area of common flat electrodes can be determined in a similar manner and it appears to be independent of the particle radius, see Eq. (31). It is known that the surface fraction or global coverage, Θ and volume fraction, Since the number of active particles at the surface remains the same as for the flat electrode, the total active surface area of a composite with protruding spherical particles is obtained by Eq. Thus, even for a composite electrode with protruding particles, the active surface area is independent of the radius; and the factor 3 can be considered to be a roughness factor which will be different for other non-flat surfaces. In porous electrodes, nearly all the particles are active and the number of active particles scales with 1/  On the basis of The simulation of current density due to the transport of protons at an electrode with 25 vol% of catalyst particles is presented in The effect of the rate constant This can be related to a competition between the backward reaction of The influence of the MnO To visualise the influence of the reverse reaction  If the decomposition reaction on MnO The first aspect to discuss is the role of the TPBL, or in particular, if the experimental results are due to edge effects caused by an active TPB, or due to a porous layer where almost all catalyst particles are active (cf. Section The simulations of the mass transport of sulphuric acid showed that only very gradual concentration gradients of acid were found. This can be explained by the migration of protons carrying away most of the generated acid. Therefore, no edge effects were present and the current density did not depend on the particle size. This finding contrasts with the SECM results The other two simulated mechanisms, however, showed edge effects that are large enough to explain the experimental results and the dependency of the current density on the particle size. Yet, there is a notable difference in the plots of the (geometric) current density versus 1/ Anyway, the simulations showed that the catalytic activity of MnO The two-step-two-material mechanism, is, however, rather complex, even when assuming a simplified reaction path. Regarding the simulations, a reader may question especially the very high value of the decomposition rate constant, Since the presence of H The formation of hydrogen peroxide during the OER has been discussed by Fierro et al. On the basis of Gibbs free energies of adsorption, generation of hydrogen peroxide on metal oxides has been recently suggested by Viswanathan et al. Although H The third possible mechanism, the coverage of the electrode by gas bubbles, could be seen as another reason of edge effects ( If the bubble coverage extends randomly over both materials, gas evolution on the composite can be treated as a process taking place on a single effective material, as in the Cassie-Baxter wetting model There is yet another mechanism presumably leading to edge effects. Adsorbed surface intermediates may block active sites. However, when these intermediates diffuse across the triple phase boundary to the catalyst − a phenomenon known as a “spill-over” mechanism Electrochemical reactions on composite electrodes were simulated using an extended diffusion domain approach employing a method similar to Davies et The mathematical model predicting the triple phase boundary length (TPBL), that was proposed to explain the previous experimental results in It was shown that two of the three simulated electrochemical microscopic process models showed promising results matching the behaviour of an active triple phase boundary: i) the influence of the catalyst conductivity on the secondary current distribution and, ii) the two-step-two-material mechanism with quasi-reversible generation of the intermediate H The influence of the conductivity explains why a catalytically active but poorly conducting catalyst performs well when combined with a conducting matrix that binds well to the catalyst. This enables the use of electrocatalysts in composite materials which would otherwise be considered as having too poor a conductivity. Proving the existence of the two-step-two-material mechanism is more challenging. Theoretical considerations of Viswanathan et al. Kai Vuorilehto is acknowledged for the input to total surface area calculations with 3D electrodes. Late Professor Kyösti Kontturi (1949 − 2015) is remembered for his advice and support to this work. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: