This work presents laboratory bench scale results for cyanide regeneration from pure alkaline aqueous solutions of gold, copper and iron cyanocomplexes using an innovative option of the AVR process associated to the ion exchange polymeric resins Imac HP555s® ((Room&Haas––USA) and Amberlite IRA-420® (Room&Haas Brasil Ltda.) in columns. The resin Imac HP555s® adsorbed 64.5% CN from the alkaline solution containing metal cyanocomplexes. Meanwhile, the elution stage with H2SO4 and thiourea reached 31.2% CN, 86.2% Au, 86.4% Cu and 41.5% Fe. The resin IRA-420® adsorbed 53.4% CN under the same experimental conditions adopted for the resin Imac HP555s®. The resin Amberlite IRA-420® eluted 48% CN, 96.8% Au, 9.1% Cu and 76% Fe.In the mineral processing industry, cyanide is the main leach agent for treatment of gold ores and it has a significant price in the world market. In the AVR process (acidification, volatilization and reneutralization) the cyanide solution has its pH adjusted to 1.5 by sulfuric acid addition and the cyanide is converted to HCN ( A recent development of the AVR process is its association with ion exchange polymeric resins, which adsorbs the metal cyanocomplexes present in the cyanidation liquor ( This technical note presents the results of the AVR process principles for cyanide regeneration associated with ion exchange polymeric resins. The experimental results for cyanide adsorption, HCN elution using H The Imac HP555s Five different aqueous solutions were prepared for the experiments: solutions containing only cyanide, only gold and cyanide, only copper and cyanide, only iron and cyanide, and all metals together, i.e. gold, copper, iron and cyanide. Alkaline aqueous solutions containing only cyanide were prepared using 8.0 g NaOH and 2.5 g NaCN in distilled water followed by pH adjustment to 10.5. The solution containing Au and CN was prepared dissolving 2.0 g of metal gold (99.9% pure) in 1.0 l of 8.0 g NaOH and 2.5 g NaCN solution. The solution was kept under intense magnetic stirring, heated at 35 A borosilicate glass column was used for loading the resins. Five grams of resin were fed to the column and 2.0 l of feed solution were percolated through the resin bed at 14 ml/min rate using a peristaltic pump. The loading solution was collected every 10 min in a suitable Erlenmeyer flask. Samples from each flask and from the initial feed solution were sent for assays of cyanide concentration by titration. Elution of the cyanide adsorbed to the resins was carried out by passing 500 ml 0.05 N H The experimental results for the Imac HP555s The experimental results for the Amberlite IRA- 420 The Imac HP555s The elution of each resin using sulfuric acid and thiourea is shown in Another important observation is related to the HCN generated by the H The elution results for the CN–Au system showed that only a small amount of adsorbed cyanide was eluted using H  In the CN–Fe system, the usage of thiourea was not effective for either CN or Fe elution for both resins. An intense blue color was observed in the resins after percolation of the thiourea solution through the resins bed. It is an indicative that iron cyanocomplexes in the presence of H The results for the CN–Au–Cu–Fe system showed that CN elution using H A dark color was observed in the resins after elution with H The Imac HP555s At the elution stage, the Amberlite IRA-420 The authors wish to thank Companhia Vale do Rio Doce––CVRD, Room&Haas Quı́mica Ltda.––Brazil, Brazilian Science Foundation-CNPq, PRONEX/Mineral Technology––Science and Technology Ministry––Brazil and Millennium Institutes Program/MCT-CNPq-Brazil for the support that allowed this work to be concluded.