To investigate the permanent compressive stress of single particles in a cohesive bulk solid during handling or transport, uniaxial compression tests were carried out with cyclic loading/unloading. This involves a continuation of our previous studies (contact properties determination of macroscopic fine disperse glass particles via compression tests in normal direction). The experiments were implemented by means of a home-built compression tester. By repeated loading/unloading cycles with spherical, dry and smooth soda lime glass particles with a mean diameter of d50,3
                     =513.20μm, a set of micromechanical contact properties was determined. It is a model-based back-calculation of experimentally generated normal force-displacement curves of the elastic-plastic sample material. For this purpose, the contact model ‘stiff particles with soft contacts’, which was developed by Tomas, is used. In order to influence the flowability of soda lime glass particles and to verify the effect of the characteristic adhesion force on the elastic-plastic contact, the particles were altered to be hydrophilic and hydrophobic.
                  Finally, the effect of the number of cyclic loading/unloading tests on the contact stiffness, the effective modulus of elasticity and the resulting contact radius was explained and discussed. According to this, there is an increase of the elastic-plastic contact stiffness up to a saturation of the plastic deformation during the repeated loading of the contact with a constant load rate of FN,max
                     =45N.
                  The determined residual plastic deformations in cyclic compression tests are directly correlated to the densification in the contact area of soda lime glass particles due to the absent long-range order in the glass structure.slope of linearized elastic normal force-displacement function Y-intercept of elastic-plastic yield limit effective Hamaker constant mean particle diameter effective modulus of elasticity weight force adhesion force characteristic adhesion force of the unconsolidated contact normal force maximum normal force normal force at yield point displacement residual plastic contact deformation total residual plastic contact deformation displacement at yield point elastic contact stiffness elastic-plastic contact stiffness characteristic micro-yield strength Van der Waals bond stress effective particle radius contact radius elastic contact radius plastic contact radius total plastic contact radius velocity elastic-plastic contact consolidation coefficient elastic-plastic contact surface ratio plastic repulsion coefficient solid density effective surface energy sphericity Soda lime glass particles are used in a variety of industries. Examples are their application as grinding media in agitator bead mills for dispersion and comminution of coatings, inks, pigments or ceramic powders, in nanotechnology or biotechnology for cell disruption The particles undergo, depending on the application, a recurring compressive stress in the form of a particle-particle or particle-wall contact. It is assumed that the particles behave inert and return to the initial state after the application. Compression tests with single loading/unloading of soda lime glass particles, however, have already proved that the resulting contact properties show differences after single loading of the material with a defined normal force F During mixing and dispersion processes of powders, by means of glass beads, it comes to handling problems due to undesired attachment or adhesion and so it is very important to be able to control directly the flow behavior of the particles. One possibility of influencing the flow properties is the method of silanization One objective of the study was to describe the normal force-displacement behavior under cyclic compression in normal direction for the unmodified and modified soda lime glass particles. As a result micromechanical contact properties, such as contact radius, contact stiffness, modulus of elasticity as well as the characteristic adhesion force, are determined model-based for macroscopic fine disperse particles. In this context the influence of the number of repetitions of compression cycles is compared with the contact properties. The elastic-plastic contact model ‘stiff particles with soft contacts’ was used for this purpose The second objective of this study was not only to determine the influence of the surface modification on the flow properties, as described by Kutelova et al. Another important aspect is the plastic deformation of the glass particles by repeated compression with a defined normal force F In this chapter, the used soda lime glass particles and their surface functionalization are presented (Section For the cyclic compression tests, as described in our previous paper The properties of the used materials are summarized in The composition of the soda lime glass particles plays a crucial role in this work. The structure determines whether the glass can deform plastically, and thus it comes under cyclic stress to a densification of the material in the contact zone. The basic unit of glass is, similar to a quartz crystal, the SiO Due to the irregularities in the structure of soda lime glass a displacement of each tetrahedron structure in the contact zone may occur during cyclic loading/unloading, which in turn causes a hardening/densification of the material. This densification can be determined in terms of the residual plastic deformation after the compression. The flow properties of the used particles were influenced, as described in  After adjustment of the maximum force and velocity, the upper steel stamp moves downwards in direction of the sample and loads and unloads this in normal direction according to the required loading force. The recording and output of the normal force-displacement data follows by means of LabVIEW (National Instruments). In the present study, the material was subjected to cyclic loading/unloading in normal direction. The important factor is the change in the micromechanical contact properties over the number of loading cycles. For instance, the change of the stiffness is of great interest. It is crucial if the particle shows stiffer contact behavior with repeated loading/unloading or whether the contact is softer. Furthermore, the formation of the contact radius and the residual plastic deformation on the particle are characterized, which in turn can lead to an increase of the characteristic adhesion force. The normal force-displacement curve of the contact between a particle and the two walls is shown schematically for five loading/unloading cycles in After the approach, the contact is first deformed elastically according to Hertz followed by an elastic-plastic deformation during the loading up to a defined maximum normal force F The intersection of the unloading curve with the x-axis is characteristical for the plastic deformation h In For displacement-controlled experiments, the start value must be new redefined for each cycle. For each surface modification 100 individual particles (d The particle is not fixed to the lower stamp. The unloading of the contact is only to the point F The compression tests were carried out under room temperature at 22.6 In After the elastic deformation according to Hertz and the elastic-plastic contact behavior after reaching the maximum normal force F As described in Section Over the trend of 10 loading cycles it can be seen that the hydrophilic glass particles show the smallest residual plastic deformation. The PFOTES modified particles on the other hand, have the largest deformation. Already after the first cycle, the plastic deformation of PFOTES modified particles is 0.82 This result might be due to the modification of the particles. By cleaning with peroxymonosulfuric acid all contaminants such as dust or debris (from the production) were removed from the surface thus the hydrophilic glass particles have a smooth surface. The unmodified particles, however, have irregularities and roughnesses on the surfaces, which are measured and squashed in the first cycles. If the hydrophobic particles are considered, it is obvious from the results that the silane layers are squashed and irreversibly destroyed. Whether this layer is detached from the loaded particle contact or pushed aside has to be examined in subsequent experiments. It was impossible to determine the layer thickness direct with methods such as scratching. Therefore, the layer was defined with the surface roughness. As described in our previous work With an increasing number of loading cycles a hardening effect can be observed. This stiffening behavior can be described, for example with the parameter of residual displacement h When comparing the investigated particles, the surface roughness and contaminations for unmodified particles as well as the silane layers on the hydrophobic particles are clearly visible. They are expressed through a significantly larger first displacement value compared to the hydrophilic particles. The low displacement in case of the hydrophilic particles occurs due to the smooth surfaces rather to form a stable contact zone. The contact radius r This means that the contact radius changes, depending on the memorized normal force F Therefore, the square root of the product from the respective mean particle radius r To calculate the residual plastic contact radius r In The elastic contact radius increases for all particle collectives with the number of loading/unloading cycles. The values increase from around 35 In consideration of the plastic contact radius, on the contrary, it is recognizable that the hydrophilic particles have with r The determination of the elastic contact stiffness k Cyclic loading/unloading leads to a densification of the material as previously described. As shown in In comparison between the investigated particle collectives it is evident that the hydrophilic particles have much lower elastic contact stiffness in contrast to the unmodified and hydrophobic particles. As described in the single loading experiments A further parameter that characterizes the stiffness of a material is the effective modulus of elasticity E In the diagram it is clearly shown that the effective modulus of elasticity E For the PFOTES modified particles a different behavior is shown. The effective modulus of elasticity E The relation between the van der Waals adhesion force F Therefore, the y-intercept b of the elastic-plastic yield limit was applied. In The adhesion force increases for the investigated particles similarly. No trend can be established between the modifications. In other words, the surface modification by hydrophilization and hydrophobization has in the investigated particle sizes only a minor influence on the characteristic adhesion force under cyclic compression. The reason for the change is the larger contact area with the increase of the number of loading/unloading cycles. A larger flattening of the particle leads to a larger acting adhesion force between the wall and the particle. The elastic-plastic contact consolidation coefficient κ was determined with Eq. In The evaluation of the contact consolidation coefficient with the table in From the values it is clear that the number of loading cycles influences the contact consolidation coefficient κ and the ratio of adhesion force and weight force F The coefficient of restitution e describes the absorption of the kinetic energy during the loading of contact partners with the increasing number of cycles, as shown in the work of Antonyuk et al. U characterizes the point of unloading and E describes the intersection of the unloading curve with the abscissa. Based on the surface integral for loading and unloading, the coefficient of restitution can be determined for contacts with a constant velocity. In the case of a fully elastic contact the adsorbed impact energy is completely recovered so that the forming contact surfaces of the loading and unloading are identical. For this example, e is equal to 1 according to Eq.  As shown in the diagram the coefficient of restitution proceeds almost constant in a range of e In the following, the determined micromechanical contact properties are summarized in The van der Waals adhesion forces F Based on a home-built compression tester, soda lime glass particles with a macroscopic fine disperse particle diameter (d By cleaning the particles with peroxymonosulfuric acid for hydrophilization, and coating of silane layers on the particle surfaces for hydrophobization, the flow properties of the glass particles were influenced. The results show that the type of coating is irrelevant with the increasing number of cyclic loading/unloading. The influence of the layers is up to the fifth loading cycle. In the following cycles it can be assumed that the silane layers were squashed or crushed. For this reason it was proven, that the influence of surface functionalization of macroscopic fine disperse particles from the fifth loading/unloading cycle is barely visible in the selected size ranges of the normal force (F Furthermore, it was shown that the micromechanical contact properties have changed sustainably because of cyclic loading. The origin of this change is an induced densification/solidification of glass particles in the contact zone. The reason for the densification of the material is the absent long-range order of the glass structure. The inclusion of sodium (Na In particular the densification and the related plastic deformation h In addition, the elastic r Furthermore, it was shown that the repetitive loading/unloading cycles of a particle have a large influence on the formation of the characteristic adhesion force F We would like to acknowledge the financial support of the German Research Foundation (DFG) through the priority program ‘PiKo – Particles in Contact’. Further we would like to thank the group of Surface and Materials Technology from the University Siegen. The support from Dr. T. Staedler with respect to the implementation of scanning electron microscopy was especially appreciated during the collaboration in PiKo.