Nitrogen-fixing trees are often used in disturbed areas to promote soil development and to prepare the ground for more demanding tree species. However, their effect on the establishment of climax tree species has seldom been tested. We mapped the occurrence of volunteer seedlings of European beech (Fagus sylvatica) and English oak (Quercus robur) in patches reclaimed by planting alder (Alnus glutinosa and Alnus incana) and in unreclaimed forest patches (dominated by Salix caprea, Betula pendula and Populus tremula). Both communities were about 30 years old and occurred on one large spoil heap from coal mining near the town of Sokolov (Czech Republic). At the same time, we mapped mature beech and oak trees in the surrounding area. We planted oak and beеch seedling in an alder plantation, an unreclaimed forest stand and a grass-covered area without trees, and recorded their growth for two consecutive years. The closest mature beech grew 1km from the heap whereas seed-producing oaks occurred in its close vicinity and on the heap itself in a 30 to 40-year-old oak plantation. In both species, seedling density decreased with increasing distance from mature trees. Unreclaimed sites supported significantly higher seedling densities than reclaimed ones. Seedlings in the unreclaimed forest stand grew significantly better than in the other two habitats. Oak seedlings exhibited significantly higher mycorrhizal colonization in unreclaimed forest stands than in the other habitats. Unreclaimed forest stands are better habitat for the establishment of climax trees, than the reclaimed alder plantation. Using of spontaneous woody vegetation as nursing cover for climax trees can be recommended in restoration practice. Risk and benefits of nitrogen-fixing trees should be carefully considered.Important part of world mineral resources is located in forested areas, which emphasize needs for restoration of functional forest ecosystems in places affected by mineral extraction ( Establishment of climax tree species in stands of pioneer trees receives relatively little attention ( Natural establishment of trees in a new area is a complex process that entails seed transport, germination, seedling establishment and growth in new places ( Beside migration barrier, the establishment of late succession plants affected by modification of environmental conditions namely soil development and nutrient accumulation. Previous studies show that changes in topsoil due to earthworm colonization allow colonization of site by more demanding late succession plant species ( Study was carried out on a large colliery spoil heap (2.5 The heap was covered by a mosaic of patches (hereafter referred to as sites) that were overgrown with different types of vegetation of varying age. Mining company keep detailed record about time when individual patches were heaped as well as about any other operation such as grading or tree planting that happen on individual sites. Our study focused on sites that had been reclaimed (afforested) by planting alder (mixture of We mapped all mature European beech ( To select the sites, we mapped all patches covered by unreclaimed plots or alder plantations falling within the 25–35 years age range. For both of these categories, we then selected the nearest and most distant site to the source of diaspores (see below). We selected two additional sites to obtain a total of four sites per category covering the gradient of distances from the source of diaspores as evenly as possible. We chose different sites to study English oak and European beech because mature trees of these species were distributed differently. None of the selected patches contain mature oak or beech trees. Patches were also selected to overlap with patches where soil and understory vegetation was previously studied ( In all patches, we mapped all seedlings using a Trimble GEO Explorer 2005 Series device with Trimble TerraSync software. We mapped oak seedlings in 2010 and beech seedlings in 2012. The mapping took place in early spring when leaves just emerged. This made it easy to spot seedlings and at the same time minimized the blocking of GPS signal by the canopy. We marked each mapped seedling with a bamboo stick. We then corrected the position of individual trees using a fixed geodetic GPS station of the CZEPOS network operated by the Czech Geodetic Institute; the maximum position measurement error was 0.5 Using ArcGIS 10.2, ArcMap 10.2, we plotted the positions of individual adult trees and individual seedlings onto orthophotomaps combined with a digital geographic model of the Czech Republic (ZABAGED) provided by the Czech Geodetic Institute. We also used the orthophotomaps to delimitate the borders of individual investigated sites. We then overlaid the whole heap with a 25 In the wavy terrain of unreclaimed sites, we studied which microhabitat is preferred along a linear transect perpendicular to the waves. We divided the waves into four microhabitats: top, northern slope, bottom and southern slope, each covering about the same area ( To test how the site affects seedling establishment, we planted bare root seedlings in an alder plantation, at an unreclaimed succession site, and at a neighbouring site that was levelled but not reclaimed and is covered by bush grass ( In all cases, we planted 24 seedlings at each of these sites. All oak and all beach bare root seedling come from the same commercial nursery (Lesy České republiky, Hluboká nad Vltavou). Saplings was in both cases with stems 18 To assess mycorrhizal colonization, we dug up three oak seedlings growing in an alder plantation, tree growing at a succession site and tree growing at a grass-covered young site. We collected all seedlings in spring when they were two vegetation seasons old. Such a comparison could not be done for beech seedlings because they survived only at the succession site. To study mycorrhizal colonization, we sampled approximately 15 We found no mature seed-producing beech trees on our post mining heap. The nearest trees form an east–west oriented line in a forest located 1 In both species, the number of seedlings decreased significantly with increasing distance from seed-producing trees (GLM, The numbers of seedlings counted along the linear transect in the succession forest patch show that seedlings were not distributed equally among the individual habitats, which covered approximately the same area ( Our three-way ANOVA evaluating the terminal growth of bare-root oak seedlings planted in fenced or unfenced spots in an unreclaimed forest stand, an alder plantation and at a grass-covered young site showed a significant effect of fencing ( In the case of beech, data were available only for bare-root seedlings from unfenced plots ( We studied the effect of fencing using potted seedlings. Our three-way ANOVA showed a significant effect of fencing ( Our study of mycorrhizal colonization in oak seedlings revealed that a significantly ( Our results show that spontaneous establishment of volunteer oak and beech seedlings is significantly better at unreclaimed forest sites overgrown by spontaneous succession than at reclaimed sites planted with alder. This may appear to contradict forestry practice of using alder as a species with an ameliorative effect to improve soil conditions and promote the growth of other trees ( Why are the densities of beech and oak seedlings lower at sites reclaimed by planting alder than at unreclaimed sites covered by spontaneous regrowth? In principle, the difference might be caused by differences in seed rain falling onto these sites or by differences in site conditions that affect the establishment and growth of seedlings. Both beech and oak have heavy seeds that can be dispersed only over short distances (c. 20 In agreement with other studies ( Concerning local conditions for seedling establishment, our experiments with bare root seedlings show that the conditions for seedling establishment of both species are significantly better in unreclaimed sites with woody vegetation developed via natural succession ( There may be several reasons why alder plantations differ from spontaneously overgrown sites in their suitability for beech or oak seedlings. The differences may arise from competition with the existing tree cover, competition with understory vegetation, the availability of suitable habitats and changes in abiotic and biotic soil conditions. The forest canopy (created by both trees and shrubs) does not differ significantly between alder plantation and successional woody vegetation ( Reclaimed sites had been levelled before alder trees were planted, unlike unreclaimed sites, which retained the wave-like terrain created by heaping. Our analysis of seedling distribution in spontaneous vegetation shows that both oak and beech prefer northern slopes of the waves and the depressions between the waves. A similar habitat preference has been reported for goat willow ( Reclaimed and unreclaimed sites vastly differ in soil development. Reclaimed alder plantations have been densely colonized by earthworms, which mix litter into the mineral soil, resulting in a thicker A horizon and absence of an Oe layer ( It should be emphasized, however, that in the present study we explored the establishment of seedlings in the understory of an existing tree cover. The presence of alder trees might therefore be part of the mechanism which reduces the success of beech and oak seedlings in reclaimed alder plantations. In forestry practice, a new forest is may be established after the previous tree generation is cut. The question how oak and beech seedlings would perform after cutting of the alder plantation in comparison with other methods of site preparation has to be explored. Our results show that spontaneous establishment of late successional tree species English oak ( The study was supported by a grant from the Czech Science Foundation (Grant No. GA13-10377S). Sokolovska Uhelna, mining company is thanked for permit to access sites and for background data about the sites.