This study investigates the effects of water-washing (extraction) process on the removal of the major elements and on heavy metals, their speciation in the washing process, and their thermal stability in the washed ash. A liquid-to-solid ratio (L/S) ranging from 2 to 100 was used in the washing process, followed by the sintering of the washed-ash pellets at 600–900 °C in a tubular furnace. The results indicate that more than 65% of the Cl, and more than 50% of the major elements of Na, K, and Ca, as well as more than 30% of the Cr, were found to be leachable at L/S=2. The washing process resulted in a concentrated heavy metal content in the ash afterwards. Sintering the washed ash showed a reduction in total concentration (RTC) of heavy metal decreased as the L/S increased, suggesting that the heavy metals evaporated less and/or were better incorporated into the sintered ash matrix. The formation of relatively low-melting point calcium-containing aluminosilicates, as identified by X-ray diffraction (XRD) techniques, was thought to be contributable to heavy metal stability in the washed ash, by acting as binder for chemical-reactions-accompanying sintering. The removal of most of the chlorides from the ash was also considered as a possibility to minimize volatile metal oxide formation, thus increasing the thermal stability of the heavy metals. However, the washing process then had less effect on the heavy metal leachability reduction. Results from this work should be useful in increasing the recycling safety of fly ash by increasing its thermal stability and decreasing heavy metal leachability.Renewed interest in the recovery and recycling of incinerator residues generated from municipal solid waste (MSW) processing has been caused by increasing disposal costs and decreasing landfill sites, by construction material benefits and by legislation restricting the direct disposal of hazardous fly ash. Such interest has resulted in the utilization of sintered MSW incinerator residues to produce aggregates for use in backfill, roadbeds, concrete blocks, and concrete mix. This ash sintering process, designed to recover beneficial aggregates, though characterized by its capability to destroy dioxins and immobilize heavy metals into a sintered matrix, still suffers from the reputation of having corrosion and leaching product problems, due to the presence of a high alkali chloride and soluble metal salt content Typically, chlorine contents as high as 11,000 and 156,000 mg/kg were found in municipal solid waste incinerator (MSWI) fly ash and bottom ash, respectively In recognition of the role of a water-extraction process as a useful pretreatment of fly ash, in this study fly ash was washed with distilled water at a liquid-to-solid ratio (L/S) ranging from 2 to 100, subsequent to the sintering of the water-washed ash at 600 to 1000 °C. The following characteristics were investigated: (1) speciation in the fly ash during the washing process, (2) the evaporation of heavy metals during the thermal treatment, and (3) the leachability of heavy metals from the sintered ash samples. The fly ash samples used in this study were collected from the cyclone of a mass-burning incinerator located in the northern part of Taiwan. This incinerator has a processing capacity of 1350 metric tons per day and is equipped with an air pollution control device (APCD) consisting of a cyclone, an adsorption reactor, and a fabric filter. The fly ash taken from the cyclone was homogenized, then placed into a pan and oven dried at 105 °C for 24 h. After the samples were dried and cooled, they were again ground and homogenized, and finally sieved. The fraction that passed through a #50 sieve was then analyzed to determine its principal properties. The tested fly ash had a moisture content of 0.55%, and a loss-on-ignition of 1.78%. The alkaline cyclone ash had a pH of 10.78 in a 0.01M CaCl The washing experiments were conducted with distilled water as the extractant, using L/S ratios from 2 to 100 and an extraction time of 60 min. The tested fly ash was first suspended in distilled water at a given L/S and stirred in an agitation apparatus the same as that used in TCLP testing, which is capable of rotating the extraction vessel in an end-over-end fashion at 30±2 rpm. After the washing process, the suspension was filtered in a vacuum and the filter cake was again washed twice, with relatively small quantities of water. The resulting material was then oven dried at 105 °C for 24 h, and then ground and desiccated until testing began. All of the washing liquor and the washed fly ash were separately analyzed for cadmium, copper, lead, chromium and zinc. In the heating experiments, the dried filter cake of the washed ash was first pelletized at 5000 psi to produce cylindrical specimens 2 cm in height and 1.6 cm in diameter. The specimens were heated at 600, 800, and 900 °C, respectively, for 1 h. Finally, the raw ash and the sintered specimens were subjected to analyses for their major elemental composition, heavy metal content and leaching concentration, as well as the speciation in the ash. The tested fly ash was digested with HNO The elemental composition of the MSW cyclone ash used in this study was determined and the results are summarized in The water extraction results, based on 1 kg of MSWI fly ash, are presented in Regarding the target metals, Cr was found to be the most leachable in the MSWI fly ash, showing that 13.42% of its content was leached out in the washing process. Lead showed a leached fraction of about 1%, and the other target metals less than 1%. The partitioning of the major elements and the targeted heavy metals during the water-washing process is illustrated graphically in On the other hand,  To assess the stability of the residual heavy metals in washed ash, the heavy metal evaporation in pellets of washed ash, at 800 and 900 °C, was determined and is summarized in The retaining effects on heavy metal evaporation in washed ash during thermal treatment may be discussed using the RTC. Two possibilities may contribute to a larger RTC, that is, a greater evaporation of heavy metal during heating, or incorporation of a greater fraction of the heavy metals into the Si–O matrix. The former reduces the residual heavy metal content in the sintered ash, and the latter increases resistance to HNO The targeted metals' RTCs for raw ash, at 800 and 900 °C, shown in Differences in heavy metals' RTCs between raw ash and washed ash indicate that despite the heavy metal contents being more concentrated after washing, the washed ash exhibited a lower RTC after thermal treatment, suggesting that the evaporation of target metals was suppressed in the washed ash, or that the fraction incorporated into the Si–O matrix was small; both cases would lead to the enhanced stability of heavy metals in the washed ash. The enhanced thermal stability of heavy metals during sintering may be explainable in terms of the formation of calcium-containing aluminosilicates, and of low-melting point sodium silicates, as well as the removal of alkali metals and chlorides. An X-ray diffraction (XRD) examination of the sintered ashes showed that, as the sintering temperature increased, there was an increase in the calcium-containing aluminosilicate phase. This result indicates that the formation of low-melting point calcium aluminosilicates that can act as a binder in chemical reactions that accompany sintering may lead to the enhanced ash sintering On the other hand, the alkali metal and alkaline metal oxides known as network modifiers, which work against the primary oxides of network formers, such as silicon, phosphorous, boron, and germanium, can result in a breaking of the glass-forming bond and a lowering of the melt viscosity  This study has demonstrated a simple water-extraction process that will increase the thermal stability of heavy metals by removing soluble chlorides and salts from the ash during the recovery and recycling of MSWI fly ash as aggregates. Some of the significant findings are summarized in the succeeding paragraphs. (1) A water extraction process at an L/S equal to or greater than 2 removed more than 95% of the Cl, more than 50% of the major elements Na, K, and Ca, as well as more than 13% of the heavy metal Cr from the tested MSWI fly ash. (2) The water extracted ash, despite its heavy metal content being concentrated due to weight loss due to washing, exhibited a smaller reduction in the heavy metal content when it was heated between 800 and 900 °C, suggesting that heavy metal evaporation was suppressed and/or the heavy metals were incorporated into the sintered matrix. (3) The formation of low-melting point calcium-containing aluminosilicates, as well as the removal of alkali metals and chlorides, as identified by XRD techniques during water extraction, could possibly have contributed to the evaporation suppression of the heavy metals and/or their incorporation into the sintered matrix after being heated to between 800 and 900 °C. (4) An MSWI fly ash water extraction process was found to decrease the leachability of the highly volatile Cd and Pb in sintered ash as the L/S increased; however, its effects on low volatile metal leachability, such as for Cu, was insignificant. (5) On the other hand, Cr behaved quite differently with a substantial increase in the leaching concentration, being mainly governed by the thermo-oxidization of the insoluble trivalent chromium (Cr The authors would like to acknowledge the funding for this study provided by the National Science Council of the Republic of China under project number NSC 88-2211-E-008-008.