Distal intraarticular femoral fractures in the elderly are associated with significant morbidity and mortality and represent a difficult clinical situation for the treating orthopaedic surgeon. Challenges are due to high levels of comminution secondary to osteoporotic bone which limits traditional fixation techniques. Furthermore, these injuries occur in the setting of patients with complex medical co-morbidities which benefit from rapid mobilization. Primary distal femoral replacement arthroplasty has emerged as a viable option for the management of distal femoral fractures in the native knee in the elderly population. In the appropriate patient population, surgeons should consider this technique in the acute setting.Distal femoral fractures account for 3%-6% of all fractures of the femur. Operative management of distal femoral fractures in the elderly is challenging due to the potentially high degree of fracture comminution, poor bone quality limiting fixation, osteochondral damage, and pre-existing arthritis and deformity, all of which occur in the context of a medically complex patient population with the need to mobilize rapidly to avoid the known complications of prolonged recumbency. Multiple fracture fixation techniques and implants have been designed and utilized in the management of distal femoral fractures in the elderly In recent years primary arthroplasty has been established as a viable option for the acute management of fractures around the hip, shoulder, Literature surrounding the non-neoplastic use of distal femoral replacement (DFR) arthroplasty has largely been in the context of nonunion surgery Strict indications for the use of distal femoral replacement for acute distal femoral fractures have not been formulated, however, this technique should be considered in elderly patients. In our practice this technique is usually limited to patients 75years or older that are stable enough medically to endure anesthesia and surgery. DFR should be considered in patients with severely comminuted distal femoral or articular fractures (AO type: B2, B3, C2, and C3 Meticulous radiological planning is mandatory, which consists of high quality anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the entire femur and tibia. Computed tomography scan with reconstruction in the sagittal and frontal plane can be helpful and is often used as an adjunct to assess for fracture extent and bone quality ( Standard preoperative antibiotic prophylaxis is used (broad-spectrum cephalosporin). Tranexamic acid is given in some form (intravenous, orally, or topical) in all patients without contraindication. The patient is placed in the supine position on the operating room table under general or spinal anesthesia. A well-padded tourniquet is placed on the proximal thigh under the drapes. If the surgical field is thought to extend well proximal in the thigh, then a sterile tourniquet will be used. For most fractures that are within the distal 1/3 of the femur, an anterior midline incision is utilized. The incision is started 10-15cm proximal to the proximal pole of the patella. The incision is extended distal just beyond the tibial tubercle similar to the approach for primary total knee arthroplasty. A medial parapatellar arthrotomy is then used. In cases of open fractures with traumatic arthrotomy or fractures that extend to the mid-diaphysis of the femur a lateral subvastus approach can be used due to the extensibility of the approach and to preserve femoral nerve innervation to the vastus medialis oblique. If reconstruction of the distal femur must be extended proximally in complex situations, a subvastus approach may be preferable. The tibia is prepared first. In our preferred system a monoblock tibial component is used that is 16cm long. The bone is prepared, and the trial component left in place. Attention is turned to the femur. Prior to preparing the femur, the surgeon should measure the amount of removed bone to ensure the resection level of the femur is appropriate for available construct lengths. For instance, if the distal femur bone removed is 5cm and the smallest available body segment is 7cm, more bone will need to be removed. The distal femur osteotomy is revised if necessary. Straight reamers are used to prepare the femoral canal. Cemented or cementless stems are available, however in this patient population with osteoporotic bone, cemented fixation is preferred. A trial stem is left in place for construct trialing. Based on resection level, different body segments are available to restore bone length. Once the construct is formed, the hinge mechanism is assembled, and trialing commences. Trialing involves measuring leg lengths, soft tissue tension in extension and flexion, and patellar tracking. In extension, the leg is pulled distally, there should only be a few millimeters of distraction possible. In flexion, with the extensor mechanism reduced, the hinge should stay reduced and patella track in the trochlear groove. Rotation is adjusted according to patellar tracking and once established is marked on the bone for final implanting. Rotation can also be referenced based on the location of the linea aspera. There are several implants referenced in the literature ( We prefer a sterile waterproof dressing that is applied in the operating room. Standard perioperative antibiotic prophylaxis is employed. Standard postoperative radiographs are obtained in the postoperative care unit ( Distal femoral fractures with significant bone loss in the elderly have historically presented difficult challenges to the treating orthopaedic surgeon and unfortunately result in high levels of morbidity and mortality. Technical challenges arise from prolonged periods of protected weight bearing, poor bone quality limiting fixation, and high rates of nonunion with standard open reduction and internal fixation techniques. Reports of DFR arthroplasty for acute fractures of the distal femur in the elderly have been limited ( Rosen The largest series to date examining the use of DFR for acute distal femur fractures had 54 patients with a mean 82years of age. The all cause reoperation rate was reported at 13.6% at 1-year and 18.1% at 3years, and a deep infection rate of 1.9%. The authors noted a 1-year mortality rate of 42%, which highlights the medical complexity and frailty of this patient population. All surviving patients at 1 year regained their presurgical level of mobility. Bettin et al. In the most recent study, Hart et al. Distal and intraarticular fractures of the femur in elderly patients are difficult to treat clinically. Poor bone quality, pre-existing joint disease, medical comorbidities, and high rates of nonunion with open reduction internal fixation lend support for endoprosthetic distal femoral replacement as a viable option in the acute management of these fractures. Although limited literature exists distal femoral replacement should be considered in the appropriate patient as it allows rapid mobilization and returns most patients to their preoperative functional status with similar reoperation rates to traditional surgical management options.