A portable gas analyzing system has been developed using conducting polymer (polypyrrole) sensor array that can be possible to analyze diabetic patient's breath. The expired breathe of diabetics often smells like decaying apples, which give off acetone. The polypyrrole thin film sensors with different thickness, which had been synthesized by chemical polymerization, were employed to detect acetone. Baseline was calibrated from dry air. The electrical signals of sensors were shown as a voltage variation rate, when the acetone was detected by the portable gas analyzing system. The sensing characteristics of acetone using conducting polymer sensor array were measured, and showed the possibility of a portable gas sensing system to check the breath of diabetic patients. The discrimination between patients and normal persons can be achieved, and easily interpreted by the PCA with low computational efforts.
                  A significant difference was shown between the diabetic patients and normal person. Throughout the experimental trails, the portable gas analyzing system has been shown the possibility of potential diagnostic tool for the case of diabetes mellitus.Many diseases are accompanied by characteristic odors, and their recognition can provide diagnostic clues, guide the laboratory evaluation, and affect the choice of immediate therapy. Common observations are the change in breath odor profile in diabetic patients entering a ketotic state, while the profiles of urinary volatiles from patients with phenylketonuria, or trimethylaminuria are vastly different from the normal urinary volatiles profile Diabetes, one of the most common endocrine patients, is a chronic life long disease caused by a carbohydrate metabolic block. In industrial countries, diabetes is the third greatest cause of death. With the improvement of life conditions, the incidence of diabetes increased rapidly. The conditions of diabetes are varied frequently and complicated. If the diabetes cannot be well controlled, the function of some tissues will be disordered, so they result in weakness, poor immunity and complications. These complications can bring great pain to patients and even endanger their lives. The main symptom of diabetes is high blood sugar concentration, so the diabetic patients cannot make full use of glucose. Simultaneously fat resolution is accelerated to produce more fatty acid, which can be converted into ketone bodies. The latter, if only a few are produced, can be completely utilized by tissues, especially muscles. But when the production is high enough to exceed the capacity of utilization, they will be excreted form ketonuria. So the expired breathe of diabetics often smells like decaying apples, which give off acetone Our concern is analyzing the difference in breath between the patient of diabetes and healthy person. A portable gas analyzing system has been developed with conducting polymer sensor array that can be possible to analyze diabetic patient's breath. The conducting polymer sensors were employed for discrimination of the breath of diabetes and healthy person. It consists of Pt/Pd alloy electrodes patterned onto the surface of an alumina substrate; the overlap electrode length is 7 Polypyrrole were prepared by chemical polymerization based on previous method The powder obtained was completely dissolved by ultrasonification in 5 Sensors were connected to the load resistor, and dc voltage was supplied to operate sensors at both end of device. When the gas was introduced at the sensor array, voltage change was measured. We defined response of sensors as following: The signals from the sensor array were transmitted to the multiplexer and the programmable logic device (PIC16F876). It was converted to digital and then reached to a Pentium-IV processor via a serial communication protocol for data analysis. We have been developed a portable gas analyzing system with a conducting polymer sensor array. The schematic of system is shown in Dry air (nitrogen 80%, oxygen 20%) was used for baseline calibration with a portable gas analyzing system. The illustrated samples in As shown in The responses of polypyrrol sensor array to 50, 100, 300 and 700  The Euclidean distances between each sample is presented in the This paper presents a portable gas analyzing system, which was implemented by using conducting polymer sensor array for diabetic patient. A significant difference between the diabetic patient and normal person was shown. The composition of the breath of patients affected by diabetes mellitus (DM) had similar smell with the property of acetone. Throughout the experimental trails, the portable gas analyzing system has been shown the possibility of potential diagnostic tool for the case of diabetes mellitus. Breath analysis with sensor systems have a number of advantages as compared traditional diagnostic techniques. It is non-invasive and painlessness. We wish to appreciation the financial support of National Research Lab. from Ministry of Science and Technology, Korea.