The Sm isotopic composition of samples from fractures below the reactor zone (RZ) Bangombé is investigated by thermal ionization mass spectrometry to shed light on neutron capture effects and migration of fission products. A well-defined mixing line from normal to fissiogenic Sm isotopic composition, which reveals that migration of normal and fissiogenic Sm at the reactor site of Bangombé is more significant than that at other RZs, is found.
                  A small shift in the Sm isotopic composition in one fracture, which was 3m below the RZ Bangombé, shows neutron capture effects in situ. The shift indicates a neutron fluence of about 4×1015
                     neutron/cm2. The neutron fluence originates from the fission reaction and is consistent with a macroscopic neutron capture cross-section.The main characteristic of natural fission reactors is the occurrence of ‘abnormal’ isotopic compositions of many elements in the core of the reactors. In the rocks located away from the core, isotopic anomalies can be explained by two processes: the migration (at micro to metre scales) of fissiogenic products from the core of the reactor and the neutron capture of isotopes during the nuclear process. The first natural nuclear fission reactors were discovered in the open pit of the uranium deposit of Oklo in 1972. Since then, 15 reactor zones (RZs) have been discovered in two uranium deposits in the Franceville basin. Fourteen reactors are in the Oklo deposit and one, called Bangombé, is located in a very small uranium deposit 30 The biggest reactors are reactors 2 and 10 of Oklo, being 150 and 350 The natural fission reactor sites at and near Oklo are unique till date and provide an opportunity to study the migration of some fission products using unconventional means ( Two processes, which produce a fissiogenic isotopic composition, have to be considered and are demonstrated for Sm: Isotopes produced by fission of Isotopes are transmutated by neutron capture. This leads to depletion of selected isotopes (e.g. The fissiogenic isotopic composition of the stable (non-radioactive) and in situ fission products is proof for the fission reaction itself and sheds light on the fission parameters, such as temperature, duration and neutron fluences. Evaluation of the isotope data reveals important information about the fission reaction. Mixing of normal elements and fission products before or after the reaction was corrected using an isotope with low neutron capture cross-section and low fission yield of the element (here, Combined mineralogical observations on a micro-scale and in situ analytical techniques allowed the demonstration of migration of fission products on a micro-scale within the RZs ( In order to ensure the reliability of the conclusions, some technical remarks are made on the measurement of the Sm isotopic composition. We know that important migration of the fissiogenic REE occurs at present in the reactors subjected to weathering conditions ( Samples are from the borehole BAX08, which crossed the reactor core at a depth of 10.75 Further samples (13.95–14.0) were collected below the oxidized zone from a different fracture network. The samples were scratched from the surface using a dentist drill or cut into pieces using a saw. A sketch of the sample spots is given in A large proportion of the samples was used for chemical separation of Nd and Sm. Only a small aliquot was used to check by ICP-MS if the total content was sufficient for TIMS. Nd and Sm were separated using commercially available HDEHP coated resin and HCl chemistry ( The Sm isotope data were normalized, when appropriate, to the mean ratio The nuclear reaction parameters, such as the neutron capture cross-section of      Calculation of the number of isotopes depending on the neutron fluence Calculation of the number of isotopes depending on the neutron fluence Calculation of the number of isotopes depending on the neutron fluence Based on the mean contents of major elements and selected isotopes of individual samples of drill core BAX 08, a macroscopic The Sm isotopic composition obtained by TIMS for organic matter (12.63 This section will focus on the isotope ratios The ratio The shift in the Sm isotopic composition resulting from a neutron fluence and fission yield was calculated from 4.0×10 The Sm isotopic composition of the sample BAX145-11.60 from RZ Bangombé ( The Sm isotope data of the RZ Bangombé is not normalized to a constant isotope ratio of  The fracture sample 11.83–11.97 The measurement of the isotopic composition of the organic matter at 12.63  All data shown in In the complete absence of fission yield, the Sm isotopic composition is changed by the depletion of The Sm isotopic composition of the fracture samples from depths of 13.95–14.0 Three possibilities have to be considered when evaluating the isotopic composition: Fission yield (in situ), Neutron capture (in situ), Migration and mixing (due to hydrothermal activity or weathering). The ratios Simple mixing of normal Sm and fissiogenic Sm from a uniform reservoir (reactor core) as end members would result in a straight line that can be drawn from the normal isotopic composition to the fissiogenic isotopic composition. A wider approach would consider a field which covers all possible mixtures of Sm with a fissiogenic composition which depends on a varying neutron fluence. This field would be limited by the mixing line on the right and the neutron capture line on the left in A simple mixing line is sufficient if the following conditions are met: REE-element and uranium content of the RZ 2 and RZ Bangombé were similar at the time of reactor operation. Fission yield and neutron flux and the final isotopic composition of Sm were similar. Sm without a strong fissiogenic composition is negligible. A small but interesting isotopic shift is observed in the fracture below the oxidized zone at 13.95–14.0 The idea of neutron capture in situ may be supported as follows: The neutrons produced from the fission reaction have a kinetic energy from 0.5 Using the fissiogenic neutron temperature of 2 We conclude therefore that neutron capture in situ caused the shift in the Sm isotopic composition when the fission reaction took place. Samples of fractures and organic matter from the most weathered reactor, namely the reactor of Bangombé (BAX 08 drill core), were investigated in detail for their Sm isotopic compositions using TIMS and compared with data from less altered reactors of Oklo (RZ 2 and 10). Organic matter and fractures contained fissiogenic Sm. The Sm isotopic composition lies on a mixing line of normal and fissiogenic Sm. This indicates migration of Sm after the fission reaction ceased. A fracture (BAX 08, 13.95–14.0 The study was financially supported through the European Commission MCR Training Grant (contract FI4R-CT96-5002) within its Nuclear Fission Safety Program (1994–1998).