In this work, decanedioic hydroxamic acid (DDHA) was introduced as a novel collector for the flotation separation of bastnӓsite and calcite, and the results were compared with those obtained for the conventional hydroxamic acid collectors benzohydroxamic acid (BHA) and octyl hydroxamic acid (OHA). The microflotation results showed that DDHA had better selectivity than BHA and OHA for the flotation of bastnӓsite from calcite. The flotation of artificially mixed minerals confirmed that the effective separation of bastnӓsite from calcite could be realized in the presence of DDHA. The zeta potentials of mineral surfaces with or without these collectors were measured, and the results indicated that DDHA strongly interacted with the bastnӓsite surface but was not adsorbed on the calcite surface.Rare earth elements (REE) are important strategic resources for many countries, are known as “industrial vitamins”, and are widely used in glass ceramics, metallurgy, military, new materials and other fields because of their excellent magnetic, optical and electrical properties ( Currently, froth flotation is used as a common approach to recover bastnӓsite ( Compared with fatty acid collectors, hydroxamates have shown superior selectivity for bastnӓsite since hydroxamates have The molecular structure determines the hydrophobicity and reactivity of hydroxamates, including components such as the carbon chain length, the number of In this study, a novel surfactant, decanedioic hydroxamic acid (DDHA), was synthesized and introduced as a collector for the flotation of bastnäsite from calcite. The flotation efficiency using DDHA as the collector was evaluated and compared with that of the conventional hydroxamic acid collectors BHA and OHA. Zeta potential measurements were conducted to investigate the interaction mechanism of DDHA with bastnӓsite and calcite. The bastnӓsite and calcite used in all experiments were obtained from Changsha, Hunan Province, China. The samples were crushed and dry ground by a porcelain mill. After that, the products were dry sieved to obtain the size fraction of +37–74 μm. Note that dry sieving was chosen because bastnӓsite and calcite may be partially dissolved in water. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of these two minerals are shown in DDHA (shown in BHA with a purity of 95% was synthesized following the procedure of Microflotation was performed in a mechanical agitation flotation machine (see The zeta potentials of the minerals were measured with a Coulter Delsa440sx Zeta analyzer. For each test, 40 mg of a −5 μm sample was mixed with 80 mL of 1 × 10 Microflotations of pure minerals were conducted to investigate the impact of pH on the flotation of bastnӓsite and calcite. The flotation performance of bastnӓsite and calcite as a function of collector dosage at pH 8.0 is presented in To evaluate the selective performance of collectors DDHA, OHA and BHA, the flotation of artificially mixed minerals consisting of bastnӓsite and calcite at a mass ratio of 1:1 was studied at different collector dosages at pH 8.0, and the best results are presented in  The above results demonstrate that a novel reagent, DDHA, can be used as an effective collector for the flotation separation of bastnӓsite from calcite. DDHA presented better selectivity than BHA or OHA, which might be attributed to the different molecular structures. As shown in The microflotation results in this study showed that the collector DDHA had better performance than BHA and OHA for the flotation of bastnӓsite from calcite. In the flotation of mixed minerals (1:1 mass ratio of bastnӓsite to calcite), a bastnӓsite concentrate with 86.19% grade and 85.91% recovery could be achieved when using 3.2 × 10  The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The author would like to acknowledge the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: