The present paper discusses the powder processing techniques of mechanically alloyed Cu–Cr powder. Mechanical alloying is required to obtain a nano-scale homogeneous mixture of Cu and Cr. Two processes to prepare Cu–Cr contacts are proposed from the present study for obtaining compacts having better properties. While the explosive compaction of the mechanically alloyed powder forcibly fills the pores to show excellent density and electrical conductivity, application of Cu coating to the mechanical alloyed powder gives a short-circuit diffusion path during sintering and thus, shows the best combination of properties compared to the presently used Cu–Cr compacts. Both the processes show near theoretical density, exceptionally high electrical conductivity and comparable hardness. Moreover, both the processes change the sintering process of Cu–Cr compacts from liquid phase sintering to solid-state sintering, thus making the process more energy efficient.Cu–Cr is a well known material in the electrical industries and different compositions of Cu–Cr are being widely used as electrical contact materials, especially in medium voltage–high current vacuum circuit breakers In the present study, four different and mostly used compositions of Cu–Cr, namely, Cu Four different compositions of Cu–Cr powder mixtures were mechanically alloyed for a maximum time period of 150 h in a Fritsch Pulversette P5 planetary ball mill. Each powder mixture was milled with three different ball sizes and subjected to two different ball-to-powder weight ratios (BPR). Details of the mechanical alloying experiments along with their nomenclature are presented in Vickers hardness was measured in a Shimadzu HSV-20 machine. Electrical conductivity was measured in a machine which works on eddy current principle and directly gives digital readings in %IACS (International Annealed Copper Standard) unit. Optical microscopy was done in an Olympus BX-60 microscope. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was performed in a Hitachi-make S3400-N machine. Some of the samples were subjected to atomic force microscopy (AFM). An AFM, supplied by Molecular Imaging Corporation, was used in the acoustic AC (AAC) mode for the imaging purpose. Before discussing the results of compaction and sintering of the mechanically alloyed Cu–Cr powder, a discussion about the nature (structure, homogeneity etc.) of the powder will be relevant. XRD profiles of the mechanically alloyed powder from batches S1 and S19 (refer Summarizing the XRD characterization of the mechanically alloyed powder, it was found that a combination of smaller ball size (15 mm dia.), more number of balls (24 balls) and smaller BPR (8:1) produces the finest nanocrystalline Cu–Cr powder (i.e. the batches S3, S9, S15 and S21), as compared to the other combinations of milling parameters, used in the present study. Evolution of fine crystallite size (and highest micro-strain) under these parameters can be supported from the understanding that smaller ball size and more number of balls increase the impact probability and frequency during mechanical alloying. Further, a lower BPR like 8:1 ensures, sufficient, but not more, quantity of powder getting trapped between two colliding balls leading to effective milling action. Further, SEM and AFM characterization of the powders showed the presence of coarser (> Formation of solid solution in the system and extension of solid solubility limits beyond equilibrium values can be adjudged from peak shifts of the XRD profiles. Though XRD is not the ultimate proof for solid solubility extension, but still it can be used, if any formula is available for the material system to correlate change in lattice parameter to the solid solubility In the first processing route, each batch of powder was subjected to uni-axial cold compaction at three different compaction pressures, 500, 750 and 1000 MPa. As expected, application of higher loads increases the green density and at 1 GPa pressure, green density attains a maximum value of 70% of the theoretical density. Electrical conductivity of the compacts was found to be a stronger function of Cr amount and a weaker function of compaction pressure. Higher Cr content reduces electrical conductivity. But, overall conductivity of all the samples was lowered by the presence of pores. Presence of closed porosities in the compact restricts them to obtain good conductivity.  All the above results points to the requirement of introduction of a compaction/sintering cycle to reduce the closed porosity. There may be two ways to improve the properties via reducing porosity; either switching over to more efficient compaction process or improving diffusion during sintering. In the present study, an alternate densification process, explosive compaction was used. Explosive compaction, being a high energy rate forming process, delivers a high magnitude impact-load to the powder mass and thus, is expected to densify more effectively. In another approach to improve the diffusion during sintering, the mechanically alloyed powder was coated with Cu following standard procedures and then compacted and sintered, so that the interface basically becomes Cu–Cu. Due to infrastructural limitations, these two types of experiments were performed on limited number of samples, taking powder from batches of S3 and S21 (refer  Explosive compacted samples of both S3 and S21 batches were found to be very near to the theoretical density. While hardness of both the sample increases after re-pressing, re-sintering of the re-pressed samples at 773 K for 15 min under a vacuum of 10 The same kind of trend was also observed for the compacts, prepared using coated mechanically alloyed Cu–Cr powder with the exception of hardness of S21 sample. Re-sintering of this sample was found to affect the hardness in an almost negligible manner. From all these results it can be summarized that uni-axial cold compaction of the mechanically alloyed Cu–Cr powder results in very poor properties. Mechanical alloying of the powder generates a high defect density and produces very fine crystallites. Thus, frictional force during compaction increases and it was not enough for the uni-axial cold compaction at 1 GPa to overcome this counter force and to effectively fill up pores. However, explosive compaction of these compacts shows excellent values of density, hardness and electrical conductivity. High intensity impact loading of the powder mass during explosive compaction was able to counter the frictional force and to fill up the pores. Another way to obtain good properties could have been improving the sintering characteristics of the powder.  In order to compare the advantages of the two processing techniques (i.e. explosive compaction and coating of powder), it is necessary to compare the properties of the compacts produced through these two routes with that of the industrial standards. An advantage of the second processing route (i.e. through explosive compaction) is that the process is cheap for mass production and thus suitable for industrial acceptance. On the other hand, third process of coating of powder allowed application of uni-axial cold compaction, a cheap and easy-to-operate process. Thus the third process is very easy to control, cost-effective and does not require involvement of any sophisticated instrument or process. Further, the present study, apart from introducing these two different processing routes for preparation of Cu–Cr contacts, also shows that in both the processes, sintering temperature could be lowered to 1173 K as compared to the normal industrial practice of 1473 K The present study thus concludes that the (a) explosive compaction of mechanically alloyed Cu–Cr powder followed by solid-state sintering or (b) coating of mechanical powder with Cu followed by uni-axial cold compaction and solid-state sintering could be a better option for production of electrical contact materials. Director, NFTDC, Hyderabad, India is duly acknowledged to allow one of the authors (Indranil Lahiri) to use facilities of the organization, for performing the necessary experiments.