An energy audit was conducted on a base metal milling facility where a top-down, bottom-up approach was presented to balance data measurements and estimates. The relation between throughput and specific electricity consumption, presented as a part-load efficiency curve for a milling operation, was established from the audit data. Unsurprisingly, the most efficient use of electricity occurred when the mill was operating at design capacity, but a survey of 14 metal mills operating in Ontario showed that 12 were operated under design capacity during 2012. For base metal flotation mills, 16–36% electricity cost savings could be realized by modification to the operating schedule, which would ensure that these facilities operated at design capacity even if plant operation was intermittent. With the Ontario electricity tariff arrangements, additional cost savings from strategic scheduling could reduce demand during coincident peak hours, which could provide financial benefit to these milling facilities.With milling costs representing 43–45% of total costs for a mining operation ( In 2008, an energy audit was conducted at Vale’s Clarabelle Mill by Byron Landry & Associates in order to identify potential energy savings ( Clarabelle Mill has been in operation since 1971 ( A simplified illustration of the comminution circuit, produced from the aforementioned sources, is presented in The comminution stage comprised two routes: a SAG mill circuit, and a crushing and grinding circuit, controlled by an Expert Grinding Control System. Throughput was maximized through the SAG circuit, which can process half of the ore based on total mill design capacity. When throughput exceeded the SAG capacity, ore was processed via the alternate crushing and grinding circuit. The crushing and grinding is performed by four lines of standard and shorthead crushers followed by two rod mills ( Once the magnetic and non-magnetic fractions are divided, various flotation circuits further separate the minerals from the waste. The result is the production of a copper concentrate which is sold to market and a bulk nickel concentrate which is fed to a smelter for further refining (  In 2008, a significant amount of effort was applied from Landry and Vale personnel to collect the data for the Clarabelle Mill audit. The dataset consisted of historical values retrieved from the company’s PI system, which allowed calculation of electricity use for each piece of equipment, on an hourly basis for the entire year. The data was organized into 12 equipment categories which included: SAG mill, Ball mills, Rod mills, Crushers, Agitators, Pumps, Blowers, Compressors, Fans, Conveyors, Heat trace, and Misc. process. The collated values consisted of: energy (kW Detailed data analysis ensued, as part of the energy audit process, to examine areas for potential savings. The following ten opportunities for reducing electricity consumption at the plant by 5% were identified, with payback periods ranging from zero to nine years ( Optimize blower operating sequence to maximize use of more efficient units. Minimize idling of conveyors. Utilize process control measures on main sumps. Refine SAG mill process control system. Reduce compressed air leaks. Implement motor rewind and replacement strategy. Optimize amount of water use in the crushing section of the plant. Replace existing light fixtures with more efficient units. Exploit energy in tailings pond discharge with installation of micro-hydro turbine. Replace fluid coupling pump drives with more efficient variable frequency drives. All of the aforementioned measures were considered as good candidates from an energy management standpoint, where implementation could deliver electricity savings. Subsequently, a review of the audit was conducted to gain a better understanding of how electricity is consumed in a mineral processing facility and to possibly identify additional energy savings. Some of the data gathered during the electricity audit of the plant consisted of hourly electricity consumption that could be summed to obtain the annual consumption. Specifically, 72% of the electricity consumption data was allocated in this manner. This indicates that there is minimal uncertainty for most of the data in the audit since no assumptions or calculations were required for this portion of the data. Conversely, for other pieces of equipment, the hourly kW For some equipment, current (Amps) values were recorded on an hourly basis which were converted to hourly energy (kW Power factor values vary depending on the rated capacity and load of a motor and can either be leading or lagging. It should be noted that facility power factor values are not the same as those of the individual equipment and that the individual power factor values should be used when available. Synchronous motors provide power factor correction to the facility ( Where run time data was gathered, voltage, current and power factor estimates were used to calculate the annual energy consumption for single-phase and three-phase motors as per For some equipment no hourly data was collected; this included 43 pumps where an annual use factor of 75% was estimated, which corresponded well with the average annual use of other pumps. Calculation of the electricity consumption for these pumps (corresponding to 17% of total electricity consumed by all pumps, or 3.6% of total electricity consumption) was achieved by using the rated capacity and an estimate for the voltage were used to calculate a value for the current. Then using these estimates and the power factor value, corresponding to that assumed for the other equipment, in the equations from Up to this point the analysis consisted of a bottom-up approach, where energy consumption from individual components was summed to estimate the total annual electricity consumption at Clarabelle Mill. Comparison of this amount to the actual total electricity supplied to the facility (top-down component) indicated that 8.8% of total electricity was unallocated, which left uncertainty. This variance was deemed significant and so precipitated a more detailed review in order to allocate this portion of electricity within the milling operation to gain full understanding of how electricity is consumed at the plant. An energy balance ensures that allocated energy consumption is not over or underestimated and allows validation of assumptions made within the bottom-up approach. The use of a top-down/bottom-up methodology provides an opportunity for reconciliation and increases confidence in the values and the results obtained during an energy audit.  It can be observed from Although the material covered in this section may seem pedestrian or of routine detail, it is important to understand the practice of energy management in addition to the theory; this is the level of scrutiny and attention to detail that is required for a thorough and reliable energy assessment. Using only the top-down approach does not provide a full understanding of energy use at a facility. Conversely, the bottom-up method used on its own does not instill confidence in the energy audit values because of the lack of reconciliation; assumed values could be incorrect, and/or data may be missing. The use of both methods together provides more accurate audit values which in turn increases confidence in estimated savings from proposed energy conservation measures. The top-down/bottom-up methodology may be used as part of a continuous improvement process such as that found in the ISO 50001 energy management standard ( An understanding of energy use is important to identify areas where efforts should be focused for savings. Sankey diagrams are useful to show how energy is used in a process plant since the widths of the bands are proportional to the amounts of energy they represent. A Sankey diagram was created to illustrate the energy flows at Clarabelle Mill using the audited 2008 annual electricity data, and is shown in It can be observed that the processes consuming the most energy comprise the SAG mill, ball mills and pumps which correspond to areas which may provide opportunities to reduce energy consumption with further investigation. An understanding of the variables that affect demand and energy consumption is essential in energy management to benchmark and improve efficiency. In advance of the audit, it was known that operation of equipment at part-load conditions can have a negative effect on energy efficiency ( A model relating the average hourly demand (MW It can be observed from A model for specific energy consumption was produced using the modeled MW It can be observed from Energy savings opportunities were investigated using the models and information from It should also be noted that during consideration of these revisions to the operating schedule, a base load of 10% of total electricity consumption was included during periods of no production to account for equipment that must operate regardless of production. These could include ventilation systems, agitators and heat trace, among others. Investigation of the electricity data from the energy balance in It can be observed from Subsequently the analysis was repeated with 2012 monthly data. It should be noted that February and September of 2012 had low production due to operating challenges and maintenance shutdown respectively, therefore these months were excluded from the analysis.  Electricity prices in Ontario vary based on supply and demand; the Independent Electricity Supply Operator (IESO) manages bids from generators to supply electricity as well as offers from consumers to reduce consumption in order to meet the forecast demand at the lowest available price ( Electricity rates in Ontario comprise various components including the Hourly Ontario Energy Price (HOEP) and Global Adjustment (GA) charges ( Demand response can be used by facilities to manage electricity costs by reducing or shifting electricity use during peak demand periods. Motivation for demand response participation in Ontario may be through programs which offer financial incentives for lowering demand or via billing rate structures where customers are invoiced based on their allocation of peak demand, such as the coincident peak (CP) pricing scheme in Ontario ( As of January 2011, customers with an average peak demand exceeding five MW were considered ‘Class A’ customers. The threshold for classification as a Class A customer was lowered on May 1, 2014 to three MW for certain industry sectors defined within the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS), of which the mining industry was included ( Scheduling production during off-peak hours would result in GA savings by minimizing consumption during the 5CP hours, which normally occur during the on-peak period. An analysis of the potential savings arising from operating at a base load of 10% of total electricity during on-peak periods was conducted. The 5CP hours for 2012 were used however the corresponding adjustment billing period occurring from July 1, 2013 to June 30, 2014 has not yet taken place therefore the global adjustment amounts were not available. Hence, the global adjustment amounts for July 1, 2012 to June 30, 2013 were used in the analysis. It should be noted that 5CP savings were not calculated for 2008 since this billing structure was not in place during that year. From It can be observed from Some companies have implemented protocols to minimize electricity demand and corresponding GA charges involving campaigns of 100 anticipated peak hours per year or more. Implementation of an intermittent schedule to minimize specific energy consumption (kW A model of specific energy consumption (kW A list of metal (gold, base metal and platinum) mines operating in Ontario during 2012 was established from the Ontario Mining and Exploration Directory ( Electricity data was then requested from each of these operations, however not all facilities responded to the request, whereas others were unable to fulfill the request due to insufficient sub-metering between the mine and the mill. In the absence of electricity data for each of the milling facilities, the part-load curve from Clarabelle Mill was used in conjunction with cost estimate models ( Electricity consumption in kW It was estimated that due to economies of scale, Strathcona and Kidd mills consumed 14.5% and 9.7% more electricity than Clarabelle Mill at design capacity. Therefore, with reference to Observation of Using the respective models from Additional electricity cost savings arising from load shifting could be obtained by these facilities, by conserving demand within the 5CP billing rate structure in Ontario. Assuming that a 10% base load was consumed during periods of no production, it was estimated that the total demand savings in 2012 from these 3 facilities would total 39 It was not possible to derive a part-load operation model for gold milling facilities due to a lack of information. However, it is estimated that the savings from these facilities would be lower than those from the flotation mills because most gold mills were operating closer to design capacity in 2012. However, this estimate is dependent on the slope of the part-load curve. Although gold mill throughput in terms of % design capacity was higher than base metal mills in 2012, a steeper curve could result in greater savings for the gold processing facilities. Conversely, a flat curve would yield a lower difference between part-load and full-load specific energy consumption, thus the savings would also be less. An assessment of the electricity demand reduction during ‘shut down’ periods could not be undertaken due to the lack of detailed electricity data from gold milling facilities, thus the demand charge reductions from the 5CP billing rate could not be estimated. An energy audit should not be undertaken simply as a data collection exercise; there needs to be some checks and balances to provide confidence in the values. This is readily achieved with a top-down/bottom-up approach. Although the first iteration of the audit may include assumptions to account for a lack of data, which represent a source of uncertainty, this highlights data gaps that need additional metering. Then the data can be refined, leading to increased confidence in the bottom-up audit values. As the uncertainty in the audit values is reduced confidence grows in understanding energy use. During the provincial analysis in this study, several assumptions were made, which may have an effect on the results. For example, it was assumed that all flotation mills had the same form of part-load operating curve and that this shifted on the vertical axis only depending on the design capacity of the facility. Furthermore, mill operation was assumed to be 24 Another model ( The efficiency of comminution processes is low; The underlying factors that produce the relationship observed in this study between specific energy consumption and throughput were not investigated. However, it can be hypothesized that the following measures influence the shape of the part-load curve: Most of the equipment used in a milling facility is powered by motors, which operation at reduced load leads to lower efficiency ( It is estimated that the mass of ore is small compared to the total mass including the ore, the grinding mill and grinding media. Therefore most of the electricity consumed would be used to rotate the vessel. So an increase in the amount of ore in the mill would not increase the electricity consumption by the same amount. Particle size reduction (grinding) in SAG mills relies on impact and abrasion from steel balls and ore ( These three mechanisms (and possibly others) manifest as specific energy consumption versus throughput expressed in terms of % design capacity. North American Palladium’s Lac des Iles (LDI) operation has realized that lower throughput resulted in increased specific energy consumption and thus unit costs, therefore they have implemented an operating pattern where the ore beneficiation plant operates for 14 Others have also investigated inefficiencies arising from part-load operation of individual processes within a mill. Using the same approach, An analysis during an energy audit at Wesfrob Mines Ltd. (now closed) showed that the relationship between specific electricity consumption (kW In 1979, a survey of energy consumption in 67 Canadian mills was conducted, including six nickel and copper ore mills which reported electricity consumption values ranging from 21 to 42  An understanding of electricity billing is important to maximize financial savings from energy management efforts. For tariffs in Ontario, as illustrated in Changes in operating schedule could lead to issues with labour relations. Intermittent schedule may pose operational challenges. For example it may be difficult to achieve a steady state (temperature, pH…) in certain areas of the process, or shutting down the mill may have a negative impact on downstream stages. Costs of shutting down and restarting operations may exceed financial benefits from the demand response pricing scheme. Contractual obligations may limit the periods for reduced production. Organizations may have difficulty in predicting peaks. Smaller facilities that do not qualify as Class A are not incentivized to reduce demand to the same level. Therefore if only a small share of mining companies are classified as Class A customers, this may hinder demand reductions from the sector but this may change as a result of lowering the qualification threshold for Class A customers from 5 Response to coincident peak pricing in Texas was investigated by Coincident peak pricing in Ontario was introduced in 2011. This policy is relatively new, thus customers billed under this structure may still be refining their strategies for maximizing response during peak hours. Over time, demand response from Class A customers may be greater. A review of the Global Adjustment pricing scheme examined alternative methods of recovering these costs, which included expansion of the current demand response structure to other consumers in Ontario ( Demand response to coincident peak pricing was also investigated by The analysis in this study was conducted with respect to an energy management perspective with a basic knowledge of milling practices. Therefore, prior to implementing the strategies from this study, it would be advisable to consult with plant operators and metallurgists to determine the optimal conditions to balance energy cost savings against operational limits while maintaining acceptable metal recovery. The proposed schedule at Clarabelle Mill, operating 11 As was demonstrated in Energy penalties are incurred when mills are operated at part-load because more electricity per tonne of ore milled is consumed, resulting in higher unit operating costs. The first step in managing energy at a milling facility should correspond to operation at design capacity, ensuring the most efficient use of electricity. For facilities where throughput may be constrained by the mining rate, market conditions, operational challenges, etc., this could entail intermittent operation at 100% design capacity, possibly through alteration of shift patterns. Alternatively, a modular design including parallel lines could offer throughput flexibility without sacrificing electricity use per tonne of ore milled. Although the most efficient use of electricity occurs when a plant is operated at design capacity, investigation of milling facilities in Ontario revealed that they are not always operated in this manner. The base metal mills were operated between 47% and 74% of design capacity, whereas the gold mills ranged from 59% to 120%. Potential electricity savings from optimizing the schedule to ensure that the base metal flotation mills in Ontario were always operated at 100% of design capacity could range between 14% and 36%. An understanding of the billing structure was essential to maximize the financial benefits. These mills could potentially have also reduced their demand charges by 90% in addition to the electricity savings, by strategically scheduling operation of the mill during non-peak hours, thus lessening demand during coincident peak hours. Economies of scale can be lost from low throughput at the larger facilities. For benchmarking, whether assessing the performance of several facilities, or quantifying improvements within a single operation as a result of modifications to the equipment or flowsheet design, only operation at equivalent load values (% design capacity) provides a fair measure for comparison. In the work reported in this paper, a third party undertook an energy audit which identified ten opportunities for improvement, amounting to 5% of electricity savings. The work done by the authors was an audit review which identified further savings of 14% arising from re-profiling the production schedule. If the current arrangement for demand billing is considered, additional cost savings of the same scale were identified. The magnitude of these savings will be important to plant design engineers and plant operators alike. As part of a continuous improvement process, progressive refinement of energy balances with the use of a top-down/bottom-up analysis approach lead to increased confidence in the audit and a stronger basis for future actions. To complete an accurate energy assessment it was essential to understand the energy data requirements, including the principal controlling factors governing energy consumption, and how this data can be converted into useful information. In theory, energy management methodology seems straightforward, but this work has shown that in practice, a significant amount of effort and analysis was required for a comprehensive and reliable assessment. The authors would like to acknowledge Vale and the Ontario Research Fund Round 6 SUMIT Program for providing data and financial support during this research, and to the reviewers for providing constructive comments to improve the quality of this manuscript.  The Mining Association of Canada. Facts & Figures 2012 of the Canadian Mining Industry. 2013; Available at: Damjanović B, Canadian Institute of Mining, Metallurgy and Petroleum, Goode JR. Canadian Milling Practice. Montreal: Canadian Institute of Mining, Metallurgy and Petroleum; 2000. Kerr A, Bouchard AP, Truskoski J, Barrett J, Labonte G. The “Mill Redesign Project” at Inco’s Clarabelle mill. CIM Bulletin 2003;96(1075):58-66. Vale. Annual Reports Form 20-F. 2013; Available at: KGHM International. Management Discussion and Analysis for the Year and Fourth Quarter Ended December 31, 2012. 2013; Available at: Glencore Xstrata plc. Sudbury Integrated Nickel Operations. 2013; Available at: Xstrata. Production Report for the 12 Months Thwaites P. Continued development of copper flotation control at the Kidd Creek concentrator. CIM Bulletin 1983;76(860):41-46. McCracken T, Kanhai T, Bridson P, McBride WR, Small K, Penna DN. Technical Report Lac des Iles Mine, Ontario, Incorporating Prefeasibility Study Offset Zone Phase I. 2013; Available at: North American Palladium. 2012 Annual Report. 2013; Available at: St Andrew Goldfields Ltd. Holt Mill. Available at: St Andrew Goldfields Ltd. 2012 Annual Report. 2012; Available at: Kirkland Lake Gold Inc. Recent Developments. 2014; Available at: Kirkland Lake Gold Inc. Annual Information Form. 2013; Available at: Kirkland Lake Gold Inc. Management’s Discussion & Analysis (’MD&A) for the Quarter and Year Ended April 30, 2012. 2013; Available at: Wardrop. Black Fox Project National Instrument 43-101 Technical Report, Technical Report filed January 7, 2011, with SEDAR®. 2011; Available at: see SEDAR Home Page. Accessed January 31, 2014. Brigus Gold Corp. Black Fox Mine. 2013; Available at: Brigus Gold Corp. Three and twelve months ended December 31, 2012 Management’s Discussion and Analysis, filed March 27, 2013, with SEDAR®, see SEDAR Home Page. 2013; Available at: Lake Shore Gold Corp. Bell Creek Mill. 2013; Available at: Lake Shore Gold Corp. 2012 Annual Report. 2013; Available at: Goldcorp Inc. Mill Circuit. 2008; Available at: Goldcorp. Annual Report 2012. 2013; Available at: Genivar. Island Gold Project Technical Report 43-101 Prepared for Richmont Mines Inc. 2007; Available at: Richmont Mines. Island Gold Mine and Mill. nd; Available at: Richmont Mines Inc. 2012 Annual Report. 2013; Available at: Wesdome Gold Mines Ltd. Annual Information Form. 2012; Available at: Wesdome Gold Mines Ltd. Eagle River MIne. 2013; Available at: Wesdome Gold Mines Ltd. 2012 Annual Report. 2013; Available at: InfoMine. Hemlo. nd; Available at: Barrick Gold. 2012 Q4 and Year-end Mine Statistics. 2013; Available at: Goldcorp. Musselwhite - Overview & Operating Highlights. Available at: Blais S, Osiowy C, Glazier I. Red Lake Gold Operation, Ontario, Canada NI 43-101 Technical Report, filed March 29, 2011, with SEDAR®. 2011; Available at: see SEDAR Home Page. Accessed January 30, 2013. Goldcorp Inc. Red Lake – Overview & Operating Highlights. nd; Available at: