Elastic-plastic properties of single crystals are supposed to influence the size reduction process of bulk materials during jet milling. According to Pahl [M.H. Pahl, Zerkleinerungstechnik 2. Auflage. Fachbuchverlag, Leipzig (1993) [1]] and H. Rumpf: [Prinzipien der Prallzerkleinerung und ihre Anwendung bei der Strahlmahlung. Chem. Ing. Tech., 3(1960) 129-135. [2]] fracture toughness, maximum strain or work of fracture for example are strongly dependent on mechanical parameters like hardness (H) and young's modulus of elasticity (E). In addition the dwell time of particles in a spiral jet mill proved to correlate with the hardness of the feed material [F. Rief: Ph. D. Thesis, University of Würzburg (2001)[3]]. Therefore ‘near-surface’ properties have a direct influence on the effectiveness of the comminution process. The mean particle diameter as well as the size distribution of the ground product may vary significantly with the nanomechanical response of the material. Thus accurate measurement of crystals’ hardness and modulus is essential to determine the ideal operational micronisation conditions of the spiral jet mill.
                  The recently developed nanoindentation technique is applied to examine subsurface properties of pharmaceutical bulk materials, namely calcite, sodium ascorbate, lactose and sodium chloride. Pressing a small sized tip into the material while continuously recording load and displacement, characteristic diagrams are derived. The mathematical evaluation of the force-displacement-data allows for calculation of the hardness and the elastic modulus of the investigated material at penetration depths between 50–300nm.
                  Grinding experiments performed with a modified spiral jet mill (Type Fryma JMRS 80) indicate the strong impact of the elastic-plastic properties of a given substance on its breaking behaviour. The fineness of milled products produced at constant grinding conditions but with different crystalline powders varies significantly as it is dependent on the nanohardness and the elasticity of the feed material.
                  The analysis of this correlation gives new insights into the size reduction process.During the past few years there has been an increasing interest in the determination of mechanical parameters of fine powders in the micron and submicron range. The development of the scanning probe technology in conjunction with improvements in the indentation technique allowed to extend these studies in the nanometer range. It had an immense impact on the field of tribology. Though mainly applied in material science to characterize ultra-thin films or coatings, nanoindentation can also be used to investigate the local mechanical response of crystals in powder technology. In the theory of comminution elastic–plastic properties of the materials to be ground are of utmost importance as they determine the breaking resistance as well as the formation and propagation of cracks. By this way they define the degree of size reduction Very often particle sizes in the micron or submicron range are required in the pharmaceutical industry. Efficient jet mills are utilized to obtain such fine products. Despite of the intensive use and enforced research the detailed mechanism of impact grinding is not yet entirely understood. Therefore and as various mechanical parameters affect this operation, it cannot be fully controlled up to date. In this work hardness and modulus values are determined on a nanoscale. These features highly influence the comminution process. The correlation of elastic-plastic parameters with the particle size distribution of the micronized bulk material will contribute to a better understanding of the comminution process in jet mills in order to control this unit operation. Indentation technique proves to be an excellent method for the characterization of local mechanical properties on a nanometer scale. By pressing a nanosized diamond tip of well-known shape into a material, applying loads lower than 10 The contact area Based on the assumption, that during the initial unloading the area of contact remains constant, Sneddons analysis By fitting the experimental data of the unloading curve by a power law relation, Nanoindentation has proven to be a reliable method not only to characterize smooth and hard surfaces like coatings, but also to successfully investigate the elastic-plastic properties of rough, non-uniform polycrystals. In this context the combination of the indentation technique with the atomic force microscopy (AFM) allows for additional insights. The three-sided diamond tip which typically is forced into the crystal surface can also be used in a way similar to an AFM cantilever, allowing for an in situ imaging of the area to be studied before and after indenting. With some materials an increase in penetration depth at peak load can be observed while the force remains constant over a certain period of time. This phenomenon indicates time-dependent plastic effects. The so called indentation creep, a well-known property of many materials observed at room temperature as well as at elevated temperatures, is believed to be caused by dislocation glide plasticity With some materials the formation of pile-up around the indent can be observed In order to achieve a homogenous distribution within a tablet, drugs often have to be micronized. Jet milling is an efficient technique in reducing the size of crystalline materials. In this study the different bulk materials were comminuted using a spiral jet mill Type Fryma JMRS 80 modified by Rief Thus pharmaceutical powders with varying elastic-plastic behaviour can be investigated while keeping the important machine parameters almost constant during comminution. By means of particle size analyses the influence of nanomechanical properties on the product fineness after milling was determined. Subsequently the grinding products were characterized with respect to their particle diameter using the d- and the n-values taken from the RRSB diagram. Grinding experiments performed with hard and brittle as well as with soft and elastic materials indicate that both hardness and young's modulus strongly affect the size reduction process. While hard and elastic samples require enormous grinding energies, soft and inelastic materials demand only less work of fraction The following substances were included in our studies: the naturally grown but ground calcite ‘Criscarb V 130’ (Eduard Merkle GmbH&Co. KG, Blaubeuren, Germany), sodium ascorbate Type AG (Hoffmann-LaRoche AG, Basel, Switzerland), lactose ‘Prismalac 40’ (Meggle GmbH&Co. KG, Wasserburg, Germany) and sodium chloride (Caesar&Loretz, Hilden, Germany). All materials were stored at dry ambient conditions and used as supplied. The crystal structures as well as the gravities of these substances are rather different, Reproducible nanoindentation measurements can be performed only on smooth and almost horizontal surfaces. Therefore particles fulfilling these conditions were selected under a stereomicroscope (‘Olympus S11’, Olympus Optical Co., Hamburg, Germany). The selected crystals had to be fixed on the metallic sample support by means of a non-elastic adhesive. In order to avoid that the elastic properties of the adhesive interfere with those of the crystal the latter one must be pressed into the adhesive until it is in direct contact with the metallic sample support. In addition the depths of the indentations were small compared to the mean particle diameters. Thus effects resulting from the ductile adhesive could be eliminated. The hardening time of the adhesive was long enough to allow for an orientation of the particle such that the slope of its horizontal surface did not exceed 5%. When the adhesive was fully hardened dust and fines adhering on the particle surface were removed by means of compressed air as they might disturb the measurements. Hardness is generally defined as the resistance of a material against a permanent local deformation when a hard indenter is pressed into a sample surface. Therefore, it is calculated as the applied load divided by the projected area of contact (Eq. The peak load ( As described below the coefficients ( The reduced young modulus ( The combination of nanoindentation and atomic force microscopy (AFM) allows for a proper location of areas being almost horizontal as well as for an in situ-imaging of the particle surface immediately after a plastic indentation is performed. A typical indent mark on a surface of calcite is shown in The indentation experiments were performed utilizing a conventional AFM base (‘NanoScope The investigations were carried out using a calibrated three-faced diamond tip (=Berkovich) with a total included angle of 142.3°. The tip shape function is given as In a spiral jet mill the particles to be ground are stressed by impact. The fineness of the milled products is affected on the one hand by the geometrical and operational parameters of the mill and on the other hand by the mechanical properties of the feed material. The jet mill used in these experiments was modified by Rief and Marquardt in such a way that operational parameters could be adjusted precisely It was the aim of our study to investigate the influence of elastic–plastic properties on the breaking behaviour during impact grinding. Therefore, all operational and geometrical parameters of the mill were kept constant while the four model substances with varying nanomechanical properties were comminuted. After each milling by means of Coulter LS laser diffraction technology a particle size analysis of the ground material was performed. The milled products were characterized by their By comparing the product fineness of different materials at constant operational parameters it should be possible to detect the influence of mechanical properties on the grinding and classifying process. A milling product characterized by small particle sizes would indicate that the low hardness of the material is determining the result. However, if the elastic modulus is the determining factor high d-values should be expected. In order to better understand the processes in the spiral jet mill, they must be described quantitatively. To this end correlation analyses between the operational parameters of the mill and the The substances included in our milling experiments are listed in The unloading and reloading curves of the four substances included in our study do not overlap but form hysteresis loops, Obviously all tested bulk materials exhibit distinct elastic–plastic behaviour. The load-displacement curves shown in Since all different crystals in Calcite showing an indentation depth of only 90 Moreover the slope of the unloading portion characterizes the elastic parameter. Therefore sodium chloride should have an extremely high young's modulus compared to its low hardness. This fact indicates a soft and brittle material, which should show ideal breaking behaviour. The small slope in the last unloading of lactose results from its low young's modulus. Lactose crystals are highly elastic and thus comminution may require increased energy compared to the other substances. As the breaking behaviour is not influenced by the hardness solely, both plastic and elastic parameters have to be taken into account. Detailed evaluation of the given force-displacement-curves yielded the values for plastic hardness and elastic modulus as shown in Hardness and young's modulus of the four materials, as determined experimentally, differ strongly ( For sodium ascorbate a hardness of 1.7-1.9 Lactose proves to be the most elastic of all materials tested in this study ( Calcite crystals are intrinsically anisotropic. Therefore it could be expected that the hardness varies with respect to indenter rotation. Despite of its rhombohedral structure hardness and modulus anisotropy for CaCO In a jet mill the micronization conditions are determined by their geometrical and operational parameters. The instrumentation of the modified Fryma JMRS 80 allows to adjust and to control all geometrical and operational parameters. If these parameters are kept constant, differences in the fineness of the milling products should only be due to the different mechanical properties of the feed material. In the following two Obviously the four bulk materials differ significantly in their breaking behaviour. Even though every experiment was conducted under identical conditions the particle sizes of the ground products vary distinctly. Above all the hardest and most brittle calcite exhibits the highest Considering the data of lactose it is evident that not only the plastic parameter hardness but also the elastic modulus must affect the fracture. As lactose is a much softer material than calcite good grindability is expected. However, lactose is also a very elastic specimen demanding high loads until particle breakage is induced. Therefore, the comminution of lactose at comparable conditions results in relatively coarse products and large particle size distributions. In contrast grinding of sodium ascorbate crystals which are substantially harder but also more brittle than lactose, results in finer powders with a narrow particle size distribution. This indicates that not the hardness but the elastic response of a material predominantly determines its breaking behaviour. Sodium chloride with its very low hardness and distinct plasticity was expected to be ground to the finest milling product of all four materials: but it proved to be different. The low n-value refers to a narrow grain size distribution, whereas the high We attribute this fracture characteristic not only to elastic–plastic properties as additional parameters like the specific density, the crystalline structure or the lattice spacing may also play a role. The experiments affirm the hypothesis that compared with soft and inelastic materials of low density, hard and elastic materials with high specific density require enormous grinding energies. In order to confirm the above findings and to better understand the processes in spiral jet mills, they should be described mathematically. For this purpose the milling experiments were performed according to a 3 Moreover, it is important not to consider one singular factor solely but always to comprise the combination of material parameters. In addition other influencing variables (e.g. crystal structure) may be of importance. The mathematical description of the grinding process is possible. By means of appropriate models the calculation of the milling conditions required to obtain a desired particle size distribution of the product is possible. Additional material properties not jet included in the calculations may have to be taken into account for further optimisation of the models. Using these improved models developed with more extensive data sets the grinding processes should be controlled more precisely.