Accurate characterization of the platinum group mineral (PGM) assemblages for Cu-Ni-PGE deposits are typically constrained by sample size and the difficulty of finding statistically significant numbers of grains, which is expected given the low concentrations of platinum group elements (<2ppm), the great variety of PGM, and the likelihood that a few large grains (>75µm) can account for large fractions of total mass. Despite these limitations, an accurate survey of PGM from different deposit types would have significant value towards developing deposit models and respective exploration strategies. In this study, we present results for a comprehensive evaluation of PGM at four copper-PGE occurrences hosted within separate but co-genetic gabbro or troctolite intrusions in the Coldwell Alkaline Complex and confirm that accurate surveys are possible with sufficient sample material and efficient PGM concentration methods. The PGM concentration methods used include: (1) hydroseparation of sieved size fractions of pulverized material, and (2) panning of grain separates produced by electric pulse disaggregation of drill core specimens. A favourable comparison of the results has verified the reliability of each method and added confidence that the PGM assemblages identified at three of the four locations are fully characterized.
                  Precious metal mineral (PMM) assemblages are determined for the Main zone and W Horizon at the Marathon deposit, and the main zones at each of the Geordie Lake deposit and Area 41 occurrence. A total of 10,824PMM grains (PGE and Au-Ag) and 68 mineral species, including 16 unknown minerals, were identified, of which 768 grains and 31 species occur at the Main zone, 523 grains and 41 species at Area 41,9485 grains and 43 species at W horizon, and 56 grains and 12 species at Geordie Lake. The PMM are grouped as follows: Pd-Ge, PGE-S-As, Pt-Fe alloy, Pd-Cu-Pb-Au, Pd-Ni-S, Pd-Pt-Sn, Pt-As, Pd-As, Pd-Pt-Sb-As, Pd-Pt-Bi-Te, and Au-Ag. All of the deposits were found to contain similar proportions of Pd-Pt-Sb-As, Pd-Pt-Bi-Te and Au-Ag minerals. But the W Horizon and Area 41 are distinguished from the Marathon Main zone and Geordie Lake deposits by the presence of minerals in the PGE-S-As, Pt-Fe alloy, Pd±Cu±Pb±Au and Pd-Ge groups.
                  Taken together, the PMM assemblages for deposits in the Coldwell exhibit a strong correlation to PGE enrichment relative to the range for mantle Cu/Pd values (1000–10,000). And there is no relationship between the abundances of Pd-Pt-Bi-Te and Pd-Pt-Sb-As minerals that are commonly associated with hydrous phases, and the intensity of hydrothermal alteration. Thus minerals found only at the W Horizon and Area 41, where significant PGE upgrading has occurred, including Pt-Fe alloys, rustenburgite, marathonite, palladogermanide, unknown Rh-Ni-Fe-sulfide, Au-Pd-Cu alloy, braggite, coldwellite, laurite, zvyagintsevite, laflammeite, and unknown phases Pd5As2, Pd3As, Pd3(As,Pb,Bi) might be considered as index minerals for PGE enriched types of mineralization in the Coldwell.The characterization of platinum group minerals (PGM) in magmatic settings is of interest for various reasons. Measuring the deportment of platinum-group element (PGE) into various PGM species or sulfides is useful for optimizing metallurgical processing ( An alternative and preferred method for PGM examination involves preparation of multiple representative heavy mineral separates by either hydroseparation of screened pulverized sample material, or panning grain separates produced by electric pulse disaggregation, as described by We present here, the first comprehensive study of PGM from large samples collected at four copper and PGE deposits/occurrences hosted within separate but co-genetic gabbro or troctolite intrusions of the Coldwell Alkaline Complex. The deposits include the Main zone and W Horizonhosted by Two Duck Lake gabbro at the Marathon deposit ( This paper complements the work of The Proterozoic Coldwell Alkaline Complex is a semi circular body, approximately 25 The Two Duck Lake and Area 41 intrusions are located at the eastern and northern contact, respectively, of the Coldwell Alkaline Complex with Archean terrain ( The Geordie Lake intrusion is located near the middle of the complex ( The Main zone and W Horizon (  Petrographic evidence for petrogenesis of sulfides and PGM is ambiguous because sulfides are associated with a wide range of minerals of both magmatic and secondary hydrothermal origin. For instance, chalcopyrite and platinum group minerals are included in the margins of plagioclase (  The Geordie Lake deposit consists of disseminated Cu-Pd mineralization up to 55 Sulfides are hosted mainly within augite troctolite and to a lesser extent olivine gabbro and albite pods. Minor disseminated sulfides also occur in syenite within a few meters of the gabbro contact and in the vicinity of thin chalcopyrite veins. The sulfides consist of very fine to coarse grained or blebby disseminated chalcopyrite and bornite with very minor amounts of siegenite, pyrite, millerite, galena, and sphalerite ( The association of chalcopyrite plus bornite with actinolite and locally intense albite alteration is unusual for magmatic sulfide deposits, and because mineralization is characterized by very high Pd/Pt and Pd/Ir, The Area 41 intrusion is situated on the northern margin of the complex ( Mineralization is disseminated and occurs within two to three bi-furcating and sub-parallel zones that extend the length of the intrusion ( Sm-Nd isotopic studies for mafic rocks at several locations in the Coldwell Alkaline Complex reveal a limited range for initial Nd isotopic compositions (ε An important aspect of this study is the premise that host intrusions for Cu-Pd mineralization in the Coldwell Alkaline Complex are co-genetic and that differences in the respective PGM assemblages are due to the dynamic intrusive setting and concurrent sulfide mineralization processes occurring at each location, and not to differences in the initial magma composition. And because each intrusion consists of multiple host rock types with widely varying abundances of major mineral and accessory phases, comparisons of the intrusions are based on similar rock types. Thus, comparisons include olivine gabbro at Two Duck Lake and Area 41 and augite troctolite at Geordie Lake. The average trace element compositions of troctolite or olivine gabbro from each intrusion are listed in The trend lines for the Two Duck Lake olivine gabbro, Geordie Lake troctolite, and Area 41 olivine gabbro are nearly parallel with strong negative Ta-La anomalies, nearly flat La/Nd, strong negative Zr/Zr Given that isotopic evidence suggests crustal contamination is not a significant component of the Coldwell gabbros, evidence such as low Ta/La which is commonly attributed to crustal contamination (example, Although it is common practice to estimate metal tenor for samples of magmatic sulfide deposits, there is significant error associated with estimation for samples with very low S or Ni content. These errors are exacerbated by possible mobility of sulfur and the heterogeneity of sulfide mineral distribution. All of these factors are important when calculating metal tenor for the Coldwell deposits, particularly for samples from the W Horizon with only trace sulfides, significant Ni contained by silicates, and very high PGE contents. Thus, instead of calculating Cu tenor, an alternative method for characterizing the Cu content of the sulfide fraction is to plot Cu vs. S for the exploration assay data set. This method enables the ranking of deposits by average metal tenors. In The Cu/Pd diagram is an important exploration tool for predicting the likelihood of prior sulfur saturation in mafic magmas ( In the Cu/Pd diagram ( To fully characterize the precious minerals in each deposit and to test for variations in PGM relative to PGE abundance, two types of sample were collected. The first type are composite samples, each comprised of 10 pulverized assay samples prepared during routine exploration activity at the Geordie Lake, Marathon Main zone and Area 41 deposits. Each composite contained a total of about 1 The second set of samples consists of 12, ½ The three composite pulp samples (from Main zone, Geordie Lake and Area 41) were sieved to size fractions +106,+75,+45,+25 and -25 The monolayer polished sections were prepared by Process Mineralogy Consulting Ltd. and systematically scanned using a Scanning Electron Microscope fitted with an Energy Dispersive Spectrometer and Oxford INCA Feature software capable of searching and quantifying the PGM and Au minerals. The grains were relocated and verified and, if necessary, additional semi-quantitative EDS analysis was carried out for further delineation. Each mineral was initially identified using the Minident software package. The initial identifications were each reviewed manually and doubtful ones were recalculated based on probable stoichiometry. The Au-Ag alloys were first grouped into aurian silver (<50 The twelve drill core samples from the Main zone, W Horizon and Area 41 deposits were disaggregated with a CNT-MC Spark-2 model Electric Pulse Disaggregator (EPD) at Overburden Drilling Management Limited following the method of The polished sections were analyzed at the Geological Survey of Canada by systematic scanning with a Zeiss EVO 50 series Scanning Electron Microscope equipped with an Oxford energy dispersive spectrometry system, INCA Energy 450 software and the latest AZtecEnergy microanalysis software. During scanning, each grain or “feature” was scanned for 0.2 A more complete description of the methods used for mineral identification and characterization of base and precious minerals in Marathon Main zone and W Horizon and Area 41 can be found in A total of 10,824 precious mineral grains (PGE and Au-Ag) and 68 mineral species, including 16 unknown minerals, were identified, of which 768 grains and 31 species occur at the Main zone, 523 grains and 41 species at Area 41, 9485 grains and 43 species at W horizon, and 56 grains and 12 species at Geordie Lake. Results for the composite pulp samples are listed in In order to summarize the mineral types and enable comparisons between deposits, the PGM are grouped into: (1) Pd-Ge, (2) PGE-S-As, (3) Pt-Fe alloy, (4) Pd-Cu-Pb-Au, (5) Pd-Ni-S, (6) Pd-Pt-Sn, (7) Pt-As, (8) Pd-As, (9) Pd-Pt-Sb-As, (10) Pd-Pt-Bi-Te, and (11) Au-Ag, as listed in Pt-Fe alloys have been described at Area 41 by Therefore in consideration of the abundant Pt-Fe alloy found by previous workers, the proportions of these Pt-Fe alloys found at Area 41 and W Horizon were added to the data summary listed in At Geordie Lake, a combination of low Pd concentration for the composite pulp sample and the examination of three heavy mineral grain mounts resulted in identification of only 56 precious mineral grains. The low PGM/PMM yield is considered problematic and not statistically significant. These results do not match those obtained by A test to show that mineral speciation is correct and that the PGM are representative of the sample compares element ratios calculated for whole rock assays to those for the mass percent contained within PGM based on grain size and mineral compositions. The poor agreement for Pd/Pt and Pd/Au could be a result of the uncertainties introduced by assays, use of ideal PGM densities during calculation, which often have extensive inter-element substitutions (in contrast to the Pt PGM and the Au-Ag alloys for which experimentally-derived densities were applied), or by the low grades in some samples. Also, as pointed out below, a few large PGM can have a significant impact on overall abundances. However, either possibility contradicts the favorable comparisons returned for Pt/Au which are based on much lower Pt and Au abundances compared to Pd and fewer Pt and Au grains (n The Au and PGM grain size distributions by frequency and by mass percent were compared for the Main zone and Area 41 composite pulp samples by Cabri (report 2014b). In both cases, the data show that a few large grains account for the majority of mass percent of the PGM and thus whole rock Au, Pd and Pt concentrations. For the Main zone composite, 3 of the 203 PGM grains found are coarser than 75 The reader should be aware that because of the methods used to concentrate heavy minerals in the composite pulp samples, in-situ relationships between PGM and silicate or sulfide minerals were not observed for these samples. The following petrographic descriptions rely for the most part on observations reported for the Marathon Main zone and W Horizon by Lakehead University Centre for Analytical Studies (LUCAS) in unpublished reports for Marathon PGM Corporation (now Stillwater Canada Inc., 2006 and 2007) and a report on Marathon and Area 41 by A total of 768 PGM grains, including 24 Pd, 2 Pt and 1 Rh mineral species, and an unknown PGE-bearing sulfide were identified in the average Main zone composite pulp ( The PGM in the Main zone occur within weak to moderately altered coarse-grained ophitic to pegmatitic gabbro of the Two Duck Lake intrusion. The host minerals for PGM were tabulated in a detailed study of 39 polished thin sections containing a total of 573 PGM in 17 species ( These petrographic observations are in agreement with previous work by A total of 10,294 precious mineral grains including 25 Pd, 7 Pt, 3 Rh, 3 Ir-Ru mineral species and an unknown PGE-bearing sulfide were identified at the Marathon W Horizon and are listed in The platinum minerals are more diverse in the W Horizon than at the other Coldwell deposits and include sperrylite (9.82 In a small study of PGM host and associated minerals in the W Horizon, 2 polished thin sections prepared from core in bore holes M07-237 and M07-306 at depths 185.0 At Geordie Lake, a total of 56 PGM grains and 12 mineral species were collected from the composite pulp sample. The minerals are listed in According to A total of 534 precious mineral grains and 42 mineral species were collected from the combined composite pulp ( Calculated average abundances, based on data in There is a distinct lack of correlation for PGM assemblages between individual samples within the Main zone (AV01 to AV04), W Horizon (AV05 to AV08), and Area 41 (AV09 to AV12) as illustrated in It is possible that the large variations in the PGM assemblages are a result of too small sample sizes as might be expected when concentrating mineral separates from samples with concentrations that are typically less than 1 or 2 If bulk composition has an effect on the PGM assemblage then there should be a correlation between PGM assemblages and whole rock metal abundances in samples from the same zone ( To evaluate the possibility that Pd mineral species and abundances are controlled by whole rock metal values, it is helpful to focus on the three dominant Pd mineral groups (Pd-As, Pd-Pt-Sb-As and Pd-Pt-Bi-Te) and recalculate abundances to 100% ( The average PGM abundances for the core samples ( For Area 41, the two sample groups are similar although agreement is not as good as for the Main zone. Of the seven most abundant PGM in the composite sample (sperrylite, zvyagintsevite, isoferroplatinum, sobolevskite, tetraferroplatinum, mertieite, and arsenopalladinite) representing 78.4 A summary of PGM data organized into groups is presented in Relative proportions for each mineral group illustrate the distinctive nature of each deposit ( A comparison of PGM at W Horizon ( The mineral assemblage at Geordie Lake resembles that found at Marathon Main zone. Of the 9 most abundant Pd minerals at Main zone, making up 42.2 An important observation made in this study is the lack of agreement for PGM assemblages between individual core specimens from each deposit, but very good agreement between the composite pulp and composite core samples. This observation suggests that the PGM distribution is uneven within samples less than about 1 On the other hand, the good agreement between the composite pulp and composite core samples demonstrates the reliability of both the sampling strategy (pulp vs. core) and the different PGM concentration methods (hydroseparation of sized fractions vs. electric pulse disaggregation and panning). In general, the intensity of hydrothermal alteration for each deposit increases in the order W Horizon, Main zone, Area 41 and Geordie Lake. Chlorite, actinolite and carbonate alteration is very low or negligible at the W Horizon ( Palladium and platinum minerals commonly associated with hydrothermal alteration are typically of the bismutho-telluride or antimony-arsenide variety and are commonly found in association with lower temperature sulfide and altered silicate mineral assemblages as have been described in the Duluth Complex, ( For the Coldwell deposits, the proportions of Pd-Pt-Bi-Te and Pd-Pt-Sb-As minerals are approximately evenly distributed in the Main zone and Area 41 ( The Coldwell deposits exhibit an increasing range of Cu/S in the order Area 41, Main zone, W Horizon, and Geordie Lake ( In the Cu/Pd diagram ( The PGM assemblage at Area 41 closely resembles, with some exceptions that of the W Horizon ( A flow through mechanism for upgrading PGE in a magma conduit setting was proposed by A primary objective of this study was to identify potential index PGM assemblages that could be used in exploration to vector towards PGE-enriched mineralization such as that found in the W Horizon. Although the term index mineral is typically reserved for metamorphic minerals, it could apply to some platinum group minerals in the Coldwell if it can be shown that unique minerals or sets of minerals can be correlated with any one or a combination of specific mineralization features such as Cu tenor (Cu/S) and sulfide assemblage, PGE enrichment (Cu/Pd), and/or late stage hydrothermal alteration. This study successfully correlated several key PGM with PGE enrichment at two similar and co-genetic gabbro hosted disseminated sulfide deposits in the Coldwell Alkaline Complex. Therefore, one or more of the following PGM are considered index minerals for PGE upgrading in Coldwell deposits similar to that found at the Marathon W Horizon. Minerals present at both W Horizon and Area 41 that do not occur at the other deposits include isoferroplatinum, tetraferroplatinum and rustenburgite. Other minerals found only at either Area 41 or W Horizon, and that have a significant grain count (>2 grains or >0.04 An important conclusion of this study is that a handful of platinum group minerals found in the high grade W Horizon and PGE enriched Area 41 occurrence could be considered index minerals and used as an exploration vector tool to test other Cu-PGE sulfide zones in the Coldwell Alkaline Complex for possible PGE upgrading. These index minerals, including Pt-Fe and Au-Pd-Cu alloys, rustenburgite, marathonite, palladogermanide, unknown Rh-Ni-Fe-sulfide, braggite, coldwellite, laurite, and laflammeite, and unknown phases Pd Finally, this study provides important evidence that very large data sets are necessary to characterize precious mineral assemblages in PGE deposits, regardless of PGE concentration. High grade samples up to 1 The authors wish to thank John McBride of Stillwater Canada Inc. for support throughout this study. D. Good would like to express appreciation to the W.S. Fyfe Visiting Scientist position at Western University for partial funding. The authors are indebted to Pat Hunt, Dr. Ingrid Kjarsgaard, Judith Price, and to Geoff Lane and Jason Redpath of Process Mineralogical Consultants Inc.), Dave Middleditch (Blue Coast Research Inc.), and Keiko Hattori (University of Ottawa) for their contributions to sample preparation and analytical work. This work was partly funded by Stillwater Canada Inc. and the Geological Survey of Canada’s fifth targeted Geoscience Initiative. This manuscript was improved by relevant and constructive reviews by an anonymous reviewer and Marina Yudovskaya.