This article presents a brief overview of the origins and development of food microbiology. It emphasizes the very applied nature of the subject with its objective of supplying safe, stable, reliable and nutritious foods, and discusses how this has influenced the subject as it has developed and appears today. In particular, the seemingly eclectic nature of the subject is a reflection of the practical need to embrace and draw from a wide range of disciplines to deliver the fundamental understanding of foodborne microorganisms, their behavior and ecology, analytical tools to determine their presence and significance, and management tools such as hazard analysis and critical control point (HACCP) to control them.Food microbiology is concerned with the activity of microorganisms in the production, preservation, and safety of foods and encompasses topics as diverse as the molecular basis of pathogenesis through to the development of food quality management systems. It is, by its very nature, an applied subject and one of, enormous economic and social importance. Unfortunately, food microbiologists can take little credit for the many great advances in food safety, preservation, and fermentation prior to the mid nineteenth century. Methods of conserving food based on drying, salting, smoking, acidic fermentation, and combinations of these were developed empirically thousands of years ago. Even more recent developments such as canning preceded knowledge of the thermal stability of microorganisms and their role in food spoilage. Seeking to explain Appert's original heat preservation process, eminent scientists of the day such as Gay-Lussac held the view that the exclusion of oxygen was responsible for the preservative effect. It was not until much later, and an extensive applied research program in the 1920s, sponsored by the National Canners Association in the USA, that microbiologists established the safe practices in food canning that have been applied with considerable success for nearly a century. In fact, it is only since the twentieth century that newly developed food processing techniques such as food irradiation and high hydrostatic pressure have been able to benefit from the food microbiologist's input from their inception. It is clear that an association between foods and the transmission of some illnesses was noted long before the advent of the germ theory of disease and may well account for some of the longstanding dietary taboos and religious priscriptions relating to food. Diarrhea and vomiting have been observed and reported since the earliest times and, though they are not invariably the result of microbial activity, associating them with the activities of eating and drinking would be natural. The link between foods and illness would be particularly apparent in those illnesses that are more severe or more distinctive in their symptoms, such as botulism. Botulism or sausage poisoning was a distinctive syndrome recognized by German physicians in the eighteenth century with the first recorded case in 1735 and others in 1755 and 1789. The first well-recorded outbreak was in Wurttemberg in 1793 when 13 people were affected and 6 died. This was caused by With increasing knowledge of microorganisms and their role in disease, an early theory on foodborne illness, developed in the late nineteenth century, ascribed pathogenicity to microbial production of ptomaines or cadaveric alkaloids during putrefaction of organic material: In effect making all foodborne illness the result of an intoxication. This theory has long since been superseded in the light of our increasing knowledge of the different mechanisms of pathogenesis involved in foodborne illness, although there are certainly echoes of the ptomaine theory in our modern understanding of scombroid fish poisoning. Appreciation of the more positive aspect of food microbiology, the use of microorganism in the production of food also increased in the second half of the nineteenth century. Like traditional food preservation techniques, fermented foods had been developed empirically, without any knowledge of the presence or activity of microorganisms. They did, however, make an important early appearance in the development of microbiology. In 1680, Leeuwenhoek described brewing yeast in his 32nd letter to the Royal Society but made no allusion to its living nature or involvement in the fermentation process, although he does describe his work as “observations of the yeast from which beer is made.” The nature of yeast and its role in alcoholic fermentation became embroiled in the frequently told tale of the, sometimes acrimonious, controversy over spontaneous generation featuring such luminaries as Pasteur and Liebig: A dispute which also included a negative aspect of food microbiology: Spoilage and putrefaction. Pasteur expounded the view that contaminating bacteria were responsible for defects (diseases) in wine and beer and he developed methods to improve brewing and winemaking by reducing the incidence of bacteria. Success was only partial however and it needed the later seminal work of Hansen at the Carlsberg laboratories where he demonstrated the role of wild yeasts in beer fermentations and developed the technique of producing pure yeast cultures from a single cell to lay the foundations modern brewing microbiology. It is clear that the growth of microbiology as a subject was based primarily on investigation of what microorganisms did rather than what they were. In that context, an early focus of food microbiology was on the safety, cleanliness, and perishability of one particular food commodity, milk, an area of continuing importance to this day. Many of the leading learned and professional societies currently active in food microbiology started life as organizations concerned with the safety and quality of milk but have since broadened their remit to encompass all food commodities. For example, around 1910 a number of US cities and states had passed laws regulating dairies, to protect the consumer from problems such as adulteration but also to protect their health as it had been shown that if a city supervised the production and sale of milk efficiently, the infant mortality rate could be greatly reduced. This led in 1911 to the formation of the International Association of Dairy and Milk Inspectors which eventually became the International Association for Food Protection. Similarly in the UK, in 1925, the Ministry of Agriculture started to appoint Advisory Dairy Bacteriologists who in 1931 recommended the foundation of the UK's first microbiology society, the Society of Agricultural Bacteriology, which later became the Society for Applied Microbiology. The importance of animal products both as a perishable food product and as potential carriers of disease also led to the early involvement of veterinarians in the development of food microbiology – a theme that was most marked in continental Europe. Progress on understanding microorganisms was for a long time constrained by the limited practical techniques available. Early light microscopy revealed the presence of the microbial world in the seventeenth century when van Leeuwenhoek, working with simple microscopes and magnifications up to 200×, famously described, in letters to the Royal Society, his observations of protozoa, yeast, and what may well have been bacteria. It was not until the 1880s, however, with the introduction of lenses corrected for both chromatic and spherical aberration by Abbe, the use of aniline dyes for staining and the development of methods for isolating and culturing organisms by Koch, that the pace of advance quickened. This still centered largely on medical microbiology where a number of pathogens were isolated and identified. These included some bacteria that were later recognized as food poisoning organisms, although they were first identified as the causative agents of very different conditions. For example, Compared to other analytical sciences, the techniques of food microbiology have changed relatively little in the century following the introduction of cultural techniques and solid media. Though there have been great strides in some areas such as molecular and serological detection methods, it is probably true to say that most of the methods used in a routine practising food microbiology laboratory today would not be too unfamiliar to Robert Koch. As an analyte, microorganisms have the unique property of self amplification; given the right conditions, a single organism can multiply exponentially over time and produce a detectable signal, traditionally a visual indication such as a colony on solid media or turbidity in broth media. Our improved understanding of the biochemistry and physiology of microorganisms has allowed an increasing range of organisms to be cultured (although molecular studies suggest that we are still some way from growing all microorganisms) and for growth media to be formulated so that growth gives additional signals, such as color changes, or fluorescence, that are of diagnostic value. To be able to distinguish not only between microbial species, but also between strains of the same species is a powerful tool in tracing pathogens through the food chain and in the investigation of outbreaks of foodborne illness. To do this requires focusing on properties that differ between closely related organisms rather than those they share in common and techniques have been developed in recent years to high levels of refinement. Procedures based on phenotypic characteristics such as antimicrobial resistance (antibiotyping, phage typing), metabolic activities (biotyping), and antigenic properties (serotyping) have been around for almost a century now. The Kauffman–White serotyping scheme for The development of molecular (nucleic acid based) techniques employing restriction enzymes and the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) has revolutionized microbial typing – improving strain differentiation, enhancing reproducibility, and standardization. Although techniques such as gene probes were used previously, their utility was limited by the lack of material available and it was not until the advent of the PCR technique, patented in 1985, that molecular approaches to the identification and typing of bacteria took off. We now have a battery of techniques, described in detail elsewhere in this book, that focus on small differences in genetic composition of cells to achieve high levels of discrimination such as pulsed field gel electrophoresis (PFGE), ribotyping, random amplification of polymorphic DNA (RAPD), and amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP). The use of instrumental methods based on electrical detection of microorganisms either directly using the principles of flow cytometry or as a result of changes in electrical properties of a medium produced by their growth has proved particularly valuable in handling large numbers of samples of particular foods. The huge progress made in understanding the molecular basis of microbiology has led to molecular and immunological techniques which have had a dramatic effect improving the accuracy and precision of diagnostic techniques. Once analytical techniques were available, it seemed reasonable to use them as a tool to determine and thus control the microbiological quality of foods. This approach was similar to that adopted with chemical contaminants but suffered from a number of drawbacks. Microorganisms do not behave as most chemical contaminants in foods: Their levels are subject to change as organisms die, grow, or simply survive, depending on the properties of the food, its processing and storage. Their behavior will vary depending on their location in an inhomogeneous food matrix so, as a result, microbes will not be distributed randomly. This means that taking a representative sample, one that gives an accurate picture of the quality of the whole lot, is either practically infeasible or hobbled by a high degree of uncertainty in the results from a limited number of samples. The need for sound statistically based sampling plans rather than casual sampling prompted the establishment of a leading international body in food microbiology, the International Commission on Microbiological Specifications for Foods (ICMSF). This was set up as a standing commission of the International Union of Microbiological Societies in 1962 in response to the need for international microbiological specifications for foods. It is made up of leading food microbiologists from around the world and has expanded from its initial focus on methodology and sampling plans to produce a series of high-quality publications on food safety management including Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) (see below). Recognition of the limitations of relying on product testing as a control measure led to more effective strategies based on intervention at source, well summarized by Sir Grahame Wilson at a meeting on quality control held in 1969: Initially this philosophy involved the production and propagation of codes of good manufacturing practice by bodies such as the Codex Alimentarius Commission, trade associations, and national regulatory bodies. These described the equipment, layout, and operating procedures and testing that would deliver high-quality products on a regular basis. However, to achieve wide applicability they tended to lack specificity in terms of their requirements and recommendations. This deficiency was later remedied by the development of what became known as the HACCP concept. HACCP originated by the effort of the National Aeronautical and Space Administration (NASA) and the Pillsbury Corporation in the US to apply the same kind of zero defects approach used in engineering the hardware of the US space program to the foods that the astronauts would eat. Its value was seen beyond the immediate concerns of space travel and was taken up by the food industry, national and international regulatory bodies. As a result, it was refined and codified into the now internationally agreed approach based on the seven principles: Hazard Analysis Critical Control Points Critical Limits Monitoring Procedures Corrective Actions Record Keeping Verification Application of a full HACCP approach can be a time consuming and costly exercise and has found its greatest application in larger scale food production and processing, but the emphasis of HACCP on identification of where and how hazards can be controlled has now become the universal basis for food control/inspection down to the smallest scale of food operation. Control of microbiological quality at source, during production, required a sound appreciation of how microorganisms behave in different foods and under different conditions of processing and storage. This knowledge, which makes it possible to understand the effect of control measures and to establish effective critical limits for them, had developed over the years since cultural techniques were first developed. Using them it was possible to analyze the microbial flora associated with foods and determine how population levels changed under different conditions. This work did not confine itself to pathogens but examined all components of the microflora including spoilage organisms. It was an early observation by Beijerinck in 1908 that a specific type of spoilage arises in a food under its normal conditions of storage, anticipating the current concept of specific spoilage organisms (SSOs) by many years. This observation that food materials serve as an ecological niche wherein particular groups of organisms are able to thrive led to an ecological approach to microbial growth and survival in foods, applicable to pathogens and spoilage organisms alike. This was formulated by Mossel and Ingram in the 1950s in a seminal article in the The initial infection of the substrate. Factors depending on the properties of the food material (intrinsic factors): nutrient content, pH, a The conditions of storage (extrinsic factors): temperature, relative humidity, and gaseous atmosphere. The properties of the organisms (implicit factors): physiological properties such as growth rate, K Processing factors: washing, comminution, heating, freezing, irradiation… A huge published literature developed describing the various factors affecting the growth and survival of microorganisms, particularly pathogens, and the limit values of various parameters beyond which growth or survival is not possible. It was an early observation that these factors often act in concert; microbial behavior being determined by the aggregate effect of a combination of factors. This idea was formulated as the hurdle or multiple barrier concept of food preservation. It had been applied unwittingly in the past in a whole range of traditional foods such as cured meats and conserves but now also gave guidance to the developers of new food products for the market. Although the mass of published experimental data available helped support the formulation of expert opinion as to the likely fate of a pathogen in a particular food, it was rarely possible to make quantitative predictions and there was frequent recourse to challenge trials where the fate of an organism was followed in the situation under investigation. Quantitative predictions were possible where a simple mathematical model was available as in the case of thermal death, but models predicting growth were not a practical proposition until the advent of modern accessible computing power. This new potential soon stimulated research programs around the world generating mathematical models that predict microbial growth (principally pathogens) over a whole landscape of conditions, combining factors such as pH, temperature, and water activity. Much of this activity has now been consolidated within a single program – the ComBase initiative. This is a collaboration between the Institute of Food Research in the UK, the USDA Agricultural Research Service in the USA, and the Food Safety Center in Australia which has used a massive library of quantitative data as the basis for ComBase Predictor – freely available web-based predictive microbiology software. The availability of such models and the predictions they generate are an invaluable tool for food microbiologists. They do however remain models of microbial behavior. They are formulated so that their predictions err on the side of safety, i.e., overpredicting growth or survival. The predictions give the microbiologist useful guidance though ultimately some limited challenge testing remains the gold standard for confirming how a pathogen will actually behave in a particular situation. Sophisticated tools such as ComBase bring us nearer to a position where we can assess accurately the risks associated with foodborne microbial hazards. They support what has been described as the third wave of food safety – microbiological risk assessment: a scientifically based process that produces an estimate of risk. This is performed in four steps Hazard identification Hazard characterization Exposure assessment Risk characterization Risk assessment takes place within the broader framework of what is known as Microbiological Risk Analysis and brings food microbiology into the sphere of public policy. In addition to risk assessment, the other aspects of risk analysis are risk communication – the interactive exchange of information on risk between interested parties such as consumers and risk managers (regulators) and risk management – the weighing of different policy options with regard to public health in the light of the risk assessment and its communication. Recognizing the impossibility of eliminating risk entirely, the outcome of the risk analysis would be an agreed Appropriate Level of Protection (ALOP): The level of risk (incidence of illness) a society is prepared to accept. In order for this to link with food safety management programs it has to be translated into a Food Safety Objective, defined as the maximum frequency or level of a hazard in a food at the time of consumption that gives the appropriate level of protection. It is then up to good manufacturing practice (GMP) and HACCP systems to deliver this objective in practice. Food safety is not a goal that can be achieved and maintained without continuing effort to improve our knowledge and keep pace with changes in the food chain, microorganisms, and consumer behavior. In the foregoing, the author presented a concise picture of the development and scope of food microbiology and shown it to be a discipline that draws on many areas in pursuit of safe, stable, reliable, and nutritious food. The author hopes that it provides some setting for the numerous topics that will be explored in greater depth elsewhere in this volume. 