Introduction
                  Given the recent criticisms in the literature regarding Synthes Variable Angle Locking Compression Condylar Plate (VA-LCP), the purpose of this study was to evaluate functional outcome, fracture healing, and complications of distal femoral intra-articular fractures using this device.
               
                  Methods
                  Patients with distal femoral fractures treated with 4.5 mm VA-LCP Curved Condylar Plate were included in this retrospective study. Follow-ups were at 4 weeks, 3 months, 6 months and 1 year. For the clinical and functional assessment of the knee, WOMAC, Koos Knee Survey, the Knee Score Society and the SF-12 questionnaire were used. Radiographically we assessed the fracture healing and the angles of the operated limb compared to the healthy contralateral limb. Complications have also been described.
               
                  Results
                  Forty-two patients with distal femoral fractures were included in the study. The mean follow-up was 8 months. Most cases (57%) reported a type 33-A fracture. Radiological healing was achieved in 33 cases; the mean time required to heal was 13 weeks. Three patients had an early postoperative complication and four cases had a late complication. Five cases required additional surgical procedures. Most patients (47.2%) achieved a complete flexion of 130° or more. WOMAC mean value 27.4%, KSS mean value 77.6 for the clinical part and 60 for the functional part, KOOS mean score 60.1, SF-12 mean score 46.1 for MCS and 35.5 for PCS.
               
                  Discussion
                  The results of this retrospective study suggest that VA-LCP Curved Condylar Plates have a good functional outcome and fracture healing similar to other standard distal femoral locking plates. VA technology allows greater versatility in fractures internal fixation regardless of the plate design. Fixation devices or Prosthesis implants previously placed may be avoided, as in periprosthetic fractures. Moreover, we have not recorded any early mechanical damage.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Osteosynthesis with Synthes 4.5 mm VA-LCP Curved Condylar Plate demonstrated to have no early mechanical failure rate with good clinical and radiological results.Fractures of distal femur are rare, less than 1% of all fractures and 3–6% of femoral fractures, but their incidence is gradually increasing with the growth of geriatric population and periprosthetic injuries. These fractures follow a bimodal distribution with an apex in young men, consequence of an high-energy trauma, and elderly women, as a result of an low-energy trauma in osteoporotic bones Distal femur fractures are complex, often displaced, comminuted and intra-articular and present a huge challenge to the orthopaedic surgeon. Surgical treatment with open reduction and internal fixation improves alignment and provides stability to the bone and surrounding soft tissues and is generally indicated to allow early joint of motion and rehabilitation Conservative management is reserved to patients with medical conditions who preclude surgical treatment, in fractures that are non-displaced and stable With the advance of technology, precontoured lateral locking compression plates have became the most commonly treatment of distal femur fracture. Fixed angle constructs constrain the trajectory of the screw through the plate to one specific direction More recently, locking plates with variable-angle screws have become available. Polyaxial locking systems add versatility in distal locking screw placement, because screws can be angle through the plate and bone in any directions up to 15° off-axis. The VA technology can be used to placing screws away from articular surface or implant previously placed such as in periprosthetic or peri-implant fractures [ The purpose of the present study was to evaluate functional outcome, fracture healing, and the complications of distal femoral fractures using Synthes VA-LCP Curved Condylar Plates. The study data was collected through a retrospective analysis and was performed at The Gemelli University Hospital's Orthopaedic department. Patients suffered acute distal femoral fractures (OTA / AO 33-A, 33-B, and 33-C) and were treated in the period between October 2017 and September 2018. The fractures were classified by an experienced traumatologist using the OTA / AO classification Demographic datas, type of fracture and internal fixation device were used to select patients. Inclusion criteria were: only adult patients with distal femoral fractures, treated with open reduction and internal fixation with Synthes 4.5 mm VA-LCP Curved Condylar Plate. Exclusion criteria were: distal femoral fractures treated with double plate, intramedullary nail, screw or arthroplasty and pathological fractures. A follow up less than 12 weeks because of the high failure rates within this period showed in the scientific literature All surgery procedures were performed by a group of orthopaedic surgeons with proven experience in traumatology. The surgery was performed with patient under general anesthesia on radiolucent table, in the supine position with 30° of knee flexion, to ensure good support for the knee and relax the tendency of the gastrocnemius muscle to pull the condyles in hyperextension. A standard lateral parapatellar approach and a parapatellar arthrotomy was used to reach the lateral femoral condyle or inter-condylar fossa. We always tried to obtain an anatomical reduction and stable synthesis at the articular part of the distal femur in order to give the patient a congruous joint. The length of the plate used was decided based on the extent of the distal femoral fracture.The post-operative physiotherapy protocol was adapted based on the type of fracture and the stability of the synthesis achieved. When possible, knee flexion was allowed on the first day post-op with active and assisted knee joint exercises. The decision whether mobilizing patients was based on bone quality, severity of the lesions and the pattern of fractures. From the second post-op day walking was granted to patients using Canadian sticks or a walker. Weightbearing on the operated limb was not allowed for at least 4 weeks after surgery up to 8 weeks, based on the stability of the synthesis. Follow-up were performed at 4 weeks, 3 months, 6 months and 1 year. The primary outcome of our study was the evaluation of the clinical results, performed through the analysis of: WOMAC, Koos Knee Survey, Knee Score Society and the SF-12 questionnaire. Secondary outcomes included radiological assessment, implant failure, including breaking or deforming of the plate or screws, the need for reoperation due to pseudarthrosis or soft tissue adhesions and the post-operative complications, such as early postoperative complication in the form of superficial infection, neurovascular damage, deep infection, imperfect fracture reduction, a thromboembolic complication, pneumonia, urinary tract infections or myocardial infarction and late complications such as pseudarthrosis, late deep infection, device failure, wrong consolidation. Weight-bearing x-rays in two projections were carried out. Angles of varus-valgus, procurved-recurved and the anatomical and mechanical axes were calculated and compared to the healthy contralateral limb. Fracture healing was evaluated by using the Radiographic Union Scale in Tibial fracture (RUST) adapted to the femur, a score of 1 up to 3 was assigned to each femoral cortical (anterior, posterior, medial and lateral), based on the x-ray appearance [ Cortex with a visible fracture line and no callus was given a score of 1, whereas cortex with both callus and fracture line visible was evaluated as 2. Finally a score of 3 was given to cortex with the presence of a bridging callus but no fracture lines. The scores assigned to each part of the femur were then added together to give a minimum score of 4 and a maximum of 12 (completely healed). Pseudarthrosis was defined as the lack of a bridging callus in at least three bone layers over four at six months after surgery without a visible progressive healing process on consecutive x-rays. A descriptive statistical analysis has been made. Forty-two patients with distal femoral fractures were included in the study, including 14 males and 28 females. The mean age was 65 years. The youngest patient was 19 and the oldest was 101 years old. Most cases (76%) were victims of road accidents while the remaining patients suffered a fracture due to an accidental fall (19%) or to sports trauma (5%). Four patients were polytraumas with multiple fractures. Three patients had periprosthetic fractures. The mean follow-up was 8 months (range 3–17 months). Two patients died in the first 12 months after surgery and four patients were lost to follow-up. Two patients were previously stabilized with an external fixator. Most cases (57%) reported a type 33-A fracture. In particular, 24 fractures were extra-articular (33-A); among the intraarticular: 2 involved only one condyle (33 B-1/33 B-2), 4 both condyles without comminution (33-C1), 9 had metaphyseal comminution (33-C2), 3 also had an articular comminution (33-C3). Two fractures were exposed and were classified according to the Gustilo and Anderson Classification: 1 of type I and the other of type IIIB. ( Radiological healing, assessed by RUST score, was achieved in 33 cases; most cases (72%) achieved it in 11 weeks. The mean time required to heal was 13 weeks. ( Three patients had an alignment variation greater than 5° in varus-valgus or in flexion-extension whereas two patients showed an altered external rotation of 10 ° up to 15 ° compared to the contralateral side. ( During the follow up, three patients had an early postoperative complication and four cases had a late complication. Five cases required additional surgical procedures. ( Three cases did not heal (7%): one due to a failure of the device and the others due to pseudarthrosis. Out of a total of 36 patients, 17 patients (47.2%) achieved a complete flexion of 130° or more. The mean ROM was between 4° of extension and 114° of flexion (extension range −2° / 22°, flexion range 55° / 145°). ( Better results in terms of range of motion were observed in extra-articular fractures compared to intra-articular fractures ( The WOMAC, assessing pain, joint stiffness and knee function, had a mean value of 27.4% (range 2.1–47.9). The Knee Society Score, divided in two sections, had a mean value of 77.6 (range 53–94) for the clinical part and 60 (range 40–100) for the functional part. The KOOS, a reliable score evaluating symptoms and the patient daily living and sport activity level, had a mean score in our study of 60.1 (range 40–77). The SF-12 mean score was 46.1 (range 35.3–50.1) and 35.5 (range 23.2–48.9) respectively for the mental and physical component. ( The results of our retrospective study suggest that VA-LCP Curved Condylar Plates have a good functional outcome and fracture healing similar to other standard distal femoral locking plates. The standard treatment for distal femoral fractures involves the use of plates with fixed-angle screw locking mechanism (Standard Locking - SL). The screw head rotation is mechanically prevented at the plate interface. This type of plate constrains the trajectory of the screws in a single direction [ The introduction of the polyaxial or variable angle locking mechanism allows the screws to be positioned through the plate in any direction inside a conical vector of 15 °, preventing the rotation between the screw head and the plate anyhow. VA technology allows greater versatility in fractures internal fixation regardless of the plate design. Avoiding the articular surfaces, comminuted or osteoporotic bone fragments, potentially increase the overall stability of the construct. Moreover, fixation devices or Prosthesis implants previously placed may be avoided, as in periprosthetic fractures [ Biomechanical and clinical data have been suggesting favorable results related to the use of polyaxial technology in the treatment of distal femoral fractures Haidukewych et al. reported a series of distal femoral fractures treated using the Polyax ™ Locked Plating System (DePuy, Warsaw, IN, USA); fracture healing was achieved in 94% of cases with satisfactory clinical outcomes for most patients Previous studies on cadavers and sawbones also showed no significant differences in the strength of the Polyaxial system compared to Standard locking systems [ Biomechanical tests on distal femoral fractures using the POLYAX® variable-axis screw placement plate (Biomet, Warsaw) gave comfortable data, without showing any early mechanical damage at the plate-screw interface despite the large applied forces, supporting the biomechanical solidity of the polyaxial devices Pascarella et al. reported good clinical outcomes and high rate of distal femoral fractures healing treated with a polyaxial locking screw plates Differently, some studies have reported less favorable results in the use of the VA technology. Henderson et al. examined a series of distal femoral fractures treated with LCP plates. These authors observed a non-union rate of 20%, due to a lack of callus formation Tidwell et al. shows a greater rotational resistance of the SL plates's screws compared to the VA locking system: increasing the angle from the axis of the VA screw from 0 to 15 °, the rotational resistance at the interface screw-plate decreases almost linearly. However, it is not clear whether these differences are clinically significant in terms of construct resistance in fractures Tank et al. argue that the VA technology is not able to provide the same rotational locking force at the screw-plate interface compared to the SL type. They reported a high rate, greater than 20%, of early mechanical failure using a Synthes VA-LCP 4.5 mm condylar plate, significantly higher rates than other plate synthesis types. They therefore, advise caution using such plates, especially in distal type 33-C femoral fractures, according to the AO / OTA classification In this study, there aren't recorded any early mechanical damage (within 3 months from surgery), as reported by Tank et al. A Recent study by H. Dang et al. also reports a relatively low early mechanical failure rate (9.1%), comparable to the results recorded for other plate systems. Therefore, they advise the use of the Synthes 4.5 mm VA-LCP plate, considering it a safe and effective internal fixation system The authors believe that performing this surgery following the clinical outcomes shown in the literature, obtaining the correct anatomical reduction, using torque limiting driver or the use of the drill guide that limits angulation, are important and probably essential factors for the construct stability The limits of this study include its retrospective nature and the absence of a comparison group, treated with a different plate system; we may compare our results only with the scientific literature data. The loss of 14.3% of patients at follow-up and probably this influenced our results. Furthermore, this mid-term follow-up allows to draw conclusions about the early mechanical failure rates associated with this type of implant but not regarding long-term results. The Synthes 4.5 mm VA-LCP Curved Condylar Plate demonstrated to have no early mechanical failure rate with good clinical and radiological results. This implant can be suggested as a safe and effective fixation device. Our study did not confirm the catastrophic early failure rate that has been suggested in recent reports. None.