A novel extractant, di (2-ethylhexyl) (2-((2-ethylhexyl) amino) propan-2-yl) phosphonate (DEHAPP, abbreviated as B), was synthesized for the selective extraction of Ce(IV) in sulfate medium. The effect of contact time, the H2SO4 concentration, the DEHAPP concentration and temperature on the Ce(IV) extraction were studied systematically. DEHAPP exhibits a good extraction ability towards Ce(IV) when compared with other neutral organophosphorus extractants such as Cyanex 923, Cyanex 925 and DEHEHP. The extraction equilibrium constants and thermodynamic parameters (ΔG, ΔH and ΔS) were calculated. The extraction reaction of Ce(IV) is an endothermic process. The extracted complexes were determined to be H2SO4·B
                     (org) and Ce(HSO4)2SO4·2B
                     (org). A extraction process to selectively recover Ce(IV) from bastnaesite leaching was proposed, by which the purity of cerium product reached 99.5% with a yield of 90.7%.Given their particular physicochemical properties, the cerium compounds have been widely used as polishing powders, fluorescent powders, magnets, catalysts and ceramic colorant ( Solvent extraction has been one of the most effective techniques for the metal separation and purification. Of course, solvent extraction was also applied for the selective recovery of cerium from the mineral acid leaching of the minerals ( As a kind of interesting extractants, α-aminophosphonates have been used for the extraction of alkali metals, alkaline-earth metals, rare metals and noble metals ( Bis(2-ethylhexyl)phosphite (Shanghai Rare-earth Chemical Co., Ltd.), 2-ethylhexylamine (Shanghai Aladdin Industrial Co.) and acetone (Beijing Chemical Co., Ltd) were used as raw materials for the synthesis of DEHAPP without further purification. Cyanex 923 and Cyanex 925 were kindly supplied by CYTEC Canada Inc. and DEHEHP was kindly provided by Shanghai Rare-earth Chemical Co. Ltd. of China (their structures shown in Stock solutions of RE(III) and Ce(IV) were prepared by dissolving high-purity rare earth oxides in concentrated sulfuric acid and diluting to the required volume with distilled water. Stock solutions of Th(IV) were prepared by transforming Th(NO Nuclear magnetic resonance spectra were recorded on a Bruker AV600M for  Equal volumes (3 The extraction percentage ( The distribution ratio  The extraction of Ce(IV) by DEHAPP was investigated with an initial H The Ce(IV) extraction by DEHAPP and other neutral organophosphorus extractants such as DEHEHP, Cyanex 923 and Cyanex 925 was investigated and compared under the same conditions. As shown in 0.0058 The extraction of Ce(IV), Th(IV) and some trivalent rare earth ions such as Sc(III), Y(III), La(III), Ce(III), Gd(III) and Yb(III) by DEHAPP was investigated and compared. As shown in The extraction of the mentioned metal ions from a mixed solution is shown in The effect of aqueous H H The extraction reaction of H The reaction equilibrium constant ( Here, By rearranging Eq. The effect of DEHAPP concentration on the extraction of H The values of conditional constant, As discussed above, H Generally, it is considered that the H The distribution ratio The reaction equilibrium constant By combining Eqs. To explore the extraction mechanism, a series of experiments were carried out to determine The effect of bisulfate ion on the Ce(IV) extraction was studied by adding different amount of KHSO  Based on the above discussion and the charge balance of the chelates, the extracted complex of Ce(IV) by DEHAPP is proposed as Ce(HSO For a extraction system where 0.13 The effect of temperature on the extraction constant The enthalpy change (Δ b: 0.0052 30% DEHAPP ( Successive extraction-stripping cycles for Ce(IV) were carried out to assess the regeneration and extraction ability of DEHAPP. Organic phase loaded with Ce(IV) was stripped first by a solution of H The extracted complexes were characterized by FT-IR spectroscopy in the range of 400–4000 Based on the above results, a process ( An α-aminophosphonate extractant, di (2-ethylhexyl) (2-((2-ethylhexyl) amino) propan-2-yl) phosphonate (DEHAPP), was found to be efficient for the extraction and separation of Ce(IV) from sulfate medium. The extraction equilibrium of Ce(IV) was attained within 1 This work was supported by