Magnetic separations have for decades been essential processes in diverse industries ranging from steel production to coal desulfurization. In such settings magnetic fields are used in continuous flow processes as filters to remove magnetic impurities. High gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) has found even broader use in wastewater treatment and food processing. Batch scale magnetic separations are also relevant in industry, particularly biotechnology where fixed magnetic separators are used to purify complex mixtures for protein isolation, cell separation, drug delivery, and biocatalysis. In this review, we introduce the basic concepts behind magnetic separations and summarize a few examples of its large scale application. HGMS systems and batch systems for magnetic separations have been developed largely in parallel by different communities. However, in this work we compare and contrast each approach so that investigators can approach both key areas. Finally, we discuss how new advances in magnetic materials, particularly on the nanoscale, as well as magnetic filter design offer new opportunities for industries that have challenging separation problems.The properties of magnetic materials were identified as early as the sixth century BC, but the means by which magnets could move material remained only a curious phenomenon until the late 18th century ( The basic principle behind magnetic separations is remarkably simple and remains unchanged from these early examples. It relies on the simple fact that materials with differing magnetic moments experience different forces in the presence of magnetic field gradients; thus, an externally applied field can handpick out of physically similar mixtures those components with distinctive magnetic characteristics ( The 1950s were a time of great expansion for the field of magnetic separations as the introduction of high gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) systems permitted faster and more general magnetic separation processes ( More recently, separations using external magnetic fields have become commonplace in biotechnology where they are used for both protein purification as well as flow cytometry ( The problem of separating materials, whether they are specialized chemicals, high purity steel or valuable pharmaceuticals, from product streams is a near universal one for any manufacturing process. When speed is not an issue and the materials of interest are solids or flocculated products, sedimentation or centrifugation is routinely employed. For faster processing, filtration is a well established method for removing waste or concentrating product. Given these standard methods it is not always obvious that magnetic separations could or should be applied to a given problem. Certainly, if part of a mixture is intrinsically magnetic then magnetic removal is often the best solution. In these cases, magnetic separations generally offer higher throughput with greater specificity than equivalent centrifugation or filtration methods ( However, even in the absence of intrinsically magnetic components the use of designer magnetic beads—targeted to the product of interest—can make a magnetic separation feasible for virtually any system. Such processes offer very different kinds of trade-offs in speed and selectivity as opposed to the more conventional approaches. A consideration of the unique advantages of moving materials with external fields, as opposed to other conventional alternatives, is detailed in An important feature of a magnetic separation is that the product stream meets with virtually no flow resistance as it moves through a separator; this is in stark contrast to filters which use a solid phase as the basis for the separation process. Filtration is particularly challenging when submicron particles or biomolecules are the target products; this requires filter pore sizes well under a micron (ultrafiltration) or even a submicron (nanofiltration). The flow resistance that this solid phase introduces to the system is significant, and industrial membrane filters often must operate with hundred of pounds of solution pressure (many times the flow of a fire hydrant) to maintain flow rates of several milliliters per minute. Such units require not just energy-intensive pumping stations, but also expensive and high performance fittings and valves. Filters also can become fouled with a wide variety of contaminants requiring backwashing procedures and ultimately replacement. Conventional magnetic separators face few of these problems. In high-gradient flow systems, the columns are loosely packed with steel wools that offer virtually no resistance to flow. Reasonable operating pressures and conventional pumps are suitable for these systems, though the electromagnets that are needed for very high gradient separations do require significant energy. For separations in which speed is not an issue, then the batch magnetic separators are interesting options. Because they usually generate the fields with permanent magnets, they can operate without any external power; with the appropriate beads, such systems can remove a greater variety of substances than those accessed through sedimentation. This makes them particularly attractive for small-volume separations in low infrastructure settings. While magnetic separations are in principle excellent choices for many problems, their widespread application has been limited by the complexity required in separator design and bead technology. In the case of flow separations, cumbersome and expensive electromagnets are used to create external fields in excess of a Tesla; the requirement for high gradients also limits column diameters and thus reduces throughput. In the batch separations favored in biotechnology, permanent magnets in a multipole configuration provide the relatively low gradients needed and their set-up and use is easy and immediate ( The magnetic separation process is amenable to simple modeling and such treatments date back to the 1950s; most analyses assume that the materials being removed act independently and that macroscopic models for fluid dynamics are appropriate. These constraints make it straightforward to describe the many forces acting on particles in a flow, such as the magnetic force, Brownian motion, gravitation, and friction. What results is a universal equation that relates the net force on a particle to input parameters such as the particle size, magnitude of the field gradient, frictional coefficient, and the magnetic moment of the particle. Obtaining precise values for these experimental data is difficult and limits the predictive power of these models. Still, these treatments provide an essential foundation for improving the materials and systems used for magnetic separations. Magnetic separation occurs as a result of the diverse and competing forces acting on a particle during flow in the presence of an external field. These include a hydrodynamic drag force due to the flow velocity; a magnetic force due to the gradient of the applied magnetic field; gravitational forces for large and dense particles; and finally a diffusive force which, arises from the intrinsic Brownian motion of particles. While the first three are deterministic forces that control a particle's trajectory, the latter is a randomizing force that must be exceeded if an ensemble of particles is to experience net movement during some time interval. Put in other terms, if the energy available to move a particle does not exceed its thermal energy due to Brownian motion then it is not possible to set up a concentration gradient ( Perhaps the most important factor to include in models of magnetic separations is the role of inter-particle forces such as Helmhotz double layer interaction, dipole–dipole interaction and Van Der Waals attraction. Thus, the magnetic, dipole–dipole interaction and Van Der Waals forces aid the process of separation, whereas, diffusion, double layer interaction and drag force act against the separation. Also, the particles are found to reversibly aggregate in presence of high field gradients, which would increase the net magnetic moment to a magnitude much stronger than the competing forces ( Magnetic separators used on the industrial scale are overwhelmingly high gradient systems which function as a column in continuous flow operations. The speed and efficiency of these systems have been exploited for decades and the early stages of the industry were marked by notable optimism: “Virtually every process in the chemical engineering industry is a potential application (for HGMS). Many previously unthinkable processes will now become practical, and many previously practical ones will become unthinkable. It has already happened in the kaolin industry, and is beginning to happen elsewhere.” (Henry Kolm, September 1975) ( Kaolin (a.k.a. china clay) is a clay mixture primarily consisting of kaolinite (Al Natural kaolin has color as mined due to the iron containing micas, tourmaline, pyrite, anatase and rutile present in the material. To remove these impurities, kaolin can be magnetically cleaned with a continuous high gradient magnetic separator to produce highly white material suitable for paper or porcelain ( On average, generating 1 Magnetic separations can also be used to treat pollution. Fly ash from coal power plants is 18% iron oxide. Magnetic filtration has been applied to capture 15% of waste fly ash, thus providing a means for recycling. Estimates show that this can replace some of the magnetite used in industry ( The treatment of ores with magnetic separation is carried out primarily to enrich iron-containing ores. Conventional chemical and settling methods are not suited for this purpose given the similar density and reactivity of transition metal minerals. The magnetic nature of iron species, however, is unique and thus a natural target for magnetic separations. Among the iron ores taconite is most often subjected to magnetic treatments. From a taconite ore (33% iron) Magnetic separation of pyrite (FeS Strict food quality standards require the food products to be contaminant free, where mainly rare earth elements (REEs) constitute the majority. The food industry, therefore, has found magnetic separations to be an ideal method to remove REEs from food ingredients. Similar to the ore beneficiation or desulfurization, the target substances are weakly magnetic and require the high gradients of a magnetic field to be removed in a continuous food production line. Bunting Magnetics Co. offers magnetic metal separators and metal detectors for the quality of food and extended service life of the processing equipment, especially for cheese processing, chocolate plants, pet food processing, flour mills, spice plants, vegetable processing. Removal of both ferrous and nonferrous tramp metals is achieved by their line of food safety products for the food processing industry. With the new, lowered maximum permissible concentration for arsenic in drinking water (10 Arsenic adsorption and desorption are heavily influenced by adsorbent particle size ( As early as 1970s The ability to control remotely inspired many biotechnologists and medical scientists to investigate magnetic solutions for several biochemical processes, such as protein and cell separations and purifications, magnetic drug targeting and delivery, and enzyme-based biocatalysis. Unlike industrial applications, in-lab or batch applications require tailor-made magnetic materials but remain fine with steady, not continuous, bench-top or batch, process solutions. First, we will give key components of a magnetic material to be used in vivo and then review some of the biological applications of magnetic separation. In vivo applications of magnetic materials require biocompatibility. Thus, biochemists tend to use naturally existing minerals, such as magnetic iron oxides (magnetite, Fe Magnetic separation of biological entities had proven to be a rapid and effective process for over 30 years ( In an excellent review, Safarik and Safarikova discuss advantages and the equipment for a successful protein purification via magnetic means with a full scan of magnetic separation applications in isolation of enzymes, antibodies, and other proteins ( Similar to protein purifications, magnetic separations offer rapid quantification, high cell recovery when compared to the conventional methods, i.e. centrifugation ( Labeled cells, i.e. neural progenitor cells ( With efforts to take magnetic cell separation to industrial level, Berger and coworkers were able to develop a micro cell separator ( Bio-distribution of pharmaceuticals always faces a big challenge: Unspecific, evenly distribution of the drugs all over the body. This requires a large amount of the dose to get enough of it to the target which also brings a side effect of the non-specific toxicity in healthy sectors. Among other drug targeting methods, magnetic targeting offers one of the most viable solutions to the targeting problem ( For a successful delivery, a carrier must also be fully controllable. Aggregation, clogging or intrinsic, permanent magnetic behavior is completely unacceptable. Superparamagnetic iron oxides, therefore, offer both requirements for being an excellent shuttle for a successful drug delivery. As can be clearly seen in FeRx example, physical (magnetic properties to drug binding capacity) and physiological (target position to body weight) limitations for the in vivo studies resulted in unsuccessful medical therapies but also encouraged more in depth research ( Recent treatments with magnetic drug targeting involved using of magnetic targeted carriers (MTCs) in liver and lung ( Biocatalysis is a newly developing field that has much to gain from the use of magnetic separations. For this area, magnetic beads are used to immobilize biocatalysts, such as β-lactamase ( Diagnostics is becoming increasingly vital for especially fatal and infectious diseases such as AIDS. Yager et al. developed microfluidic diagnostic technologies to replace highly sophisticated technologies which are specifically designed for climate controlled facilities with constant supply of calibrators and chemicals, stable electricity, adequate and rapid transportation and highly trained personnel ( Magnetic separations on the industrial scale is a well studied and well developed area; recent research applications based on the same principles have made these tools relevant for biotechnology. In these cases, bench top magnetic devices can be used to purify solutions in batch processing. With proper magnetic carriers that features high quality nanocrystals, with greater surface areas and more responsive magnetic cores, we anticipate an expansion of the magnetic separations in biotechnology. The field faces many opportunities for growth in the 21st century. For industrial scale applications, the magnetic strength of separator columns can permit more rapid and universal applications. Superconducting electromagnets are already in use but designing less expensive permanent magnets that could generate massive magnetic fields would be a key factor for further development. Batch applications, which by nature are highly specific, have the ongoing challenge of designing custom magnetic beads tailor made to recognize elements of interest. For every biological species that is desired to be separated, a different antibody or binding functionalization may be required. An improvement in more universal and magnetically responsive materials would be a breakthrough. For both industrial and batch scale systems, there is an ongoing need to lower the field strengths needed to move materials in liquids, as well as create simpler and more versatile systems. The authors would like to thank the NSF (EEC-0647452) for funding through Center of Biological and Environmental Nanotechnology (CBEN). C.T.Y. thanks Robert A. Welch Foundation (C-1342) for his stipend.