Conducting polymer polypyrrole (PPy) possesses good biocompatibility and conductivity and has been used as functional coatings in bone tissue regeneration. In this study, a cholic acid doped PPy nanowires (PPy NWs) coating was electrochemically polymerized on the surface of titanium (Ti). The porous intertwined PPy NWs coating exhibited excellent electrical conductivity and electrochemical activity, better hydrophilicity and higher surface energy. In vitro cell experiments demonstrated that the PPy NWs coating together with a 10μA substrate-mediate electrical stimulation (ES) was capable to positive regulate the functions of MC3T3-E1 such as cell adhesion, proliferation and differentiation. Further long-term functions of cell tests including alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, bone-carboxyglutamic acid-containing protein (BGP) and calcium deposition were all thoroughly increased. These confirmed that the combination of PPy NWs and ES could accelerate MC3T3-E1 cells mature and osteogenesis. Hence, the PPy NWs coating was an electro bioactive coating and may have potential applications in the treatment of bone damage repairing and regeneration with ES.During the past decades, the number of patients suffered from bone defects have significantly increased, which results in increasing needs for bone implant materials. In general, an ideal bone implant material should not only have good biocompatibility and osteoinductive activity, but also can response to the external stimulus to up-regulate the bone cell adhesion, proliferation, and differentiation. So far, clinical bone implant materials are mainly titanium (Ti) alloy, cobalt alloy and stainless steel. However, all of these materials have some common disadvantages, such as relatively low osteoinductive activity, different elastic modulus far from the natural bone, dissolved gradually in body fluid and causing inflammation or complications, and other side effects On the other hand, it is well known that electrical microenvironment is important for the growth of osteoblasts. Lots of researches have confirmed a real electrical stimulation (ES) plays a positive effect on the regeneration, reconstruction of bone defect and promotion of the ossointegration of bone implants In the present work, pure PPy nanowires (NWs), instead of PPy nanocomposites or ca-PPy, were electrochemically polymerized on the surface of Ti, one of the most often used metal implant material. Compared with ca-PPy, nano-morphology PPy NWs had advantages in promoting cell growth. Additionally, pure PPy maintained higher electrical conductivity and stability than PPy nanocomposites or some biodegradable electroactive polymers Pyrrole monomer (98%, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) was doubly distilled and stored at − Monocrystal silicon wafers were cleaned and oxidized on which 500 In order to enhance the adhesivity between PPy coating and Ti substrate, Ti/Si wafers were treated with a boiled peroxide solution, part of distilled water, NH PPy NWs were two-step electrosynthesized on the Ti layer with CHI660D electrochemical workstation (Chen Hua Instrument Company, Shanghai, China) at room temperature. Conventional three-electrode system was used, with the Ti/Si as the working electrode, a platinum wire as the counter electrode and a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) as the reference electrode. The first step was to synthesize a PPy layer with normal cauliflower-like morphology on Ti surface with a constant potential of 1.0 The morphology of PPy NWs was observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, LEO-1530, Germany) at an accelerating voltage of 20.0 PPy NWs ultrasonic dispersed in Chemical composition of PPy NWs was analyzed using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR, Nicolet IN 10, Thermo Fisher, USA). The sample was recorded using KBr pressed discs. Electrical conductivity of PPy samples was calculated with the four-probe apparatus (SZ82, Suchow Baishen Instrument Company, Suchow, China). Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was conducted on a CHI660D electrochemistry system using SCE and Pt as the reference and counter electrodes, respectively. The Ti/Si electrode was used as the working electrode, and the scan rate was 10 Contact angles of Ti, ca-PPy, and PPy NWs were tested using tensiometer and contact angle meter (JC2000A, Shanghai Zhongchen Digital Technic Apparatus Co., LTD, Shanghai, China). The measurements ( MC3T3-E1 cells, an osteoblastic cell line from normal mouse calvarias, were cultured in alpha-modified minimum essential medium (α-ΜΕΜ, Gibico, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco, Grand Island), 1% penicillin and streptomycin (Hyclone, USA) in a humidified incubator of 5% CO We developed a homemade electrical cell culture device to apply the direct current field to MC3T3-E1. In this device, two copper electrodes were fixed at the opposite two ends of the PPy NWs disc by using a silicon rubber seal to avoid the contact with the culture medium directly. The surface of PPy NWs exposed to cell culture was 0.75 All discs were sterilized by immersing in 75% ethanol for 2 The prepared materials including PPy NWs, ca-PPy and Ti/Si dices (2.3 As a contrast, each group was divided into two parts, ES part and non-ES part. 10 To test the cellular viability and proliferation, MC3T3-E1 cells were seeded (2 To investigate the cell adhesion and proliferation, MC3T3-E1 cells cultured on different surfaces with or without ES were subjected to cell nucleic staining at a density of 2 Cytoskeleton of MC3T3-E1 was visualized by staining of filamentous actin (F-actin) to observe the cell spreading on different surfaces. After cultured for 12 The morphologies of MC3T3-E1 cells cultured on different PPy substrates were also examined by SEM. After cultivation for 12 Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity of MC3T3-E1 was tested by measuring the amount of ρ-nitrophenol using commercially available ALP assay kits (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology, China). In brief, after cultured for 3, 7 and 14 Total intracellular protein content in MC3T3-E1 was measured by a commercially available BCA Protein Assay Reagent kit (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology, China) following manufacturer's instructions. Cells were collected, trypsinized, lysed and centrifuged after cultured for 7 and 14 The intracellular calcium deposited by differentiating MC3T3-E1 was assessed quantitatively by a calcium reagent kit (Nanjing Jiancheng Bioengineering Institute, China) following manufacturer's instructions. After removed of the medium, MC3T3-E1 cells were washed 3 times with PBS. Next, cells cultured on different substrates were trypsinized, collected and lysed after cultured for 7 and 14 To detect the BGP synthesized in differentiating MC3T3-E1, cells were cultured and collected at 14 and 21 All experiments were performed four times in parallel. Data were statistical analyzed using SPSS 11.5 for windows. PPy NWs was synthesized by two-step electrochemical polymerization on Ti surface. FTIR spectroscopy of PPy NWs doping with cholic acid were characterized qualitatively in the range of 400–4000 Contact angle measurements were shown in The electrochemical property of the ca-PPy and PPy NWs were evaluated by cyclic voltammetry in 1.0 The conductivity of PPy NWs was about 5 Generally, the absorbance of MTT assay is proportional to the number of viable cells. To determine the adhesion and proliferation activities of MC3T3-E1 cells growing on various surfaces quantitatively, MTT assay was tested. The result was shown in To further observe the cell adhesion and proliferation behaviors on different substrates, Hoechst nuclear counterstaining of MC3T3-E1 cells cultured for 24 Cytoskeleton staining and SEM images showed the spreading morphology of MC3T3-E1 cells on various surfaces. After 12 As previously known, when biomaterials were implanted in body and contacted with body fluids, the first step is adsorption of protein on the surface of biomaterials Physical and chemical properties and micro/nano morphology of material surface also have a significant effect on cell adhesion and growth process Besides, the cholic acid doped in PPy NWs had lots of hydroxyl and carboxyl groups, the hydrophilicity and surface free energy of PPy NWs was improved which were advantage for cell adhesion and spreading as well. As a result, cells cultured on PPy NWs surface displayed better adhesion and proliferation activity than that cultured on ca-PPy and Ti. Comment: Compare with control * was P The protein content of cell could indicate cell's metabolism ability and activity. After 7 ALP is an early marker of osteogenic differentiation. ALP activity of MC3T3-E1 showed significant time-dependent growth stages during osteogenic differentiation in vitro Bone Ψ-carboxyglutamic acid-containing protein (BGP) is synthesized and occurred at the same time with bone matrix mineralization process. This protein is an important indicator of bone formation. The results in Intracellular calcium deposits mainly occurred in cell calcification period followed the ALP activity increase and BGP secretion. All these results were agreement with the results that the PPy NWs was benefit for bone formation, consistent with the results of the present study that nano-structure enhanced ALP, BGP synthesis and calcium deposition. Additionally, ES play a positive role in promoting osteogenesis. Just as some literatures showed, ES can promote cell proliferation, synthesis and secretion of growth factors. In sum, the PPy NWs coatings combining with ES could facilitate the MCET3-E1 cells biosynthesis, differentiation and mineralization. We have successfully synthesized the cholic acid doped PPy NWs coating on Ti by a two-step electrochemical method. The prepared PPy NWs have good conductivity, redox properties, hydrophilicity and higher surface energy. In vitro experiments evidenced the PPy NWs occupied better biocompatibility and osteoinductivity. When electrical stimulation was applied to MC3T3-E1 through conductive PPy NWs coating, the expression and secretion of total protein synthesis, ALPase activity, osteocalcin expression and calcium-containing in the extracellular matrix were significantly increased. These findings highlight the synergistic effect of ES and nanostructure in promoting the differentiation of MC3T3-E1. Furthermore, we also speculate that ES combined with nanostructured PPy may play a positive role in enhancing bone damage repairing and regeneration. This work was supported by the