This experimental study is focused on several aspects of microfluidic solvent extraction of uranium in setups comprising of microbore tube(s) connected to microfluidic junction(s). Extraction experiments are carried out using simulated lean aqueous phase having 550 ppm uranium in 1 M HNO3 as the feed. The organic phase consists of 30% (v/v) tributyl phosphate (TBP) in dodecane. The effects of flow rate on flow pattern, mass transfer and settling are studied. Performance of a straight microbore tube is compared with a coiled microbore tube of identical diameter and length. Two-stage extraction and stripping at total flow rate of 10 LPH are demonstrated using 20 parallel microbore tubes to highlight the ease of scale-up by numbering up.Specific interfacial area (m Settling area (m Solute concentration in the aqueous phase at the inlet (mol l Solute concentration in the aqueous phase in equilibrium with organic phase in batch experiments (mol l Solute concentration in the aqueous phase in equilibrium with the organic phase at the inlet (mol l Solute concentration in the aqueous phase at the outlet (mol l Solute concentration in the aqueous phase in equilibrium with the organic phase at the outlet (mol l Solute concentration in the organic phase at the inlet (mol l Solute concentration in the organic phase at the outlet (mol l Solute concentration in the organic phase in equilibrium with the aqueous phase in batch experiments (mol l Coiling radius (mm) Dean number (−) Diameter of microbore tube (μm) Dispersion band height (m) Distribution coefficient (−) Overall mass transfer coefficient (m s Overall volumetric mass transfer coefficient (s Length of microbore tube (cm) Ratio of the organic phase flow rate and the aqueous phase flow rate (−) Pitch of helically coiled microbore tube (mm) Aqueous phase flow rate (ml/min) Dispersed phase flow rate (m Organic phase flow rate (ml/min) Total flow rate (ml/min) Mixer volume (l) Log mean concentration difference (mol l Stage efficiency (−) Residence time in microbore tube (s) Residence time in settler (s) Finely dispersed flow Droplet flow Internal diameter Log mean concentration difference Liter per hour Monoblock distributor with integrated microfluidic junctions Percentage extraction Percentage stripping Polytetrafluoroethylene Slug and droplet flow Slug flow Settling rate per unit volume of dispersion band Tributyl phosphate In recent years rapid strides have been made in the field of chemical microprocessing in which unit operations and unit process are carried out in microchannels which have characteristic diameter in the range of a few hundred microns. This is because of several advantages possible with microchannels. Due to high surface to volume ratio in a microchannel, high heat transfer rates can be achieved. This makes microchannels attractive for conducting highly exothermic reactions without thermal degradation of the products [ Though microchannels can be made in materials such as glass, metals, polymers etc. the microbore tubes, available commercially, are probably the cheapest microchannels that can be used for solvent extraction at room temperature and moderate pressures. Solvent extraction in a microbore tube is carried out by contacting an aqueous phase with an organic phase at a microfluidic junction which precedes the microbore tube and acts as the dispersing device. The microbore tube then provides the required residence time for mass transfer. Depending on the geometry of the microfluidic junction, physical properties of the two liquid phases and flow rates, the contact of the immiscible aqueous and organic phases at the microfluidic junction may lead to a variety of liquid-liquid two-phase flow patterns. The type of flow pattern generated at the microfluidic junction directly affects the rate of mass transfer by affecting specific interfacial area for mass transfer. In literature, several studies have been reported on liquid-liquid two-phase flow patterns in microchannels [ The advantages of microfluidic solvent extraction have motivated researchers to explore the possibility of using it for solvent extraction of uranium. Some of the previous studies on microfluidic extraction of uranium are summarized in The schematic diagram of the setup used in the experiments with single microbore tube is shown in For scale-up, MDIMJ is used. The detailed sketch of the MDIMJ used for solvent extraction in parallel microbore tubes is shown in Schematic diagram of the setup for two-stage microfluidic solvent extraction is shown in Extraction of uranium from aqueous phase containing 550 ppm uranium in 1 M HNO Following equations are used to quantify the experimental results: In general, the driving force for mass transfer vary from the inlet to the outlet of the contactor and hence, in a way analogous to log mean temperature difference in a heat exchanger, a log mean concentration difference ( A change in flow rate changes the velocities with which the two liquid phases flow at the microfluidic junction and inside the microbore tube. Therefore, the shear force exerted by the continuous phase on the dispersed phase also changes with a change in flow rate. As a result, coarseness or fineness of the dispersion i.e. the quality of dispersion also changes with a change in flow rate. Thus specific interfacial area for mass transfer is directly affected by the flow rate. Flow pattern may also change with change in flow rate e.g. slug flow may change to droplet flow when flow rate is changed. For a microbore tube of a given length, a change in flow rate changes contact time of the phases during which mass transfer occurs. Thus on changing flow rate, mass transfer is affected both because of change in contact time and change in specific interfacial area. To study the effect of only flow pattern on mass transfer, flow rate is changed such that contact time is kept constant. This is achieved by using microbore tubes of different lengths. On changing flow rate, four different flow patterns -  Since flow rate can affect mass transfer by affecting both flow pattern or quality of dispersion and contact time, another set of experiment was conducted to understand whether the change in quality of dispersion or the change in contact time has the dominant effect on mass transfer. For this, experiments were conducted by varying the flow rate but keeping the length of the microbore tube constant and thus varying the quality of dispersion as well as contact time. The results from this set of experiments are shown in   Flow rate affects mass transfer as well as the settling characteristics of the dispersion generated at the microfluidic junction. As mentioned earlier, a long microbore tube required to ensure sufficient contact time for extraction needs to be coiled to keep the setup compact. However, coiling may affect the quality of dispersion and as a result mass transfer and settling behavior. To study the effect of coiling, experiments were conducted with both straight and coiled microbore tubes of identical length.  A single microbore tube can handle only a limited flow rate. Beyond a certain flow rate, the dispersion generated becomes too fine to settle fast making the phase disengagement a bottleneck. Thus to achieve higher flow rates, several microbore tubes should be stacked in parallel. In our previous study on extraction of uranium by 30% (v/v) TBP in dodecane, it was shown that a single microbore tube of 800 μm diameter and 67 cm length can handle total flow rate up to 0.6 LPH with high stage efficiency (above 90%) and fast settling [ Microfluidic extraction of uranium from lean aqueous phase using 30% (v/v) TBP in dodecane is reported. The effects of flow pattern on mass transfer and settling behavior are studied. Four different liquid-liquid flow patterns – slug flow, slug and droplet flow, droplet flow and finely dispersed flow – are observed. Among all observed flow patterns, maximum and minimum values of overall volumetric mass transfer coefficient were observed for finely dispersed flow (K