The present study aims at the development of photodegradable epoxy based materials comprising o-nitrobenzyl ester links that undergo well defined bond cleavage in response to UV irradiation. New bi-functional epoxy based monomers bearing o-nitrobenzyl ester groups are synthesized and thermally cured with an anhydride hardener to yield photosensitive polymers and duromers. The UV induced changes in solubility are exploited for the preparation of positive-type photoresists. Thin patterned films are obtained by photolithographic processes and characterized by microscopic techniques. The results evidence that sensitive resist materials with good resolution and high contrast behavior can be accomplished. Along with resist technology, the applicability of o-nitrobenzyl chemistry in the design of recyclable polymer materials with thicknesses in the millimeter range is evaluated. By monitoring the thermo-mechanical properties upon UV illumination, a distinctive depletion of storage modulus and glass transition temperature is observed with increasing exposure dose. Additionally, single fiber pull-out tests are carried out revealing a significant decrease of the interfacial adhesion at the fiber-matrix interface due to the phototriggered cleavage reaction.Whilst the photoisomerization of Along with the use as protecting groups in organic synthesis, the controlled cleavage of covalent links simply by light exposure has made the photoisomerization of Besides the patterning of hydrogels, the photochemistry of Taking advantage of the photocleavage of Due to the incorporation of photolabile links within highly crosslinked epoxy based networks, this strategy offers a new approach towards duromer materials with improved recycling properties. Following the visions of a low-carbon-economy, the development of new chemical recycling techniques for highly crosslinked materials such as cured thermosetting resins has become a key issue in current materials research One prominent concept involves the application of reversible crosslinks, which can be controllably cleaved by heat or UV exposure Going a step beyond the application in thin films, the present work also highlights the employment of All chemicals were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich (United States) unless otherwise stated and were used without further purification. (2-Nitro-1,4-phenylene) bis(methylene) bis(2-(oxiran-2-yl)acetate) was synthesized as previously reported 3-Butenoic acid (8.1 mL; 95 mmol) was added to a stirred solution of (2-nitro-1,4-phenylene) dimethanol (6.7 g; 36.6 mmol) in 40 mL dichloromethane. The reaction mixture was cooled to 0 °C and 4-( An excess of 3-chloroperbenzoic acid 77% (m-CPBA) (36.0 g; 162 mmol) was added drop-wise at room temperature to a solution of (2-nitro-1,4-phenylene)bis(methylene)bis(but-3-enoate) (10.8 g; 33.8 mmol) in 54 mL dichloromethane. The reaction mixture was stirred at room temperature for 2 days and 3-chloroperbenzoic acid 77% (5.0 g; 22 mmol) was then added drop-wise to the solution again. This procedure was repeated and after a reaction time of 6 days a yellowish solution with a white–yellowish precipitate was obtained. The product mixture was solved with dichloromethane and the organic layer was extracted with saturated sodium bicarbonate solution and deionized water. Finally, the solution was dried over sodium sulfate, filtered and the solvent was removed by rotary evaporation at 30 °C. Chromatography on silica gel (cyclohexane:ethyl acetate = 20:1) afforded the product as a yellowish liquid (50% of the theoretical yield) which was analyzed by  UV–Vis measurements were performed with a Varian (United States) Cary 50 UV–Vis spectrophotometer in absorbance mode. For irradiation experiments, epoxy- Resin formulations were prepared by dissolving different amounts of the photolabile monomer epoxy- Both the thermally induced ring-opening reaction between epoxy monomers and anhydride based hardener as well as the photoinduced cleavage of the Gel permeation chromatography (GPC) was performed on a Merck Hitachi system (Germany) with a combined refractive index – viscosity detector from Viscotec (Viscotec 200, Germany). Chloroform was used as eluent with separation columns of Polymer Standards Service, 8 × 300 mm STV 5 μm grade size (106, 104 and 103 Å). Polystyrene standards supplied by Polymer Standard Service were used for calibration. Thin films were obtained by spin casting a tetrahydrofuran solution of resin- The patterned films were examined by confocal microscopy (MicroProf Sensitivity and contrast were investigated by irradiating the spin cast Si-wafer with a medium pressure Hg lamp (Omnicure S1000, Lumen Dynamics, Canada) over different periods of time. After subsequent development in chloroform the insoluble gel fraction was determined by quantitative FT-IR spectroscopy using a Vertex 70 spectrometer (Bruker, United States) with a resolution of 4 cm The storage modulus ( Differential scanning calorimetry measurements were performed with a Mettler-Toledo DSC 821e (United States) using a nitrogen flow of 20 mL min The maximum pull-out force (2-Nitro-1,4-phenylene) bis(methylene) bis(2-(oxiran-2-yl)acetate) (epoxy- When it comes to the design of epoxy based materials bearing photocleavable In terms of the photocleavage reaction, it has to be considered that Along with thin films, the UV induced absorbance changes of the photocleavable monomer were determined in acetonitrile. In solution the decrease of the Along with the high optical density, undesired crack formation that can be related to the high brittleness of the photocleavable duromers is observed in cured resins with a thickness in the millimeter range. The brittleness of materials can be governed by several factors including molecular structure, use of additives or crosslink density The curing kinetics of selected resin formulations (see  The subsequent photocleavage reaction was characterized by following the conversion of the nitro group to the nitroso group. By monitoring the depletion of the normalized NO Thermal curing of resin- When the amount of bi-functional epoxy- As expected, the In a further step, the photoinduced change in the solubility of epoxy based networks was evaluated by sol–gel analysis. For this study, thin films of the cured resin- The efficient conversion of insoluble epoxy based networks into soluble species was further exploited to prepare positive-toned photoresists. For these studies, thin films were spin cast from resin- Going a step beyond the application of photocleavable epoxy based materials in thin films, the cleavage reaction was characterized in samples with a thickness of 1 mm. GPC measurements were performed to determine the efficiency of the photocleavage reaction in the macroscopic samples. In To correlate the cleavage of the In addition, the change in the storage modulus at room temperature was continuously monitored upon in-line UV illumination. It should be noted that it was not possible to characterize the performance of cured resin- Single fiber pull-out tests were finally performed to study the influence of the photoinduced matrix cleavage on the adhesion strength of the interface between non modified glass fibers and the photosensitive matrix. Prior to the experiments the sizing of the commercially available glass fibers was removed by a wet chemical etching with Caro's acid to avoid any influences of the organic layer. The quantitative removal of the sizing from the glass surface was confirmed by photoelectron spectroscopy and zeta-potential measurements. In With respect to non illuminated samples, the micrographs show relatively smooth and clean glass fibers with a small resin droplet at the end of the embedding length which indicates an adhesive failure at the interface between fiber and matrix (see optical micrograph in To determine the apparent shear strength in illuminated samples more than 20 pull-out tests were carried out to obtain ten force–displacement curves where fiber-matrix debonding and thus adhesive failure mode was observed. Comparing the results a distinctive decrease of the apparent shear strength from 16.8 ± 3.8 MPa to 10.5 ± 3.6 MPa is accomplished upon UV exposure with 174 J cm Epoxy based polymers and 3D networks bearing Along with the matrix properties, single fiber pull-out tests reveal that the cleavage reaction also influences the adhesion strength of the interface between glass fibers and the epoxy based materials. A decrease of the apparent shear strength at the fiber-matrix interface is observed after UV illumination, which demonstrates the applicability of the photocleavable materials for thin composite materials with improved recyclability. The research work was performed within the K-Project “PolyComp” at the Polymer Competence Center Leoben GmbH (PCCL, Austria) within the framework of the COMET-program of the Federal Ministry for Transport, Innovation and Technology and the Federal Ministry for Economy, Family and Youth. Funding is provided by the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at