This paper estimates sectoral mark-ups in the Spanish economy during the period 1983–1996. The data consists of a large firm level data set that encompasses all sectors of economic activity apart from financial institutions. The time period considered is well suited to assess the pro-competitive effect of economic integration, as Spain’s economy became fully integrated in the EU, which was itself embarking on a massive liberalisation exercise. I find that sectors most exposed to international competition witnessed a significant drop in margins, while those more sheltered from competitive pressures did not. Finally, comparing estimated mark-ups to accounting margins indicates that the latter are a reasonable proxy for margins obtained econometrically.An idea often put forward is that, compared to traditional Vinerian effects, the principal outcome stemming from the removal of trade barriers is to sharpen competitive pressure (see, among others, Spain’s recent experience represents an interesting case of liberalisation triggered by economic integration. In the early 1980s, the country was still in the midst of its political transition to democracy, and the economy had not yet been freed from the corporatist and interventionist policies of the previous regime. Shortly after, in 1986, the country joined the European Union (EU). This led to the progressive opening of the Spanish economy. In parallel, EU membership triggered a wave of domestic liberalisation meant to bring the Spanish economy into the European mainstream. Moreover, entry into the EU coincided with the most important liberalisation exercise in Europe since the 1960s, namely the implementation of the Single Market Programme (SMP). From that perspective Spain’s experience represents an interesting ‘natural experiment’ of policy induced changes in competitive conditions. The identification and analysis of industry mark-ups has evolved over time. Starting with the cross-section focus of the structure-conduct-performance (SCP) paradigm, research in ‘new empirical industrial organisation’ has moved towards the time-series analysis of market power in single or closely related industries ( Changes in competitive pressures stemming from the removal of tariff and non-tariff barriers (NTBs) have been extensively analysed (  I use an extensive survey of firms carried by the As a first step, I estimated sectorial mark-ups for the period 1983–1996 using two distinct methodologies that differ in terms of data requirements. This initial exercise is motivated by methodological concerns regarding endogeneity. The analysis is then extended in two directions. I also make use of accounting margins, and it emerges that the latter are surprisingly good proxies for mark-ups that are econometrically estimated. Second, the data permit the identification of a structural break in the behaviour of mark-ups. The main results are that firms most exposed to increased competition following EU accession experienced a drop in mark-ups, while firms in more sheltered sectors did not. Note that this paper does not attempt to identify the source of positive mark-ups. The focus is on quantifying firms’ ability to price above marginal costs, and on evaluating the effect of economic integration on the behaviour of industry mark-ups. The paper is organised as follows. In 1983, Spain was emerging from its political transition, and with it, the previous statist/corporatist economic system was being progressively dismantled. The exercise of labour’s rights put many firms under strain, While there is a priori evidence that the economy was subjected to a competitive shock, measuring its extent is marred by practical difficulties. The first consists in the fact that relevant variables are unobservable or poorly measured. Second, the change in competitive conditions may have been fairly uneven across economic activities. Sectors that were already exposed to international competition may have experienced little change following accession, while others may have remained sheltered even after entry. Related to this point is the possible existence of ‘knock-on’ effects: activities not directly exposed to international competition may also experience an increase in competitive pressures. Third, the effect of integration may have been dwarfed by the restructuring that took place during the 1980s and early 1990s, at least in some cases. Fourth, EU accession for Spain involved bilateral liberalisation, which led to increased import competition, but also better access to markets that were hitherto protected. Under such circumstances, the effect on mark-ups is ambiguous and has to be determined empirically. The derivation of the empirical specification is based on A variation in costs, denoted Δ By multiplying Let Let This equation is similar to that estimated by The data, which consists of an unbalanced panel, comes directly from the raw files of The final sample is about half the original size, and consists of 39,926 observations. This panel is unbalanced in the time dimension, given that some firms do not report in all years. Each firm is classified according to its sectorial activity. This affiliation ranges from broad two-digit sectors (26 for the whole economy), intermediate (82 sectors, three-digit), to very fine (more than 400 sectors, four-digit). Subject to the number of observations available, it is thus possible to work at very different levels of aggregation. Given the large number of short term (or temporary) contracts in Spain, the questionnaires report the number of employees on long term and short term contracts separately. Firms also report the average number of weeks that employees on short term contracts have worked during the year. Thus, it is possible to construct the labour input in full time equivalents (the variable Output is measured as gross output (i.e. including intermediate consumption). As is often the case, construction of the capital stock proved the trickiest issue. In the survey, firms report their level of fixed assets, gross investment, and depreciation allowance, for each year. In addition, the Bank of Spain computes annual fixed capital formation (net of depreciation) for each firm, using the raw data. The capital stock was constructed as follows: the level of fixed assets reported by the firm in the first year available was taken to be the true value of capital stock in that year (see It is well known that firms may have distorted incentives (e.g. tax) to report the true value of their capital stock, so that the initial estimate may be a biased one. In addition, the initial value of the stock is reported using historical costs. This is problematic, as it introduces a positive bias in the computation of the growth rate of the capital stock. Bearing this caveat in mind, the estimates obtained make sense. First, the survey carried out by the Bank of Spain is extremely detailed (so that cross-referencing is possible), thus minimising the risk of gross mis-reporting. Second, these surveys are confidential, and not made available to tax authorities. Third, it is possible to compute an implicit depreciation rate (and thus expected lifetime of an investment). The resulting estimates are quite sensible not only at the aggregate level (all sectors, or broad sectors), but also at the disaggregated level. On average, depreciation is estimated to be between 5 and 10% per year, well in line with what is found in the literature. Moreover, when a closer look is taken at the sectorial data, that initial impression is confirmed. All variables have been deflated using aggregate (economy-wide) deflators, taken from the The specification of The set of estimates presented below provide some basic information pertaining to mark-ups in the Spanish economy. The Solow residual (the left hand-side of In industries that depart from perfect competition, output prices are no longer exogenous to the model. To address the issue of endogeneity, the generalised method of moments (GMM) proposed by The estimations (denoted ‘GMM’) are obtained by using three, four, and five period lags of the regressor as instruments. The results, presented in the second column of The coefficient measuring the Lerner index is estimated very precisely (most estimates of The advantage of applying TSLS is that sample size is not reduced by the use of long lags, so that it is possible to work at a lower level of aggregation. The drawback is that it requires a valid set of instruments that are sometimes hard to obtain. Fortunately, working with firm level data makes it somewhat easier to construct instruments. Still, in order to check the validity of the instruments, I re-estimated The next set of results pertain to TSLS three-digit estimates, and are presented in the second column of The estimates confirm the earlier findings of positive mark-ups. Again, the precision is generally quite high, and the magnitude of estimated mark-ups is consistent with priors. For instance, ‘other non-metallic mineral products’ enjoys high mark-ups compared to the rest of manufacturing. This sector comprises cement and concrete production, two activities characterised by high fixed costs and a concentrated market structure. The dichotomy between manufacturing and services persists, with the latter displaying higher mark-ups. As for the time dummies, they are jointly significant, at least for some three-digit sectors. In the latter cases, they confirm the previous finding of declining TFP growth. The results presented above are consistent, both across the level of aggregation and estimation procedure. An additional source of information are accounting margins. The limitations of this measure has been extensively discussed ( To obtain an accounting estimate of price cost margins, I apply the methodology proposed by The two- and three-digit sectorial averages for the entire period are presented in the third columns of The main difference between estimated mark-ups and accounting margins is one of magnitude, the latter typically taking lower values. However, accounting margins appear to do a good job of ranking the different sectors in terms of firms’ pricing above marginal cost. A constellation of events suggest that Spain was subjected to a pro-competitive shock during the late 1980s. In practice, measuring the intensity of competition, and changes thereof, is complicated. Cyclical factors as well as changes in the population of firms via entry and exit processes will have affected industry mark-ups. Indirect measures of competitive pressure, such as the import penetration ratio, may be appropriate in the case of unilateral trade liberalisation, but are of limited use in the case of EU accession. For instance, in an industry where trade diversion occurs, margins may well increase as a result of economic integration. Furthermore, imports may remain unchanged if firms react to the Furthermore, variables that are known to influence mark-ups, such as fixed costs and/or concentration are either not available or imprecisely measured. At best, I can construct a proxy for concentration because I only have a sub-sample of the true population of firms. Trade liberalisation expands the relevant market, as imports increase the competitive pressure they exert on domestic firms. Following The results presented below attempt to go further by directly measuring changes in mark-ups. Under imperfect competition, a narrowing of mark-ups is one of the few robust predictions regarding the effect of successful economic integration ( Spanish entry into the EU occurred in the second half of the 1980s as did the implementation of domestic economic reforms and the launch of the EU’s single market programme. Choosing a cut-off date is bound to be arbitrary, as firms reactions may have been one of anticipating increase in competition, or adopting a ‘wait and see’ attitude given that the internal market programme initially moved slowly. In addition, government policy may have affected the timing of the firms’ reactions. In the results presented below, I used alternative years to date the change in competitive conditions. Obvious candidates are the years that just follow Spanish accession and saw the first concrete steps towards the implementation of the SMP. A simple procedure consists in interacting the second term in An initial batch of results at the two- and three-digit levels proved inconclusive, as some of the estimates of the interacted dummy were imprecise, possibly due to the limited number of observations. A solution to the lack of precision is to pool observations along a reasonable dimension. Most manufactured goods are traded internationally, while many services and utilities are not. Moreover, the internal market programme mostly affected traded goods.  In the case of manufacturing, the interacted dummy appears with a negative sign, suggesting an increase in competition did occur. However, the estimates are not very precise, and the estimated fall in margins is significant at the 10% level for the years 1988 and 1989, while it is not for 1990. In services and utilities, no pattern emerges: the interacted dummies are nowhere near being significant. For both broad sectors, the time dummies are jointly highly significant, while industry are not jointly significant at conventional levels. A close examination of the time dummies confirms the fall in TFP growth reported above. Save for 1986, all time dummies are insignificant or positive prior to 1992. As of that year, dummies are predominantly negative and significant, at least in the case of manufacturing. An avenue to improve the efficiency of the estimation is to impose some kind of structure on the time dummies. Once some form of structure is imposed on TFP growth, it emerges that there are important differences in the behaviour of mark-ups across these two broad sectors. In the case of services and utilities, mark-ups are estimated in the 0.36–0.4 range. The interacted dummy is negative but not statistically significant at the 10% confidence level. This indicates that if competition increased, it did so mildly. It could be argued that given the smaller number of observations for services and utilities, less stringent standards of significance should apply (say 15 or 20%). Still, even if the point estimates of the interacted dummy were deemed to be significant, the fall in mark-ups is of a much smaller magnitude. These results are consistent with the two-digit results mentioned earlier. For manufacturing and 1989 as the cut-off year, I found that seven sectors (representing 62% of observations) had experienced a significant fall in mark-ups. In the case of services and utilities, no two-digit sector appears to have experienced a fall in the Lerner index (even at the 15% confidence level). The specification of Unravelling the true relationship between margins’ dynamics and competitive pressure requires that consideration be given to entry and exit. Unfortunately, Overall, these results indicate a fall in manufacturing margins, but it is not possible to say whether it is of a permanent nature. It could be the case that the increase in competition narrows margins temporarily until a new steady state is reached. The theoretical framework proposed by The results presented in this paper indicate the presence of positive mark-ups in the Spanish economy. Overall, EU accession appears to increase competitive pressure, confirming the view held by specialists in the field that this is one of the main effects of integration. The fact that the dynamics of mark-ups differ across manufacturing on the one hand, and services and utilities on the other, provides support to the idea that Spain was subjected to an integration-led pro-competitive shock. In terms of welfare, the result of this increase in competition is probably much larger than traditional Vinerian effects. However, empirically unearthing this effect is arduous, since the number of firm level observations must be large and the time period sufficiently long. Three important caveats deserve mention regarding the results reported in this paper. First, factor markets have been assumed competitive throughout the analysis, an assumption unlikely to be met in the real world, and in particular, in the Spanish economy. An interesting research topic would consist in assessing whether rents are shared, at least partially, among factors of production. Second, the role industry of dynamics has only been touched upon. Finally, no attempt has been made to account for these positive mark-ups. The more macro oriented literature has identified four possible explanations: increasing returns (industry-wide or at the level of the firm), thick market externalities, labour hoarding, and finally, market power. No attempt is made to disentangle the contribution of each of these factors to positive mark-ups. However, the thrust of the results presented in this paper indicate that market power ought to be one of the culprits. This paper was begun while I was a Research Fellow of the Bank of Spain’s Research Department. I would like to thank the staff of the Bank of Spain for their help with the data, and seminar participants at Universidad Complutense, CEMFI, Bank of Spain, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, and EARIE 2000 for useful comments and suggestions. The comments provided by Stephen Martin and two anonymous referees to improve this paper are gratefully acknowledged. I am particularly indebted to César Alonso, Olympia Bover, Jordi Jaumandreu, Pedro L. Marı́n, Ricardo Mora, Alessandro Sembenelli, and Nadine Watson for insightful suggestions. Enrique Cañizares provided excellent research assistance. The usual disclaimer applies. The data were filtered in order to systematically eliminate observations of dubious value. Labour input: firms reporting non positive values for this variable were dropped. Value added and gross output: firms reporting non-positive values for either of these variables were eliminated. Firms reporting total labour costs greater than value added, inclusive of subsidies, were dropped. Firms that reported gross fixed capital formation data, which implied an expected life time of the investment greater than 60 years, or less than 3 years, were dropped from the sample. Firms whose payments to suppliers of inputs and total labour costs were greater than the value of gross output were dropped from the sample. Behaviour of mark-ups pre and post competitive shock for ‘surviving incumbents’ 