Platinum-group elements (PGE) are relevant for many high technology applications, prompting the search for potential alternative resources and environmentally friendly processing technologies. The largest deposit of PGE worldwide is the Bushveld Complex in South Africa. The pristine sulfide-bearing ore is mined using conventional metallurgical methods, while the near-surface oxidized PGE ore is currently stockpiled. Economic extraction of PGE from these stockpiles using conventional technologies is not feasible to date. Hence, biohydrometallurgical approaches to recover valuable transition metals and liberate platinum-group minerals for subsequent chemical PGE extraction have been considered. The four stockpile samples taken from a heap of oxidized PGE ores from the Platreef formation showed a similar mineralogical composition with >90 wt% silicates and minor amounts of Fe-(oxy)/hydroxides, both associated with Ni, Mn and Cu. Platinum-group minerals were present as sperrylite (PtAs2), cooperite (PtS low Pd), native platinum and Pd‑bismuthotellurides and mostly associated with silicates. Stirred tank bioleaching under various conditions was proven to be most feasible for an oxidative process at moderately-high temperatures using a consortium of iron- and sulfur-oxidizing acidophiles dominated by Acidithiobacillus caldus and Sulfobacillus thermosulfidooxidans. Bioleaching achieved up to 86% total metal recovery (including Co, Cu, Mn and Ni) and led to a liberation of platinum-group minerals. The bioleach residues were subsequently chemically leached by a HNO3/NaCl and a cyanide leach, allowing for the enhanced extraction of up to 89% Pt and 96% Pd after bioleaching. Chemical and mineralogical analysis validated the potential of oxidative bioleaching as a promising processing option for a pre-treatment of oxidized PGE ore, allowing separate and efficient recovery of valuable base metals and enhancing the subsequent chemical PGE extraction.Platinum-group elements (PGE: Ru, Rh, Pd, Os, Ir and Pt) are present in extremely low concentrations (0.000022–0.00052 ppm; One of the main issues faced with processing of near-surface oxidized PGE ores is the very heterogeneous and polymodal PGE distribution, including dispersion of PGE in secondary silicates and in iron- and manganese oxides/hydroxides. Concentrate dilution during froth flotation due to the occurrence of naturally floating gangue (NFG; The Mogalakwena Mine, situated near the town of Mokopane in the Limpopo province, South Africa, and operated by Anglo American Platinum Ltd., is the largest open-pit PGE mine in the world to-date, by reserves and production. Significant portions of the near-surface oxidized ores are already excavated, crushed, analyzed and classified and stockpiled according to 4E grades. Processing of these stockpiles is not feasible at the moment due to the lack of adequate processing technologies that enable the economic extraction of PGE. Since metal recovery from these PGE ores using conventional technologies is usually low or in the case of stockpiles not economic, biohydrometallurgical approaches to recover valuable transition metals and to extract PGE have been considered. These include bioleaching using acid-producing and redox-active microorganisms as well as the application of complexing compounds produced by microorganisms to recover PGE ( Subsequent extraction of the PGE from the residues can be achieved by either biological-based or chemical approaches. Siderophores are capable of mobilizing Pt and Pd (and other polyvalent metals) at high pH from oxidized PGE ores, which were preconditioned with hydrochloric acid for the removal of base metals ( This study aims to apply and assess a range of bioleaching approaches as a pretreatment option for oxidized PGE ores to recover valuable transition metals and enhance the recovery of PGE in a second chemical extraction step using HNO The near-surface oxidized PGE ores of approximately 30 m thickness are removed as overburden and stockpiled in order to obtain access to the underlying pristine Platreef ores. Four samples of oxidized PGE ore were collected from various sites of a stockpile within the Mogalakwena Mine in the northern Bushveld Complex, South Africa. The samples were crushed and sieved to achieve different size fractions (<63 μm, 63–200 μm, 200–315 μm, >315 μm) for bioleaching experiments. Various acidophilic, iron- and sulfur-oxidizing microorganisms were applied for bioleaching experiments. Basal salt medium supplemented with trace elements was used in all experiments ( Bioleaching experiments in stirred tank reactors were carried out under aerobic and anaerobic conditions. 2-L-Bioreactors (Electrolab, UK) with 1.5 L working volume were operated with 10% ( Abiotic control experiments were conducted under sterile conditions with automated pH adjustment according to pH values determined in corresponding bioleaching experiments upfront. Regular sampling involved determination of pH, redox potential, dissolved metals, light microscopy and microbial community monitoring ( Following bioleaching of the ore samples, the residues were subjected to chemical extraction of PGE using HNO For validation of the HNO Two aliquots (A and B) of each of the four homogenized heap samples were sent to Activation Laboratories Ltd. (Actlabs), Canada, for bulk chemical analysis of major and trace elements, including Au, Pt and Pd grades. The complete geochemical dataset is provided in Table S1. Gold, Pt and Pd were determined by fire assay followed by inductively coupled plasma - mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) analysis (Actlabs Code 1C-Research), whilst other major and trace elements were determined with four-acid (HCl, HNO Regular offline pH (BlueLine 18 pH electrode, Schott, Germany) and redox potential vs. Ag/AgCl reference (PCE Instruments) measurements were performed directly in the bioreactor pulp. Ferrous and ferric iron concentrations were measured in 0.45 μm-filtered samples using the Ferrozine assay ( The leachates of the HNO The PGE ores showed a very similar mineralogical composition and were composed of >90 wt% silicates, predominantly clay minerals like vermiculite, kaolinite or talc in combination with residual pyroxenes in the form of enstatite and augite. Additionally, traces of feldspar, serpentine minerals and amphibole were detected (Appendix Table S2). The presence of alteration minerals (serpentine minerals like chrysotile and clay minerals like talc and kaolinite) indicate an overall high degree of weathering. Minor amounts of Fe-(oxy)/hydroxides were present. The silicates and the Fe-(oxy)/hydroxides were associated with Ni, Mn and Cu. The complete geochemical dataset of the bulk PGE ores is provided in Appendix Table S1. The Pt/Pd ratio of the untreated oxidized ore samples varied from 1.02 to 1.46 ppm (  Bioleaching of host minerals of the oxidized PGE ore was applied in stirred tank bioreactors under various conditions comparing the effect of (i) temperature, (ii) ore sample, (iii) particle size and (iv) microbial community. All experiments were supplemented with 1% elemental sulfur as the total sulfur concentration ( Bioleaching efficiency was reported as total metal recovery calculated as mean value of the recovery of copper, cobalt and nickel as the most relevant metals. Oxidative bioleaching using the grain size fraction <63 μm of sample 102 at various temperatures resulted in the highest total metal recovery (86%) at 42 °C at the end of the bioleaching process at pH 1.1 using a microbial consortium consisting dominantly of Oxidative bioleaching at 30 °C, 42° and 65 °C with the respective microbial communities did not affect the abundance of the secondary Fe-(oxy)/hydroxides as they remained in a similar range than in the untreated ore. The presence of chloritic clay and chlorite decreased during the oxidative bioleaching, indicating a possible proton or ferric iron attack. The occurrence of PbO as well as a relative increase of silica oxide was slightly increased during the bioleaching. The final products after bioleaching showed that PGM and electrum had a largely completely free surface, and remained intergrown with other PGM or were associated with phases as a result of the bioleaching methodology (Fig. S4c-f). In particular sperrylite, cooperite (PtS low Pd), and Pd‑bismuthotellurides were usually completely liberated, which is of great benefit for subsequent chemical PGE extraction. Abiotic control experiments with pH control showed, however, significantly less metal leaching compared to biological setups. Proton concentration therefore is not a single key factor for leaching but rather a complex interaction between microorganisms operating in biofilms close to the mineral surface, redox potential, other (metal) ions and protons ( Reductive bioleaching under aerobic (30°C) and anaerobic (35°C) conditions, targeting mainly ferric iron minerals, achieved no higher metal recovery compared to oxidative methods ( No significant variance in total metal recovery (81–94%) was observed between the various Platreef stockpile samples under oxidative bioleaching at 42 °C (particle size <63 μm, Experiments on the influence of particle size on the bioleaching behavior clearly showed that metal recovery was most efficient at the smallest particle size (<63 μm, PGEs were not leached in any of the bioleaching approaches and therefore remained in the residue for subsequent chemical extraction. Similar data for oxidative bioleaching from sulfidic PGE ore were reported by The bioleaching experiments showed that an almost complete extraction of base metals from oxidized PGE ores is feasible, whilst the PGE largely remained in the bioleach residue. For subsequent chemical extraction of the precious metals from the bioleach residues an alternative method to conventional cyanidation was investigated. The HNO The results of the combined pulp density and acid admixture experiments on untreated PGE ore with an experimental time of 24 h are shown in Temperature experiments proved increased recoveries (by more than 15%) of Pt and Pd at 80 °C compared to lower temperatures, while 40 °C and 60 °C data showed similar recoveries of both metals (Fig. S3). Highest leaching of the PGE was achieved after 24 h with no significant changes after 36 h (Fig. S3). In order to keep the leaching process as inexpensive as possible, an admixture of 10:1 was chosen in combination with a pulp density of 200 g/L at 80 °C for the subsequent chemical leaching step on the bioleach residues as presented in chapter 3–4. The HNO Extraction of Pt and Pd from residues bioleached under the various conditions described in 3–2 resulted in maximum extraction of 89% Pt and 96% Pd depending on the pretreatment conditions ( Comparative experiments applying cyanidation to extract PGE from untreated ore and bioleach residue confirmed the applicability of the HNO The presented study demonstrates the feasibility of bioleaching of base metals from well characterized oxidized PGE ores using autotrophic, acidophilic microorganisms. Various processing options have been tested to define the most efficient and economic bioleaching approach for the subsequent chemical extraction of PGE from the ore. Chemical and mineralogical analyses proved the potential of oxidative bioleaching using moderate thermophiles as promising processing option for oxidized PGE ores. Bioleaching of the PGE ore prior to chemical extraction of PGE allowed for separate recovery of valuable base metals followed by efficient chemical PGE extraction using, for example, HNO The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest. We thank Anglo American Platinum for providing access to the mine and the sample material and especially Trust Muzondo and Zama Langa for their help during sampling at the Mogalakwena Mine. Financial support was provided by  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at