Since nanocrystalline WC–Co powder was produced over a decade ago, the sintering of nanocrystalline powders remains a technological challenge. The goal of sintering nanocrystalline powders is not only to achieve full densification but also to retain nanocrystalline grain sizes. This is difficult because of rapid grain growth at high temperatures. Previous studies on the sintering of nanocrystalline WC–Co have shown that grains grow rapidly during the early stage of sintering. But there are few studies on the mechanisms of grain growth and densification during this stage. This paper presents the results of an experimental investigation on grain growth and densification of nanocrystalline WC–Co powders during heat-up at equilibrium solid-state temperatures. The results have shown that nanocrystalline WC grains grow rapidly during this period concurrently with rapid densification. The rapid densification and grain growth are partially attributed to the surface energy anisotropy of tungsten carbide. The effects of vanadium carbide on grain growth at solid state during heat-up are also discussed.Nanocrystalline tungsten carbide powders have been produced by a variety of different technologies in the past decade The sintering behaviors of nanocrystalline (<100 Specifically, the grain growth of WC during sintering can be treated as consisting of two parts: during heat-up and during isothermal hold at liquid phase sintering temperatures. Although grain growth during liquid phase sintering has been well researched and documented in the literature, there is little information available regarding the grain growth mechanisms or kinetics during the early stages of sintering. It has becoming increasingly clear, however, in order to retain nanoscaled grain sizes at sintered state, the grain growth during the early stages of sintering, including heat-up, must be fully understood. It is also important to understand the interplays between densification and grain growth mechanisms. The ultimate goal is to be able to achieve complete densification while minimizing grain growth mechanisms and minimizing grain growth during sintering. The present research investigated the grain growth and densification of nanocrystalline WC–Co powders during sintering, particularly at equilibrium solid-state temperatures. Emphasis of the study was focused on the heat-up stage of sintering and the evolution of relative density and grain structure as functions of temperature and time. Experimental observations and discussions on the mechanisms of densification and grain growth are presented. Four different grades of WC–10% Co powders were used in this study namely nano-50 Sintering experiments were carried in vacuum furnace and the heating rate was 10 Density of the samples was measured using Archimedes method. The porous samples after sintering were mounted in vacuum chamber using low viscosity EPO-THIN epoxy, polished and etched with Murakami’s reagent. Samples were cobalt etched in boiling hydrochloric acid (20%) for 40   The fact that a significant amount of densification of WC–Co occurs at solid-state temperatures has been documented in a number of studies which dates back to 1970s for conventional WC–Co powders by Milner and co-workers    In order to understand densification and grain growth mechanisms, systematic microstructural examinations using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) were conducted to study the evolution of grain structure versus temperature during heat-up. The important microstructure features include the shape of WC grains, grain sizes, and the pore structure. These microstructure observations are consistent with the line-graph of When the microstructure depicted in Comparing When considering the information in It is well known in the tungsten carbide industry that the grain growth of WC can be mitigated by adding a small percentage of vanadium carbide, VC, or other transition metal carbides in the system. VC is considered the most effective grain growth inhibitor. The effect of VC has been theorized on the basis of its solubility in liquid cobalt phase during sintering and its effects on limiting the dissolution of W and C in liquid cobalt  These results suggest two significant findings. First, the effects of VC on grain growth during sintering of WC–Co system are not limited to the liquid phase sintering stage. Perhaps more importantly, these results prove that VC inhibits grain growth and slows densification even at low solid-state temperatures. Secondly, VC suppresses the change of WC grains from non-faceted to faceted shape at solid state, which limited the grain growth by coalescence. The effects of VC could be related to the solubility of V in solid cobalt, as is the case during liquid phase sintering. A more likely explanation, however, is that the addition of VC alters the surface and interface energies of WC grains and thus the driving force for WC grains to change from equi-axial to faceted shape, which in turn reduces the likelihood of WC grains making contacts with others of the same orientations. Without such contacts, grain growth by coalescence during heat-up will not take place. It has been pointed out earlier that the mechanism of the rapid densification stage is by the drastic rearrangement of particles corresponding to the collapse of the pore structure surrounding aggregates. However, it was not clear why the rearrangement leads to such a high degree of densification. Usually rearrangement of particles during solid state sintering is caused by the imbalance of thermal and surface stresses. The stress imbalance causes particles to rotate and repack to achieve higher packing density. The amount of densification that can be achieved by rearrangement is therefore limited by the maximum packing density determined by the particle size, size distribution, and geometric shape of particles. In previous published studies, analysis of the densification of WC–Co at solid-state temperatures relied on the diffusion of cobalt for the formation of aggregates Some had attributed the collapse of pore structures and filling of voids to the formation of liquid, which is consistent with our observation of micron-sized or coarser particles Another important factor that affects densification as well as grain growth is the dissolution of tungsten carbide (W and C) into the cobalt matrix. The dissolution causes the disappearance of extremely small particles and shortens the distance between the centers of neighboring particles, leading to densification. The solidus temperature for the dissolution process decreases as particle size decreases. This explanation is also consistent with the experimental observation on the effects of continuous heating versus isothermal hold because the solubilities of W and C in Co increase with temperature while they remain constant if specimens are held at a constant temperature. Present research suggests that the surface energy anisotropy of WC grains is another important factor that affects grain growth and densification. Present results also show that the surface energy anisotropy is a critical factor that determines the In order to understand densification and grain growth mechanisms during the sintering of nanocrystalline WC–Co powders, experimental studies were carried out to investigate these processes during heating up. The results show that over 90% of densification of the nanocrystalline WC–Co powder can be achieved at solid-state temperatures during heat-up prior to the formation of a liquid phase. The temperature ranges of the rapid densification stage decrease drastically when the initial grain sizes decrease from a few microns to approximately 50 The authors wish to thank H.C. Starck, USA for supplying WC powders. The research has been supported by US Department of Energy, Industrial Materials of the Future Program.