Background
                  Minimally invasive surgery has a significant and evolving role in the treatment of DIACFs, but there is limited literature on this topic.
               
                  Objectives
                  To compare the clinico-radiological outcomes of DIACFs fixed with MIS technique with ORIF.
               
                  Methods
                  This randomised control trial (RCT) included 21 closed Sanders type 2 and 3 DIACFs which were selected from 70 who presented. Extensile lateral approach was used in the ORIF group; while MIS techniques included either percutaneous reduction or small incisions with indirect fragment manipulation.
               
                  Main Outcome Measurement
                  AOFAS hindfoot score, pre-operative and postoperative radiology.
               
                  Results
                  There were 9 fractures in the Extensile group and 12 in the MIS group, with both groups having comparable demography, fracture classification, surgery delay & initial radiology. Bohler′s angle improved after surgery by an average of 18.44 with ORIF and 14.67 with MIS (p=0.28). Mean AOFAS in the MIS group was 82.58 (66.67% good and 33.33% fair) and was 89.56 (44.44% excellent, 55.56% good, 0 fair/poor) with ORIF (p=0.034). Two patients who underwent ORIF had a major complication (one deep infection and Sural nerve injury each) while none in the MIS group.
               
                  Conclusions
                  MIS methods minimized soft tissue complications and achieved comparable radiological reductions but clinical outcomes were poorer, with percutaneous methods having the worst outcomes.The calcaneus is a unique bone, with a unique mechanism of fracture. Many controversies exist in the literature regarding the management options The extensile L-shaped lateral approach has gained wide popularity for the surgical fixation of the DIACFs. It provides excellent exposure, allowing access to manipulate and fix the fractures. However patients treated with extensile lateral approach are known to develop soft tissue complications, such as flap necrosis and wound infection. The complication rate has been reported to be as high as 30% in patients treated with this approach Minimally invasive surgery (MIS) strives to strike a balance between Open Reduction and Internal Fixation (ORIF) and conservative management. The achievement of anatomical reduction of the articular component and overall shape and alignment of the bone, without jeopardising the soft tissue envelope, forms the basis of this approach. MIS of calcaneal fractures can be divided into percutaneous reduction of fragments by Kirschner-wire leveraging, application of external fixators, application of principles of ligamentotaxis and percutaneous screw fixation or even minimally invasive introduction of some specially designed plates. Various minimally invasive approaches have been described, which minimize the wound complication rate and some of these approaches have been effective in lowering the prevalence of wound-related complications MIS has a significant and evolving role in the treatment of DIACFs, but there is limited literature on this topic. This study was hence designed to prospectively compare the outcomes of DIACFs treated by MIS with those treated by the extensile approach. This study was conducted on patients attending the Orthopaedic emergency department and the out-patient department of PGIMER Chandigarh, India, from 1 All calcaneus fracture patients were enrolled after informed consent based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria. The patients were randomized into two groups: Group A consisted of patients who underwent ORIF by the Extensile lateral approach and Group B were treated using one of 3 MIS techniques listed below. Randomization was done using envelope method. The fractures in Group A were treated with extensile lateral approach as described by Gould, Zwipp, Sanders, Benirschke, and others Group B fractures were reduced and fixed either percutaneously or using small incision internal fixation (limited lateral, limited posterior open, and the sinus tarsi approach) In the sinus tarsi approach, the skin incision was from the distal tip of the fibula to the base of fourth metatarsal, allowing access to the sinus tarsi and the subtalar joint including the posterior, middle, and anterior facets. The extensor digitorum brevis muscle was mobilized, the subtalar joint exposed and depressed facet fragments were elevated. A pin in the tuberosity allowed manipulation of the tuberosity fragment. Fixation methods ranged from screw fixation and multiple K wires, to addition of external fixators. In the limited posterior open approach, the longitudinal limb of the extensile approach was used along the lateral border of the Achilles tendon, to expose the subtalar joint and the lateral wall of calcaneus. Steinmann pins and a periosteal elevator were used to restore the Bohler’s angle and posterior articular facet reduction was done by leverage. A variety of fixation methods could thus be employed for fracture stabilization (See Patients were discharged on post-operative day 4 and were followed up at 3 weeks, 6 weeks, 3 months and 6 months. AOFAS ankle hindfoot score A total of 60 patients presented during this period, of which 10 had bilateral calcaneus fractures, thus making a total of 70 calcaneus fractures available for evaluation. Of these patients 21 calcaneus fractures fulfilled the inclusion criteria specified as per proposed protocol. The inclusion criteria were strictly followed so as to prevent any selection bias and eliminate all possible confounding factors. Thus only 30% of the feet made it to the final selection (See  Total patients – 60 (49 Males/11 Females) Total patients with bilateral fractures – 10 Total feet 70 Total Patients included – 20 Total feet – 21 (Both sides of only 1 patient included) Mean Age Twenty cases (35.71%) were open fractures, and thus excluded; the second largest group comprised of patients with fracture characteristics that made randomization under our protocol impossible as they had associated head injury/spine injury with varying neurological deficits, severe comminution (Sanders type 4), undisplaced fracture (Sanders type 1) or presented after 3 weeks. Three cases (3.57% cases) had anterior end calcaneus fractures, which were operated as midfoot injuries, and were excluded from this study group. Both groups of patients were comparable in terms of age, sex, fracture morphology and preoperative Bohler's and Gissane's angle (p In this study, the authors found that feet with a postoperative Bohler's angle within normal range tend to have an AOFAS score higher than those with low Bohler's angle. This is statistically significant at 3 weeks (p Based on the AOFAS scores, the extensile group had better clinical outcomes at 3 weeks (p In the comparison between various MIS techniques, sinus tarsi and limited posterior open method appear to have better clinical outcomes than percutaneously fixed cases. However comparison of individual MIS techniques individually with extensile group, and among themselves is difficult due to small sample size of each MIS subgroups. Clinically significant soft tissue problems occurred in only one foot (11.1%) within the extensile group. Insignificant marginal necrosis and maceration was initially encountered in some cases of extensile lateral group but they resolved. One patient (11.1%) in the extensile group had sural nerve injury. In the MIS group two patients (16.67%) had heel broadening and heel mal-alignment while one (8.33%) had reflex sympathetic dystrophy. These complications altered the initial AOFAS scores and patients with sural nerve injury and infection had a less favourable pain scores and thus delayed rehabilitation. In the patient with infection no specific organism could be isolated in wound cultures, but microscopy revealed pus cells. Oral antibiotics, repeated dressings and use of papain urea ointment (Debridase) topically lead to wound healing. In the Sural nerve neuropathy over the first 3 months, burning sensation improved with medication but hypo-aesthesia persisted. At the last follow-up patients with infection (AOFAS 84, good) and sural nerve injury (AOFAS 88, good) had comparable AOFAS scores to other patients in group A (Extensile lateral) K wire removal was done in MIS group after 6–8 weeks when radiographs began to show evidence of union. Patients were kept non weight bearing for 8–12 weeks postoperatively in both groups. Initially parallel bar walking was begun and partial weight bearing started gradually progressing to full weight bearing over the next 4 weeks. All patients were encouraged to wear comfortable shoes with thick soles and soft sponge was used under the heel. The physiotherapy protocol included balance and gait training with strengthening exercise for foot and ankle muscles. Patients were then gradually switched over to normal footwear. This rehabilitation was delayed in patients with infection (1 patient, Extensile group), sural nerve injury (1 patient, Extensile group), Bilateral fracture (1 patient, MIS group) and heel broadening (2 patients, MIS group). The ideal choice of treatment for DIACFs has generated controversy for more than a century Without sufficient confirmatory evidence, most surgeons have reserved MIS techniques for a stratum of patients who have a particular type of DIACF There are certain factors that are under the control of the surgeon like timing of surgery, accuracy of reduction, fixation stability and surgical experience. On the other hand, there are factors that are beyond the control of the surgeon like severity of trauma, degree of comminution, fracture pattern, and the amount of damage to the articular cartilage. Our aim was to compare the outcome of current gold standard management viz-a-viz a group of methods labelled MIS techniques, to evaluate outcomes in terms of clinic-radiological parameters. Factors that are beyond the control of the surgeon were equally distributed in both groups A and B. In our study Group B, is a heterogeneous group consisting of MIS (both percutaneous reduction and small incision approach techniques). Due to a large number of available small incision approaches and percutaneous reduction methods, The present study is a registered prospective randomized control trial. Most studies done previously have been carried out retrospectively The AOFAS score was used for comparison in the present study as it is the most cited score for assessing calcaneus fracture outcome with a high reliability and validity Recent evidence states that the goal of treatment for DIACFs should be the restoration of the calcaneal architecture with emphasis on correct heel alignment and the height of the calcaneal body The rate of wound infection (11.1%) and Sural nerve involvement (11.1%) with the extensile approach are within range of described complication rate in the literature In summary, the current trends pointing out that MIS is equivalent to ORIF may be misleading. ORIF with extensile lateral approach, in a tertiary care hospital with experienced surgeons, has better outcomes. Though wound complications may occur in some cases of ORIF, long term effect of wound issues is negligible. With Extensile lateral approach for plating there is no need for implant removal and more accurate subtalar joint reconstruction is possible. MIS techniques needed a second minor procedure for percutaneous imlant removal and had less optimal articular reduction leading to less favorable clinical outcomes. More research is needed prospectively to identify which amongst the MIS methods is the best; with current evidence, percutaneous reduction and fixation gives the worst results out of this group, and should be reserved for cases where other methods cannot be used.