Direct-current arc furnaces operate with a graphite cathode positioned above a molten slag and metal bath contained inside a furnace vessel. The plasma arc, consisting of ionised particles at extremely high temperatures, forms a conducting path between the graphite cathode and the molten bath. The power provided by the arc can be controlled by adjusting the arc length and the current.
                  The high-intensity plasma arc emanates from a relatively small attachment area on the graphite electrode, and extends down to the surface of the molten bath. Photographs of the arc are presented and compared to models of the shape of the arc. These models provide a description of how the arc voltage varies as a function of arc length and current, for a given set of conditions in the furnace.
                  The arc attachment zone, where the arc impinges on the molten slag surface, is highly turbulent and operates at a very high temperature. This promotes very rapid melting, fast reaction kinetics, and effective mixing. The impingement of the arc causes a crater-like depression in the surface of the slag. This has a significant effect on the distribution of current in the molten slag, and the voltage drop across the slag. The shape and size of this depression has been photographed, and the resulting information used in a model of the depression.The inherent persistency and intensity of a direct-current (DC) plasma arc offers some unique advantages for a number of smelting processes ( The open arc provides an additional degree of freedom to the supply of energy to the furnace, in that the resistivity of the slag is no longer solely responsible for the dissipation of energy to heat the molten slag. This renders the energy supply nearly independent of slag composition, which may allow the slag chemistry to be optimized for the best recovery of valuable metals (instead of for the required electrical characteristics). The high-intensity plasma arc emanates from a relatively small attachment area on the graphite electrode, and extends down to the surface of the molten bath. Photographs of the arc have been compared to models of its shape. These models provide a description of how the arc voltage varies as a function of arc length and current, for a given set of conditions in the furnace. The arc-attachment zone (AAZ), where the arc impinges on the molten slag surface, is highly turbulent and operates at a very high temperature. This promotes very rapid melting, fast reaction kinetics, and effective mixing. The impingement of the arc causes a crater-like depression in the surface of the slag. This is believed to have a significant effect on the distribution of current and temperature in the molten slag, and the voltage drop across the slag. The shape and size of this depression has been photographed, and the resulting information used in a model of the depression. The steady-state electrical behaviour of the DC arc has been well described previously ( The high-intensity plasma arc has been modelled by Bowman as emanating from a relatively small attachment area on the graphite electrode, and extends down to the surface of the molten bath. This is shown schematically in  The arc shape function allows the arc voltage to be obtained by integration. Several constants of Bowman’s along with a single variable parameter, the arc resistivity, appear in the arc voltage expression. Variation of the arc resistivity then allows the model to be fitted to pilot or industrial plant data. The integration required is The final result of this integration is an expression relating the voltage of the arc to its length and current. This is shown in  Values for arc resistivity have been obtained experimentally on a number of pilot-plant furnace campaigns at Mintek. These were obtained by measuring the voltage while keeping the current constant and varying the arc length. The value used for the arc resistivity is that which best fits the experimental data. The resistivity varies substantially according to the prevailing gas atmosphere in the furnace. For example, the presence of zinc vapour makes the arc more conductive than carbon monoxide does. Observations of real arcs (as illustrated in Additional variables come into play when the arc is enclosed in a hot re-radiating furnace vessel, and when the arc is struck on a molten surface that deforms and splashes. The changing shape of the depression in the liquid surface provides a rapidly changing geometrical arrangement that encourages the arc to move to new, shorter, more conductive paths. In moving to a new position, the arc moves extremely rapidly across the tip of the electrode. Multiple ‘simultaneous’ arcs have been observed and recorded (see The arc jet is seen, from previous measurements and modelling work ( The volume of the displaced slag, in the paraboloid, may be expressed as The buoyancy force generated by the absence of the slag from the cavity can be taken as the volume multiplied by the slag density and gravitational acceleration. The buoyancy force may be equated to the thrust, in order to provide an expression relating One further constraint needs to be imposed on these two dimensions, in order to specify fully the size of the cavity, as a function of the arc current. A relationship between According to In smelting systems, the slag resistance causes a voltage drop across the molten bath. If the slag is highly resistive, this voltage drop can be quite significant. It is important to have a relatively accurate prediction of the voltage across the slag before specifying the power supply of a new industrial furnace. An incorrect specification can cause the failure of the process, and an over-conservative specification that will guarantee operation over a wide range of conditions may unnecessarily add significantly to the purchase price of the transformer. The slag bath would be easy to model electrically if it was known to have a flat surface and a uniform conductivity, and if the potential distribution at the upper surface was well understood. A small zone of constant high potential could be envisaged where the arc impinges on the surface, and a zero potential could be envisaged across the bottom surface of the bath where it is in contact with molten metal across the diameter of the furnace. The Laplace equation could then be solved to obtain the potential distribution. However, in reality, the impingement of the arc causes a depression in the surface of the slag. This has to be taken into account in the model, as it can alter the geometrical current distribution quite significantly. The specification of the power supply is one of the principal requirements when an industrial furnace is about to be built, and needs to be in place about 12–18 months before the furnace is to be commissioned. The total power requirement of the furnace is derived from the desired throughput, and the experimentally determined specific energy requirement for the process. The specification of the operating ranges for voltage and current requires a more detailed understanding of the scale-up of the furnace design. In the past, there has been much speculation about the behaviour of high-current arcs, as some features such as thrust depend on the square of the current. Industrial-scale arcs are very difficult (sometimes even dangerous) to photograph, and in many furnaces, the arc is never visible. Fortunately, video images taken of the high-current arc in an industrial steelmaking furnace showed very similar behaviour to the pilot-scale arcs previously photographed. Some sample images are shown in The work presented here includes a number of images taken using a standard digital still camera as well as with a standard camcorder. Welding filters were used to reduce the intensity of the light to manageable levels. The video images were captured at a rate of 25 frames per second (at a resolution of 768×576 pixels), but by separating the odd and even scan lines of the interlaced PAL video image, the frame rate was effectively doubled to 50 frames per second. Much higher filming speeds, with very little delay between successive frames, would be needed in order to capture some of the faster phenomena. High performance digital video cameras may capture images at rates from 1000 to 60 A number of critical areas have been identified where an increased understanding is required. The most important of these is the need to better understand the energy transfer in the furnace, closely followed by an ability to correctly specify the requirements of the electrical power supply. Higher-speed digital video imaging would make a valuable contribution towards achieving these objectives. Dynamic mathematical modelling of arcs is required to better understand the transient phenomena, as the steady-state models do not provide the full picture. Some preliminary work in this area at Mintek has already shown very promising results in using a deterministic model of the arc to predict behaviour that strongly emulates the real chaotic movements of arcs. The diameter to depth ratio of the arc depression has been determined from photographs, and this has been used for electrical bath modelling. This paper is published by permission of Mintek.