Blast furnace slag (BFS) is a typical solid waste generated in the steel production. Most of previous investigations have reported that the BFS has been used as traditional construction materials (cement, roadbed filling, concrete). In this study, a novel use route for BFS was proposed to prepare high-temperature composite phase change materials (C-PCMs) for thermal energy storage. Three typical inorganic PCMs (NaNO3, Al and Na2SO4 with different operating temperature) were blended with the pre-ground BFS to fabricate BFS-based C-PCMs by means of a mixing and sintering process. The results showed that NaNO3 had excellent chemical compatibility with BFS and the prepared C-PCMs had perfect phase change performance. The enthalpies of NaNO3/BFS C-PCMs was 65.53 J/g with melting point 300.5 °C and the super-cooling was only 0.1 °C. Furthermore, the NaNO3/BFS C-PCMs could retain good thermal reliability after 100 thermal cycles, which presented a potential application in the thermal energy storage system. In addition, the morphological structure, thermal reliability and heat transfer property of the NaNO3/BFS C-PCMs were characterised by using SEM, TGA and TG-DSC.The energy crisis has aroused a lot of attention with the enormous consumption of fossil fuels. Therefore, many energy utilization systems such as wind power generation Nevertheless, the PCMs may leak into their surroundings during heat storage process if they are applied directly without being encapsulated. These disadvantages, as reported, can be overcome by employing porous materials with good thermal stability and thermal conducting property to manufacture composite phase change materials (C-PCMs) Blast furnace slag (BFS) is a nonmetallic by-product generated in the steel industry, mainly composed of SiO Therefore, the BFS was first proposed to used as structural materials for high-temperature C-PCMs by mixing and sintering method in this study. NaNO NaNO The TG-DSC curves of the BFS are plotted in The raw BFS, generally, had a large grain size, hence, a pre-grinding process was conducted in a ball grinding mill for the BFS until the BFS was ground to 100 wt% less than 74 μm. Then, two samples of raw BFS (Sample #1) and the ground BFS (Sample #2) were characterized. The SEM images showed in In this study, the C-PCMs were prepared by a mixed and sintering process. Three typical high-temperature PCMs (NaNO Thermal reliability of the prepared NaNO Chemical constituents of the BFS were measured by X-ray Fluorescence (XRF, EDX6000B). Phase compositions of the raw BFS and the prepared C-PCMs were tested by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku D/max-2500). N The melting-freezing DSC curves of pure NaNO The melting DSC curves of pure Al and 40 wt% Al/BFS C-PCMs are presented in The melting DSC curves of pure Na The studies mentioned above verified that the NaNO Chemical compatibility of NaNO As shown in  The macroscopic shape of the NaNO TGA curves of BFS and the NaNO The heat transfer property is a very important character in latent heat energy storage application and it was expressed by thermal conductivity coefficient in this study. We tested the thermal diffusion coefficient α (m Where λ (W/m·K) represented the thermal conductivity and ρ (kg·m The study presented a novel route to utilize BFS for preparing high-temperature C-PCMs for thermal energy storage, and the following conclusions were obtained: BFS has a porous structure and excellent thermostability. The pre-grinding process was beneficial for the porous structure of BFS, enlarge the total pore volume and increase the BET value for the BFS. Three typical PCMs (NaNO NaNO We declare that we have no conflict of interest. The authors would express their heartful thanks to