Fractures of the os calcis are disabling injuries. The treatment of these fractures is challenging and fraught with difficulties. Over the last two decades, surgeons have reported good outcomes with operative intervention in these fractures.
                  We reviewed 42 intra articular fractures of the os calcis treated surgically, with a minimum 2-year follow up. All these fractures were evaluated with CT scans and classified according to the Sanders system. The functional outcome was evaluated using the scoring system described by Atkins. The functional outcome was evaluated separately for Sanders 2 and 3 part fractures. The results suggest that 2 part fractures do better than 3 part fractures. Also the results tend to improve over time with the 2 part fractures, but not significantly with the 3 part fractures.There is considerable debate over the appropriate treatment of displaced intra-articular fractures of the calcaneum. Conn in 1926 wrote that they are ‘serious and disabling injuries in which the end results continue to be incredibly bad’ This study reports the results of open reduction and internal fixation in displaced intra-articular fractures of the os calcis. The senior author, using specific criteria for patient selection and the same operative technique performed all the operations. Since June 1993, patients with displaced intra-articular fractures of the os calcis have prospectively undergone open reduction and internal fixation using a fixed protocol at the Royal Bolton Hospital. The fractures were evaluated with plain radiographs, AP, lateral and axial views, on admission. If the radiographs reveal an intra-articular component to the fracture, these were further evaluated with computed tomographic scans. The fractures were classified on the preoperative CT scans by the system of Sanders et al. The operation is performed with the patient in the lateral decubitus position, under a general or spinal anaesthetic. All patients received prophylactic antibiotics. After exsanguination of the limb, the tourniquet is inflated to 300 Postoperatively the limbs are elevated and early ankle and subtalar movements commenced at 48 The patients were followed up clinically at regular intervals. The functional outcome was evaluated using a questionnaire based on the scoring system for calcaneal fractures described by Atkins The first 20 patients in this study were reviewed in a departmental audit in 1996 and again in 2000. The significance of differences between the functional scores at the two time points was assessed using a paired students' Forty-two patients with displaced intra-articular fractures of the calcaneum were reviewed at a mean follow up of 38.6 months (range 25–86). There were 26, 2 part fractures and 16, 3 part fractures by the Sanders classification system. The mean age of the patients was 47.18 (range 31–74). There were 35 male and seven female patients. Surgery was performed at a mean of 8.4 days following the injury (range 1–18). There were no major complications. Two patients had superficial wound infection at the apex of the wound that settled with a course of antibiotics. The functional results were evaluated at regular intervals using the Atkin's scoring system. The overall mean score was 71.45 (range 12–100). The mean score was 78.96 (range 38–100; SD 17.75) for 2 part fractures and 59.25 (range 12–100; SD 27.93) for 3 part fractures. Two part fractures appear to do better than 3 part fractures following surgical treatment ( The first 20 patients (11 2 part fractures and nine 3 part fractures) included in our study were evaluated in a departmental audit in 1996 with a minimum 2 year follow up. These 20 patients were again evaluated in 2000 with a minimum 6-year follow up. The mean difference in the 2000 score for 2 part fractures as compared to the 1996 scores was 11.1 (95% CI 1.8–20.4) ( The early results with the management of intra-articular calcaneal fractures have been disappointing. In 1916, Cotton and Henderson, wrote ‘ordinarily speaking, the man who breaks his heel is done, so far as his industrial future is concerned’ For patients with displaced intra-articulator fractures of the calcaneum, nonoperative treatment offers little chance of return to function because calcaneal malunion will develop. Of concern is the fact that a reduction of the articular surface is never obtained, the heel remains shortened and widened and the lateral wall causes impingement and binding of the peroneal tendons Several types of surgical treatment have been reported medial approaches Crosby and Fitzgibon in their study utilising a CT classification concluded that all patients with an undisplaced fracture had good results but that most who had a type 2 and all who had a type 3 fracture had a poor result with closed treatment Randle et al. in a meta-analysis on calcaneal fractures could identify only six articles comparing operative with nonoperative treatment that met the minimum criteria for inclusion in a metaanalysis The evidence to support operative management of intra-articular fractures of the calcaneum, we accept is limited. We also appreciate the limitations of the study in that all fractures were treated surgically and the results analysed retrospectively. In these respects it does not help the evidence base. This paper, however, does show that good functional results are achievable with surgical management in intra-articular calcaneal fractures. The greater the comminution the poorer the functional outcome as defined by the calcaneal fracture score, 2 part fractures doing better than 3 part fractures. The functional score tends to improve over time with the 2 part fractures but appears to remain static with 3 part fractures. The incidence of complications in our study was very low. Most calcaneal fractures occur in male industrial workers, making the economic importance of this injury substantial. A good functional outcome can be achieved with surgical intervention in intra-articular fractures. We recommend that all displaced intra-articular fractures should be considered for open reduction and internal fixation.