The permeability of coalbed methane (CBM) reservoirs is typically very low and it is challenging and essential to effectively increase coal permeability to maximize CBM recovery. An exploratory study on enhancing coal porosity/permeability using freeze−thaw cycling with liquid nitrogen (LN2) was conducted. The changes of fracture and porosity in coal with the freeze−thaw treatment using LN2 were evaluated using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). After freeze−thaw treatment, the coal pore size tended to increase and new pores/fissures were generated. The growth rate of the pore size was positively correlated with the LN2 freezing duration. The effective porosity had a positive correlation with the freezing duration, but the correlation for residual porosity was negative. This means that the volume of irreducible fluid in the coal decreased while the amount of free fluid increased. Scanning electron micrograph studies indicated that the maximum fracture width in the coal samples grew from 5.56 μm at a Tfreezing = 1 min to 100 μm for Tfreezing = 60 min, matching the NMR findings. This study provides a scientific basis and guidance for engineering application of freeze−thaw using liquid nitrogen to enhance coalbed methane extraction.Coalbed methane (CBM) is considered to be an unconventional natural gas resource and is a greenhouse gas (GHG) but it has become a substantial supplement to global energy resources ( Because of the exigent need for coal permeability enhancement, some hydraulic measures are being applied in coal mines ( Water expands when it freezes. Thus, the volume of water in pores and fractures increases during freezing, resulting in pore enlargement and new pore initiation. When rock is subjected to cyclic freezing and thawing, the fracture network is modified, and thus, the permeability is elevated. Based on freeze−thaw erosion and the expansion of water upon freezing, the authors proposed a method of extracting CBM by increasing the porosity of coal seams using freeze−thaw cycling driven by LN Compared with fracturing coal using gaseous nitrogen, fracturing with LN Although LN In the 1990s, Many studies have analyzed the changes in frozen−thawed coal−rock samples ( The coal samples used for this study were coal blocks collected from the Shengli coal field in Inner Mongolia, China. The collected coal is lignite in rank. The cylindrical coal specimens were drilled from the blocks, and the specimens were 25 mm in diameter and 50 mm in length. To ensure similarity across all of the specimens, all specimens were drilled from the same coal block under identical laboratory conditions, as shown in The equipment items used in this study included: The freeze−thaw system includes the chamber (DN300) for freeze−thaw test, and a LN An MR−60 magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) analysis system (Shanghai Niumag Electronic Technology Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China) was used as the NMR−based core analyser. A scanning electron microscope (SEM), a QuantaTM250 manufactured by FEI (Hillsboro, OR, USA), was used for imaging the thin section specimens. This SEM has the resolution of 3.5 nm at 30 kV and the accelerating voltages were set to between 0.2 kV and 30 kV with a magnification that could be adjusted from 6 × to 1,000,000×. A vacuum drying oven (DZF−6020), a vacuum water saturation device, and a centrifuge were also included. The coal specimens were numbered and tagged and then dried in a vacuum drying oven at a vacuum pressure of −0.1 MPa and a temperature of 60 °C until a constant mass was reached (the difference between two successive measurements being less than 0.1%). The size and weight of each coal specimen were measured and recorded after vacuum drying. After being saturated with water in a vacuum water saturation device at a vacuum pressure of −0.1 MPa for 12 h, the coal samples were taken out and their size and weight were measured and recorded again. Coal specimens were then placed in the LN After this freezing−thawing treatment, the coal specimens from each group were scanned with a NMR−60 MRI analysis system to quantitatively determine the pore characterization for each specimen. Each group of specimens was then placed in a centrifuge for 90 min at 1.4 MPa before size and mass measurements. After removing the free water from the coal samples, the NMR−60 MRI analysis system was again used to evaluate the pore information of each group of centrifuged coal samples. Low field NMR means NMR measurements in a low external magnetic field. In the low external magnetic field, the hydrogen−containing molecules in the pore fluid of a rock become excited in the NMR magnetic field and the quantity of hydrogen has been shown to be a function of the relaxation time and relaxation distribution of these excitations. The amplitude of the dipole moment increases in proportion to the quantity of hydrogen atoms in the pore fluid, thus this method can determine the amount of fluid in any kind of pore. The relaxation of the dipole can be decomposed into spectra of decay times including the longitudinal relaxation time ( Low field NMR was used to acquire the distribution and connectivity of the micro-pores, mini-pores, meso-pores, macro-pores, and fractures in these coal samples as well as various physical parameters of the coal itself by measuring the relaxation time T The relationship between the pore size of a coal specimen, According to In the T This study recorded the low field NMR  In the By fitting a curve to the growth rate data, the curve can show variations of the growth rate for the The coal pores in the Statistical analysis of the number of pores with different sizes allowed a continuous curve to the data showing variations of the growth rate of the number of adsorption pores and seepage pores with the LN When extracting CBM, it is necessary to connect the pore spaces in which the CBM is adsorbed to increase the apparent permeability. The extent of the development of pores along the fractures determines the permeability of coal. The volume of the coal pores is generally regarded as the total porosity, that is, the ratio of the volume of all pores to the total volume of coal. The total porosity includes the closed porosity and the connected (or effective) porosity of coal, and the effective porosity can be accurately measured by low field NMR Low field NMR  The pore structure was modified and evolved by being frozen and thawed for different lengths of time. With increasing LN The change in effective porosity in the frozen−thawed coals has been measured in two ways. The change in effective porosity during LN From the results shown in The values of The increments of the effective, residual, and total porosities (Δ The curves fit to the three types of porosity are shown in Eqs. The values of In CBM extraction, the fracture network and porosity determines the coal permeability. Based on our experimental results, the effective porosity/permeability had a positive correlation with the LN Our concept is that using cyclic LN The combined influences of the frost heave, the combined effect of the expansive force induced by the gasification of LN LN With increased LN The total porosity and effective porosity of the coal specimens had a positive correlation with the LN With increasing LN This work was financially supported by the