Study on the stabilization processes is important to follow the landfill process and evaluate quality of organic matters. However, a simple, yet reliable and widely acceptable analytical tool to evaluate the degree of stability remains to be found. Temperature programmed combustion and pyrolysis tests were carried out to investigate the stabilization degree of sludges and demonstrate applicability of thermal methods in waste management. By the combination of combustion and pyrolysis, we can get more information of the sludges and reaction happened in the programmed heating process than combustion only.
                  TG/DTG analysis of sludge combustion helps us to know about the variation of different kinds of organic matters and the degradation degree of the anaerobic stabilization process. The decreasing tendency of DSC peaks reveals the stabilization process is still ongoing.Wastewater treatment entails the generation of a by-product, sewage sludge, which is difficult to dispose of, owing to both increased production and more restrictive policies concerning re-use. The production of dried sewage sludge corresponding to China is around 300,000 It is necessary to follow the landfill process with suitable parameters able to evaluate stabilization and the quality of its organic components. Many parameters have been proposed for the evaluation of waste materials stability, with varying degrees of reliability and technical complication, including chemical tests, microbiological assays and the determination of the humified organic matter; but the analytical determination of all these parameters was often complicated Degradation and stabilization are manifested by changing energy content. This fact leads to consider thermal methods as promising techniques through the control of the energy content of the sludges and the loss of organic matter by oxidation/ignition. They are based on a programmed heating of the samples in controlled atmosphere, which finally provides qualitative and quantitative information regarding the organic matter. In addition the entire sample can be analyzed avoiding chemical extraction steps that very often affect the nature and the ambience of organic matter. For complex samples this approach proves advantageous and provides additional information. To study the thermal degradation of wastes, many thermal analysis techniques have been used However, deriving knowledge of the thermal degradation process from TG mass loss data is rather complicated owing to generally complex kinetics Some papers have been published about the pyrolysis of sewage sludge. Caballero et al. The aim of this work was to give a contribution to a deeper knowledge of the landfill process and to demonstrate the applicability of thermal analysis to assess stability of sewage sludge by analyzing TG-DTG, DSC of combustion and corresponding pyrolysis of sludge with different stabilization degree. In the absence of mass spectrometry, the combination of combustion and pyrolysis provide more detailed information than combustion only to define sludge quality and stability. Therefore, the study carried out in this work is important and novel with respect to other papers. Sewage sludge employed in this study came from the Bailonggang wastewater treatment plants in Shanghai. The sludge was landfilled at Shanghai Refuse landfill. A total weight of 1800 The samples were taken from the same sampling points for an interval from weeks to months. For thermal analyses five samples (0, 60, 90, 150, 300 days) were selected from the samples during the landfill process (0 day represents the sludge used for landfill) .The sludge was air dried at room temperature for about 24 Thermal analyses were performed with an SDT Q600 (TA) that enables the recording of thermograms and DSC curves, all samples were combusted with synthetic air (gas flow: 100 Water-soluble extract 1:10 (w/v) for shaking one hour was made to measure pH using pH meter and soluble total organic carbon (STOC) after filtration with 0.45 During different periods, some parameters of the sludge were analyzed to make sure that we can follow the stabilization process. Microorganism activity can change during biodegradation of organic compounds under anaerobic conditions. DHA concentration was used to indicate microorganism activity in this study. There is relative high DHA content in 60d and 90d. This is related to the acid stage of anaerobic process. In these two stages, the microorganism activity is higher than that in later methane production stage. STOC can reflect the content of soluble organic matters already directly degradated. There is good correlation relationship between STOC content and DHA content, and the degradation ability of microorganisms can be determined by measuring DHA content.  Considering the undistinguishable characters of so many TG combustion curves and the corresponding pyrolysis curves, only combustion curves and corresponding pyrolysis curves of two landfill periods are listed in From Here, we should note that the degradation of organic materials in the second part may increase the amount of volatiles at the same time, because volatile matter is usually the easiest to be digested by microorganisms and it has been the first to disappear along the landfill process. The amount of volatiles produced in the second part is less than that of degraded in the first part, so the temperature at which combustion starts for most of materials in 150d sludge is still lower than that of 0d sludge. So we can conclude that the TG combustion curve and corresponding pyrolysis curve of landfill sludge in different degradation stages can not only give us some information about the weight variation of the sludge in certain temperature, but also let us to know about the degradation of simple and complex organic matters generally.  Two obvious peaks (between 130 and 375 From 590 to 900 Accordingly, we can further analyse and discuss about the main materials and reactions happening under different temperature by comparing DTG curves of combustion and pyrolysis. DTG combustion curves of different landfill periods are presented in From results in  It is noteworthy that the temperature of the two distinct DTG peaks does not correspond exactly with the two peaks maximum of the heat flow in the aged samples, especially the first peak. This is mainly because of the thermal inertia of the heat flux sensor (delay on signal). According to the declining energy content, the energy release is higher in the undecomposed material than in the degraded one. The decrease of organic compounds results in a reduction of DSC peak intensities. As the landfill process advanced, because of preference combustion of the degradated organic matters during landfill, energy release of the second peak begins at lower temperature. The declining tendency of heat flow indicates that stabilization of sludge is still ongoing. This finding is confirmed by conventional parameters. Smidt and Lechner Thermal methods have proved to be a faster and complementary way for the assessment of the stage of degradation and stabilization in waste materials. They have proved to be advantageous in the management of complex materials and only require a simple procedure for data interpretation. In the absence of mass spectrometry and other complementary methods, thermal analysis of combustion are not so effective in distinguishing the materials and reactions going on in the programmed heating process, while the combination of combustion with pyrolysis analysis can give us more information to estimate them. Due to the mineralization process taking place during stabilization treatment, sewage sludge residues from temperature programmed combustion increase as stabilization progresses. According to the combustion DTG, the volatiles and easy degradable organic matters are the main fraction consumed first by microorganisms at different landfill periods. A small amount of complicated organic materials are also degraded. The decreasing intensity and shift toward lower temperatures of DTG/DSC peaks reveals that the stabilization process is still ongoing. The influence of aerobic and anaerobic disposal technologies on stabilization efficiency, thermal behavior, and exothermic reactions still remains to be properly investigated. The work was financially supported by the Research Foundation from Education Ministry of China (Grant No. 305005).