Fracture fixation devices such as rods, plates, screws, and wires are some of the oldest used orthopedic implants. Concepts of internal fixation of fractures date back to the mid-1800s when Lister introduced open reduction, internal fixation (ORIF) of fractures. These early devices were fraught with issues such as infection, lack of materials quality control, and biocompatibility, as well as the lack of understanding of the biology and mechanics of bone fracture healing. Much progress has been made in the understanding of the science of fracture healing, which has led to contemporary fracture fixation theories and techniques. Advances in mechanical testing techniques, materials developments, and stress analysis have greatly improved the devices used to accomplish these techniques. This chapter has a brief introduction to the basic principles of fracture fixation, the implants that are available to treat fractures, and test methods to evaluate those implants.Fracture fixation devices such as rods, plates, screws, and wires are some of the oldest used orthopaedic implants. Concepts of internal fixation of fractures date back to the mid-1800s when Lister introduced open reduction, internal fixation (ORIF) of fractures ( This chapter has a brief introduction to the basic principles of fracture fixation, the implants that are available to treat fractures, and test methods to evaluate those implants. Many excellent books are available that are dedicated to the study of fracture fixation techniques ( Untreated fractures heal with the formation of callus, a process called “secondary” fracture healing. Direct contact, rigid fixation, and axial compression provide optimal conditions for “primary” healing of fractures. The size of the gap and the presence or absence of motion will in part determine the type of tissue that forms within the gap and when the tissue forms. Some forms of internal fixation produce primary fracture healing while other forms rely upon secondary fracture healing. There are four general stages of healing for a fractured, or broken, bone by secondary fracture healing. In the first stage (0–4 hours), a hematoma, or blood clot, forms at the site of the fracture. The blood vessels that are cut off at the broken ends of the bone are sealed off by the blood clot. The bone cells that are then deprived of nutrients begin to die. Inflammation is the second stage (4 hours to 4 days). A few days after the initial fracture, new capillaries begin to grow into the blood clot and phagocytic cells start to clear away the dead cells. Inflammation is a soft tissue reaction that advances the healing process. The third stage is soft callus (4 days to 4 weeks). Fibroblasts and chondroblasts (the cells that build connective tissue and cartilage, respectively) begin to repair the fracture site. The tissue that is repairing the broken bones is a fibrocartilaginous callus. The fourth stage is the formation of a hard callous (4–12 weeks). In this stage, calcium is deposited within the fibrocartilaginous soft callus which is remodeled into a bony callus of spongy (immature, disorganized) bone. If conditions are right, the fourth stage takes about 6–8 weeks for the broken bone ends to be firmly joined together. The fifth and final stage is remodeling, the bony callus is remodeled by osteoclasts and osteoblasts to create bone organized along lines of stress and recreation of normal morphology. The bone of the fully healed fracture is histologically almost identical to the original, unbroken bone. This final stage of remodeling can take many months or even years to complete and is influenced by both the biological and biochemical conditions of the fracture site ( For these stages of fracture healing to progress, certain conditions must be met. From a biomechanical point of view, strains between 10% and 100% will cause granulation tissue to form, strains between 2% and 10% produce fibrocartilage (stage 3), and strains less than 2% in stage 4 and 5 result in bone filling in the gap. In the transition from the first to second stage of healing, the granulation tissue that first forms helps to stabilize the gap and reduce strains in the gap, enabling fibrocartilage to eventually form. However, if the strain in the gap is not reduced or stabilized, damage will occur to the healing tissue and a pseudoarthrosis may form. Goals of operative fracture treatment include alignment of the broken bone pieces to reduce the gap size and then fix them together rigidly to minimize the intragap motion when exposed to physiological loads so that the bone can go through the normal stages of healing. It is likely that there will always be some micromotion at a fracture gap; this limited micromotion is important for the normal bone healing process. As a general rule of thumb, a technique used to stabilize a fracture should have fixation rigidity at least in the range of 20–60% of the intact bone in bending ( The four primary categories of internal fracture fixation devices are (1) plates and screws, (2) external fixation, (3) intramedullary devices (rods or nails), and (4) wires and cables. The type and extent of the injury, the status of the patient, and the location of the injury are factors that influence the device that is used by the surgeon. For example, external fixation techniques may be chosen if the patient has an open, dirty wound that requires extensive soft tissue repair along with hard tissue repair. Internal fixation with plates, rods, and screws may be used for a comminuted or multiple fracture surface injury or if the injury is near a joint. The choice of fixation implant is often related to the mechanical demands of the fractured bone, the proximity to the skin, nerves, or blood vessels, and the rate of expected healing. The surgeon balances the rate at which the body can heal the fracture versus the potential for mechanical failure of the implant. Regardless of the treatment mode chosen, the goal of fracture fixation is to stabilize the fracture and stabilize the broken bone pieces in near proximity to reconstruct the normal anatomy as closely as possible. With use of fracture fixation devices, there is a race between bone healing and device failure. It is generally understood that virtually any fracture fixation device will ultimately fail if bone fusion or healing does not occur. Bone screws are the most commonly used orthopaedic implants. Just as there are many different types and sizes of screws for wood and metal, there are many different screw types for bone. Most bone plates for long bone fracture fixation are made out of stainless steel or titanium alloys. The mechanics of screws for wood and metal apply in many ways to the mechanics of screws for bone. The outer diameter, root diameter, and thread pitch and angle are important in determining screw mechanics. Screws function by converting the tightening torque into internal tension in the screw and elastic reactions in the surrounding bone. This creates compression between the fracture fragments that the screw is holding together. Cortical bone screws are typically inserted into holes drilled equal to the root diameter and are either self-tapping or are inserted tapped (threaded) holes. The torque to insert cortical bone screws can be high, so the screws must be properly inserted into the correct size drilled hole and designed to withstand insertion torque levels expected in cortical bone. Cancellous bone screws have large, deep threads that grip the spongy bone well. Because of the relatively low strength of the cancellous bone, failure of the screw itself during insertion is rare, but pull out can be an issue. Purchase of the cancellous bone screw into the bone is critical ( Most bone plates are held in place by bone screws. Bone plates can be found in many different shapes and sizes for different locations and types of fractures. The function of a bone plate is essentially to act as a splint across the broken pieces of bone and hold the fracture fragments together. The bone plate must maintain proper alignment, prevent relative motion, and create compression between the ends of the fracture or neutralize forces created across the fracture site. Compression across the fracture site should be achieved so that part of the load can be transferred to the bone and not carried solely by the bone plate and screws. Because of size/space limitations and the desire to stimulate fracture healing, most bone plates are not designed to carry the entire load originally carried by the bone for a long period of time. Dynamic compression (DC) plates are designed to bring the ends of the bone fracture together and to compress them. In the DC plate the holes on at least one side of the plate are elongated with an inclined surface, as illustrated in Bone plates are designed to be placed on the tension side of a fracture, if possible. As shown in Plating of fractures typically involves anatomic reduction and rigid fixation with primary bone healing. Gaps and macromotion at the fracture site may result in non-union. Anatomic reduction is particularly important for intra-articular fractures to avoid post-traumatic osteoarthritis. Plates are generally considered to be “load bearing” devices and weight bearing by the patient is generally delayed. External fixation is often the treatment of choice for open or infected fractures. It involves a semi-rigid external metal frame and percutaneous pins placed into the bone and removed after the bone is healed. External fixation is also used as a temporary stabilization means for wounded soldiers during transportation from the battlefield to a hospital where he/she can receive definitive surgical treatment. There are many designs of the frames: unilateral, bilateral, triangular, quadrilateral, and semicircular, and circular. The key biomechanical factor in determining the performance of an external fixation construct is the bone-segment rigidity after fixation, as the rigidity determines gap opening of the fracture site when subjected to physiological loads like walking. The factors that govern the bone segment rigidity include: (1) number of pins, (2) pin diameter, (3) pin separation within a group, (4) connecting rod separation, (5) distance of pin group to fracture site, (6) pin configuration (half or full), (7) number of connecting rods, (8) symmetry of the connecting rods, (9) pin and frame material, (10) compression at the fracture site, and (11) type of fracture. External fixation typically provides relative stability and secondary fracture healing. Pin tract infection is a common downside of external fixation techniques. As with bone plates, intramedullary (IM) rods or nails act as internal splints for fractures. Nails provide relative stability and secondary fracture healing. Restoration of length, rotation, and alignment, but not necessarily anatomic reduction, is the goal. Small amounts of residual displacement are tolerated by the formation of a large quantity of external callus. The likelihood of a fracture healing depends in part on gap opening, which in part depends on the bending and torsional rigidity and stability of the IM rod. Insertion of an IM rod across a fracture site can be tricky. Some IM rods are slotted to decrease rigidity and enhance ability of insertion. While the slot does decrease rigidity, it also decreases strength, making the rod more susceptible to fatigue failure. Design of IM rods for various fracture locations should take into account the possibility of delayed healing or pseudoarthrosis at the fracture site. Nails are considered “load sharing” devices and early weight bearing by the patient is generally allowed. Wires and braided cables are sometimes used in cerclage configurations to hold fractures together. Wires can be monofilament or multifilament. When used in cerclage configurations, wires can be crimped or twisted and braided cables crimped to form the connection and put the cerclage in pretension. The tensile strength of the wire is directly proportional to the wire diameter. Knots (or twists) in the wires can reduce the failure stress by 25–30% and decrease fatigue resistance. Twisting or crimping results in a permanent deformation in the wire or braid; the increase in energy due to the permanent deformation can decrease fatigue life and increased local corrosion. In order to achieve stability of a cerclage through bone-to-bone contact, the fracture fragments must be closely fitted and a lasting tension of the cerclage is required to reduce movements across the fracture site. A recent study found that in general, cerclages should be combined with internal splinting (such as an IM rod), as they cannot sufficiently reduce torsional and bending moments or shear forces across a typical fracture ( Testing of facture fixation devices is the most straightforward of all orthopaedic implants. The guiding principles of fracture fixation implant testing is that the device must be sufficiently rigid to reduce motion at the fracture gap to allow for healing while retaining longer term fatigue strength in case of nonunion or pseudoarthrosis. Initial stability needs to be sufficient to prevent fracture displacement. This can be measured by single event load to failure testing. Stability needs to be maintained over time as the fracture heals so fatigue testing of fracture fixation constructs is also important. Fracture fixation devices are commonly tested in four different types of formats: (1) cadaveric specimens, (2) mechanical analogue bones, or (3) synthetic materials or constructs set up to simulate basic body loading conditions, and (4) finite element analysis. These types of tests are meant to represent the in situ case of implantation. There are pros and cons for each of these test formats and special considerations that must be made to make the tests reasonable. For all tests that attempt to mimic in situ conditions, the creation of the fracture defect and the fracture interfaces is very important. If the fracture to be simulated is comminuted, the method of creating the comminuted fracture and the geometry of the fracture surfaces may be important in the stability of the fracture fixation device. It is difficult to consistently create the same fracture surface geometry. It is often difficult to simulate the soft tissue component of a fracture in the laboratory testing setting, especially when fracture comminution (more than two fragments) is present. A worst case scenario is sometimes used in which the fracture surfaces are not in contact and the device is left to carry the load ( Cadaveric specimens are the closest to human bone in terms of shape and structure. However, when using cadaveric specimens to mimic in situ conditions, one must be aware that the quality of bone changes with age and preservation techniques ( Animal models can be used for mechanical testing but the geometry of the bone is quite different from humans. Care must be taken to choose appropriate animal bone models and recognize limitations of using the animal bones. Synthetic anatomically correct mechanical test models have been developed to test a variety of implants, including fracture fixation devices ( Standards for testing of fracture fixation devices are designed to determine the rigidity of the device and its ability to withstand fatigue loading. The primary standards for testing of fracture fixation devices are listed in The standards listed in Second the user should understand that fracture fixation devices are found in all different shapes and sizes and that the test standard may require some interpretation to implement correctly. In general, it is very good idea to try out one's new test setup on uniformly shaped specimens and compare your results to known material properties. This will enable you to demonstrate that your testing methodology produces established results in established conditions. When using real parts, such as curved bone plates in ASTM F382, the user should understand about which axis testing should be performed to most closely replicate the clinical use. Because some fracture fixation devices are unusual in size, shape, and function, there are times that a user must deviate slightly from the standard test method to successfully carry out an experiment. Regardless of the reason for the needed deviation, the user must be able to justify his/her reason for the deviation. If the standard is being used to compare different types of devices for research purposes, this justification can be broad. If the tests are being done for purposes of generating data for a regulatory submission, the user should take care in following the standard as closely as possible with rigorous justification for deviations. When comparing between a new device and a predicate, care must taken to conduct tests in the same fashion without major deviations in the test setup so that data can be directly compared. The Ilizarov frame was introduced in the 1950s and has been used for limb lengthening and to treat infected non-unions, certain fractures, and bony deformities (  Most bone plates for long bone fracture fixation are made out of stainless steel or titanium alloys. Considering the required rigidity of a bone plate, think of how a polymeric bone plate might be designed. Consider how a composite material might be used in the design of a bone plate. When setting up a fracture fixation implant test using cadaveric specimens, it can be important to have fracture surfaces that mimic typical in vivo conditions. Speculate on the pluses and minuses of the various ways of creating reproducible mock fractures in cadaveric bones. List the factors that should be considered when setting up this fracture creation. Several factors that influence the rigidity of an external fixation device are presented. From an engineering point of view, consider the sensitivity of each of the parameters and discuss which might be most critical in the selection of a fixator construct design. Is there such a thing as “too much” rigidity of fixation? If so, what problems might occur? What safety concerns are common when testing fracture fixation? What happens when a construct reaches failure?