The dissolution of a manganese dioxide ore in dilute sulfuric acid facilitated by Fe metal in the form of powdered sponge iron was investigated. Effects of such parameters as molar ratios of sponge iron and sulfuric acid to manganese dioxide, temperature, particle size of sponge iron as well as ore particle size on the dissolution efficiency were studied. The results showed that manganese could be rapidly leached out to a complete degree even at room temperature. Based on both theoretical and experimental facts, it was concluded that the usage of metallic iron for the reductive leaching of manganese dioxide was superior to that of ferrous ion as far as dissolution rate and efficiency were concerned.Although the conventional treatment of reduction roasting has been widely applied for processing manganese ores, alternative hydrometallurgical techniques have drawn much attention in recent years. Electrochemical and kinetic aspects of reductive dissolution of MnO  Dissolution of manganese dioxide in the presence of iron sulfides has been the subject of some recent studies.  Despite the relatively large number of research studies mentioned above involving incorporation of several iron bearing compounds into the acidic dissolution of manganese dioxide, the authors could find little to no information in the literature concerning the direct usage of metallic iron for this purpose, which could be considered as a method for the in-situ production of Fe(II) reductant. Simultaneous addition of manganese dioxide and iron metal to the sulfuric acid solution brings about a severe reaction. With regard to the complexity of this system, it seems to be necessary to review the possible reactions that may take place in the system. Half-reactions of concern that may play a part are tabulated in A range of side and main reactions (leading to the production of Fe Following in this paper, results of an experimental study concerning dissolution of a manganese dioxide ore in dilute sulfuric acid in the presence of sponge iron are reported and discussed. X-ray diffraction analysis of manganese ore used in the experiments showed pyrolusite ( Samples of manganese ore and sponge iron were prepared after crushing, milling and dry-sieving. In all experimental runs, calculated amounts of manganese ore and sponge iron based on the relevant acid to manganese dioxide and iron to manganese dioxide molar ratios (A/O and I/O ratios, respectively) were weighed and added to 200 mL of 10% (v/v) sulfuric acid solution in a stirred reaction vessel at the desired temperature. Both I/O and A/O ratios were chosen taking possible reaction schemes and kinetic considerations into account. The stirring speed was set to 350 rpm in all experiments. Samples were taken at appropriate time intervals and manganese contents were determined by standard spectrophotometeric method after proper dilution. The experimental parameters and their respective values examined in this study are tabulated in To study the effect of iron quantity, experiments were conducted for various molar ratios of iron to ore at 20 °C and ore and sponge iron particle sizes of − In studying the effect of acid amount, experiments were performed at 20 °C and ore and sponge iron particle sizes of − Deducing from the experimental data depicted in The temperature effect was investigated with convincingly sufficient amount of sponge iron and sulfuric acid (I/O and A/O ratios of 2.0 and 4.0, respectively) to avoid depletion of the reactants. Also, a relatively larger particle size of − The effect of sponge iron and manganese ore particle sizes was examined at two size fractions of − Whether the overall reaction of manganese dioxide dissolution in the present investigation could be basically described by any one the schemes represented by Eqs. In this paper, results of a laboratory investigation for the dissolution of manganese ore in sulfuric acid media assisted by sponge iron were presented. From the both theoretical and experimental standpoints, the utilization of iron metal for the reductive leaching of manganese dioxide was shown to be more beneficial than the direct usage of ferrous ion. Much of the advantage could be attributed to the fact that, with iron metal being present in the system, the The dissolution was found to be severe and essentially fast even at room temperature. Increasing temperature from 20 to 60 °C, reduces the time for the completion of manganese dissolution from 10 to 3 min. The effect of particle size of manganese ore on the dissolution efficiency was found to be considerable, while that of sponge iron was less significant. It was found that the amount of sponge iron could be more crucial for a successful dissolution of manganese dioxide than that of sulfuric acid. The most favorable conditions for a complete manganese extraction were found to be iron to MnO