Tin stripping is a key process step in printed circuit board fabrication. At the end of a tin stripping process, in general, metal concentration in the waste is 2–40g/l Cu and 150g/l SnO2 [D. McKeeson, Print. Circuit Fabr. 22 (7) (1999) 34–37] in addition to nitric acid, ferric ions and other complexants. In a previous work we had carried out a thermodynamic analysis to determine if copper can be recovered from a tin stripping process. In this paper we present a kinetic analysis to determine the current efficiency for copper electrodeposition from a tin strip waste solution. We have performed electrochemical stripping analysis from simulated and real waste tin strip solutions. Copper is electrodeposited from solutions containing only copper and nitric acid, copper and nitric acid with ferric and tin ions, or waste from tin-strip processes. Our results showed that copper can be recovered at reasonably high current efficiency from solutions containing nitrate ions. The presence of ferric ions, however, reduces current efficiency significantly. It was shown that the tin stripping solution is a mixed potential system. In order to develop a high efficiency electrochemical copper recovery system, the crucial criteria are to maintain a low concentration of ferric ions in solution and to suppress the generation of ferric ions by electro-oxidation.Electronics is an important industry in the UK and the world, as there are many home grown manufacturing companies in the areas of optics, electronics and micro-systems. Printed circuit boards (PCBs) constitute an integral part of electronics and are fabricated in large volumes across the world. Tin stripping process is a key process of the outer layer circuit formation of a multilayer printed circuit board The process of stripping the tin from the copper circuit board is usually carried out with a nitric acid based solution. The solutions are proprietary but tend to contain, in addition to the acid, an inhibitor to control the removal of copper and prevent tarnish, a ferric salt to increase the oxidising power of the solution, and additives to ensure the tin oxide is kept in suspension Although it is common to recover metals from plating or etching processes However, there are economic drivers towards recovering metals for reuse from the stripping solution. The directives that will have the most impact on the disposal of the tin stripping solution in the EU are the Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control Directive (IPPC), the Landfill Directive and for the UK, Landfill Tax In a previous paper we carried out a thermodynamic analysis for a separation process In this paper we present a kinetic feasibility assessment of copper recovery from the tin-strip waste solution. This work uses electrochemical stripping analysis to determine the current efficiency of Cu A typical tin strip solution consists of copper, nitrate, ferrous and ferric ions, tin oxide and additives. At the end of a tin-strip process, the maximum Cu(II) concentration in the waste stream is 0.3 The concentration of the second significant component, i.e., NO After the characterisation of the copper/nitrate solutions, subsequent experiments were carried out with the addition of iron/tin. The Fe Based on the above reasoning, Anodic stripping experiments were then performed to find the efficiency for a variety of applied currents. These experiments were carried out at room temperature (between 18 In the stripping experiments, initially, copper was deposited from solution onto the gold electrode in the H-cell, which was rotated at 800 Hydrochloric acid was chosen as the stripping electrolyte as it can dissolve copper into cuprous ions only, rather than a mixture of Cu(I) and Cu(II) The potential at which copper could be removed as cuprous ions was determined by stripping the copper potentiodynamically, according to the method described by Horkans et al. The data for copper deposition using an acidified copper solution followed by anodic stripping at 0.0 The charge The efficiency was therefore calculated as twice the stripping charge The method described above, however, could not be used to determine the efficiency of copper deposition from the real tin-strip waste solution. This was mainly because the deposited copper from the real waste solution was powdery, and could flake off during an experiment, producing erroneous results. In addition, the deposit was difficult to dissolve in 0.5 The deposition efficiency of copper from Solutions 1, 4, 5 and 9 was found for a range of deposition currents. The chosen currents (and current density) as well as the corresponding potentials are shown in Typical current  In order to check the reproducibility of the stripping experiments, five experiments were carried out after depositing copper at −0.60 The current efficiency, The calculated copper deposition rate from Solution 4 during the stripping experiments is shown in Deposition rate calculations were also carried out for Solutions 1, 5 and 9; the deposition rates for each applied cell current are shown in A second notable point in The rate of this reaction is dependent on both nitrate (first order) and proton concentration (second order). Our data indicate that for Solution 4, where Cu The calculated current density for NO Solutions 10, 13, 14 and 18, shown in The deposition currents are shown in The current efficiency calculated for deposition from Solution 10 at −47 These anodic stripping experiments were repeated for Solutions 13, 14 and 18, which are summarised in The low current efficiencies observed in solutions containing Fe The other possibility is that ferric ions, present in tin-strip solutions, could be the cause of low current efficiency. In order to determine if this is true, a separate set of polarisation experiments was carried out using different amounts of Fe(NO The deposition efficiency of copper from the real waste stripping solution (Tinsolv 2000) was also found for four deposition currents. The waste solution was sourced from an industrial partner, and represented typical waste generated from a tin-strip process. The suspended SnO The deposition currents used and corresponding potentials used in the stripping experiments are shown in However, when a higher current was applied to recover the metal, the current efficiency increased because Cu The anodic stripping studies show that the deposition of copper from nitrate electrolytes can be achieved with reasonable current efficiency. For example, copper can be recovered with 95% efficiency from a 0.3 The concentration of H The crucial stumbling block, however, is ferric ion in solution, which reduces the efficiency of copper deposition. The severity of the reduction depends on the concentration of Fe Although the detrimental effect of Fe Current efficiency trends can also be assessed using the illustration in The current efficiency for copper deposition is defined by the following equation: Prior assessments related to copper recovery from tin-strip waste solutions used simulated solutions containing copper and nitrate only A process for copper recovery by electrodeposition will require careful monitoring of Fe Electrochemical stripping experiments were carried out to determine the current efficiency during copper deposition from solutions containing copper, nitrate, ferric ions and tin oxide as well as real tin strip waste solutions. Solutions containing only copper and nitrate were found to deposit copper at current efficiencies close to 90%. This indicates that nitrate reduction reaction proceeds at a low rate at the electrode and therefore it is feasible to recover copper from these solutions. A reduction in current efficiency was observed as the copper concentration decreased and the nitrate concentration increased. The inclusion of ferric ions in solution lowers the deposition efficiency substantially, i.e., >70%. The deposit quality of copper obtained from synthetic waste was found to be of good quality. Poor quality deposits were obtained from real waste solutions. Copper deposition efficiency was understood in terms of a mixed potential system and partial current density. Here, ferric ions form a galvanic couple with copper and reduce the current efficiency greatly. Therefore, in order to develop a process for copper recovery it is crucial to maintain low levels of ferric ion in solution and choose an anode where Fe The authors acknowledge the support by the EPSRC and ITRI via The Resource Efficiency Knowledge Transfer Partnership (quota reference 03303073 and GR/T11302/01). Real tin-strip waste solutions were provided by Circatex plc., South Shields, Newcastle.