An alkali roasting process, which consists of roasting with caustic soda, water washing and sulphuric acid leaching, has been found to be an effective method for graphite purification even at low roasting temperature. With this process, a flotation fine concentrate containing 87–88% carbon could be purified to about 99.4% carbon when roasted with 25% NaOH at 250 °C and leached by 10% H2SO4 solution at room temperature. In addition to the successful removal of silicate impurities, the process was also found to be effective to eliminate sulphide impurities. For instance, the sulphur content in the end product could be reduced to below 0.05% from 0.6% by the process. Furthermore, the consumption of NaOH can be lowered by using high-grade feed. When using a feed of 95.9% carbon (upgraded by flotation), the NaOH concentration could be reduced to 10% from 25% while the product purity could reach the same purity level of over 99%.Graphite is the mineral which is easiest to float as rougher concentrate, but very difficult to be upgraded further by flotation or other mechanical processing methods. By the process of scrubbing and two-step cleaning flotation ( The graphite sample used in this study is the fine flotation concentrate (−80 μm) from Woxna Graphite AB (Sweden), and the reagents include NaOH (analytical reagent, purity 99%), H The chemical composition of the raw material was analyzed as C 87.7%, S 0.6%, SiO The effect of roasting temperatures was first investigated and the procedure was as follows. First, the raw material was mixed with 25% NaOH solution in a liquid–solid ratio of 2:1 (w/w), and then roasted at different temperatures for 1 h. Then, the roasted mixtures were washed to neutral (pH 7) on a vacuum filter. Finally, the water washing residues were leached by 10% H The results ( Following the same procedure as the above tests, the effect of NaOH concentration was tested at the roasting temperature of 250 °C and the roasting time of 1 h. The results ( Besides, a higher purity can be observed at relative higher liquid–solid ratio of 2:1 ( Also, the results ( The sulphur content in the raw material reaches 0.6%, which is unacceptable in many applications. Direct roasting experiments (without NaOH) proved that roasting at high temperatures of over 500 °C was effective to remove the sulphur in this material, but the efficiency was poor at temperatures below 500 °C ( It has been found out that the alkali roasting purification process is an effective method both for the removal of silicate impurities and for the removal of sulphide impurities even at low roasting temperatures of 200–300 °C. After roasting with NaOH at 250 °C, and followed by water washing and H This work was completed with the financial support of China Scholarship Council and Woxna Graphite AB.