Depending on the mode of operation and quality of the feed material, discrete unburned carbon particles are evident in coarse gasification ash emanating from a commercial gasifier. Black, partially reacted carbon particles in the size range −13+4mm were randomly hand picked from grab sample following a gasifier shutdown. These particles were classified into three major categories namely: unburned carbon, carbonaceous shale, and “shrinking core” particles. The unburned carbon particles were further macroscopically subdivided into remnant “coal” particles, solid carbon, layered carbon, and porous carbon. The unburned carbon particles were characterized using a petrographic analysis, reflectance analysis, chemical analysis, TGA mass loss curves, pore volume and surface area, and mineral characterization. The carbon particles were compared to the feed coal. The petrographic-based characterization technique as developed for the characterization of coarse unburned carbon particles indicated that remnant coal, devolatilised coal, highly porous isotropic carbon, dense anisotropic carbon, and variations in-between occurred in the coarse gasification ash sample.Low-grade, low-rank bituminous coal is gasified in Sasol–Lurgi Fixed Bed Dry Bottom Gasifiers (SL-FBDBG) to produce synthesis gas Unburned carbon in fly ash is the major determinant of combustion efficiency in pf coal-fired boilers, and, along with bottom ash, has been studied extensively Maroto-Valer et al. Many of the findings from combustion studies can be inferred for carbon behaviour during gasification and unburned carbon in gasification ash. Wu et al. This paper deals with the detailed characterization of the discrete unburned carbon particles present in coarse gasification ash and provides possible reasons for their presence in the ash. A 40 The handpicked carbon particles were classified into three main groupings, namely: (1) unburned carbon, (2) carbonaceous shales, and (3) particles exhibiting a hard ash layer around black, “carbon-like” material (termed ‘shrinking core”). From the unburned carbon group, four subdivisions were determined based on apparent density and physical appearance ( Petrographic observations and reflectance readings were made on individual unburned carbon particles to determine reaction zones within particles. Additional reflectance readings and morphological determinations were conducted on particles crushed to −1 The TGA proximate and reactivity analyses were conducted on a Mettler TGA/SDTA 851e, and the ultimate and sulphur analyses were conducted following ASTM D5373 and D4239, respectively. BET surface area and pore size distribution in the coal and unburned carbon particles was determined on a TRISTAR (Micromeritics) instrument by using N In a complementary study, an electron microprobe and optical microscope were used to determine the chemical composition of individual macerals present in a discrete carbon particle from gasification ash (partially burned carbon) and a coal feedstock lump. A Cameca SX-50 electron microprobe equipped with the Windows based SAMx operating system and interface software was used. The accelerating voltage for the electron beam was 10 A blend of inertinite-rich, low-rank bituminous coals is fed to the gasifiers. Typical coal feed properties of the blend are provided in Coal fed to gasification has a typical wide particle size distribution (PSD) and the resultant ash is typically coarse. Discrete carbon and carbonaceous shale particles in the coarse gasification ash are prominent in the size range +4 The macrocharacteristics observed in hand specimen ( Hurt et al. The unburned carbon particles have an ash content comparable to or lower than the feed coal. Whilst some volatile matter was determined in all the unburned carbon samples, this could be attributed to minerals, or to residual organic volatiles The TGA mass loss curves ( The different unburned carbon types characterized have a range of reflectance readings (crushed samples), and individual lump samples have relatively constant reflectance values across the whole particle. That is, whole (uncrushed) particles appeared to have the same reflectance value throughout the particle, with no discernable reflectance gradient. This would imply that the temperature in the particles is similar to the surrounding temperature and that heat diffusion is constant. The reflectance data also indicates that the temperature profile through the gasifier is highly variable, with low and high temperature channels most likely related to poor particle size distribution (PSD) of the feed entering the gasifier. The petrographic-based carbon-form characterization technique and reflectance analyses ( Correlations back to the original coal type are possible, as vitrinite-rich particles or bands are likely to soften, swell, and become porous in the pyrolysis zone, and the inert inertinite-rich particles or bands will, by and large, maintain their physical appearance during heating. The coal feed is an inertinite-rich coal, and therefore one would assume that the unburned carbon would primarily reflect this maceral group, which is true for the dense and “coal–like” carbon particles, but not so for the porous and layered carbon particles. Pressured gasification processes encourage porous char formation. The porous carbon form is dominated by highly porous isotropic carbon (vitrinitic origin), which one would expect to be highly reactive and not reach the ash zone. The dense carbon form, making up the bulk of the sample, is dominated by mixed anisotropic carbon (inertinite origin), and will require a longer burn out time than the vitrinite-derived carbons, However, as the particles are porous, again one would expect these particles to have reacted to completion before the ash zone. The TGA results ( The porosity determination reflects the petrographic findings, with the porous and layered carbon particles having a relatively high porosity and containing retained reactive macerals. Fusinite and other highly inert coal macerals do occur in the coal feed, and appear as unfused materials in the unburned carbon. The BET surface area analyses ( The dense carbon particles account for approximately 50% by mass and volume of all the unburned carbon types ( Accounting for 21% by mass of the unburned carbon, in hand specimen, these particles reveal bands of coal macerals which have behaved differently during pyrolysis ( In hand specimen, these particles are light weight and porous ( The CO Accounting for only 4% by mass of the total sample, the particles in this category by physical appearance in hand specimen did not appear to have altered from the original feed coal ( Through optical and electron microprobe analysis, it was determined that vitrinite and semifusinite dominate the feed coal lumps for gasification, whilst fusinite and semifusinite were more prominent in the selected unburned carbon particles from gasification ash. The results given in A detailed characterization was conducted on a variety of unburned carbon forms handpicked from a single coarse gasification ash sample. This work has shown that the different carbon forms identified are visually, physically and chemically different, and the following conclusions can be drawn: The unburned carbon particles had ash values comparable to or lower than the feed coal, low volatile matter, high fixed carbon contents, and tend to concentrate in the −13 The sulphur content in the unburned carbon particles was 0.29–0.31%, which is significantly lower than that of the feed coal, indicating early release of sulphur gases during gasification. The porous and layered carbon types have the highest BET surface and micropore areas, and could potentially be used as activated carbon or precursors for premium carbon products. The unburned carbon in the coarse gasification ash is predominantly comprised of dense carbon particles originating from inertite-rich coals. The petrographic characterization technique developed for the coarse unburned particles correlated well with the chemical and physical characteristics, and the unburned carbon forms determined were consistent with literature findings in terms of being porous, dense or mixed, isotropic or anisotropic. Electron microprobe analysis of the partially unburned carbon particle and coal feed indicates that there are variations in elemental composition of macerals in coal and unburned carbon, and confirmed the low sulphur content in the unburned carbon compared to the feed coal. The reflectance analysis, carbon type (petrography) and CO This work supports the findings by Matjie et al. The explanation for residual carbon in ash is not simple and most likely a combination of factors and processes, including variations in chemical and physical properties of the coal, variations in operating procedures and so on. A theory for the reason for the occurrence of unburned carbon in gasification ash has been proposed. The high temperature in the bottom of the gasifier is attained by the exothermic reaction between residual char (carbon) and the oxygen content of the gasification agent. A point will be reached where the potential energy of the exothermic reaction becomes lower than the cooling effect of the blast of the gasification agent (340 Another reason for residual carbon could be attributed to the possibility that particles are captured in cooler zones vertically through the reactor (channels) and are not exposed to reagents and reactive conditions required for full conversion. A third potential theory could be that the top size of particles entering the gasifier do not get sufficient time to react (slow heat-up rate) and end up passing through the gasifier un-reacted at their core. This requires further investigation. This work was conducted whilst at Sasol Technology Research, and the assistance from other members on the project team is gratefully acknowledged. Barry Searle and Zhongsheng Li of the University of New South Wales, Australia, are thanked for assistance with different aspects of the analysis program.