In this study, we have developed a novel method for ilmenite activation. Sodium hypochlorite was used as an oxidant and surface modifier to promote ilmenite flotation. And it has successfully been performed valence transitions of iron atoms on the ilmenite surface, thereby enhancing the action activity between the surface sites of ilmenite and sodium oleate. Eventually the surface Fe3+ content increased from 42.15 to 63.79%. Oxidation by sodium hypochlorite increased the amount of Fe3+ on the ilmenite surface by 21.64% and improved the ilmenite recovery to 95%, while the maximum recovery of ilmenite without sodium hypochlorite addition was only 85%. The activation mechanism of ilmenite by sodium hypochlorite was studied by batch flotation, Zeta potential measurement, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), and reaction thermodynamic analysis. The results of potential measurement show that sodium hypochlorite made the Zeta potentials of ilmenite–sodium oleate system more negative mainly due to the enhanced adsorption effect between them. FTIR results indicate that more prominent absorption peak of iron oleate appeared in the FTIR spectrum of ilmenite treated with sodium oleate after sodium hypochlorite oxidation. XPS analyses suggest that more Fe2+ on ilmenite surface supplied electrons to the oxidant and formed more Fe3+. Reaction thermodynamic analyses also show that compared with Fe2+, Fe3+ was more likely to interact with oleate ions and formed more stable species. In summary, sodium hypochlorite can activate ilmenite and improve its flotation.Ilmenite is the most important ore source in the industrial production of Ti Commonly, ilmenite displays moderate floatability under conventional flotation conditions. Various surface modification techniques such as use of efficient collectors, and pretreatment or surface modification have been investigated in attempts to improve ilmenite recovery The addition of active components on the ilmenite surface is currently the more common activation method. Fan and Rowson Another activation method involves changing the atomic structure or valence of the target mineral surface by specific methods such as roasting or microwave irradiation and ultrasonic treatment Essentially, microwave irradiation, oxidation roasting and ultrasonic pre-treatment can promote ilmenite flotation by oxidizing Fe But both the energy consumption and processing cost of the microwave irradiation, oxidation roasting and ultrasonic pre-treatment are too high, so their industrial application potential is limited. Based on the above analyses, we proposed that using an oxidant to convert Fe The ilmenite used in the experiments was obtained from Panzhihua, China; it was repeatedly purified by physical methods, namely magnetic separation and gravity concentration. The ilmenite was sieved and samples of sizes ranging from 38 to 74 μm were used for flotation tests. Multi-element analysis of the samples showed that the TiO The chemical reagents used in the experiments were all from China, as follow: sodium oleate (Tianjin Guangfu Fine Chemical Research Institute, Tianjin), sodium hypochlorite (Tianjin Fuyu Fine Chemical Co., Ltd.) and potassium chloride (Tianjin Fengchuan Chemical Reagent Technologies Co., Ltd.), H Flotation tests were performed with a 40 mL XFG trough-type flotation machine with a rotary speed of 1600 r/min at a flotation temperature of 25 °C. In each test, the ore sample (2 g) was placed in the flotation cell. Deionized water (30 mL) was added and the mixture was stirred for 1 min. A pH adjuster was then added and the mixture was stirred for 2 min. After addition of sodium hypochlorite, the mixture was stirred for 3 min. Finally, sodium oleate was added and the mixture was stirred for 3 min. The flotation time was 3 min. The dosages of sodium oleate and sodium hypochlorite were 1.75 × 10 Zeta potential measurements were performed with a Zetasizer Nano Zs 90 (Malvern Instruments Co., Malvern, UK). The Zeta potential measurements were performed as follows. The ore sample was finely ground to a particle of less than 2 μm. The powder sample (100 mg) was placed in a beaker with a certain amount of DI water containing an electrolyte solution (1 × 10 Attenuated total reflectance FTIR spectra were recorded with a Nicolet iS 10 Spectrometer (Nicolet Instrument Corporation, USA) in the range 400–4000 cm The mixture was centrifuged to achieve solid–liquid separation. The liquid was removed and the solid was washed twice with deionized water of the same pH as the flotation system, and dried at 35 °C. The FTIR spectrum was then recorded. Deionized water (30 mL) was added to the sample and the slurry pH was adjusted with H   The mechanism of ilmenite activation with sodium hypochlorite was investigated by recording FTIR spectra of ilmenite samples treated under different conditions. The IR spectrum of sodium oleate shows absorption peaks at 2917.71 and 2850.25 cm   XPS analysis was performed on ilmenite before and after treatment with sodium oleate and sodium hypochlorite to explore the mechanism of ilmenite activation with sodium hypochlorite. In the following XPS analyses, samples a, b, c, and d corresponded to ilmenite, ilmenite + sodium hypochlorite, ilmenite + sodium oleate, and ilmenite + sodium hypochlorite + sodium oleate, respectively. The XPS full spectrum and fine-energy scanning results were used to determine the binding energies, chemical shifts, and changes in valence states of elements on the mineral surface before and after treatment (see The data in The binding energies and chemical shifts of Fe In addition, O1s narrow-spectrum scans of the ilmenite surfaces were performed The crystal structure and surface properties of ilmenite indicate that the ilmenite surface is rich in active Fe The standard Gibbs free energy change (Δ The side reaction coefficients for oleate ions with protons are The side reaction coefficients for Fe If In Eqs. Eqs.  Parapari et al. Zhong and Cui The flotation tests in this study confirmed that sodium hypochlorite improves ilmenite recovery when sodium oleate is used as a collector at pH 5–10. XPS analysis showed that sodium hypochlorite addition increases the amount of Fe Based on previous studies and the results of this study, we propose a mechanism for the interactions among ilmenite, sodium hypochlorite, and sodium oleate (see In this study, batch flotation test, Zeta potential measurement, XPS, FTIR spectroscopy, and reaction thermodynamic calculation were used to investigate the mechanism of ilmenite activation with sodium hypochlorite in a sodium oleate system. The following conclusions were made. At pH 5–10, sodium hypochlorite effectively promoted ilmenite flotation; the highest recovery achieved was over 95%. At pH 5–10, the Zeta potentials of ilmenite conditioned with sodium hypochlorite and sodium oleate were more negative than those of ilmenite treated with only sodium oleate. The difference between the Zeta potentials of these two systems was highest (near 4.5 mV) under weakly acid conditions and at neutral pH. The characteristic peaks of ferric oleate appeared near 1460 cm Sodium hypochlorite captured electrons from Fe We declare that we do not have any commercial or associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with the work submitted. This research project has been supported by Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following are Supplementary data to this article: