The Egyptian petroleum fuel market is increasing rapidly nowadays. These fuels must be in the standard specifications of the Egyptian General Petroleum Corporation (EGPC), which required lower sulfur gasoline and diesel fuels. So the fuels must be deep hydrotreated which resulted in increasing hydrogen (H2) consumption for deeper hydrotreating. Along with increased H2 consumption for deeper hydrotreating, additional H2 is needed for processing heavier and higher sulfur crude slates especially in hydrocracking process, in addition to hydrotreating unit, isomerization units and lubricant plants. Purification technology is used to increase the amount of recycled hydrogen. If the amount of recycled hydrogen is increased, the amount of hydrogen that is sent to the furnaces with the off gas will decrease. In this work, El Halwagi et al. (2003) and El Halwagi (2012) optimization methods which are used for recycle/reuse integration systems have been extended to be used in the partitioning purification of hydrogen networks to minimize the hydrogen consumption and the hydrogen discharge. An actual case study and two case studies from the literature are solved to illustrate the proposed method.The research regarding refinery hydrogen management can trace its history back to 1980s. But hydrogen usage has increased day by day, due to many new factors. First, stricter legislation on sulfur and aromatic levels in petroleum fuels increases the need for hydrotreating to produce low sulfur fuel products The main hydrogen purification technologies used in refineries are pressure-swing adsorption (PSA), selective permeation using polymer membranes, and cryogenic separation. These purification units can be used to remove impurities and increase the hydrogen concentration. These recovery technologies are based on different separation theories. Hydrogen concentration, impurity characteristics and available pressure of off-gas determine the selection criteria Over the past decade, several design techniques have been developed to minimize hydrogen usage in refinery plant through efficient process integration and maximizing recycle/reuse The problem of synthesizing mass exchange networks (MENs) has been first introduced by El-Halwagi and Manousiouthakis Tahouni et al. Shariati et al. In this work, a simple optimization method for partitioning purification systems of hydrogen networks is proposed as an extension of El Halwagi et al. method The formulation is a linear program that can be solved globally by LINGO program V.11. For a given process there is a set of process sinks and a set of process sources described as follows: The set of process sinks: SINKS The set of process sources: SOURCES Also available for service is a fresh (external) resource that can be purchased to supplement the use of process sources. There is a purification unit that is used to decrease the targeted species from the sources. First the problem is analyzed to allocate sources to sinks only, and then is expanded to the options of process purification of streams to satisfy the demands of the sinks at minimal fresh resource. (1) The first step in the analysis is to represent the problem through a source–sink representation as described by El Halwagi et al. method The objective function is to minimize the fresh hydrogen Each source The following step is the mixing of the split fractions into a feed to the (2) The second step is to represent the problem as a process purification of streams by adding a purification unit to source To determine the location of the purifier, it is assumed that all sources are purified. For each source (3) The third step is to calculate the annual operating cost for the hydrogen network with each purifier as follows:  OC (4) The fourth step is to choose from the results the best purifier and the best location of the purifier at which the minimum operating cost exists. (5) The fifth step is to draw the optimum network with the best purifier from the results of the lingo program. Two published case studies from the literature and one actual case study were solved to illustrate the ease and applicability of the proposed method.  The hydrogen sink flowrate for each hydrotreating process unit is the summation of hydrogen makeup and the recycle of this unit. Also, the hydrogen source flowrate for each hydrotreating process unit is the summation of the recycle and the purge streams of this unit After applying the first step in the proposed method, it is found that the minimum fresh hydrogen is 268.82 In case of adding a membrane or a PSA unit to the network and assuming all sources are purified, For each case we calculate the annual operating cost. The cost of production, OCH is taken as $ From Optimum hydrogen network design is shown in  After applying step 1 of the proposed method, it is found that the minimum fresh hydrogen is 125.2125 In this case study, the discharge amount (90.9625 For each case we calculate the annual operating cost. As represented in From Optimum hydrogen network design is shown in This case study is representative of a real refinery system. There is a PSA unit that is used to purify some amount of hydrogen flow rate from the catalytic reforming unit. The produced purified hydrogen is with 99.9% purity. All purified hydrogen from PSA unit is mixed with the hydrogen produced from hydrogen plant and sent to the hydrocracking unit: After applying step 1 in the proposed method, it is found that: The minimum fresh hydrogen and the discharge are determined to be 2257.964, and 1004.514 In this case study, all sources flowrates are lower than the discharge flowrate except sources 1 (Outlet 1 NHT), 4 (Outlet DHT), 7 (Outlet 1 HCU), and 9 (CRU). By purifying these sources and using a membrane or a PSA unit, the minimum fresh hydrogen and the discharge for each case are represented in For each case we calculate the annual operating cost. It is noted from Optimum hydrogen network design is shown in A simple proposed optimization method for partitioning regeneration systems is represented. This proposed method gives: Accurate identification of the minimum fresh hydrogen and discharge flowrates. The appropriate selection of the purifier giving the minimum operating cost. Best location of the purifier. All the solved case studies give the same results as represented in the previous work.