Enhancing the surface hydrophobicity of the medium solids is an effective method of increasing gas–solid fluidized bed applicability to dry beneficiation of feed stocks with different external moisture contents. Exploratory experiments determined that stearic acid was appropriate to use as the modifying agent of magnetite powder. Magnetite powder with a hydrophobic surface was prepared with a reagent dosage of 1.5% by wt., a slurry concentration of 15% by wt., a temperature of 60°C and an agitation time of 40min. The effects of the modification on the fluidization characteristics of the resulting magnetite powder were studied. The results show that modification increases the minimum fluidization velocity but does not apparently change the bed pressure distribution. The uniformity of the bed density is enhanced to a certain degree, indicating an improved fluidization quality. As external moisture of feed-coal increases the fluidization performance of both unmodified and modified magnetite powders decreases gradually. However, when the external moisture content was 4% (the upper limit) the modified magnetite powder still showed good fluidization performance. The upper limit for external moisture content of feed-coal was increased by 100%.Coal accounts for 70% of the primary energy used in China today, a level 40% higher than the international average. The extent to which clean coal is utilized is, however, low in China. Only around 30% of the total coal and 14% of the power coal are processed at present. Approximately 70% of all raw coal is directly combusted without processing. This has resulted in serious environmental pollution, such as smoke, sulfur dioxide and acid rain, and economic losses. Coal beneficiation is the original technology used in clean coal technology and it is the most economic and effective method for realizing a highly efficient and clean utilization of coal. The advantages and importance of dry coal beneficiation have been recognized all around the world. China University of Mining and Technology developed a dry beneficiation technology for coal that is based on gas–solid fluidized beds ( Modifying or reducing the surface hydrophobicity of the medium ( The experimental apparatus used in the study is illustrated in To perform an experiment, the fan blower was first turned on. Then, a certain amount of magnetite powder of a certain size range was fed into the bed and subsequently fluidized by the fluidizing gas. A fluidized bed having a certain density and height was formed thereby. The fluidization characteristics of the modified medium were examined under various operating conditions. Stearic acid (C The true and bulk densities of the magnetite powder used for the study were 4.62 and 2.37 The effect of modification on the minimum fluidization velocity, The When the superficial gas velocity reaches Eqs. The    During dry beneficiation with a gas–solid fluidized bed moisture is transferred between feed-coal, the medium and the fluidizing gas. A portion of the moisture is removed from the bed by the gas but the rest remains within the bed. Therefore, the effect of external moisture of feed-coal on the fluidization performance of both unmodified and modified magnetite powder was investigated. The results are shown in It can be seen in As shown in It is clear that modification has raised the upper limit for external moisture content of feed-coal from 2% to 4% while still allowing relatively good fluidization performance, which represents a doubled increase in moisture tolerance. The reasons for this increase are, first, that the immersion wetting work of moisture on the unmodified surface, For the unmodified particles  The optimum conditions for hydrophobic surface modification of magnetite powder was determined to be: for stearic acid modification the dosage was 1.5% by wt., the slurry concentration was 15% by wt., the temperature was 60 The minimum fluidization velocity of the magnetite powder increased after surface modification. A mathematic model predicting the minimum fluidization velocity is proposed. The mean relative error between the calculated and experimental data was 9.73%. Modification had no obvious effect on the bed pressure distribution but it improved the fluidization quality of the bed. Comparing initial to modified magnetite: Under different superficial gas velocities the maximum relative error in bed density was 0.56% and 0.54% while the corresponding maximum standard deviation was 1.15 An increase in moisture content feed-coal reduced the fluidization performance of both unmodified and modified magnetite powders. Moisture was liberated from the modified particles more easily. The upper limit of external moisture content of feed-coal was improved from 2% to 4%, representing a doubled increase in moisture tolerance. The bed still had a relatively good fluidization performance at the high moisture levels. This work enlarges the applicability of gas–solid fluidized bed beneficiation. This work was financially supported by the