Sulfation roasting followed by water leaching process was used to extract lithium from lepidolite. Various parameters including roasting temperature, the amount of additions, and solid/liquid ratio in leaching process were optimized. The lithium extraction efficiency of 91.61% could be reached with a mass ratio of lepidolite/Na2SO4/K2SO4/CaO of 1:0.5:0.1:0.1, and roasting at 850°C for 0.5h. XRD analysis showed that sulfation roasting caused the decompositions of the original aluminosilicate to NaSi3AlO8, KAlSi2O6 and CaAl2Si2O8. The phases of CaF2 and Ca4Si2O7F2 are observed due to the addition of CaO.Lithium is the lightest known metal and has been widely utilized for many commercial lithium products due to its fascinating electrochemical reactivity as well as other unique properties. Lithium compounds and minerals have attracted much attention for their applications in ceramics, glass, aluminum, lubrication industries and pharmaceuticals ( Most lithium products are currently from brine's sources. Compared with brines, extracting lithium from spodumene, lepidolite and other solid minerals is not cost effective ( Various methods have been developed to obtain lithium from lithium ores ( Wadman and von Girsewalt ( To save operating cost and enhance lithium recovery from the ores, herein, an improved base-exchange with alkali sulfates method is introduced in this paper. Mixture of alkali sulfates and alkali oxide was used as reactant and the results demonstrated that an agreeable effect was obtained when the lepidolite was roasted with a mixture of Na The lepidolite in this study was provided by Jiangxi Province (China). The lepidolite was first crushed in a jaw crusher, then ground in a ball mill and screened to 100% < Roasting was conducted by placing the mixture of lepidolite, Na In all the experiments, AAS (Atomic Absorption Spectrometry) was used to determine the content of Li, K by standard procedures. ICP (Inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy) was employed to determine the content of other metal elements in the leaching liquor. The lepidolite was mixed with Na In order to study the effect of roasting temperature upon lithium extraction, a series of experiments were carried out from 750 to 900 The effect of mass ratio of sodium sulfate to lepidolite was investigated by roasting for 0.5 A suitable amount of K The roasted mass was obtained under the optimum condition in previous section, and then leached with water.  The extraction of Li from the solution can be proceeded by any known method, notably by the addition of lime water, which will remove any aluminum and any heavy metals by precipitation, followed by the addition of Na In summary, an improved process including the sulfation roasting followed by water leaching was employed to extract lithium from lepidolite. The results indicated that roasting temperature, and mass ratio of Na