Pretreatment is required to destroy recalcitrant structure of lignocelluloses and then transform into fermentable sugars. This study assessed techno-economics of steam explosion, dilute sulfuric acid, ammonia fiber explosion and biological pretreatments, and identified bottlenecks and operational targets for process improvement. Techno-economic models of these pretreatment processes for a cellulosic biorefinery of 113.5 million liters butanol per year excluding fermentation and wastewater treatment sections were developed using a modelling software-SuperPro Designer. Experimental data of the selected pretreatment processes based on corn stover were gathered from recent publications, and used for this analysis. Estimated sugar production costs ($/kg) via steam explosion, dilute sulfuric acid, ammonia fiber explosion and biological methods were 0.43, 0.42, 0.65 and 1.41, respectively. The results suggest steam explosion and sulfuric acid pretreatment methods might be good alternatives at present state of technology and other pretreatment methods require research and development efforts to be competitive with these pretreatment methods.Butanol is a potential next generation liquid biofuel that can be produced from lignocellulosic biomass, including forest residues, agricultural residues and energy crops. Among these lignocelluloses, corn stover is a viable feedstock due to its immediate availability, high residue yield rate and ease of hydrolysis ( Over the years, several pretreatment techniques are being investigated to disrupt the lignin matrix of a lignocellulosic biomass, which can be broadly divided into three categories: (1) physical; (2) chemical; and (3) biological ( Among several physical, chemical and biological pretreatment methods, steam explosion, sulfuric acid, ammonia fiber explosion (AFEX) and biological with white rot fungi are commonly used pretreatment methods for lignocellulosic biomass ( While various potential pretreatment processes are available, they have different operating conditions and product yield rates. However, very few techno-economic studies, such as In this regard, choice of a single pretreatment process for commercial butanol production is difficult at this stage. A thorough techno-economic analysis of each of these common pretreatment methods is required to identify the most cost effective pretreatment method for butanol production through ABE fermentation from corn stover feedstock. Thus, four common pretreatment methods, including steam explosion, dilute sulfuric acid, ammonia fiber explosion and biological pretreatment, are considered for techno-economic analysis in this study based on total sugars yield, microbial inhibitors formation, current research interests and general comparison of different pretreatment process available from literatures ( Techno-economic process models for the selected pretreatment methods for a cellulosic biorefinery with a capacity of 113.5 Modelling assumptions were based on the data gathered from recently published studies on the selected pretreatment methods. After completion of the process flow diagram for all discrete units, necessary expressions and data required to accomplish material and energy balance, equipment size and purchasing price, maintenance and installation expenses for different operations were assigned to the models. Material and energy balance analysis results were further used to determine the equipment size and quantity, utilities and raw materials quantity, as well as other direct and indirect costs associated with capital and operating costs. The governing expressions to estimate purchasing price of equipment are available elsewhere ( Based on the literature data on different ABE fermentation and recovery methods ( Milled corn stover was assumed to be fed into pretreatment reactor. Corn stover mainly consists of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin. As discussed earlier, all pretreatment processes destroy lignin barrier and partly transform cellulose and hemicellulose into fermentable sugars. Depending on types of pretreatment process, rate of conversion of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin are different.  Cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin conversion rates into glucose, xylose and soluble lignin, respectively for dilute sulfuric acid pretreatment are included in   In addition to cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin, acetyl groups in the hemicellulose are liberated as acetic acid. The equations governing chemical reactions of these conversion processes can be found elsewhere ( While process inhibitors are not reported for ammonia fiber explosion and biological pretreatments, these inhibitors are formed during dilute acid and steam explosion pretreatments. Thus, the pretreated slurry after dilute sulfuric acid and steam explosion pretreatment were assumed to be fed to overliming reactor, where 5% excess ammonia was assumed to be added after neutralization to reduce process inhibitors. The excess ammonia is neutralized with addition of sulfuric acid in the following neutralization reactor. All the input chemicals and corn stover slurry were assumed to be transferred through centrifugal pump. Material and energy balance were conducted by assigning standard chemical equations with input and process chemicals, as suggested by The disruption of structure of biomass increases assessable surface area for enzyme, which can transform most of the remaining cellulose and hemicellulose into fermentable sugars during the enzymatic hydrolysis process. The detoxified slurries for steam explosion and sulfuric acid pretreatments or pretreated corn stover for the other pretreatment methods were assumed to be hydrolysed with enzyme to transform pretreated corn stover into fermentable sugars. These fermentable sugars mainly glucose and xylose are metabolized by microbes to produce biofuels. For this conversion, cellulase enzyme was assigned at a loading rate of 20 Hydrolysis time of 72 Capital and operating cost parameters used to estimate capital and sugar production costs were gathered from previous studies ( Apart from capital investment, annual operation cost was estimated as the sum of the facility-dependent cost, raw materials, labor-dependent cost, heating/cooling utilities and electricity. The facility dependent cost is the cost related to the use of a facility, which was estimated as the sum of the costs associated with equipment maintenance (10% of purchase cost), depreciation of the fixed capital cost, and miscellaneous costs, such as insurance (1% of DFC), local (property) taxes (2% DFC) and factory overhead expenses (5% of DFC) ( Previous section discussed economic analysis of different pretreatment processes based on the average values of technical and economic parameters including inputs, conversion rates and capital cost. Variation in the process technical and economic parameters could change sugar production cost. For instance, glucose and xylose conversion rates were found to be varied with severity factor ( These input parameters generally have different level of impact on the sugar production cost. Thus, a sensitivity analysis was conducted to determine the effects of uncertainties in the inputs on the sugar production cost. This analysis examined influence of different input parameters on the output by changing their values by ±20%. Apart from the sensitivity analysis, optimum sugar production cost was estimated using optimistic data for the most sensitive input parameters, which is discussed in the optimization section. Corn stover feedstock requirements estimated for 113.5 million liters annual butanol production with steam explosion, sulfuric acid, AFEX and biological pretreatment were 818,826; 746,797; 666,805; 1,675,743 In addition to corn stover feedstock, water was found to be another main input material. Similar to feedstock, the highest water was found to be required for biological pretreatment followed by steam explosion, sulfuric acid and AFEX pretreatment ( Apart from feedstock and water, sulfuric acid pretreatment required about 75 Finally, enzyme mixtures (kg/t total sugars produced) of 319, 270, 269 and 541 were found to be required to transform cellulose and hemicellulose into fermentable sugars for steam explosion, sulfuric acid, AFEX and biological pretreatment processes, respectively. The enzyme mixture contains about 95  On the other hand, AFEX pretreatment was found to require the highest external energy of 9558 While steam explosion pretreatment also requires rapid release of pressure or explosion after pretreatment similar to the AFEX pretreatment, heat from exploded stream was recovered due to the higher temperature difference of about 91 About 2.8 fold less external energy was found to be required for enzymatic hydrolysis unit of steam explosion pretreatment methods when compared to sulfuric acid pretreatment process mainly due to 33% higher temperature of input pretreated slurry in the enzymatic hydrolysis reactor resulting less utilities requirement. The higher pretreatment temperature of 200  Although biological pretreatment process does not require detoxification unit, about 12 fold more capital investment is required when compared to other pretreatment processes. One obvious reason is that biological pretreatment requires about 2 fold more feedstock to produce the same amount of fermentable sugars than other pretreatment processes requiring different capacity or quantity of process equipment. Another main reason is that biological pretreatment requires large number of pretreatment reactors mainly due to long pretreatment time (23 Apart from biological pretreatment, other pretreatment processes required almost similar level of capital investment. Regardless of type of pretreatment processes, purchasing price of hammer mill, feedstock storage bin, and pretreatment and hydrolysis reactors were the major contributors to the total fixed capital investment.   Apart from pretreatment, feedstock preparation was second major cost contributor to AFEX and biological pretreatment, which accounted for 32.6 and 36.6 of total sugar production cost, respectively, where major cost contributor was corn stover feedstock. Following this, enzymatic hydrolysis unit accounted about 13.3 and 12.1% of total sugar production cost for AFEX and biological pretreatments, respectively, where enzyme itself accounted for 71 and 73% of total hydrolysis cost, respectively. While several techno-economic studies on ethanol fermentation are available ( Irrespective of differences among previous techno-economic studies and this study, a good correlation (R  Glucose yield during hydrolysis was found to be most sensitive parameter for biological pretreatment method, while this was found to be second most sensitive parameter for other pretreatment methods. This may be due to glucose yield not only determines quantity of feedstock requirement, but also total output sugar. The quantity of feedstock requirement determines pretreatment reactor size and quantity, which is specifically important for biological pretreatment process as majority of sugar production cost is dependent on facility dependent cost ( Heat recovery was found to be third most sensitive parameter for steam explosion and sulfuric acid pretreatment methods. Heat recovery is a good trade-off between utilities requirement and facility dependent cost ( Apart from glucan and xylan losses during biological pretreatment, and glucose and xylose yields for other pretreatment, enzyme cost was found as a sensitive parameter. Previous studies ( The sugar production cost obtained from base case analysis as discussed earlier could be reduced through the selection of an optimistic value of each of the most sensitive input parameter under each pretreatment process. Feedstock cost is one of the key parameters, which determines sugar production cost. Previous studies ( Apart from feedstock and conversion rates, a proper selection of severity factor could further reduce sugar production cost by reducing utilities and quantity of reactors requirement. Optimum severity factors for each pretreatment process were selected based on total sugar yield obtained from experimental studies ( Enzyme loading and cost were found to be other key contributors to sugar production cost. Overall enzyme cost can be reduced by optimizing both enzyme loading rate and cost ( Considering the most optimistic values of several input parameters collectively reduced the sugar production cost ($/kg) to 0.212, 0.208, 0.305 and 0.590 under steam explosion, sulfuric acid, AFEX and biological pretreatment methods, respectively. Reduction in feedstock and enzyme cost, and increase in glucose yield during enzymatic hydrolysis were some key parameters reducing sugar production cost under steam explosion and sulfuric acid pretreatment methods. For AFEX pretreatment, high solid loading rate and low feedstock cost were found to be key contributors reducing sugar production cost. Finally, Optimistic sugar production cost under biological pretreatment was found to be dependent on several parameters including glucose and xylose yield during enzymatic hydrolysis, solid loading rate, severity factor (specifically pretreatment duration), feedstock cost, and glucan and xylan loss during pretreatment. At the current state of the pretreatment technologies, steam explosion, sulfuric acid and AFEX pretreatments could be the cost competitive options due to their close sugar production cost ($/kg) of 0.43, 0.42 and 0.65, respectively. However, the sugar production cost ($/kg) through biological pretreatment is 1.41 and higher than the others. Optimization of the most sensitive parameters, including feedstock cost, feedstock to sugar conversion rates, solid loading rate and enzyme cost, could reduce the overall sugar production cost. These could be achieved through process optimization and intensification, which require further research. Some technical and economic results are included in the This work was partly supported by funding from the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 