In this study, three different boric acid production process alternatives which can be performed in the presence of propionic acid and/or calcium propionate were evaluated. The process in which calcium propionate is the recycling component was selected as the best alternative and modeled. Some of the design parameters were determined for the selected process. These parameters are solubility change of boric acid in the presence of calcium propionate at 25°C, 35°C and 75°C, precipitation risk of calcium borate components in concentrated boric acid solutions containing calcium propionate, and the effect of calcium propionate on the solution pH with respect to free sulfuric acid concentration. According to the determined parameters, principal reactions occurred in the process, and other process parameters obtained by industrial practice, mass balances were conducted and all flow rates were calculated. In the process, calcium propionate concentration in production liquor must be kept lower than 3% and the reaction must be carried out without any free sulfuric acid in order to perform the process according to the model.Boric acid can be produced from the reactions of various boron minerals (such as colemanite, ulexite and borax) with various acid solutions (such as hydrochloric acid, phosphoric acid, sulfuric acid, propionic acid, acetic acid, and nitric acid) Boric acid is industrially produced based on the reaction of colemanite and sulfuric acid (Reaction Simplified block diagram of the production process is given in The problems in this process are sourced from the decomposition of side minerals in the colemanite ore. These minerals are clay and feldspate minerals, some borate minerals (such as ulexite, veatchite-A, and tunellite), minerals containing arsenic (such as realgar and orpiment), calcite and dolomite, celestine, calcium sulfate minerals (such as anhydrite, hemihydrate, and gypsum) In the conventional process, sparingly soluble gypsum is formed in the reaction and easily separated from solution by filtration. This advantage is also valid when other acids which can form insoluble salts (in spite of gypsum) with colemanite, such as oxalic acid. However, if the reacting acid forms easily dissolving salts, the process can be designed to make this weak acid to be cycled in the process. The aim of this study is to choose an appropriate process based on the reaction of colemanite with propionic acid/sulfuric acid mixtures by evaluating alternative approaches and to determine the principal process parameters to design the process. In a previous work, conductivity of the reaction media during the reactions of pure colemanite mineral with various sulfuric acid/propionic acid mixtures was followed and it was stated that colemanite reacts with sulfuric acid in the first instance and when all sulfuric acid is consumed it reacts with propionic acid It is possible to design the production process in the presence of propionate ion in three different ways as follows. In Propionic acid enters to the reaction with the mother liquor and leaves in the form of calcium propionate: In a continuous process, in order to feed propionic acid to the reaction step, calcium propionate must be reacted with sulfuric acid in an intermediate stage. In this model, high purity gypsum can be produced as an advantage; however, it requires an additional filtration and washing stage which makes the process more complex. Furthermore, it is not advantageous to begin the reaction with propionic acid because colemanite preliminarily reacts with sulfuric acid. In this model, the sum of sulfuric acid used in the main reaction and used to convert calcium propionate to gypsum is equal to the stoichometric amount of sulfuric acid equivalent to colemanite. Propionic acid enters to the reaction and leaves as propionic acid: In this one stage model, stoichometric amount of sulfuric acid equivalent to colemanite must be used in the reaction step. In this model, colemanite will only react with sulfuric acid always present in the media during the reaction. But pH will be increased in the presence of propionic acid in order to avoid the decomposition of side minerals in the ore. Since the recycling component is propionic acid, the loss of propionic acid will be substantial in the reaction stage and crystallization stage proceeded under vacuum and smell problems will arise. Calcium propionate enters to the reaction step and leaves as calcium propionate: As in the second model, stoichometric amount of sulfuric acid equivalent to colemanite must be used in the reaction step. First, calcium propionate entering to the reaction with the mother liquor reacts immediately with sulfuric acid and propionic acid is formed. Consequently, colemanite will react with remaining sulfuric acid and then with propionic acid. As an advantage, free propionic acid is lost only from the reaction stage in this model. On the other hand, the disadvantage of the reaction is the presence of high amount of calcium propionate in a concentrated boric acid solution which can lead to the precipitation of calcium borates. The loss of boric acid due to this precipitation causes to decrease the efficiency of the process. So, optimum calcium propionate concentration that will be formed in the production liquor should be determined by considering precipitation risk and impurity intake rate. High calcium propionate concentration can also increase the impurity level of boric acid in terms of calcium but due to its high solubility of calcium propionate In all three models, presence of propionic acid or calcium propionate leads to increase pH of media and decrease the decomposition rate of clay and feldspate minerals. If the precipitation risk of calcium borate component is avoided and boric acid crystals are washed effectively, it was found out that the third model, in which calcium propionate is the recycling component is more advantageous. In order to design the production process which will be executed in the presence of calcium propionate, the following parameters must be determined: Variations in solubility of boric acid in the presence of calcium propionate. Analysis of the precipitation risk of calcium borate components in concentrated boric acid solutions containing calcium propionate. Effect of calcium propionate on the solution pH. Solubility behavior of boric acid in the presence of calcium propionate was determined by adding boric acid into solutions containing various amounts of calcium propionate at 25 Additionally, pure colemanite was reacted with various sulfuric acid/propionic acid mixtures in a 1 Precipitation risk of calcium borate components in the media was investigated with conductivity measurements. For this purpose, solutions containing various amounts of calcium propionate were prepared in a 0.5 pH values of solutions were recorded online by using a pH meter (Mettler Toledo-S47 Seven Multi) and in 0.5 In order to model the process, solubility behavior of boric acid must be determined in 25 Data gathered from the analysis were given in Solution composition determined by crystallization of boric acid after reacting pure colemanite mineral with various propionic acid/sulfuric acid mixtures and separation of gypsum through filtration were shown in In case of 75 Although precipitation of calcium borate in high concentrations of calcium propionate is a disadvantage, increase in boric acid solubility in low calcium propionate concentrations which will avoid the crystallization of boric acid during the filtration of gypsum and inert matter is an advantage. During the experiments which were performed to obtain the solubility curve at 75 As it can be seen from In the production process, continuous reactions are carried out with pH control in the first reactor in a 4-stage cascade reactor system. When solely sulfuric acid is used in the reaction, pH is adjusted to 1.2 in the first reactor. In the new process, pH that will be applied in the first reactor should be determined carefully in order to perform the reaction according to the model and to obtain the desired calcium propionate concentration. In the model, it was considered that stoichometric amount of sulfuric acid which is equivalent to colemanite was used. In a continuous reaction system, if the amount of sulfuric acid which is fed to the system is not controlled, the excess sulfuric acid will react with calcium propionate (formed in the reaction), calcium propionate concentration of production liquor will decrease, propionic acid will be formed and pH will change. In order to see this effect, variations in pH in boric acid solutions containing various amounts of calcium propionate was investigated with respect to free sulfuric acid concentration at 88  By using the findings described above and other process parameters determined by industrial practice, a continuous boric acid production process in the presence of calcium propionate can be modeled. Process parameters determined by industrial practice are the solid concentration of the sludge leaving filtration units, boric acid concentration of the solution in the washed solid waste, solid boric acid concentration of the stream leaving the hydrocyclone and entering to crystallization, solid boric acid concentration of the top stream of hydrocyclone, moisture content of the stream entering to the dryer, and the ratio of crystals escaped from the dryer with air to dried crystals. It was assumed that there is no boric acid supersaturation in the solution leaving the crystallizers. In the model, concentration of calcium propionate in the production liquor can be changed up to 3% (selected concentrations are 1.26% and 2.24%) and flow rates can be calculated for each case. In order to determine the flow rates, mass balances were conducted beginning from the drying stage. For crystallization unit, either mass and energy balances were used. As it was determined, saturation concentration of boric acid was a function of calcium propionate concentration in solution. Because of this, solubility diagrams given in Principal reactions occur in reaction stage are given in Reactions One of the principal reactions occurred in the reaction stage is the reaction of strontium borate exist in the ore with sulfuric acid (Reaction Flow rates of all process streams was defined by using mass and energy balances and reaction calculation as described above. Details of the calculations and the calculated flow rates can be found in Refs. It was stated that, the presence of calcium propionate in solution had a considerable effect on the solubility of boric acid and calcium borate precipitation was detected in 75 We gratefully acknowledge