Experiments on comminution energy of different coals under conditions for CFB (circulating fluidized bed) boilers were carried out in a jaw crusher and a parallel roller crusher. The R–R (Rosin–Rammler) distribution was used to describe the size distribution of the crushing product. The size distribution of the product has a significant influence on comminution energy. With lower values of xP
                     
                     =63.2% (size modulus) or α (distribution modulus), the comminution energy increases. With a fixed particle size distribution of the product, the comminution energy increases gradually with the increasing of feed coal size, while, when the feed coal size is larger than 15mm, the effect can be neglected. With a fixed outlet width of the crusher, the average product size tends to be finer when smaller sized particles or coal with higher HGI (Hardgrove grindability index) are fed into the crusher. Therefore, in coal preparation process, the adjustment of the crusher should be performed considering coal grindability or crushability and the feed coal size distribution. At last, an empirical model of comminution energy was proposed and validated by the measured values with ±25% of accuracy.comminution energy consumption particle size size index comminution energy coefficient constant constant maximum size feed size 80% passing size of the feed coal 80% passing size of the product constant constant cumulative mass of particles smaller than distribution modulus size modulus fractal dimension minimum size specific energy of a single particle specific energy of a particle of infinite size potential energy of the product particle assembly potential energy of the feed particle assembly size group of feed particles mass fraction of particles with size Hardgrove grindability mass of product particles finer than 0.071 size group of product particles According to flow patterns reconstruction proposed by Tsinghua University, the circulating fluidized bed (CFB) boilers ( Comminution is a fundamental operation in mineral processing and expends significant amounts of energy (  With this assumption, the energy-size relationship can be described as the superposition of Kick’s and Rittinger’s Laws.  The calculation models and experimental data on energy-size relationship available in the literature are mostly limited to rock or other ores, or coal grinding with finer particle size ( Experiments have been performed in two lab-scale crushers: a jaw crusher (a jaw plate oscillating) and a parallel roller crusher (two rollers with smooth surface rotating in the opposite direction), commonly used for coal preparation in CFB power plants. Both of the crushers achieve material breakage through extrusion between the main parts. For different size ranges of the feed particles, the outlet widths of the jaw crusher and the parallel roller crusher were adjusted as 3, 4, 6, 9 Crushing and grinding focus on different size stages in comminution processing, crushing for coarse particles and grinding for fine particles. Crushability or grindability of coal refers to the difficult degree of comminution, namely the energy expended in comminution. The Hardgrove grindability For determination of coefficients in the calculation model, coal particles were sieved into a narrow size range and then fed into the crushers. Coal particles with a wide size range were also crushed for validation of the model. The parameters in each test are listed in details in The energy consumption was obtained by measuring the crusher power online with three-phase power measuring instrument by recording the motor power with time interval of 500 The crushing products were sieved for 3 The cumulative distribution of particles can be described by several methods, such as Gaudin–Schuhmann (G–S) distribution, Rosin–Rammler (R–R) distribution, fractal distribution and multifractal comminution approach. R–R distribution is described by Eq. G–S distribution is described by Eq. Fractal distribution is given by Eq. Multifractal comminution approach is expressed as follows For the size distribution of the crushing product, the R–R distribution is the most suitable method to fit, with the highest COD (Coefficient of determination), as seen in Laws of Rittinger, Kick and Bond have a simple form with one coefficient The specific energy The size distribution of the particles produced during crushing is assumed to be the R–R distribution (Eq. The potential energy of the product particle assembly If the inlet particles are classified into If the size distribution of inlet particles is fixed, the comminution energy changes with the different sizes of products  As mentioned above, with a certain amount of comminution energy input, the finer the product is, the higher HGI is. In each test, 50 In this work, the screen sizes used for HGI determination are chosen according to the national standard of China (GB/T 2565-2014) instead of the ISO standard. These changes are suitable for the Chinese standard screen series and don’t have an appreciable effect on the results. For different coal types, the comminution energy Therefore, According to the measuring method of HGI, the product particles can be classified into two size groups, From Eq. Combining with Eq. Therefore, According to the experiment results, the values of The values of From comparison of the predicted and measured comminution energy for feed coal with a wide size distribution, the model was further validated, correlating the data within ±25%, as shown in It is noted that the maximum specific energy is higher than the usual values. It’s mainly caused by the size reduction and instrument scale in this work. For the maximum specific energy, coal particles in the narrow size range of 8–10 The product size has a significant influence on comminution energy, as shown in With a fixed particle size distribution of the product ( With a fixed outlet width, the feed coal size has a slight influence on the product size distribution. As the feed coal size decreases, the mass fraction of fine particles in the product increases and the particle size distribution tends to be finer, as shown in With a fixed outlet width, the property of coal has a remarkable influence on the size distribution of the product. If the coal has low crushability or grindablity, the mass fraction of fine particles in the product will significantly decrease, as shown in In this paper, experiments on coal comminution energy under conditions for CFB boilers were carried out. The R–R distribution was used to describe the size distribution of the crushing product with high COD. An empirical model of comminution energy was proposed. The model provides good accuracy by correlating the experimental data within ±25%. Some conclusions were drawn as follows: The size distribution of the product has a significant influence on comminution energy. With lower values of With a fixed outlet width of the crusher, the coal type has a remarkable influence on the size distribution of the product. The mass fraction of fine particles in the product significantly increases with HGI of the coal. The feed size also has a slight influence on product size distribution. As the feed size decreases, the product size distribution tends to be finer. Therefore, in coal preparation process, the adjustment of the crusher should be performed considering the coal grindability or crushability and the feed size distribution. Financial support of this work by Coal A with a wide size distribution was crushed in the parallel roller crusher. The feed particles can be classified into five size groups, namely 1–2, 2–3, 3–5.5, 5.5–8 and 8–10 For coal A, HGI Therefore, the calculated comminution energy is The 95% confidence interval is 5.132–8.554 The measured value is 6.955 The relative error,