Mechanically activated mixtures of some hydroxocarbonates with powder, metallic aluminium caused chemical reactions, which result in alloy formation. The identification of phases formed during milling was successfully achieved by thermal analysis methods supplemented by X-ray diffraction measurement.Mechanical impulse operating in the solid–solid system can initiate or intensify chemical reactions. This action is defined as a mechanical activation. To accomplish indispensable high energy milling devices such as planetary or vibrational mills are used Nowadays, reactive milling can be used to produce various alloys Because of a lot of interesting features of the mechanochemical reactions the main thing is estimating the phase composition of products of milling. The aim of this research is the recognition of types of chemical reactions and physical transformations that occur during activation of the system of copper hydroxocarbonate with powder aluminium in a planetary mill. Copper hydroxocarbonate (malachite) was obtained by precipitation from aqueous solution A laboratory planetary mill with steel balls was used. Ball to powder weight ratio was of 14:1. The velocity of the ball was of 3.20 Thermogravimetric analyses of the samples were carried out on a Mettler thermobalance TG-50 in a Mettler TA-4000 system. Records were obtained with samples heated up to 950 Differential thermal analysis was made in helium (under the same conditions as thermogravimetric measurements) using a Universal V2.5H TA instrument. X-ray powder diffraction patterns were obtained using a Philips X’Pert diffractometer (Cu Kα) in the 2 In the system Cu The X-ray diffraction patterns of mixtures with 20% amount of Al The presence of alloys after mechanical activation of Cu The heat emission in reaction 2 is an additional factor which favours the mechanical alloying. The proof of our thesis was provided by a strong exothermic peak in the temperature range 550–650 The content of alloy in the tested systems increase with the time of milling. Therefore, the TG curves for the mixture of Cu The amount of aluminium in the mixtures of Cu Investigations of the mechanical activation effects in the system Cu The mechanical alloying in an oxidising atmosphere is a consequence of the following reactions: decomposition of hydroxocarbonate, oxidation of aluminium, aluminothermic reduction of CuO. The alloy formation depends mainly on three factors: the “sufficient” content of aluminium in the system, the duration of mechanical treatment (the longer milling time increases the amount of alloys) and the atmosphere. It can be stated that the oxygen present during activation seems to be determining reasonable time for mechanical alloying in our study. Some literature data concerning the mechanical alloying point to the possibility of alloy formation in an inert gas atmosphere after very long time of milling, e.g. TiZrCuNi for 100 The authors wish to thank Dr. W. Balcerowiak at the Institute of Heavy Organic Synthesis in K