Bulk ultrafine-grained (UFG) or nanostructured Zn, Al and their alloys were produced via in situ consolidation of powders by mechanical attrition (MA) at room temperature. In situ consolidation of metal powders during MA may be a promising method to produce bulk UFG or nanostructured materials with full density and less contamination.Nanostructured materials (with grain sizes less than 100 nm) have been synthesized by a number of different techniques The Zn and Al samples were prepared from Zn or Al powders with a purity of 99.9% (99.95%) and an average particle size of 50 μm. The mechanical attrition was carried out in a SPEX 8000 shaker mill with a purified argon (<3 ppm oxygen) atmosphere at room temperature. Martensitic stainless steel (440C) balls were used with a ball-to-powder ratio of 10:1. The spherical balls formed via ball milling were then compacted to disks at room temperature by uniaxial compression. X-ray diffraction patterns were obtained for these disks with a Rigaku Geigerflex diffractometer with Cu K Pure Zn powders have been ball milled up to 25 h at room temperature under ultrahigh-purity argon. Only the original samples and the sample ball milled for 1 h (bm1h) are in the form of powders. All other samples ball milled for longer times are in form of ⩾1 mm size spheres. The sphere sizes increased to 3–8 mm after 18 h of ball milling, and eventually about 4–10 mm after 25 h of ball milling. The average size and the largest size of the spheres all increased with increase of ball milling time. The appearance of these balls becomes more regular and uniform for longer milling time. Similar experiments have been performed in some other systems, including Al, Zn–1%Al, Al–3%Mg and Al–3%Zn. Spheres of pure metal or alloys have been produced in all cases. Some of these samples are shown in A phenomenon of preferred orientation was observed from X-ray diffraction patterns of the pure Zn spheres milled at different times. Preferred orientation has also been observed in bulk Al alloys with ultrafine grain sizes induced by ball milling techniques. Details of this phenomenon are being studied. The iron contamination of all Zn samples is negligible. The oxygen impurity concentration was analyzed and listed in Ball milling produces nanostructured materials by an SPD process. During this process, the powder particles undergo a repetitive cold welding and fracture mechanism Disks were made out of the spheres by uniaxial compression at room temperature. All these disks reached a relative density equal to or higher than 98% of theoretical value. This work suggests that in situ consolidation of ductile metal powders via high-energy ball milling techniques can be a promising method to produce bulk UFG or nanostructured materials. The bulk samples made from this technique are large enough (∼10 mm in diameter) to perform many different kinds of mechanical test, including the tensile test. Bulk UFG and nanostructured Zn, Al and their alloys were formed via in situ consolidation of elemental powders during the ball milling process. Bulk samples induced by ball milling usually have preferred orientation and modest contamination from oxygen and iron. After room temperature compaction, the disk samples are suitable for tensile tests and bend tests. This research was supported by the US National Science Foundation, Division of Materials Research, under grant number DMR-9871980 with Dr. Bruce MacDonald as Program Officer.