Utilization of N-carboxymethyl chitosan (N-CMCh) to limit the detrimental effect of serpentine on the flotation of pyrite is presented in this work. Flotation results show that the presence of hydrophilic serpentine slimes results in lower recoveries of the valuable pyrite. Utilization of N-carboxymethyl chitosan can limit the detrimental effect of serpentine on the flotation of pyrite. Zeta potential measurements illustrate that N-CMCh is with negative charge and the electrostatic interaction between serpentine and N-CMCh is occurred at pH8.5, then the serpentine zeta potential will be changed from positive to negative, the electro-steric attraction converts into electro-steric repulsion between pyrite and serpentine and the pyrite recovery is improved.Serpentine often associates with many metal sulfide ore deposits. In sulfide minerals flotation, many studies demonstrated that serpentine slime coatings can occur on the valuable mineral surfaces through the electrostatic attraction, reduce the hydrophobicity of the sulfide particle and then depress mineral flotation ( N-CMCh (see The aim of this work is to determine the effect of serpentine slimes on pyrite flotation, a new depressant used to limit the detrimental effect of serpentine on the flotation of pyrite, control studies using CMC are also performed to evaluate the superiority of the N-CMCh. In order to assess the validity of the results, zeta-potential measurements were used in this study. The serpentine and pyrite samples used for all experiments were obtained from Donghai, Jiangsu Province and Yunfu, Guangdong Province of China, respectively. The samples were crushed and ground using an agate mortar − Technical grade SBX (Sodium butyl xanthate) with 85% purity was used as collector, analytical grade MIBC (Methyl Isobutyl Carbinol) was used as frother. Chemically pure N-CMCh and CMC (obtained from Aladdin Chemical Reagent Co., Shanghai, China) were used as depressants for serpentine. Analytical grade sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid were used for the pH adjustment in the experiments, and water used in all the tests was distilled water. The flotation tests were carried out in a mechanical agitation flotation machine. The mineral suspension was prepared by adding 2.0 Single minerals zeta measurements were measured in 1 The flotation recovery of pyrite in the absence and presence of serpentine as a function of pH is shown in  In order to investigate the reaction mechanism of dissolve species on the pyrite surface, zeta-potential tests were carried out. The zeta potential of pyrite and serpentine in the absence and presence of N-CMCh were measured as a function of pH value shown in N-CMCh has a group of carboxymethyl (see The micro-flotation tests demonstrate serpentine slimes strongly depress the flotation recovery of the pyrite in the presence of SBX, the detrimental effect of lizardite on the flotation of pyrite can be efficiently depressed by the utilization of N-CMCh. Zeta-potential measurements result shows the serpentine surface potential changes from positive to negative and slightly effect the pyrite surface charge in the presence of N-CMCh. Electrostatic interactions occurred between the negatively charged N-CMCh and the positively charged surface of serpentine. Under these solutions, the electro-steric attraction will convert into electro-steric repulsion between pyrite and serpentine. Thus, N-CMCh might be potential depressants to limit the detrimental effect of serpentine slimes on the flotation of pyrite. The authors acknowledge the support of the