Methods for size classification of wood chips were analysed in an international round robin using 13 conventional wood chip samples and two specially prepared standard samples, one from wood chips and one from hog fuel. The true size distribution of these two samples (according to length, width and height) had been determined stereometrically (reference method) using a digital calliper gauge and by weighing each of the about 7000 wood particles per sample. Five different horizontal and three rotary screening devices were tested using five different screen hole diameters (3.15, 8, 16, 45, 63mm, round holes). These systems are compared to a commercially available continuously measuring image analysis equipment.
                  The results show that among the devices of a measuring principle—horizontal and rotary screening—the results are quite comparable, while there is a severe incompatibility when distributions are determined by different measuring principles. Highest conformity with the reference values is given for measurements with an image analysis system, whereas for all machines with horizontal screens the median value of the size distribution only reached between one-third to half of the reference median value for the particle length distribution. These deviations can be attributed to a higher particle misplacement, which is particularly found in the larger fractions. Such differences decrease when the particle's shape is more roundish (i.e. sphericity closer to one). The median values of length distributions from screenings with a rotary classifier are between the measurements from an image analysis and horizontal screening devices.Particle size distribution influences the handling and combustion characteristics of solid particulate biofuels. Storage and ventilation properties are affected For fuel chips, mechanically or manually operated screening devices are commonly applied and there is a large variety of applicable systems. The screens are usually arranged in a tower of several sieves, which are clamped to each other, starting with the largest aperture size on top ( Recently some measuring alternatives to the common flat screens have been discussed for use in wood fuel quality determination Such disadvantages are overcome by the application of a dynamic online image analysis system ( A reliable way of size determination is by hand, using callipers. However, such a stereometric measurement is generally too time consuming for routine operations and it is therefore only applicable for measurements on reference materials. The measuring principles described are also based on different physical assumptions. The gravimetric methods—and also the stereometric method—are indirect methods where all particles are initially separated to size fractions before they are converted to mass fractions by weighing. The measurement therefore implies the hypothesis that the density of smaller and larger particles is more or less constant in order to allow conclusions on the size fractions by weighing. Density differences or inconsistent moisture contents would disturb the accuracy of the measurement. For the optical method, however, density differences are irrelevant, as the size measurement is made directly by regarding the projection of each particle shape. In order to achieve comparable measurements, it is important to know to what degree the determination methods are compatible and which are the influencing factors. Such knowledge is particularly required for the currently ongoing elaboration of European biofuel standards. In this research, the goal was to determine any systematic differences between the methods and to evaluate the influencing factors. Two standard fuel samples were produced from wood chips and hog fuel as distinguished in the new Technical Specification for solid biofuels The particles were hand sorted by length into five size classes. They were then coloured by different stain colour (in water bath) and dried. Each colour represents one of five size classes following the same size sequence as applied for the screening devices: 3.15–8 In order to enable conclusions on the influence of the particle shape, a second standard sample (SF2) was designed following the same length distribution as the first standard sample (SF1) but using hog fuel. The conformity of length properties was achieved by a constant monitoring of all changes in the size distribution curve which were caused by each particle added. Particles for SF2 were thus selected to achieve a best possible fit to the cumulative length distribution curves of SF1 ( Additionally to the two standard samples, 13 wood fuel samples of approximately 8 Five different horizontal sieves and one type of rotating sieve were used in the round robin ( The rotary screen classifiers consists of five joined cylindrical screening cylinders, each of 400 For all sievings (horizontal and rotary), identical sieve hole diameters were applied. They were round holes of 3.15, 8, 16, 45 and 63 For the photo-optical analysis, a commercially available classifier was used (Haver-CPA 4 RT Band, by Haver & Boecker, Germany). In this set-up, the sample is fed into a container, which serves as a feeder hopper discharging the particles to a vibrating feed canal. At the end of the canal the particles are dropped onto a conveyer belt which singularises the particles by transporting them at an approximately 22 times higher speed than on the vibrating feed canal (belt speed: 0.9 All round robin partners followed common guidelines, which were elaborated based on the experience from pre-tests. Prior to measurements, the 15 samples were placed in the laboratory under constant climate conditions for minimum 24 For the horizontal shaking screens, a maximum sample layer of approximately 5 In the rotary screening device, the samples were placed in eight equal 1-l heaps on a tray from where they were slowly poured by hand into the infeed slide of the drum. Thus, a more or less constant feeding rate of 1 In case that particles were found as sieve oversize on the 63-mm screen (in horizontal screening) or were discharged from the 63-mm sieve to the final collecting pan (in rotary screening), the maximum expansion of the largest particle was measured by hand using a calliper gauge. This information was required for the calculation of the mean particle size and the size distribution curve. For horizontal screenings all samples were tested at four laboratories (five different devices) in three replications. Rotary screenings were tested at three laboratories (three devices) in three replications per sample. For the image analysis, the number of replications was increased to five in order to gain enough results for repeatability calculations since this equipment was available at only one partner. The feeding rate was set individually for each fuel, whereby it was attempted to minimise overlapping particles or particles tangent to each other as much as possible by visual inspection. These overlappings were higher for fine than for coarse fuels, thus the processing duration for each 8-l sample varied between 5 and 20 For data evaluation and statistical processing, the measured size allocations were reduced to a single parameter. Here the median value of the particle collective was chosen because it is less susceptible towards extreme values or outliers than the mean particle size. This applies for example when few bigger particles do not fall through a designated screen hole. The median value is defined as the calculated particle size where 50% of the particle amount is below and 50% is above. Therefore, the distribution is separated into two halves. Graphically, the median value is established by the intersection of the cumulative distribution curve with the 50%-line (see also The image analysis of particles also allows a calculation of the sphericity which is a parameter to describe the shape of a particle. Its calculation follows Eq. Here, the sphericity is the measured circumference of the projection area of a particle divided by the circumference of a circle equal in size. In the case of a perfect sphere shape (round projection area), the sphericity of the particle is Repeatability and reproducibility of the results were tested by comparison of the relative repeatability ( The results from trials with the standard fuels show that the methods tested for particle size determination (image analysis, horizontal and rotary screening) are largely incompatible. Compared to all other methods, a horizontal screening operation generally tends to overestimate the share of small particles when a classification by length is desired. If the particles are to be classified by width, there is a higher compliance of the screening results for wood chips (SF1) with the results from the image analysis. This, however, is not true for the hog fuel sample (SF2), where the reference median value (width) is overestimated by screening. This is indicated in For the length, which is commonly regarded as the useful fractionating criterion, the highest conformity with the reference median value is given by the measurement with the image analysis system. This applies particularly for the wood chip sample, while there is a 13% difference to the reference method for hog fuels ( For the rotary classifying system, a relatively high conformity with the reference median particle length is given when wood chips are measured (sample SF1). However, this technique has some drawbacks when using hog fuels (SF2 in The underestimation of particle lengths by horizontal screening can also be read from For horizontal screening systems, the particle width seems to be a more decisive dimension than the particle length; this is indicated by the higher compliance with the reference value in The phenomenon of vertically passing particles is reduced by using rotary screening equipment, where the passage through the screen holes is limited by the retention time of a hole below a particle during each rotation. Consequently, long and thin particles are partly detained from slipping through the aperture. This had been intended by the designers of the equipment and therefore the rotary screen can be characterised as a measuring system for a deliberate incomplete screening. For comparable results, it is however important that the screening time, which is determined by a combination of angle and rotation speed, is always kept constant. The degree to which oversized particles pass the screen holes vertically can be read from The conventional round robin fuels (mainly wood chips and hog fuels) performed similar to the standard fuels ( From the results, it can be seen that samples with a high mean particle sphericity—which for example means a large share of long and thin particles—have a high tendency for deviations from the image analysis results (here chosen as reference values). This is indicated by the regression analysis in For the finer fuels, which would be classified as wood chips “P16” according to the recently published European technical specification for solid biofuels The average relative repeatability limits The relative reproducibility limits Particle size analysis of biofuels is a difficult task which is associated with high measuring uncertainties if different measuring principles are applied. In horizontal screening, a severe underestimation of the particle length is given, while some improvements are found for the rotary screening method. Results from both screening methods are highly repeatable but a direct comparability is not given. The highest conformity with the reference values is given for an image analysis system. But this technology is still relatively costly, therefore its major focus of application is presumably given when large sample volumes are processed or when frequent sampling is required. As long as the widespread horizontal screening methods are still common in practice, the image analysis can preferably be applied when conformity to such measurements is not required. This applies for example in an internal quality assurance system for large biofuel suppliers or purchasers. Here the additional benefits of this technology, such as combinations with automated sampling processes or the additional measuring features (e.g., the mean particles’ sphericity or the mean length–width ratio), could also be utilised. Nevertheless, it would be useful to launch a standardisation process in order to include the image analysis method to the scope of applicable standard laboratory principles for biofuels, too. This would be a first step to overcome the disadvantages of the screening methods. The research was funded by the EU-Commission within the European project “Pre-normative work on sampling and testing of solid biofuels for the development of quality assurance systems” (BioNorm) ENK6-CT-2001-00556.