The hydrometallurgical extraction of metals from spent lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) was investigated. LIBs were first dismantled and a fraction rich in the active material was obtained by physical separation, containing 95% of the initial electrode, 2% of the initial steel and 22% of plastic materials. Several reducers were tested to improve metals dissolution in the leaching step using sulphuric acid. Sodium metabisulphite led to the best results and was studied in more detail. The best concentration of Na2S2O5 was 0.1 M. The metals dissolution increased with acid concentration, however, concentrations higher than 1.25 M are unnecessary. Best results were reached using a stirring speed of 400 min−1. The metals leaching efficiency from the active material (Li, Mn, Ni, Co) increased with the temperature and was above 80% for temperatures higher than 60 °C. The dissolution of metals also rose with the increase in the liquid/solid ratio (L/S), however, extractions above 85% can be reached at L/S as lower as 4.5 L/kg, which is favourable for further purification and recovery operations. About 90% of metals extraction can be achieved after only 0.5 h of leaching. Sodium metabisulphite can be an alternative reducer to increase the leaching of Li, Mn, Co, and Ni from spent LIBs.Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have advantages over other rechargeable batteries, which have made them widely used in portable electronic devices, such as personal computers, video cameras and mobile phones since they were first commercialized in 1991. For that, contribute excellent properties such as high energy and power densities, high battery voltage, long charging-discharging cycles, long lifespan and large operating temperature range ( Given concerns about the carbon dioxide footprint, the interest in alternative energy sources has increased and represents a great market for lithium-based batteries, highlighting the electric mobility (electric (EV), plug-in (PHEV) and hybrid (HEV) vehicles) and electrochemical energy storage for renewable energy conversion (solar and wind-powered electric generation) ( Lithium is classified by the American Physical Society (APS) and Materials Research Society (MRS) as an “energy-critical element”, given its role in emerging sustainable energy sources and the fact that it might encounter supply risks and a shortage could significantly affect the adoption of some energy technologies ( The increase in the lithium battery market will result in a growth in the spent battery waste flow, which must be recycled. Batteries recycling is critical not only from an environmental point of view, but they are also an important secondary source of metals, which can be found at very high concentration, sometimes even higher than those found in the ores of those metals ( Unlike conventional batteries, in LIBs lithium ions move back and forth between the anode and cathode, forcing electrons to move with them. When the battery discharges, lithium ions exit the graphite anode and migrate through the electrolyte and form chemical compounds with the metal oxide within tiny channels in the physical structure of the cathode. When an opposing voltage is applied, it forces the ions back to their starting point, recharging the battery ( Recycling of spent lithium batteries generally involves mechanical treatment, hydrometallurgical treatment, association of thermal pre-treatment and hydrometallurgical methods or pyrometallurgical treatment. Mechanical treatments include crushing and physical separation methods to liberate and separate specific components and recover the black mass (active electrode material) that contains valuable metals, such as cobalt, nickel, manganese and lithium. In the hydrometallurgical treatments, after a mechanical/physical processing, the metals from the black mass are dissolved in aqueous solutions containing reagents (usually acids). The resulting metal rich solution is treated by precipitation, solvent extraction or ion exchange to recover metals. However, these processes produce wastewater that can be treated. By the pyometallurgical route, spent LIBs are generally processed without mechanical treatment. Plastic covers and all the organic electrolyte and binder are decomposed or combusted, thus, these processes are often associated with stringent treatment/filtration standards for gas emissions. Other drawback of pyrometallurgical processes is that metals such as aluminium, manganese and lithium are lost in the slag. Therefore, for many authors, the efficiency of pyrometallurgical processes is often considered lower than hydrometallurgical processes ( Several LIBs leaching studies were performed using inorganic acids, such as HCl ( Although some studies using different reducers have been performed ( Two hundred and seventy-nine laptop batteries were classified by their brands and models and their average weight was determined. In order to obtain a sample, 40 batteries were selected taking into consideration their representativeness (amount among the several brands and models) in the initial set. These 40 batteries were dismantled using pliers, and their plastic case, microcontroller board and connectors were removed. Six lithium-ion cells were contained in each battery and their residual voltage was measured for safety precautions. Cutting the cell cases can produce strong heating, given their internal short circuit or self-ignition (even with a residual charge) when cathode and anode are in contact in the dismantling ( After shredding, the solids passing the discharge grid were mixed with the residual material above the grid (about 20% of the initial sample). Particle size analysis was carried out by the sieving method (Fritsch analyser). The material was physically processed to remove some of the scrap (especially plastics and steel) from the black mass containing the active electrode materials. A diagram of this experimental procedure can be seen in Only the non-floated fraction was used in the leaching tests, which was concentrated in active materials (black mass) and had a lower iron content, since it was magnetic separated. This fraction was additionally crushed in a cutting mill (Retsch SM2000, discharge grid of 2 mm) for a more efficient sampling. Sampling was performed in a rotary sample splitter. Samples (5 g) were leached in closed glass flasks in a thermostatic orbital shaker (at 100 rpm). Different leaching conditions were used in the experiments and will be detailed in the results section. After leaching, the reaction mixtures were filtered (Whatman 50 filter paper) and the solid fraction was washed with demineralized water, then dried in an oven (50 °C for 24 h) and stored for the eventual need for further analysis. When necessary, samples from the leach liquor were taken from the leaching vessels during the reaction time, were subsequently centrifuged and the clean solutions were analysed for determining the evolution of the leaching yields over time. The metal content in the leaching solutions was analysed by atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS, Thermo Elemental SOLAR 969 AA spectrometer). Solid samples (battery materials, fractions obtained in physical processing and final leach residues) were also analysed by the same technique, after appropriate digestion with concentrated acid mixtures (HNO X-ray powder diffraction (XRPD) was used to characterize the initial sample (after the physical separation) and was performed using a PANanalytical X′PERT-PRO diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (scan step size of 0.050 °2θ, step time 150 s, generator settings of 35 mA and 40 kV). The interpretation of the results was made using the X’PERT HIGHSCORE PLUS software and the PDF4 data base. Initially some batteries were dismantled to evaluate the main fractions that compose them. The external plastic case comprises about 11.7% of the batteries weight, the printed circuit boards and connectors share about 1.3% of the batteries weight, other components, such as other internal plastics, glue, foam and papers, represent 1.8% of the batteries weight and the internal cells comprise the largest fraction (85.2%). The internal cylindrical cells were also dismantled and their composition was also evaluated, which consisted of 19.2% of steel can, 35.8% of cathode materials, 29.8% of anode materials, 3.9% of separator and about 8.7% of other components. These values are compatible with those found by After shredding, particle size analysis was carried out and the results are shown in Samples from several streams of the physical separation (see Mass balances were performed to quantify the separation efficiencies and recoveries of the different battery components in the separation circuit. The main five components considered in the calculations were the electrodes, the Al foil, the Cu foil, the steel parts and the plastic materials. Essentially, balances were accomplished by combining the weights of each stream with the respective chemical compositions. The steel materials, the Al foil and the Cu foil present in each stream were determined from the contents of Fe, Al and Cu, respectively. Plastics were determined by weighting the pieces/strips, collected by visual inspection and hand picking. This fraction includes the polymeric electrode separator as well as other plastic pieces (e.g. insulators, external labels). The electrode material in each stream was estimated by assessing two contributions: the active material (LiMO About 98% of the steel scrap was removed by magnetic separation. This is an important result taking into account that iron is a very deleterious contaminant in the subsequent hydrometallurgical processing. About 9% of the aluminium foils and 7% of the plastics are also removed in this operation, attached to the steel fragments. About 3% of the electrodes are lost in the magnetic fraction. In the following sieving operation, the coarse light fraction is removed, essentially composed of polymeric materials. About 27% of the total plastics from the feed material is in this fraction. Losses of electrodes are about 1.7%. A mass proportion of about 44% of the plastic materials was removed by water density separation. Losses of metals in this step, namely the electrodes, are negligible. The final black mass contained about 95% of the initial electrodes, with only 2% of the initial steel and 22% of the initial plastic materials. The separation processes did not allow removing the Al and Cu foils (respectively 81 and 91%, of the initial foils are present in the final material). The results demonstrated that mechanical pre-treatments and separation methods of spent LIBs are necessary for the separation and removal of several unwanted scrap components contained in this heterogeneous waste. The literature also addresses this issue ( According to A water density separation similar to the used in this study was employed by The leaching experiments were conducted using the sample obtained after the physical concentration, referred as the black mass, whose the elemental composition is depicted in In a first phase, tests using different reducers were performed and the results are shown in The dissolution of Li, Mn, Ni and Co increased by 1 h of leaching and after that remained stable or slightly increased until 4 h of leaching. Lower lithium dissolution was reached when Na The dissolution of Cu, Al and Fe increased until 1 h of leaching and then decreased, which is positive since these metals are considered contaminants of the solution and can turn difficult the purification of the leaching solution for obtaining the metals of interest (from the cathode). It is worthwhile to mention that copper recovery from batteries should be an objective of a global recycling process, but it was not a goal of this specific investigation, mostly based on the electrode materials recovery by leaching. Copper separation could be attained in the physical processing steps (not optimized here) and the copper remaining in the black mass used in the leaching is, therefore, a contaminant that should be minimized in the leachate. The highest dissolution of copper was reached with H The impurities behaviour (Al, Fe and Cu) was somehow similar but not always due to the same reasons. The copper behaviour can be explained by changes in the oxidation state. Initially part of the copper dissolves in acid media but the reductive conditions of the reaction do not allow attaining high concentrations in the leachate and part of the Cu(II) is reduced again to the metallic form. Regarding Al and Fe, the decrease in the solution concentration after a certain reaction time is attributed to the acid consumption and the subsequent increase in the pH for which precipitation of hydroxides could be expected. Based on these results obtained by the comparison of the use of different reducers, it was decided to perform a detailed study using Na Some tests varying the leaching temperature were performed. The leaching time was fixed at 1 h, the L/S at 10 L/kg, the concentration of Na Some tests were carried out varying the concentration of the acid and the reducer and the results can be seen in The general equation that describes the reductive leaching can be written as This means that the reduction of the transition metals in electrode material can be done by several reducing agents that are in equilibrium with metabisulphite, such as bisulphite or even sulphur dioxide. However, Eq. It is important to highlight that the industrial use of sulphur-based compounds, such as the reducer used in this paper, is always subject to potential emissions of sulphurous gases. However, such compounds are widely used in several industries, including in hydrometallurgy. Therefore, special cares regarding gas emissions and their treatment are necessary, mainly at an industrial scale. A gas treatment that could be adopted in the process proposed is the scrubbing in alkaline solutions, for example. When the acid concentration was varied ( It is important to highlight that the use of small amounts of acid, preferably near to the stoichiometric value, is desirable not only from the economic point of view of the consumption of reagents but also in order to simplify the treatment of final solutions and waste water. Tests varying the L/S ratio were performed. In the first case ( Tests varying the leaching time from 15 min to 2 h were carried out and the results are shown in It is important to highlight that although high extraction of the metals of great interest (Li, Mn, Co and Ni) are reached at 0.5 h of leaching, their extraction increase for higher leaching times (2 h), therefore, the interaction of the several factors affecting this process (temperature, time, L/S amount of reagents) should be studied in more detail to evaluate the possibility of reaching higher extractions at lower leaching times. The concentration of the metals after 2 h of leaching is presented in Two tests using different stirring speeds were carried out, one at 150 min  The physical separation used allowed obtaining a final product with about 95% of the initial electrodes and only 2% of the initial steel and 22% of plastics. However, Al and Cu foils were not removed in this step and about 81 and 91% of the initial foils, respectively, were present in the final material. In the leaching phase, several reducers were tested for the extraction of metals from spent LIBs by H The metals dissolution increased with the increase in the acid concentration, however, concentrations above 1.25 M H The author N. Vieceli acknowledges the doctorate grant ref. 9244/13-1 supplied by CAPES Foundation, Ministry of Education of Brazil.