Rock joints infilled with sediments can strongly influence the strength of rock mass. As infilled joints often exist under unsaturated condition, this study investigated the influence of matric suction of infill on the overall joint shear strength. A novel technique that allows direct measurement of matric suction of infill using high capacity tensiometers (HCTs) during direct shear of infilled joints under constant normal stiffness (CNS) is described. The CNS apparatus was modified to accommodate the HCT and the procedure is explained in detail. Joint specimens were simulated by gypsum plaster using three-dimensional (3D) printed surface moulds, and filled with kaolin and sand mixture prepared at different water contents. Shear behaviours of both planar infilled joints and rough joints having joint roughness coefficients (JRCs) of 8–10 and 18–20 with the ratios of infill thickness to asperity height (t/a) equal to 0.5 were investigated. Matric suction shows predominantly unimodal behaviour during shearing of both planar and rough joints, which is closely associated with the variation of unloading rate and volumetric changes of the infill material. As expected, two-peak behaviour was observed for the rough joints and both peaks increased with the increase of infill matric suction. The results suggest that the contribution of matric suction of infill on the joint peak normalised shear stress is relatively independent of the joint roughness.Rock joints, in particular those filled with compacted sediments, are the most common geological structures that can contribute to a drastic reduction in the stability of rock masses. The key factors affecting the joint shear behaviour include joint roughness, type and thickness of joint infill, stress history and water content of infill ( While the influences of water content and humidity conditions on the shear behaviour of infilled rock joints have been recognised in the past by introducing empirical parameters such as joint water reduction factor ( Furthermore, the influence of matric suction of the infill material on the joint shear behaviour has been only appreciated for in constant normal load (CNL) direct shear or traditional triaxial shear, but in some cases, the in situ rock joints are more likely to experience constant normal stiffness (CNS) conditions ( In this study, a mixture of fine sand (25%) and commercial kaolin (75%) was selected as the infill material. The index characterisation of the infill material reported in To accurately replicate the behaviour of rock joints in laboratory, typically artificial joint specimens are adopted rather than natural jointed specimens. The joint models ensure repeatability of the geometric profiles used for various tests. In this study, an innovative technique based on 3D printing was adopted for generating rough joint moulds with specific profiles due to its precision and efficiency, and simplified two-dimensional (2D) irregular joint moulds were employed to prepare the joint specimens (see The replicated joint specimens were square with dimensions of 120 mm × 120 mm. The 3D printed joint moulds were then used to make joint specimens using high strength gypsum plaster (CaSO After curing, the surfaces of joint specimens were sealed with an organic waterproof sealant, and then fully saturated to minimise water exchange between the gypsum and the infill material during compaction and shearing. An extra collar was attached to the bottom shear box around the infill specimen, to assist in the compaction of the infill material by preventing the soil from squeezing out. After placing the HCTs into the brass tube ends below the joint surface, the infill material of a required thickness was spread uniformly over the joint surface within the collar. The bottom and top boxes were then placed into the shear apparatus, and the infill between the coupled joint surfaces was statically compacted. In this study, two HCTs were adopted to directly measure the variation of infill matric suction. A pore-water pressure transducer with a high air entry (15 bar, 1 bar = 0.1 MPa) ceramic tip capable of measuring negative pore water pressures (i.e. EPB-PW from Measurement Specialties Ltd.) was used. This type of transducer was selected because of its miniature dimension (6.4 mm in diameter) and robust sensor body (titanium casing) that could withstand possible large lateral stresses applied during compaction and shearing without sustaining damage. Before installing the HCTs into the infilled joint specimens, rigorous saturation of the HCTs was conducted. The saturation chamber designed and the steps adopted for saturating the HCT were based on the procedures outlined in past studies (e.g. The existing CNS shear apparatus (designed and built at the University of Wollongong ( In order to maintain the initial compaction stress state during shearing, a range of specimens having different water contents were statically compacted in the CNS apparatus. A series of CNS shear tests was carried out on both planar and rough joints ( The infilled joints shearing behaviour of planar and rough joints ( For planar joints, the shear stress reaches peak after moving a distance about 2 mm, then decreases to a residual state (   As the Two peaks were also observed in the normal stress, normal displacement and matric suction curves. Before the first peak, the infilled joint was “compressed” as shown in By comparing  In addition, it seems that the curves corresponding to the second peak of This study proposed an approach for directly measuring matric suction of a compacted infill material inside a rock joint under CNS shearing conditions. The existing CNS apparatus was modified to accommodate two HCTs in the lower shear box and the HCT saturation system was designed. Selected joint specimens were cast using 2D extruded surface moulds obtained using 3D printing, and a pair of brass tubes specially machined was left in the simulated rock specimen to facilitate the HCTs access to the joint shear plane. Tests were conducted at constant water contents for both planar and rough joints. Due to the CNS loading condition, test results were analysed compared to the traditional CNL conditions. The normalised shear stress at peak was analysed rather than the shear stress. A relationship was observed between the unloading rate and the variation of matric suction of infill during planar joints shearing. Although the infill matric suction shows a similar predominantly unimodal behaviour for both planar and rough joints, the mechanism may be different due to the changes in normal stress and volume caused by joint asperities. The results show that there is an increase of peak normalised shear stress with the increase of matric suction of the infill material. However, compared with the impact of joint roughness, this influence is secondary, particularly for the second peak of normalised shear stress. In contrast, the joint roughness has little effect on the first peak compared with the influence of matric suction of infill. The evaluation of the variation of infill matric suction during joint shearing is important for predicting the peak shear strength in jointed rock engineering practice. Typically the additional shear strength derived from the infill matric suction provides a cohesion intercept in the peak shear strength–normal stress envelopes of infilled joints ( The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. The financial support provided by the