The extraction of non-renewable resources is broadly viewed as an unsustainable activity. After 60+ years of examining the role of non-renewable resource development in broader economic development, and its implications for economic welfare, there is little consensus on its effects–or even its desirability. This paper examines the issue of sustainability in the context of non-renewable mineral resources which, we argue, is entwined with the mineral extraction industry‘s “boom-bust” and “resource curse” images. We present a standard Solow-style economic growth model that integrates mineral endowment and uses the model to examine the mineral blessing or curse question empirically with a cross-section of countries. The model is tested using several econometric techniques that generally support the mineral blessing hypothesis. On the question of sustainability, we contrast the applicability of the concept in the contexts of renewable and non-renewable resource development. In the former case, the concept of sustainable yield is relatively straightforward. In the latter, the concept is much more difficult to apply. Sustainable development of non-renewable resources depends on factors beyond physical rates of production, such as governance and investment in human and physical capital.Sustainability in its various manifestations is a major concern for many in both academia and the public at large. These concerns range from climate change and its numerous and far-ranging implications to more focused issues like forestry and agriculture. In the latter case, that of renewable resources, the concept of sustained yield is well known and relatively simple in principle. Yet, when it comes to non-renewable resources like minerals, the concept of sustainability becomes much more difficult to formulate. In fact, to most people the concept of the sustainable use of non-renewable resources appears downright paradoxical at first glance. In a historical context, humanity has typically leapt from one set of unsustainable practices to another. The hunters and gatherers of our distant past were engaged in an unsustainable activity: they over-hunted and over-gathered. They eventually learned how to domesticate animals to eat instead of hunting them and to cultivate crops instead of randomly foraging for edible plants, ushering in an agricultural revolution. Along the same lines, the Stone Age was not sustainable. But, as Sheikh Zaki Yamani's immortal saying goes, “the Stone Age did not end for lack of stone.” On the contrary, it was because there were metallurgical revolutions that led to bronze, and later iron, that provided more useful materials for satisfying human wants. From this perspective, human socio-economic and technological evolution has consisted of a long series of unsustainable models that have been abandoned–not necessarily because they were unsustainable, but because our ancestors found better ways of achieving human survival. Indeed, the very process of sustainable progress may ultimately be societies lurching from one unsustainable system to another via price adjustment and technological progress in response to that which is unsustainable. In this paper, we address the issue of whether mineral extraction provides a basis for sustainable development. To do so requires examining several initial and intermediate concepts; ranging from a very broad inquiry into the very nature of sustainability to a narrow focus on what it means for non-renewable natural resource extraction to be sustainable. Other authors have examined these questions, and their findings are reported and discussed in In Two common themes in the discussion of the minerals producing industry are “boom and bust” and the “resource curse” (or “Dutch Disease”). Both of these observations about the industry have a basis in facts that are readily observable. For instance, there have been numerous mineral price cycles because of changes in demand and supply, and these cycles have had profound impacts both on the natural resource based industries and communities dependent upon them (see, for example, Perspectives about mining among the general public and academics reflect these themes and have evolved over time. For example, studies in the 1950s and 1960s on economic development based on natural resource development, e.g., The general assumption, based on the experience in Western countries like the U.S., Australia and Canada, was that resource abundance would stimulate economic development. Resource development, after all, leads to growth in exports, foreign exchange earnings and rising personal incomes. The classic export-led growth hypothesis found in More recently, however, the focus of the development literature has shifted to institutional and demographic factors such as educational attainment and political institutions. The latter perspective focusing on governance and human capital has likely been gaining currency because of the obvious exceptions based on casual observation. We see nations with little in the way of natural resource endowments, e.g., Hong Kong, Singapore and Switzerland, with dynamic developed economies, and countries like the United States, Canada, Australia, and Chile with significant natural resource endowments and also with dynamic developed economies. So, if there is a “curse” that inhibits economic development, it does not appear to be a result of the abundance of natural resources. Rather, as the more recent literature suggests, institutional and cultural factors appear to be the determinants of whether resources are a blessing or a curse. This apparent paradox also has implications for those concerned with the sustainability of industries and economies based on natural resource development. As Sustainability of non-renewable resource use presents a particular conundrum for some who view it as an oxymoron. Advocates of so-called “peak” theory, e.g., peak oil ( This formulation appears reasonable but has several practical problems with one of the most significant being the fact that at any given point in time we cannot know if a non-renewable resource could be replaced by a “functionally equivalent” renewable resource. If we had known, for example, that millions of miles of copper telephone lines could be replaced by the electromagnetic spectrum, telephone lines would probably never have been built. But, of course, the people who built the telephone lines had no way of knowing that cellular telephones would be invented. Indeed, perhaps the invention of cellular phones might have required the prior use of wired telephony. Alternatively, if the builders of the telephone lines knew that straw was functionally equivalent to copper, which of course it is not, why would they have bothered to incur the cost of mining copper? Still, the idea of sustainability has broad appeal. And it makes good sense when applied to renewable resources like forests, fisheries and other renewable resources. Ultimately, definitions of sustainability suffer from the problem of being impossible to apply to non-renewable resources because of information limitations. The ability to identify whether the use of a non-renewable resource is sustainable depends critically on information that is unavailable to contemporary observers–future technological innovations, future reserve discoveries, etc. Logically, this biases the identification of any non-renewable resource toward being unsustainable, regardless of that resource's true sustainability. Applied to non-renewables one has to ask if sustainability is anything more than a platitude. In this context As an example, There has been a tendency, particularly in the popular press, to look at non-renewable resource development as undesirable because of instability caused by commodity price cycles and the resource “curse” problem which are then conflated into unsustainability. However, As shown in the literature review, mineral endowment can and has been considered both a boon and a curse. Ultimately, the long-term sustainability of mineral resource development, or perhaps more precisely, the sustainability of economic growth in mineral extraction intensive economies, is typically called into question due to notions like the resource curse or the boom-bust cycle. We focus specifically on the link between sustainable economic growth and the resource curse by identifying the various mechanisms via which the resource curse is expected to operate and incorporating them into a Solow-style model of economic growth that can be subjected to empirical examination. In the context of a model of economic growth and development such as the Solow model, mineral endowment can be characterized as a scalar because it shifts the growth curve. Let We could also add a scalar for technology that is common in Solow style models, but technology in the mining industry is fairly uniform and easily transferable between countries. Other forms of technology–such as information technology–are also easily transferable and are likely more a function of capital formation. As discussed in the literature review, a secondary question is how mineral endowment affects A third question relates to capital formation. We hypothesize that capital formation is a function of the legal/political system and civil society. If we can characterize the strength of civil society as To test the model and the impact of mineral endowment on economic development and, ultimately, sustainable development, we estimate three equations to represent the equations above. The equations are estimated by three techniques to test the robustness of the model: ordinary least squares (OLS), seemingly unrelated regression (SUR), and three-stage least squares (3SLS). 3SLS estimation has the added benefit of allowing us to disentangle the direct and indirect effects of mineral endowment on development. The analysis uses a cross-sectional design with a sample of the 60 countries For the first equation in each model the dependent variable is the natural log of GDP per capital and the independent variables are the natural log of capital per worker, average years of school for the population, mineral potential estimated by the Fraser Institute Annual Survey of Mining Companies ( The second equation uses average years of schooling as the dependent variable with the natural log of GDP per capita, labor market regulations, and mineral potential as independent variables. We expect that higher GDP per capita to be positively correlated with educational attainment because of the impact of greater human capital on wealth creation. The more important issue for this discussion is the impact of mineral endowment on educational attainment since others (e.g., The third equation estimates the log of capital per worker as a function of an index of freedom from the Fraser Institute Index of Economic Freedom and the median age of the population. The economic freedom variable is included with the expectation that more economic freedom would attract more investment. Hence, we expect a positive sign on the coefficient. The rationale for including median age is that an older population has had more opportunity to accumulate capital and we expect a positive coefficient. In addition, another rationale for including the age of the population in the equation is that older populations tend to be less violent ( Most of the variables used are “standard fare” for cross country regressions and come from the usual sources–the World Bank, the Barro-Lee dataset, the CIA factbook, and the Fraser Institute's Economic Freedom of the World project. The unique variable in this paper is mineral potential, a new measure that is also produced by the Fraser Institute. This variable is constructed from nearly 500 survey responses from international mining and exploration companies and captures the industry's perception of the geological attractiveness of 122 different jurisdictions around the world. The unique construction of this variable allows us to examine the potential mechanisms that might cause the resource curse in a way that cannot be done with production data; if a resource curse truly exists, then production figures, and arguably even reserves figures (see  The first column of The results of estimating the second equation, with educational attainment as the dependent variable, have a more nuanced interpretation for the impacts of mineral endowment. The first variable in the equation, the log of per capita GDP, has the expected sign and implication: higher levels of income and wealth lead to higher consumption of education. The coefficient is also highly significant. However, the coefficient for mineral endowment is negative and significant at the one percent level, suggesting, as shown by The third equation in the system has capital per worker as its dependent variable. This equation does not bear as directly on the mineral blessing or curse question but is included because it brings the nature of a country's civil society into the system of equations. The results from the third equation are generally robust, like those of the other two equations. The economic freedom variable has the expected sign and is highly significant, suggesting that more open and free governments are more able to attract investments in physical capital to their countries. The rationales for including the median age of the population—that an older population has more opportunity for individual capital formation and is more likely to have a stronger civil society—are also supported by the results. In order to check the OLS regression results shown in Generally, the SUR results are very similar to the OLS results. The R-squared statistics for the three equations are identical to two decimal points, but there are some differences in individual coefficients. For example, the coefficient for mineral potential in the first equation in the SUR model is almost 20% larger than in the OLS model. Other coefficients in the first equation, however, are fairly close to those in the OLS specification. In the second equation, where the independent variable is years of school, the results of the SUR regression are again very similar to those in the OLS regression. The biggest difference between the OLS and SUR regressions on years of education is that the negative coefficient for mineral potential is about 15% larger (in absolute value) than in the OLS regression. All coefficients remain highly significant. In the third equation, which has capital per worker as its dependent variable, the SUR results are again very similar to those in the OLS regression. Economic freedom, median age, and mineral potential are all highly statistically significant. A final test of the model uses three stage least squares (3SLS) technique. The 3SLS results appear in Column 3. While the results are generally similar to those derived from the SUR regressions, there are some significant differences. Like SUR, 3SLS estimates a system of equations where the dependent variables in the equations are also independent variables in other equations ( The most significant differences between the SUR estimates in column 2 and the 3SLS estimates in column tion3 occur in the first equation, where the coefficients for mineral potential and education become insignificant. This result would appear to have an impact on identifying a mineral blessing or mineral curse. However, the coefficients of mineral potential and education in the first equation only represent the direct effects of these variables on GDP per capita. The coefficient for mineral potential in the first equation does not include the entire effect of mineral potential on GDP per capita, which is the variable of most interest. There are also indirect effects through the channels of years of educational attainment and capital per worker, as seen in the second and third regressions equations in the 3SLS model, which are also functions of mineral potential. The direct effect is captured by It should also be noted that since the first equation is the only equation where capital per worker appears as an independent variable, its coefficient in that equation (1.191) is its total effect on GDP per capita. Hence, the impact of mineral potential on GDP per capita is about 50 per cent greater than the next most important variable, capital per worker. While not definitive on the blessing or curse issue, the analysis suggests that a blessing is a more reasonable interpretation. Also, we point out that these results are not based on ad hoc associations but a simple yet nonetheless structured macroeconomic model. Overall, the empirical tests of the model described and presented in On the issue of sustainability, as noted at the outset, the boom-bust image of the industry created by commodity price cycles and the fact that the minerals are “non-renewable” resources, has led some, e.g. The problem with assessing the sustainability of the minerals industry lies in the relatively amorphous definition of sustainability, as noted above. As The problem is further complicated by whether we address the issue locally or globally. The empirical results as well as anecdotal evidence (see, for example However, even if mineral development is not locally sustainable by the The issue of sustainability and non-renewable resource development may be inconclusive, but the empirical evidence presented above appears to be conclusive on the relationship between mineral potential and wealth (as measured by the natural log of GDP per capita). It is also clear that the rising levels of wealth in the last two centuries, although not distributed evenly around the world, have also coincided with the massive increases in the production and consumption of non-renewable resources that have allowed for rising living standards and higher levels of education. Recall that GDP per capita is the most significant factor in the second equation estimating educational attainment. In 2015, world economic output was worth approximately $75 trillion. About 60% of that will come from three regions/countries: North America ($20 trillion), the European Union ($16 trillion), and China ($11 trillion). These regions/countries account for only a little over one quarter of the worlds population, suggesting a significant degree of income and wealth inequality far larger than what politicians in developed nations discuss (as in the case of CEO vs. worker pay) because it involves billions of people and much wider disparities. In the context of this discussion, meeting the aspirations of the three-quarters of the world‘s population outside of these three regions/countries to achieve a standard of living matching the standards of the developed world will require the extraction of non-renewable resources on a scale far exceeding what we saw in the 20th century. Can it be done? The “peak” theorists are doubting Malthusians who say no–but they have consistently been saying no for hundreds of years. Ultimately, since there are many paths to sustainable development, what matters is how the problem is managed. The governance challenge is to make sure that mineral development leads to the investments in the human and physical capital that enable sustainable development. Our evidence, while not conclusive, suggests that it can be done. Indeed, as we suggest in the introduction, sustainable progress may ultimately rely on faith in prices and technologies indefinitely transforming unsustainable systems into other unsustainable systems. But This ultimately brings us back to the observations of We are grateful to the Fraser Institute for their giving us access to their data. We would also like to thank Ken Green and multiple anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments on this paper. We claim any remaining errors as our own.