Microscale mechanical behaviour of single crystalline Barium Titanate (BaTiO3), a ferroelectric ceramic was studied by uniaxial in situ micropillar compression and nanoindentation. It was observed that pillars below 1 µm diameter reached the theoretical strength of BaTiO3 whereas larger pillars yielded at lower stress values with multiple stress drops confirming slip activity. A size scaling exponent of 0.96 ± 0.09 was estimated for BaTiO3 which is close to one of the soft fcc metals. The material's strength, hardness and deformation behaviour did not show any dependence on the character of the ferroelectric domain, within our error bars.Ferroelectric ceramics are widely used as sensors, actuators and capacitors in micro-electro-mechanical devices due to their piezoelectric properties and polarizability. Miniaturised devices use these ferroelectric ceramics in thin film and nanostructured forms. Although their brittle behaviour is quite well understood in bulk BaTiO Several nanoindentation studies carried out on BaTiO Initial characterisation of single crystal sample of (100) oriented BaTiO Size effect studies were carried out on micropillars of diameter 5 µm, 2 µm, 1 µm and 0.5 µm with height (L) to diameter (D) ratio between 2 and 2.5, milled from the single crystal sample using focussed ion beam (FIB) milling (Zeiss Auriga® Compact). Coarse milling was done at an ion current of 16 nA and 4 nA followed by fine milling at 500 pA and 100 pA. SEM images were taken after milling all pillars, and a taper angle of ~3° was measured for 5 µm, 2 µm, 1 µm pillars and ~5° on 0.5 µm pillars. This taper angle is unavoidable due to the nature of milling. Micropillars were compressed uniaxially The loading direction [001] is oriented for activation of multiple Some of the 5 µm and 2 µm diameter pillars also failed in a brittle fashion at much higher stresses than pillars which underwent slip. This catastrophic fracture was not observed in other smaller diameter (1 µm and 0.5 µm) pillars; instead they showed slip at higher stress values. Identical family of slip system was activated in pillars of other dimensions too ( The theoretical shear strength value ( The CRSS for dislocation mediated slip in ionic crystals like LiF, NaCl, KCl, MgO are reported to be in the order of few tens of MPa. By assuming a similar range of stress for BaTiO Yield strength ( Transmission Kikuchi diffraction (TKD) was done on the deformed micropillar lamella of 2 µm diameter ( It was found that smaller diameter pillars sustain much higher elastic strains than 2 µm and 5 µm pillars ( To understand the differences in mechanical behaviour between individual domains, 2 µm pillars milled on 90° Micropillar compression studies on BaTiO The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to thank the