Fractures of the olecranon are the most common type of elbow fracture. Although isolated closed fractures of the olecranon in adults have a favorable long-term outcome, a few complications with this technique have been reported. The authors present a case of a patient with an isolated fracture of the olecranon that developed a proximal radio-ulnar synostosis and an olecranon nonunion associated with the use of the transcortical tension-band wiring technique. The possible mechanism for the synostosis formation, different from others described previously in accordance with the literature reviewed, will also be discussed herein below. A 25-year-old healthy man stripped and fell sustaining a displaced closed fracture (Type IIA of the Mayo Clinic classification) of the right olecranon ( Thirteen months after the initial trauma the patient consulted our institution. Clinical examination revealed a total blockage of pronation and supination with the forearm in the mid position, complete elbow flexion/extension range of motion and no pain. Radiographs showed a proximal radio-ulnar synostosis and an olecranon nonunion ( Treatment of an olecranon fracture may still be controversial. The surgical treatment for isolated displaced fractures of the olecranon usually yields satisfactory clinical results Elbow posttraumatic heterotopic calcification and proximal radio-ulnar synostosis represent a serious complication, leading to substantial loss of forearm rotation and functional disability. Heterotopic calcifications may occur after olecranon fractures, mainly in patients with significant associated soft-tissue injuries (fracture-dislocation), radial head fractures, and those with closed head injuries. The case report presented could reveal another mechanism for the proximal radio-ulnar synostosis associated with the transcortical position of the K wires. In this patient, short-term follow-up, x-rays showed a heterotopic calcification in contact with the proximal radius. Computed tomography scan at 13 months postoperatively demonstrated how the mature calcification extended from the medial aspect of the radial cortex covering the proximal ulna. Based on this observation, we assumed that the heterotopic ossification and the consequent synostosis could be developed due to a direct periosteal stimulation of the radius caused by the impingement of the K wires with the radial cortex during pronation/supination of the forearm. If the normal varus angulation of the shaft of the ulna in relation to the olecranon is ignored, the natural tendency of the surgeon is to insert the K wires pointing laterally toward the radial neck. Because of the proximity of the proximal radius and ulna, especially during the pronated position, cortical penetration in a radial direction is not well tolerated. To avoid interference with the proximal radioulnar articulation, it has been recommended directing the pins slightly medially choosing a more lateral entry point into the tip of the olecranon and using the ulnar midshaft as a landmark during insertion. Interestingly, this patient also developed a nonunion of the olecranon. Nonunion has been reported to occur in 1-5% of all olecranon fractures. The transcortical technique of tension band wiring relies on a small amount of protrusion of the K wires through the anterior cortex of the ulna. The use of transcortical wires may have benefits over the original tension band technique. However, this case suggests that careful attention must be paid to prevent excessive prominence of the K wires in order to avoid interference with forearm rotation or neurovascular problems and, as described in this report, to prevent synostosis development due to wires impingement. Radioscopic assessment is essential to recognize the adequate wires position. Intraoperatively, once the fixation is completed, pronation and supination should be examined to confirm that there is no blockage due to malpositioned hardware. A special careful evaluation of forearm rotation in the follow-up clinic is also recommended, considering the early removal of hardware in case there is any symptom or sign of transcortical impingement with the proximal radius.