During the electrolytic extraction of Ga, iron and vanadium are main metal impurities in Ga solution. The influences of Fe(ІІІ) and V(V) on current efficiency (QE) of Ga electrowinning were studied. The surface structures of electrodeposited Ga coatings were examined by SEM, EDS and potentiodynamic polarization. The results indicate that QE is sharply decreased in the presence of V(V). Spherical Ga particles are easily produced in Ga solution with impurities, especially in the presence of V(V) and at higher current density. It is difficult for Ga particles with impurities and newly formed Ga crystals to incorporate into Ga films due to the difference of surface structure and properties between Ga and impurities. As a result, newly formed Ga crystals are easily re-dissolved which leads to the decrease of QE. When both Fe(ІІІ) and V(V) exist in Ga solution, QE at lower current density is increased due to the siderophile affinity of Ga.The compound semiconductors of gallium are widely used in optoelectronic devices such as advanced semiconductor, LEDs and DVDs ( Gallium is extracted primarily from mother solution of alumina production. Many methods have been developed to extract gallium from Bayer liquor ( It is showed that V(V) is the predominant oxidation state in alkaline solutions ( Both cathode and anode were 316L stainless steel for gallium electrowinning. The geometrical area of electrode was 30 Solution for Ga electrowinning consisted of 10 The electrochemical reduction or adsorption of iron hydroxyl anion on electrode leads to the dissolution of ferric oxide into alkaline solution according to Eq. Current efficiency ( Potentiodynamic polarization curves were measured on CHI 604B electrochemical working station (CH Instrument, Inc.) with conventional three-electrode cell in 10% NaOH solution. Pt foil and saturated calomel electrode (SCE) were used as counter electrode and reference electrode, respectively. The working electrodes were Ga-coating cathodes electrodeposited in Ga solution with the presence and absence of impurities. All experiments were carried out at 40 Surface structures of deposited gallium were characterized to investigate the influence mechanism of impurities. The morphologies of electrodeposited gallium were observed by SEM (FEI MLA 250). The surface atomic distribution was examined by EDS (FEI MLA 250). The effects of impurities on Ga electrowinning using 316L stainless steel cathode are shown in  Potentiodynamic polarization curves to examine the electrochemical properties of Ga coatings are shown in The chemical compositions of Ga coatings are characterized by EDS ( As stated above, particle structure with larger specific surface area is responsible for the higher oxidation activity for Ga coatings. In the presence of Fe(ІІІ) ( Similar effects of V on melting point and surface properties of Ga particles contribute to the formation of more spherical Ga particles ( In practice, both Fe(ІІІ) and V(V) exist in Bayer liquor and may be brought into Ga solution. The synchronous effects of Fe(ІІІ) and V(V) on Ga electrowinning are also studied ( Considering the effect of impurities on Ga electrowinning and surface structure of Ga coatings, During Ga electrowinning, current density is an important effect factor on current efficiency and extraction rate. The effect of impurities on Ga electrowinning may be related to current density. As shown in In order to understand the effects of current density on Ga electrowinning in the presence of impurities, surface morphologies of Ga coatings electrodeposited at different current densities were examined. As shown in The effects of V(V) and Fe(ІІІ) in Ga solution on Ga electrowinning were studied. Compared to Fe(III), current efficiency ( This work is supported by the