This paper develops an efficient approach to modeling and analyzing the overall dynamics of polydisperse particulate systems, exemplified using a rotating drum with horizontal axis, under both constant and time-varying operating conditions. This approach captures the collective dynamics using stochastic models in the form of Markov chains. The characteristics of such dynamics can be obtained from the Markov chains operator. It provides a systematic way to the analysis of collective dynamical features of particle movements. The obtained operators are used to estimate the spatial particle distribution and the degree of particulate mixing as examples of collective dynamic features of polydisperse particulate systems. In this paper, Markov chains models were developed from discrete element method simulation results to show the effectiveness of the proposed approach.Collective dynamics of polydisperse particulate systems modeled using Markov chains. The collective dynamical features of each type of particles characterized. Spatial particle distribution, mixing degree with different operating conditions studied. Particulate mixing is one of the most important industrial processes, especially in mining, pharmaceutical and chemical industries. Rotating drums with horizontal axis are common tools used for this process. An experimental based study of particle mixing–demixing behaviors in a rotating drum is reported in Numerical simulation approaches, such as the discrete element method (DEM), have been used to study particulate systems ( Stochastic approaches, for example Markov chains, have been used to study and analyze the collective dynamical features of particulate systems, such as particulate mixing. A Markov chains approach was used in particle mixing study in a motionless/static mixer ( Markov chain operators were adopted in our recent work ( This paper is organized as follows. The collective dynamical features of particulate systems are reviewed in Collective dynamical features of particulate systems in horizontal rotating drums are often qualitatively classified into different types of flow regimes. The commonly encountered flow regimes are rolling, cascading, cataracting and centrifuging regimes ( Particulate systems typically involves a large number of particles, where each particle behavior such as translational and rotational motions, can be studied based on Newton's second law of motion. The collective dynamic behavior of particulate systems are highly complex due to the interactions between particles and also interactions with the system boundary. Discrete element method (DEM) simulations are used to generate particle trajectory information by solving the differential equations obtained from Newton's law of motion ( For the system under study, Newton's second law of motion is used to describe the translational and rotational motion at each time In this work, the detailed data as obtained from DEM simulations are used to construct a Markov chain operator, from which the macroscopic particulate system information can be extracted. The 3D DEM simulations results were projected to two dimensions for Markov chain modeling. Note that, a thin drum, with dimension given in In this work, trajectories of the particles in a horizontal rotating drum are modeled stochastically. The location of each individual particle at time Here, we consider how the states evolve with respect to time after each drum revolution for a constant drum rotational speed. Denote The Markov property implies that the updates for the state of the chain can be written as  In this paper, particulate trajectories generated from DEM simulations are used to compute each element of matrix This section introduces the modeling of polydisperse particulate systems. In addition, it also presents the spatial particle distribution and degree of particulate mixing results estimated using the Markov chains approach developed in this work. Besides giving similar results to DEM simulations, the approach also provides significantly faster computation time. For illustrative purposes, binary disperse particulate systems is used to exemplified the proposed method. It can be extended to other polydisperse systems. In this section, we extend the Markov chains approach used in The trajectories of particles of each type were obtained using DEM simulation with the presence of the other species. As such, the Markov chain operators derived are valid and do reflect the effects of the presence of all species (e.g., the Markov chains model for one specie is different with or without the presence of other species). However, from the modeling point of view, this approach does assume that the probability of movements of one type of particles is Consider System 1 which consists of 1066 Type The spatial particulate distributions are estimated from the proposed approach using The information obtained from the particle distributions can be used to quantify the degree of particulate mixing. The mixing index adopted from For particulate systems consisting different types and different number of particles, the RSD of the type of the particles with the minimum number in the system gives a good representation of the degree of mixing. The first step to estimate RSD is to compute the variance of particle fractions, As an illustrative example, consider System 1 operated at a constant drum rotational speed (Ω Most particulate mixing studies based on Markov chains approach operates at constant operating condition ( Consider a binary disperse particulate system consisting Types For illustrative purpose, consider System 2 which consists of 799 Type For Type Type The Markov chains results obtained in this section are similar to the one obtained in The degree of particulate mixing for time-varying drum rotational speeds is analyzed using the RSD presented three separate cases. Consider System 3 which consists of 1000 Type The RSD of these three cases are estimated using Markov chains approach, shown in The Markov chains results in The proposed approach based on the Markov chain model requires significantly less computational effort than DEM simulations. It took more than 13 The features of collective dynamics of particulate systems can be quantitatively characterized using the dynamic indices developed in Consider a polydisperse particulate system and treat each type of particle as separate systems. Denoted by Following Systems 1, 2 and 4 with properties given in It can be observed in Similar observation can be seen for System 2 in The proposed approach can be scaled up for more types of particle in the system, this is shown in the analysis of System 4. The CDI result for System 4 is consistent with two previous systems. In general, it can be observed that the CDI values increase with drum rotational speed. This is to be expected, since the oscillatory behavior in particle distribution increases with drum rotational speed. As the values of CDI reflect the magnitude and frequency of oscillation of particle movement, they are directly related to the flow regimes, from rolling to centrifuging regimes, as shown in In polydisperse systems, the type of particle with higher density has relatively constant CDI values with increase in drum rotation compared to the other types. This means that the change in oscillatory behavior is insignificant and it remains in the same flow regime (such as Type The singular value decomposition (SVD) approach developed in As detailed in Systems 1, 2 and 4 are used to illustrate the maximal particle movement analysis. The maximal particle movements for various drum rotational speeds for Systems 1, 2 and 4 are shown in In this work, an approach to modeling and analyzing the collective dynamical features of polydisperse particulate systems is developed based on Markov Chains. A set of Markov chain operators corresponding to different types of particles and rotational speeds were built using particles trajectories generated from DEM. The results show that the collective dynamics of a polydisperse system can be captured by separate Markov chain operators, each of which models the behavior of one type of particles. The proposed analysis enables one to estimate the evolution of spatial particulate distribution as well as the degree of particulate mixing under constant or time-varying operating conditions. The advantage of the proposed approach lies in its ability to model the collective dynamics of polydisperse particulate systems and systematically characterize the features of such dynamics. The simple form of such models will allow their application in large scale industrial applications for which numerical approaches, such as DEM, are not suitable due to computational limitation. In this work the accuracy of the proposed approach is shown from the evolution of particle distribution and the degree of particulate mixing results, which are consistent to the DEM results. The proposed approach opens a new pathway towards process control of the collective dynamics of particulate systems, such as control of particulate mixing.