Four commercially available ion exchange resins were tested to compare their ability to remove ferric from copper electrowinning electrolytes containing antimony and bismuth. Ion exchange batch tests were performed in the initial phase of the study and indicated that all resins tested co-loaded some antimony with the ferric. The aminophosphonic resin tested was the only resin to load a significant amount of bismuth.
                  Further investigation was performed with the sulphonated monophosphonic resin, Purolite S957. Results were inconclusive as to whether antimony would continue to load onto the resin with time or whether the antimony would eventually reach an equilibrium loading on the resin. Antimony stripping was shown to be possible using a solution containing sulphuric acid and sodium chloride, indicating that ferric ion exchange is a technically feasible process for removal of iron from copper electrowinning electrolyte solutions containing antimony and bismuth.In Part I of this work, the ability of four commercially available ion exchange resins containing a phosphonic acid group were evaluated for the removal of ferric iron from a synthetic copper electrowinning electrolyte solution. Most copper electrowinning operations utilize solvent extraction ahead of the electrowinning tankhouse to minimize the impurities present in the electrolyte solution. However, in a refinery where solvent extraction is not used, significant amounts of other impurities, such as antimony and bismuth, can be present in the electrolyte. For example, at the Vale Inco copper electrowinning facility in Copper Cliff, electrolyte purification is achieved without solvent extraction, and consequently the impurity levels in their electrolyte are fairly high ( While the presence of antimony, and bismuth in a copper electrowinning electrolyte is unusual, these impurities are quite common in copper electrorefining electrolytes. In copper electrorefining, these impurities often contaminate the copper cathode product and so their levels in electrolyte must be controlled ( In Dreisinger's study, elution was performed using hydrochloric acid and can be described by Eqs. As an alternative to using hydrochloric acid, elution schemes with solutions containing sulphuric acid and sodium chloride have been proposed ( It is important to note that both resins shown by Dreisinger to have excellent removal capability to remove antimony and bismuth are aminophosphonic resins. Also note that the synthetic solutions tested contained no ferric, and no sulphonated phosphonic resins were included in the study. In a later study, UR-3300 and C-467 were loaded with a commercial copper electrorefining electrolyte containing antimony, bismuth, and iron. Some iron loading was observed on both resins; however this could be eliminated by pre-reducing any ferric to ferrous by first passing the solution over a bed of copper wire. Loading of antimony and bismuth on both resins was improved when the ferric was pre-reduced to ferrous ( This work focuses on the ability of four commercially available ion exchange resins containing the phosphoric acid group to remove ferric from a copper electrolyte solution containing antimony and bismuth. As in the work in Part I, four commercially available resins were tested: Eichrom Diphonix (sulphonated diphosphonic), Purolite S957 (sulphonated monophosphonic), Generic D416 (sulphonated monophosphonic), and Lanxess Lewatit MonoPlus TP-260 (aminophosphonic). It is important to note that all these chelating resins contain the phosphoric acid group. In addition to the phosphoric acid group, the aminophosphonic resin also contains a group from the amine family; the sulphonated monophosphonic resins contain the sulphonic acid group; and the sulphonated diphosphonic resin contains both the sulphonic acid group and a carboxylic acid group. Note that the pH of the solutions tested in this work is sufficiently low that the carboxylic acid group, typical of a weak acid exchanger, is not expected to have any impact on results. Sketches illustrating the chemistry of these chelating resins can be found in Prior to testing, all resins were conditioned to ensure that each resin was in the acidic (H To gain a qualitative comparison of the performance of the four resins, equilibrium loading experiments were performed. A test set was performed for each resin in which a series of flasks containing different electrolyte to resin volume ratios were placed in an orbital shaker at 175 rpm and 55 °C for 24 h. For each test set, a synthetic electrolyte solution was prepared by adding the following reagents to water: sulphuric acid, copper sulphate, nickel sulphate, cobaltous sulphate, ferric sulphate, bismuth trioxide, antimony sulphate, and arsenic pentoxide. Heat was added to this solution in an attempt to dissolve all reagents; however, in all cases there was a small amount of residual solids left so the synthetic electrolyte was filtered before use. Temperature was not monitored during this procedure, and is believed to be the reason for fluctuations in feed chemistry between test sets. It should be noted that the 24 h is believed to have been more than enough time to reach equilibrium since a series of tests run with Vale Inco plant electrolyte reached equilibrium within 8 h for a volume ratio of 14:1 (mL electrolyte to mL resin). Based on the results of this first set of scoping tests, the optimum resin type was selected for further testing. The next set of tests performed involved further equilibrium batch loading tests with a volume ratio of 100:1 (mL electrolyte to mL resin). In these tests the amount of ferric added to the various flasks was varied in order to produce different iron to antimony ratios in the synthetic electrolyte solution. An extended column loading test was performed to determine if antimony or iron would displace the other element off the resin. In this test, 130 BV of a synthetic electrolyte was passed over the resin. Note that the synthetic electrolyte for this test was prepared with a similar chemistry as used in the batch equilibrium tests, but otherwise followed the column loading procedure reported in Part I of this work. Next, antimony elution tests were performed by loading two columns, each containing 10 mL of resin, with 150 BV of a solution containing sulphuric acid and saturated in antimony at a rate of 15 BV/h. Stripping of both columns was performed at 50 °C. The first column was stripped with a solution containing only sulphuric acid while the second column was stripped with a solution containing both sulphuric acid and sodium chloride. Finally, repeated cycle testing was performed on a single sample of Purolite S957 resin. In these tests, antimony was added to both the loading and stripping electrolyte, in order to observe how antimony loading affects the resin performance over a few cycles. Ten cycles of loading and stripping were performed, followed by a column wash consisting of 50 BV of solution containing sulphuric acid and sodium chloride. A final cycle of loading and stripping was performed to determine whether this wash had been able to restore the performance of the ion exchange resin. It should be noted that challenges were encountered obtaining accurate antimony assays in the solution samples. All samples were analyzed at the Vale Inco Central Process Technology Laboratory in Copper Cliff, Ontario. Solution metal concentrations were determined using an in-house inductive coupled plasma procedure: ICP-PMET. In order to ensure that these results were accurate, resin loadings for the 100:1 volume ratio from the first set of batch tests were determined by both a mass balance using the solution assays and by resin digestion. Results showed good correlation for all elements except antimony. Therefore, for subsequent tests, the amount of antimony present in solution was determined using ICP-MS, which was found to correlate very well with resin digestion results. Resin analysis involved completely dissolving a known mass of resin in nitric acid using microwave digestion. The resulting solution was then analyzed using a standard ICP analysis and results were reported in mg/g resin. This could then be correlated back to the initial volume of resin to obtain values of mg/mL resin. Note that no antimony or bismuth was detected in samples of conditioned, unloaded resin (i.e. resin blanks) and only minimal amounts of iron (< The results for the various tests are discussed in following subsections. The composition of the synthetic electrolyte feed solutions for the various tests is displayed in The loading curves for ferric and bismuth are shown in   The resin digestion results in Additionally, Based on the results from these initial equilibrium batch loading tests, the sulphonated monophosphonic resins appear to be better suited than the sulphonated diphosphonic resin or the aminophosphonic resin for ferric removal in the presence of antimony and bismuth. Therefore, the Purolite S957 resin was selected for further testing. A second series of equilibrium batch tests were performed with the Purolite S957 Resin. The composition of the feed solutions for the flasks can be found in At the end of the test, all resin samples were digested and analyzed. Since flasks “F” and “I” contained approximately the same amount of iron, and only flask “F” contained antimony, comparing the results from these two tests gives an indication of how the presence of antimony may affect the loading of iron onto the resin. The resin loading for the flask without any antimony present (“I”) was 30.6 mg Fe/mL Resin, while the flask with antimony present (“F”) loaded slightly less iron: 27.6 mg Fe/mL Resin. This suggests that the loaded antimony is taking up ion exchange sites that could have been available for ferric. Resin loadings at the various iron to antimony ratios are plotted in An extended column loading experiment, with the feed composition shown in The loading curve from the displacement test is plotted in The composition of the feed solutions for both loading and elution of antimony from the Purolite S957 resin can be found in Using the assays from the stripping samples, the cumulative percent antimony eluted from the resin was calculated for each sample from the stripping test. These results are plotted in It should be noted that as the stripping test with the solution containing sodium chloride started, a white precipitate was observed in the strip solution. This precipitate subsequently redissolved by the time 5 BV of solution had been collected. The white precipitate was not sampled, but it is possible that SbOCl may have formed, since the initial sample of strip solution collected would have had low acidity due to displacing the deionized water remaining in the column from the load wash step. This reaction could be described by Eq. This result suggests that flushing the ion exchange bed with water prior to a wash with sulphuric acid and sodium chloride may not be desirable as it may lead to SbOCl precipitation in the ion exchange bed. Further work would be required to test this hypothesis. The composition of the feed and stripping electrolyte used in each cycle of these tests can be found in To more precisely determine the effect of antimony on iron loading, the stripping time required was plotted against cycle time. As in Part I, stripping time was defined as the time required to reach an ORP of 500 mV It is interesting to note that the results from cycle 3 and cycle 6 fall significantly off the general trend line. During cycle 3, the loading cycle was not stopped after 8 h (approximately 80 BV), and 110 BV of loading solution were passed over the resin. The fact that this cycle took longer to strip may be an indication that the resin was not fully loaded after 8 h. The reason for cycle 6 stripping much sooner than expected is unknown. It may be that some of the cuprous from the previous stripping cycle formed copper powder and found its way into the ion exchange column. The mass balance for this test does not give any indication that this occurred; however if this were to have happened, then less iron would have loaded onto the resin since some of the ferric would have been reduced to ferrous during the loading cycle. During the loading portion of cycle 10, samples were taken to generate a loading curve. This loading curve is plotted in Results are inconclusive as to whether or not the antimony will continue to load onto the resin to the point where the loaded antimony would significantly impede iron loading. On the one hand, the iron loading capacity does not appear to have decreased over the ten cycles, and the shape of the antimony breakthrough curve for the tenth cycle is significantly different than for the first cycle, suggesting that the resin could reach an equilibrium loading of antimony on the resin. On the other hand, the required stripping time appears to have decreased steadily as the number of cycles increased, indicating the possibility of continuous antimony loading on the resin. Pilot testing is recommended to determine the long-term behaviour of the resin in a solution containing both antimony and iron. The salt and acid wash appears to be able to restore resin performance, indicating that iron ion exchange is technically feasible in electrolyte solutions containing antimony, even if antimony continuously loads on the resin. Results from the equilibrium loading tests indicate that in an application where it is desired to remove ferric from an electrolyte that also contains antimony and bismuth, all resins tested will co-load antimony with the ferric. The investigations carried out with the Purolite S957 resin (sulphonated monophosphonic) have shown that ferric removal from a copper electrowinning electrolyte containing antimony and bismuth is a technically feasible process. Although antimony will load onto the resin, it should be possible to elute it with a solution containing sulphuric acid and sodium chloride. Further testing is required in order to determine whether or not the antimony will load continuously onto the resin, or whether it will reach an equilibrium loading level. In an application where antimony removal is desired, both the sulphonated monophosphonic resins and the aminophosphonic resin appear to load approximately the same amount of antimony under the batch test conditions. Therefore, it may be worthwhile investigating the performance of the sulphonated monophosphonic resins for antimony removal in the absence of ferric to determine whether or not these resins may be useful for antimony removal. Note that the loading test performed during the antimony elution tests showed that the resin was not fully loaded when it contained more than 40 mg Sb/mL resin. In an application where bismuth removal is desired, the aminophosphonic resin was clearly superior to all other resins tested. This work was done as part of a Vale Inco sponsored MASc degree at the University of British Columbia. Vale Inco is gratefully acknowledged for providing the funding for this work and for performing the assay analyses. Thanks should also be given to Fenix Hydromet for providing the ion exchange resins for testing and to Dr. B. Wassink of the University of British Columbia for his guidance with the development of the experimental procedures.