This special issue contains a selection of papers presented at Bio and Hydromet ’09, one of a series of conferences on this topic running since the 1990s. The conference was held at the Vineyard Hotel in Cape Town in April 2009. It was attended by delegates from Brazil, China, Germany, India, Iran, Japan, Korea, Spain and South Africa drawn from academia (∼67%), the science councils (∼8%) and industry (∼25%). The meeting focussed on developments in leaching, solvent extraction and ion exchange, biohydrometallurgy using micro-organisms in metal extraction and associated remediation processes hydrometallurgy, and other applications of biotechnology in minerals engineering. The papers focused on the extraction of base metals, extraction of precious metals, metal recovery, and environmental solutions and clean up. Base metal leaching, mainly of copper ores, was reported through both abiotic and biotic leach processes. Of special interest was the new work on visualising the role of micro-organisms in mineral leaching, as well as the effect of chloride, iron availability and temperature on leach kinetics. The hydro- and biohydrometallurgical applications in remediation of water streams, ground water and mineral processing sites were presented. Further general topics included mass transfer considerations, biocorrosion and ion exchange. The delegates recognised the current challenges in the sector of maximising resource productivity, handling multi-metal systems, remediating metal-contaminated sites, and optimising use of water and energy in metal beneficiation. Authors were invited to submit final papers after the conference, allowing incorporation of discussions taking place during the meeting. All papers accepted for the special issue have been peer-reviewed, according to the Elsevier standards and compiled into this special issue. The next conference in this series Bio and Hydromet ’10 will be held in Cape Town in November 2010, where it is planned that discussions of developments in this area will continue.