In this present work, orientin and vitexin were effectively extracted from Trollius chinensis flowers using ionic liquid-based homogenate extraction (ILHE) method. 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ([C4mim]BF4) was selected as the extraction solvent. The optimum conditions of 1.10M ionic liquid concentration, 4min homogenate time, 23mL/g liquid-solid ratio and one extraction cycle for the ILHE process were obtained after investigating by single factor experiments, extraction kinetics and Box-Benhnken design. Under the optimum conditions, satisfactory extraction yields of orientin (5.66±0.18mg/g) and vitexin (0.85±0.03mg/g) were obtained by the pilot-scale homogenate equipment. The kinetic curves of orientin and vitexin were studied, and the phenomenon was explained in detail on the base of visual photograph and percentages of different particle sizes of T. chinensis flowers after ILHE for different times. Relative to other methods, not only the time consumption was shortened to only 4min for the proposed approach, but also the extraction yields were improved greatly. Meanwhile, effective separation of the target analytes from [C4mim]BF4 ionic liquid extraction solution was realized after the adsorption and desorption on HPD100B macroporous resin in a pilot scale, with the recovery yield of 82.86% for orientin and 84.71% for vitexin, respectively. The total recovery yield of [C4mim]BF4 ionic liquid was 97.48% in the whole process. Therefore, the environmentally friendly ILHE method proposed in this work is a convenient, effective and rapid technique, and has superiority in extraction of active ingredients from plant materials.Recently, increasing attentions have been paid on the development and use of environmentally friendly extraction methods. In general, plant materials need to be smashed firstly for better extraction and release of its bioactive compounds because of the uniform size distribution of small-sized particles, for which mechanical pulverization process is the most commonly used method  To the best of our knowledge, majority of extraction processes for thermal-unstable orientin and vitexin have been conducted by usual temperature techniques, such as maceration extraction (ME) This work aims to develop a convenient, effective and rapid ionic liquid-based homogenate extraction (ILHE) method for extraction of orientin and vitexin from Dried Reference compounds of orientin and vitexin were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Inc. (St. Louis, MO, USA). Acetonitrile used for HPLC analysis was of chromatographic grade and purchased from J&K Chemical Ltd. (Beijing, China). All Ionic liquids (ILs) including 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride ([C In this study, the extraction experiments for optimizating conditions were carried out at laboratory scale, for which a Waring blender (ZZ102 Model, Zoke, Foshan, China) with a 1.6 An Agilent 1260 chromatographic system (Agilent Technologies, USA) consisted of an on-line degasser, a quaternary pump, an autosampler, a thermostated column compartment, and a diode-array detector (DAD), was employed to determine the contents of orientin and vitexin. A 4.6 Mobile phase of acetonitrile-water-phosphoric acid (18:81.6:0.4, v/v/v) was used for HPLC detection of orientin and vitexin. Prior to analysis, the standard solutions of orientin and vitexin and extracts needed to be filtered through 0.45 The HPLC detection of [C The extraction process was performed by weighing a designated amount of flower samples accurately (5.0 The mean mass of orientin and vitexin in sample was determined by HPLC analysis of three samples, respectively. The mean mass of the sample was the average mass of three samples before extracted. The homogenate time of the ILHE technique was optimized by the first order kinetic model. The relevant mathematical equations were presented as follows: Response surface methodology was employed to statistically optimize the main effects, interaction effects and quadratic effects of the formulation ingredients, including homogenate time ( Ethanol-based homogenate extraction (EHE), ethanol-based maceration extraction (EME), ethanol-based ultrasound-assisted extraction (EUAE), ethanol-based heat reflux extraction (EHRE), and ethanol-based microwave-assisted extraction (EMAE) were selected as the reference extraction methods for comparison. The conditions for each technique were based on the descriptions in Refs. Five hundred grams of A stainless steel (SUS304) column (φ 90 As previously mentioned, the ionic liquids to be recycled included two parts, one was the water effluent solution of macroporous resin after absorption (12.5 The structure (anion and, or cation) of ionic liquid decides its physicochemical properties, which may significantly influence the extraction yields of orientin and vitexin. The effect of ionic liquids with different anions or cations on the extraction yields were investigated in this work ( The anion of ionic liquid is considered to be a crucial factor and has the most dramatic effect on their properties A series of 1-alkyl-3-methylimidazolium ionic liquids with various cations including C Considering the effects of both anion and cation, [C Some parameters potentially influencing the ILHE process were investigated and optimized in terms of the extraction yields of orientin and vitexin, including concentration of ionic liquid, liquid-solid ratio and number of extraction cycles. All assays were conducted in triplicate. The concentration of ionic liquid plays an important role in the extraction process, thus the effects of different ionic liquid concentrations (0.00, 0.50, 0.75, 1.00, 1.25 and 1.50 Generally, selecting a proper liquid–solid ratio is important for obtaining desired yields. Several experiments were conducted by extracting the flowers using 1.00 In order to investigate the influence of extraction cycles on the yields of orientin and vitexin, extraction experiments were conducted with different extraction cycles (1, 2, 3 and 4), the rest of parameters employed were 1.00 Optimization of the homogenate time for ILHE process is crucial to guarantee higher extraction yields of orientin and vitexin simultaneously. The experiments were performed under different homogenate times, the result presented in It is well known that particle size has important influence on the extraction yields in the extraction process, thus the percentages of different particle sizes (>20 mesh, 20–30 mesh, 40–90 mesh and <90 mesh) after homogenate for 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 Based on the results of single factor experiments and extraction kinetics, we investigated and optimized the interactions between the parameters, including homogenate time, liquid-solid ratio and concentration of ionic liquid by RSM. The experimental design and result are shown in Considering both the yields of orientin and vitexin, the optimum conditions predicted by software were as follows: 1.10 To evaluate the validity of the response surface analysis method, the scale-up verification tests (500 The comparison with other different extraction methods was performed on the base of time consumption and extraction yields of orientin and vitexin. In the present study, EHE, EME, EUAE, EHRE and EMAE techniques were compared with the proposed ILHE for extraction of orientin and vitexin from Comprehensive consideration of these aspects mentioned above, the developed ILHE method was a potential and powerful alternative to conventional extraction techniques in extraction of active compounds from plant materials. In this work, a wet-packed fixed-bed column separator was used for the pilot scale separation experiments of dynamic adsorption and desorption. The diluted ionic liquid extraction solution of 500 The merged solution consisted of 5 In this work, an efficient ionic liquid-based homogenate extraction (ILHE) method was developed for extraction of orientin and vitexin from The authors thank the