This paper presents a study of the copper–ammonia–thiosulfate system for the leaching of gold. The major problem with the thiosulfate system is that for solutions containing copper(II), ammonia and thiosulfate, the chemistry is complex and continually changes due to the homogeneous reaction between copper(II) and thiosulfate. The present paper highlights the effect the changing solution chemistry has on the gold leaching reaction. It will be shown that the gold leach rate decrease as the reaction between copper(II) and thiosulfate proceeds. Although the copper–thiosulfate reaction can be affected by the addition of species such as phosphate, little improvement to the leach kinetics were observed. Thus, the use of oxygen to reoxidise copper(I) to copper(II) was studied, and it will be shown that the oxygen addition rate is critical to leaching, as too much oxygen results in very slow leaching kinetics. Experiments conducted using gold powder and an oxide gold ore showed a similar trend.For the past century, the hydrometallurgical recovery of gold from ores has largely involved the use of cyanide as the lixiviant. Due to the toxicity associated with cyanide and the increasing public concerns, research into alternative lixiviants has heightened in recent times. Of these alternatives, thiosulfate has been given considerable attention with a large number of research papers published, along with more than a dozen patents being filed around the world As there have only been a few fundamental studies of the thiosulfate leaching process, the mechanisms of this process remain unclear. A large portion of the literature has investigated leaching using freshly prepared solutions with little to no consideration of the continually changing solution conditions; thus the solution chemistry is also poorly understood. Attempts by the Newmont Gold Company to pilot thiosulfate heap leaching gave support for the continuation of process development, although it was found that the leach chemistry was very complex and maintaining its stability was a key factor The major problem with the thiosulfate systems is that for solutions containing copper(II), ammonia and thiosulfate, the chemistry is complex and continually changes due to the homogeneous reaction between copper(II) and thiosulfate All experiments were carried out using solutions prepared from analytical-grade reagents and distilled water. Unless otherwise specified, the experiments were conducted at 30 °C, and the solutions contained 0.2 M sodium thiosulfate, 0.4 M ammonia, and 10 mM copper(II). The pH of this solution was initially 11.4, and the pH was found to be almost constant throughout the experiments conducted. In each instance, the ammonia was mixed with the copper(II) prior to addition to the thiosulfate containing solution. Experiments were conducted using a rotating electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (REQCM) at a rotation speed of 300 rpm. Details of the REQCM, along with the preparation of electrodes, have been described previously The gold powder was prepared by the reductive precipitation of gold from gold chloride solutions using sodium disulfite. The powder leaching experiments were performed using 5 mg of gold with 100 ml of solution. Thus, when leaching is complete, the solution will contain 50 ppm gold. The concentration of gold in solution was measured as a function of time using a Varian SpectrAA-400. The ore leaching experiments were performed using a roasted gold ore containing 80–90 g/t of gold. A 30-g portion of solid was mixed with 70 ml of solution, and solution assays were performed at regular time intervals using the AAS. Head and tails assays were performed by aqua regia digestion followed by extraction into a DIBK/Aliquat 336 mixture. The gold concentration in the organic was measured using the AAS. Both the powder and ore leaching experiments were performed in an enclosed reactor, and agitation was supplied with a magnetic stirrer at 500 rpm. This setup prevented the excess entry of oxygen into the pulp. It is well established that copper(II) oxidises thiosulfate, as shown in It has been previously demonstrated that the reaction between copper(II) and thiosulfate is an inner co-ordination sphere reaction One of the most important aspects of this mechanism is that the axial sites can also be co-ordinated by other anions, such as chloride, sulfate and phosphate. Phosphate has been found to the very effective at reducing the rate of copper(II) reduction by thiosulfate Leaching experiments were carried out in the solution containing 0.1 M phosphate, and the results are shown in There has recently been a detailed study into the oxidation of thiosulfate by oxygen in the presence of copper and ammonia Even though oxygen rapidly oxidises copper(I) to copper(II) in thiosulfate solutions, a large proportion of the copper exists as copper(I). The thiosulfate oxidation rate is proportional to the oxygen flowrate. The steady state copper(II) concentration is not greatly affected by the oxygen flowrate. For gold leaching in thiosulfate solutions, the copper(II) concentration and the thiosulfate oxidation rate are very important. Therefore, it was decided that low flowrates of air should be adopted, since increasing air flowrate does not increase the copper(II) concentration of the thiosulfate leach solution, but does increase the rate of thiosulfate oxidation It would appear, however, that the addition of oxygen has some merit, as the copper(II) concentration in the longer term (>3 h) is higher than that for solutions without air sparging. Consequently, leaching experiments were carried out using the aerated solutions. The results are shown in It has been previously shown that the major products from the oxidation of thiosulfate by oxygen in solutions containing copper and ammonia are trithionate and sulfate, whilst tetrathionate and disulfite were suggested to be intermediate species It is known that in thiosulfate solutions, disulfite is oxidised by copper(II) Leaching experiments were conducted in the solutions sparged with 2% oxygen, and the results are shown in It has been demonstrated above that the REQCM is invaluable for measuring the kinetics of gold leaching as a function of time in aging thiosulfate solutions. However, most hydrometallurgists are interested in the rate of extraction of gold from a particular ore sample. In order to expand on the fundamental measurements carried out above, two different types of batch experiments were performed: gold powder leaching; and gold ore leaching. The powder leaching is useful as a means of illustrating the effects observed above without the interactions of gangue components of the ore. The major difference in the powder leaching to the REQCM leaching is that the gold is exposed to the solution for the entire experiment. The gold concentration in solution was measured as a function of time using AAS, and the % extraction was calculated based on the mass of gold initially added to the solution. Four powder leaching experiments were carried out: (1) deoxygenated solutions; (2) deoxygenated solutions with 0.1 M phosphate; (3) air sparging at 32 cm Experiments were also been performed using a roasted gold ore sample containing 80−90 g/t of gold. Even though the ore sample is well oxidised, it was found that the copper(II) was almost immediately reduced to copper(I) upon mixing with the ore. It should be thus obvious that ore leaching in this instance requires some oxygen to regenerate copper(II). In an industrial plant, air will be preferentially used as a source of oxygen, and hence leaching experiments were performed using different flowrates of air. Leaching was carried out in two stages: (1) preleaching with oxygen, copper, and ammonia; followed by (2) leaching with air, copper, ammonia and thiosulfate. This procedure was adopted as a means of oxidising the copper(II) consuming minerals prior to the addition of thiosulfate. The % gold extraction was calculated based on solutions, head and tails assays. The results from the ore leaching experiments conducted using different air flowrates are shown in Even though the gold had been roasted, it was still found to be quite reactive towards copper(II). In the absence of oxygen, this results in all of the copper(II) being reduced to copper(I) within the first 30 min of leaching. When oxygen is added to the solution, the steady state copper(II) concentration will depend on both the rates of copper(II) reduction and copper(I) oxidation. Since the rate of copper(II) reduction is enhanced in the presence of the ore, a lower steady state copper(II) concentration will be obtained at the lower air flowrates. This is consistent with the rate of gold extraction increasing when the air flowrate was increased from 27 to 53 cm It has been illustrated that the gold thiosulfate leaching system is complex due to the interaction between the leaching kinetics and the solution chemistry. During the studies utilising the REQCM and a gold powder, it was shown that the gold leaching kinetics are very good when either: (1) phosphate is used to slow the reaction between copper(II) and thiosulfate; or (2) a mixture of 2% oxygen and 98% nitrogen is used to reoxidise copper(I) to copper(II). However, when the experiments were carried out using air, very poor leaching kinetics were observed. This result is consistent with an intermediate oxy-sulfur species of thiosulfate oxidation, such as disulfite, hindering the gold leaching reaction. Ore leaching studies showed a very similar trend, where poor leaching kinetics are observed when too much oxygen is added to the pulp. The ore leaching experiments were complicated by the fact that the ore is reactive towards copper(II), and thus it was shown that an optimum air addition rate exists.