Shotcrete for the support of underground excavations has been widely used in mining engineering and civil engineering. The shotcrete can prevent large deformation of ground causing the tunnel to collapse. The shotcrete failure was largely dependant on the loss of adhesion of shotcrete with rock mass and bending failure of shotcrete, and the adhesion of shotcrete should be maximized to improve the supporting ability of shotcrete. It has been reported that the cement concrete has been deteriorated by chemical materials, such as acid, sulfate, and so on, in the water. Also, the shotcrete may be deteriorated by chemical materials because the components of shotcrete are similar to those of cement concrete. The deterioration of shotcrete may cause the collapse of the tunnel. The objective of this study is to evaluate the effect of sulfate and acid in the groundwater on the engineering properties of shotcrete with time. For this study, shotcrete samples for compressive strength test and shotcrete samples with rock for adhesive strength test were prepared at the tunnel construction site. These samples had been immersed in the neutral water, 1%, 2% and 5% of sulfate solution, and pH 1, pH 2, and pH 3 of acid solution. Compressive strength test and direct tensile test were conducted on these samples at 0, 2, 4, 8, 16 and 35 weeks. Compressive strength ratio (CSR) and adhesive strength ratio (ASR) were used to evaluate the effect of acid or sulfate on the compressive strength and adhesive strength of shotcrete in comparison of the compressive strength and adhesive strength of shotcrete immersed in the acid or sulfate solution with those of shotcrete cured in the water at same curing time. The compressive strength ratio values of pH 3, pH 2 and pH 1 of acid solutions at 35 weeks were 92.4%, 83.5% and 55.8%, respectively, and those of 1%, 2% and 5% of sulfate solutions were 0.0% at 35 weeks. The adhesive strength ratio values of pH 3, pH 2 and pH 1 of acid solutions at 35 weeks were 124.7%, 58.4% and 45.8%, respectively, and those of 1%, 2% and 5% of sulfate solutions at 35 weeks were 19.5%, 15.5% and 0.0%, respectively. In conclusions, acid and sulfate affect the compressive strength and adhesive strength of shotcrete. The compressive strength and adhesive strength of shotcrete decreased with decreasing pH of acid solution and with increasing concentration of sulfate solution. The compressive strength and adhesive strength of shotcrete decreased with increasing contacting time with the acid and/or sulfate. The shotcrete deteriorated by acid solution became very soft and loose, and the shotcrete deteriorated by sulfate solution collapsed after cracking in the shotcrete. 