Industrial application of biomethanation is impeded by the slow development of cost effective technologies, which can supply the methanogenic archaea with H2 both effectively and at sufficient rates in large scale. This paper is the first to present developmental work of a H2 mass transfer technology in full-scale, investigating the H2 mass transfer potential of a venturi-type injector through injections of up to 33.5 m3 H2 into a 1200 m3 anaerobic digester under normal operation. The venturi system poses a potentially inexpensive system of in situ biogas upgrading, since it is easily installed on already existing anaerobic digesters. Experimental H2 consumption rates increased with H2 injection rates, and was clearly indicated to be limited by the gas-liquid mass transfer rate due to injection of large bubbles. Consumption of the unconverted H2 was increased by recirculation of the headspace gas, but at lower rates due to dilution of H2 with biogas. The incomplete H2 consumption gives the venturi system application in combination with ex situ methanation systems in its present form, but the system must be developed further in order to provide sufficient gas-liquid mass transfer efficiency in order to comprise a stand-alone biogas upgrading system.The share of renewable energy production, especially from wind and solar photovoltaics, is constantly increasing on a global scale This study is the first of its kind, providing experimental data from full-scale biomethanation. The aim of the study was to evaluate the H A thermophilic (52 °C) manure-based anaerobic digester with a working volume of ∼1110 m A Landia® GasMix system (Landia, Denmark) was modified to feed H A mass balance describing H Statistical analyses were performed in R version 3.3.2 ( Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) using a finite volume approach was implemented with ANSYS CFX (v17.1). A three-dimensional representation of the biogas reactor was built using ANSYS SpaceClaim as per the physical description above, except that the internal agitator was not included, allowing for evaluation of the developed injector system only. The fluid was modelled as a two-phase gas-liquid mixture using a Eulerian-Eulerian approach, solving the Navier-Stokes equations for both phases simultaneously. The SST k-ω turbulence model was used, with production and dissipation of buoyant turbulence. The system was assumed isothermal and constant volume. Buoyant lift acted on the less dense phase due to an applied gravity field, with the Ishii Zuber drag model to determine the bubble drag. Bubble-induced liquid turbulence was included with the Sato model and dispersion of bubbles due to turbulence using the Favre drag model. Sludge properties were established from feeding rates, with total solids approximated as 5.4%, and a density slightly higher than water at 1000 kg/m The liquid surface in the tank was a degassing boundary, such that it allowed gas to escape but acted as a slip wall to the water phase. Boundary condition for the reactor outlet leading liquid to the pump was a static pressure equal to the liquid head above it. This allowed both water and gas to escape, although in actuality due to relative volume fractions was effectively a liquid-only outlet. The tank walls were treated as a no-slip boundary. Mass flow inlets were specified for both gas and liquid, with the phases assumed to have equal initial velocities due to the H ANSYS Meshing was used to generate an unstructured tetrahedral mesh. Mesh independence was tested using meshes ranging from 110k to 3.8m elements. The average gas volume fraction of H The full system was solved in 90 min (RMS of residuals below 10 Large volumes of H Initial consumption rates during recirculation (measured as the slope during the first ten minutes of recirculation, A CFD model was constructed based on process data and deployed to elucidate the observed correlation between H Experimental and computational results suggest that absolute H A full-scale venturi-type H The results clearly indicate that H In the case of biomethanation, it is necessary that H Recirculation of unconverted H This study constitutes the first contribution to development of mass transfer technologies for This study was funded by None. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 