SAILMA grade HSLA steel is thermally and thermo mechanically processed in order to obtain different microstructures and mechanical properties. Multidirectional forging and inter critical annealing techniques are used. Slurry erosion and cavitation damage of the processed HSLA steels showed that the most erosion resistant steel has a dual phase ferrite–martensite microstructure. Its erosion resistance is 1.5 times superior to that of the least resistant as-received HSLA steel. This is attributed to high hardness, toughness, and greater strain hardening capacity of dual phase HSLA steel as compared to that of the as received and multi directionally forged HSLA steels. Mechanisms of erosion operating in differently processed steels corresponding to either forms of damage are discussed.Erosion of steels by solid particles and shock waves in a fluid stream cause heavy damage in mineral processing, handling, and transporting industries Interaction of solid particles suspended in a liquid and a surface that experiences loss of mass from repeated impacts of solid particles results in slurry erosion There is scope for increasing the performance of HSLA steel in applications that require slurry and cavitation erosion resistance. In the present work, severe plastic deformation of HSLA steel by multidirectional forging (MDF) and inter-critical annealing methods produced different microstructures with varying mechanical properties. Effect of test conditions on the erosion and cavitation damage of the processed steels is studied. Metallographic analysis of damaged surfaces combined with weight loss and surface roughness measurements are used to determine the mechanism of erosion. SAILMA grade high strength low alloy (HSLA) steel produced by Steel Authority of India is used. Slurry erosion tests were performed using a slurry pot test set up shown in The test samples were ground with 2000 grit SiC paper, cleaned in acetone, dried and weighted before and after each erosion test. A Mitutoyo SJ-400 profilometer measured the surface roughness. All the test samples had a mean roughness (Ra) value of 0.06   Changes in the Vickers hardness with the processing condition of bulk HSLA steel are shown in  Slurry-pot erosion test, because of its relatively high impact angle of particles, does not truly simulate the erosion conditions in slurry transport. Yet the Coriolis test that involves lower impact angles of particles does more distinctly establish that (silica sand) slurry erosion resistance of the steel increases with hardness  Eroded surface of DP HSLA steel shows much fewer pores, very scarce craters (    Thermal and thermo-mechanical processing has large effect on the microstructure and mechanical properties of SAILMA grade HSLA steel. Variously processed steels exhibited a large variation in hardness, tensile properties, and toughness. Refinement of ferrite–pearlite microstructure because of warm multidirectional forging and formation of dual phase ferrite–martensite microstructure because of inter critical annealing, were responsible for these variations. Dual phase HSLA steel showed the best slurry and cavitation erosion resistance. Its better slurry erosion resistance is because of insignificant micro cutting and low plastic strain from particle impact. This accrues because of its combination of high hardness, high strength, excellent toughness, and high work hardening capacity as compared to the as received and MDF processed HSLA steels. The relatively higher erosion of MDF processed steel specimens is because of finely dispersed carbide particles that are easily detached upon slurry impingement of the matrix. As compared to other steels studied, the dual phase HSLA steel exhibited improved cavitation erosion resistance because of its higher tensile strength and hardness together with good toughness. Authors acknowledge the research funding provided by