This paper uses the random fatigue limit (RFL) model of Pascual and Meeker to address fatigue limits for PVC pressure pipes. This model differs from previous ways of describing fatigue data for PVC by recognising that the fatigue limit is a stochastic quantity rather than a single valued stress amplitude below which fatigue failures will not occur. By analysing published fatigue data, it is demonstrated that the RFL model is capable of quantifying fatigue limit variability and its influence on fatigue life variability. Moreover, the RFL model was used to illustrate the risks associated with defining fatigue limits based on small quantities of high-cycle fatigue data. In particular, it is shown that fatigue failure can occur below the mean fatigue limit and that the RFL model is capable of quantifying the probability of failure at a given level of stress amplitude.Traditionally, the concept of a fatigue limit has been based on the hypothesis that the stress amplitude – cycles to failure (S-N) curve forms a horizontal asymptote beyond some high number of cycles, often approximately 1 × 10 For many years, fatigue limits have been suggested for unplasticised polyvinyl chloride (PVC-U) and PVC-M (unplasticised polyvinyl chloride modified with chlorinated polyethylene) pressure pipes. These have been based on notched rotational bending by Brogden Most design criteria for PVC pipes use the collected data of Joseph and Leevers The concept of a single-valued fatigue limit seems incongruent with other material properties. When yield strength, ultimate tensile strength, fracture toughness, for example, are measured a range of values are found with a mean and some variation. Generally, the variation can be described by some continuous probability density function. Hence the measured variability is thought of as a random variable. It is sensible that the fatigue limit will also be a random variable since the resistance to fatigue crack initiation and propagation is likely to be determined by some variable small scale structural feature in the material. Pascual and Meeker This paper is part of a larger program investigating the application of the RFL model to PVC-U, PVC-M and oriented PVC (PVC-O) pipe fatigue data. The aim of this work is to demonstrate that the RFL model is a good descriptor for PVC pipe fatigue life. Its use would allow for better prediction of high cycle fatigue life in plastic pipes for prudent pipeline design. The RFL model is a failure-time regression model. The model parameters are fitted to data using maximum likelihood estimation (MLE). The goodness-of-fit of a model is determined by its likelihood value, the distribution fit via probability (P-P) plots, and the deviation of the model from the data via standardized residual plots. Pascual and Meeker Since Fatigue life at a given stress amplitude is a continuous random variable, but is conditional on the fatigue limit. The conditional pdf for fatigue life, where The marginal cumulative distribution function (cdf) of fatigue life is: Maximum likelihood estimation is used to determine the best model for a data set. The log likelihood function is maximized for the data by changing the values of θ. Different For convenience, the log likelihood function, log ( Confidence regions for Probability (P-P) plots are used to assess the distributional fit of The standardized residual, The RFL model was tested with two sets of PVC pipe fatigue data. The first set was that of Joseph and Leevers The integrals in the above equations were calculated numerically using MATLAB™. The maximization of the likelihood function was achieved using the Six models were fitted to the Joseph and Leevers’ data: four RFL models using either the normal (norm) or smallest extreme value (sev) functions for The most positive log (  The quantiles for the norm-norm model capture the data variability tapering considerably from the lower stress amplitudes where greater fatigue life variability is predicted to higher stress amplitudes where variability decreases. The norm model quantiles are parallel and more data at low stress amplitude are outside the 0.05 and 0.95-quantile. Eq. Profile likelihood profiles of the parameters for the RFL norm-norm model were plotted and gave smooth continuous curves. From these upper and lower 95% confidence intervals could be calculated and this are listed in It must be noted that the Joseph and Leevers’ data does not possess any censored data whereas the recently presented Folkman et al. data does. It will be seen in the next section that censored data does have a strong effect on the RFL models. Depending on the value and quantity of censored data, they can strongly affect the MLE of θ because the magnitude of the ( To assess the effect of censored data, the six models were fitted to the combined data of Joseph and Leevers The P-P plots of these models are shown in The standardized residual plots for the norm-sev models, The poor quality P-P and standardized residual plots indicate that the two data sets are most likely dissimilar. This is supported by the profile likelihood of the parameters from the norm-sev model shown in Although the norm-sev model appears to describe the combined data sets well ( Noticeably, the mean curves in Secondly, based on the analysis of Joseph and Leevers’ data, although the mean fatigue limit suggests a large fatigue lifetime of approximately 1 × 10 It is quite likely that the analysis of the Joseph and Leevers’ data gave an overly pessimistic value of the stress amplitude at the fatigue limit since it did not include any long term data or censored data. Supplementing this data with that of Folkman et al. probably produces a more realistic value of the true fatigue limit in modern PVC-U pipes of 2.2 MPa, even though the analysis here questions whether the two sets of data came from the same population of pipes. As noted earlier, there was over 20 years between the two studies and improvements in resin and processing could be expected. There is also doubt whether the long term performance of PVC-U and PVC-M are equivalent. Nevertheless, similar design considerations taking into account the fatigue limit variability need to be made. Based on The random fatigue limit model has been shown to be a good descriptor of published fatigue data in PVC-U pipe materials. It is able to reproduce the key characteristics of the stress amplitude life time (S-N) plots such as the increasing fatigue life with decreasing stress amplitude, the increasing fatigue life variation with decreasing stress amplitude, the curvature at low stress amplitude, and the fatigue limit at low stress amplitude. Implications for the design of PVC-U pipes have been discussed. This work was supported by an