The potential of ultrasound and mechanical activation (MA) in cutting down the acid amount required for low-grade MnO (manganese ore as received) extraction was extensively investigated in this study. Results showed that MA and heating-up combination could obviously promote Mn dissolution kinetics and thereby achieve higher extraction efficiency under identical H2SO4 dosage. The positive role of ultrasound was found to be evident in the extraction of MnOA (manganese ore after MA), but negligible for MnO. Such a difference was correlated with the much different physicochemical properties of the liquid/solid systems that ultrasound involved in, as MA was confirmed to induce the dissociation of Mn-containing flocs and SiO2 particles. High potential of ultrasound in weakening the agglomeration of ultra-fine MnOA was also recommended. Semi-empirical Averami equation was found to well model the Mn extraction kinetics, which was much more diffusion controlled after MA based on the modeling. The modeling disclosed high capability of MA in decreasing the activation energy of Mn extraction (from 11.33 to 5.43 kJ/mol), whereas, ultrasound was effective in enhancing mass transfer or promoting pre-exponential factor A. Considering the potential in assisting efficient extraction via a cleaner way, ultrasound and MA combination provides a feasible alternative in mediating the hydrometallurgy of low-grade minerals.As a very effective and non-polluting method of activation, ultrasound has played an important role in chemical and physical activities of the process industry in the recent decades ( After rapid development for more than 60 years, China now has a dominant role in global electrolytic manganese metal (EMM) production and its annual EMM output exceeded 1.0 million tons for the first time in 2007 ( A typical electrolytic manganese metal production process mainly consisted of milling, leaching, oxidation combined neutralization, filtering, purifying and electrolysis. Attempts were made in our investigation to decrease the amount of H All reagents (Sinopharm Chemical Reagent), such as H The obtained MnO was subjected to MA which was achieved with a customized stirring mill driven by a commercial available drill press equipped with a speed-tuned motor. For each grinding experiment, the MnO samples (50 g in each batch) were added into a stainless steel chamber (1000 mL) with 600 mL Zirconia milling balls (in different diameters), then the samples were subjected to wet milling (water) in ambient atmosphere without any other additives during the milling. The samples were activated in the stirring ball for 1 h at 600 rmp for all the bath experiments. Finally, the samples after mechanical activation (MnO A schematic illustration of the experimental set-up was shown in Kinetic modeling of noncatalytic solid-liquid reactions is accomplished usually by means of well-established theoretical models. Very often, for insoluble solid in the liquid medium, unreacted shrinking core models were proved to better understand the extraction patterns ( Namely, Meanwhile, in order to further reveal the inherent mechanism that regulating the MA induced MnO dissolution in and out the presence of ultrasound thermodynamically, Arrhenius equation was also adopted: It is well understood that Mn dissolution kinetics was in the function of various parameters, including temperature, agitation speed, and possibly ultrasonic power. In this case, the agitation speed and ultrasonic power were pre-optimized, and the impact of temperature on Mn dissolution would be extensively investigated later. As can be seen in The excess energy that induced by MA stored in the solid structure (as lattice distortions, defects, etc.) increased the entropy and internal energy of the system, and may involve warming up of materials, thereby the free energy of the system increased. Most of the excess free energy is linked to the defect structure, leading to the crystal structure being unstable (lattice or bulk activation) and the particles being mechanically activated ( As can be seen, accelerated Mn dissolution kinetics as well as promoted Mn dissolution efficiency was feasibly deduced for MA induced MnO dissolution. Particularly, the promotion of MA in Mn dissolution seemed to be much more pronounced at lower temperature (30 °C) than those at higher temperatures (45 °C, 60 °C). For example, for initial 0.10 mol/L H Note that within 1 h, the Mn dissolution efficiency of MnO Considering the positive role in promoting the solid/liquid reactions ( However, taking ultrasound into consideration, almost opposite results were obtained for Mn extraction for MnO before and after MA. For MnO dissolution, the Mn extraction curves with and without ultrasound showed negligible difference, indicating that ultrasound showed no enhancement in the MnO dissolution. Nevertheless, ultrasound was noticed to be quite effective in promoting MnO Avrami equation (Eq. The positive role of both ultrasound and MA in promoting the kinetics and total efficiency of the MnO dissolution from 30 °C−60 °C could be concluded based on the aforementioned analysis. For example, the total percent Mn extracted in 1 h at the initial condition of 30 °C, 0.075 mol/L H While ultrasound was found to be effective in promoting MnO In order to decrease the acid consumed and thereby acidic wastewater generated in ferrous and non-ferrous metal metallurgy, ultrasound and MA were employed to promote the acid extraction of manganese ore in our investigation. MA and heating-up combination was found to obviously favor the Mn dissolution kinetics and total extraction efficiency, which provided a promising alternative to extract more eco-friendly. Moreover, ultrasound exerted promotion in the extraction of mechanical activated MnO, though its effectiveness in dissolution of MnO as received was negligible. Such a difference was supposed to be correlated with the much different physicochemical properties of the liquid/solid systems that ultrasound involved in, as MA was confirmed to result in the dissociation of Mn-containing flocs and SiO This study was financially supported by the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at