Hydrophilic and hydrophobic silica nanoparticles were synthesized by a cheap, simple and low temperature one-step method. The method involves a catalytic reaction between ammonium hydroxide, tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) and dichlorodimethylsilane (DDS) in an ethanol solvent. The effects of different parameters such as chemical concentration and reaction temperature were investigated on size of the synthesized silica particles. Characterizations of hydrophilic and hydrophobic particles were performed using dynamic light scattering (DLS), X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). According to the results, by reducing the amount of ammonium hydroxide, ethanol and temperature, the size of hydrophilic silica particles can be reduced to 129±10.4nm. Other sides, addition of DDS agent caused to silica particles found hydrophobic property and size of the particles reduced to about 65±6.5nm.Silica nanoparticles have an outstanding position in scientific research, because of their various industrial applications, such as pigments and coating Among different methods which have been used to synthesis silica nanoparticles, sol-gel method has more advantages because of its low temperature process, simplicity, high-quality product and compositional designing Recently, a novel one-step method has been introduced for synthesis of finer hydrophobic silica particles. The method consists of a base-catalytic reaction between silicon alkoxide and a catalyst in the presence of a silane coupling agent Marini et al. In this paper, application of dichlorodimethylsilane (DDS) as a silane coupling agent is studied for surface modification of silica particles. Effects of different parameters such as concentration of ammonium hydroxide, TEOS, DDS, ethanol, as well as reaction temperature on the size of the particles have been investigated and conditions for synthesis of hydrophilic and hydrophobic silica nanoparticles presented. Ethanol (C The first solution was prepared by mixing distilled water, ammonium hydroxide and ethanol and stirred for 15  Size distribution of synthesized silica particles was measured using dynamic light scattering (DLS, Fritsch A22) and standard deviation (SD) and mean size of particles in each experiment reported. Phase identification of silica particles was performed with a Philips X' Pert diffractometer using Cu K Proposed one-step synthesis process was performed in the H  Hydrolysis and condensation reactions act as the nucleation and growth mechanisms during the synthesis process. Therefore, different process parameters which influence on such reactions kinetics can control the size of silica particles. Mean size of the particles as well as their standard deviation measured by DLS and the results were reported in The effect of NH The effect of ethanol concentration on the particle size is given in Although it is expected that reaction temperature affects on the particle size and its uniformity Effect of TEOS concentration is also plotted in Furthermore, dichlorodimethylsilane (DDS) agent is used for surface modification of silica particles and synthesis of hydrophobic particles.   The results show that for synthesizing the smallest hydrophilic silica particles through one-step method, the procedure should be done in the least amount of ethanol and temperature (run 5). Accordingly, the minimum size of 129 TEM micrographs of typical synthesized particles were presented in Energy dispersion spectroscopy (EDS) was used to investigate the chemical composition of synthesized hydrophobic particles. As can be seen ( In order to measure the modification percentage, thermogravimetric (TG) analysis was performed up to 1000 One-step synthesis and surface modification of silica particles were studied by the means of dichlorodimethylsilane (DDS) as the silane coupling agent. By dissolving of TEOS in water and ethanol, the OH functional groups are formed on the silica surface, which leads to creation of hydrophilic particles. After adding DDS, OH functional groups react with chlorine and lead to a ligand exchange on the surface of silica particles and creation of hydrophobicity and particle size reduction up to 65