This is a broad statement and there is no doubt that in selected proximal humerus fractures percutaneous pinning is superior to plate fixation. However, unstable two- and three-part fractures in young patients may require plate fixation for reliable union. Comminuted higher energy injuries do well with dual-plate fixation. Older patients with four-part fractures are still best treated with hemiarthroplasty with tuberosity osteosynthesis. Percutaneous pinning, while being minimally invasive, is not without complications. Complications, including pin tract infections and subsequent septic arthritis from migration of septic pins, have been reported. In addition, pin migration has been associated with potentially life-threatening complications due to the close proximity to neurovascular structures and the thoracic cavity. Loss of position of fracture fragments in the first several weeks of treatment is not uncommon with pin fixation. Open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) may be necessary to obtain anatomic reduction and secure fracture fixation. Recent changes in the approach to plate fixation with lateral based incisions and variable angle locking screw fixation have improved ORIF outcomes.Proximal humerus fractures are relatively common, accounting for approximately 4% of all fractures. The incidence approaches 70 fractures per 100,000 people and continues to increase due to an aging population. The advantages of percutaneous pin fixation are that it may be done in a minimally invasive fashion, with only small stab incisions. This is advantageous because of its minimal soft tissue stripping and preservation of the blood supply to the fracture site. It is ideally suited for acute fractures in patients with good bone quality. Fractures that may be amenable to percutaneous pinning include displaced surgical neck fractures ( Open reduction and stable internal fixation has traditionally been the treatment of choice for most displaced proximal humerus fractures ( Elderly patients with displaced four-part and some three-part fractures are at higher risk for avascular necrosis and failure of fixation. Primary hemiarthroplasty with tuberosity osteosynthesis is indicated in this patient population. Boileau and coworkers Optimal treatment of proximal humerus fractures varies according to the fracture pattern, displacement, comminution, and patient factors such as age and bone quality. While some fractures, such as the displaced surgical neck fracture or certain comminuted fractures in patients with good bone quality, may be good candidates for percutaneous pin fixation, it may not be adequate fixation for some. Fractures with significant comminution or poor bone quality may require ORIF. Use of fixed angle plates and less invasive approaches have improved the results of ORIF for proximal humerus fractures. Hemiarthroplasty with tuberosity osteosynthesis remains the treatment of choice for certain three- and four-part fractures, especially in elderly patients with osteopenic bone.