The role of kinetics of extraction in the design of extraction equipment is becoming more important with the move to reduce organic inventories and phase residence times. This paper examines the influence of the kinetics of ZnSO4 extraction into di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) in Shellsol 2046 in a 100 mm diameter, 1 m tall column packed with Super Mini Rings (SMR). Concentrations of zinc along the column in both phases could be simulated to within ±10% using an axial dispersion model with a diffusion-kinetic model incorporated.Most solvent extraction equipment is designed based on equilibrium concepts such as the number of theoretical stages or number of transfer units, some with axial dispersion. While mixer settlers with large residence times are the major contactor in use, this approach is acceptable. Today however, a number of mineral companies are considering columns, inline mixers and other short contact devices. Such devices can have a residence time for the inter-phase mixture of an order of magnitude lower than the traditional mixer settler. In these cases, the kinetics of extraction can be important. In this investigation, the role of reaction kinetics on the performance of a packed column is investigated using the standard test system of liquid–liquid extraction by the European Federation of Chemical Engineering for validating liquid–liquid extraction design procedures when both reactive and diffusion rates have to be taken into account ( In this study, the equilibrium and kinetics models are combined with an axial dispersion model for the column to simulate the zinc ion extraction process by D2EHPA/Shellsol 2046 in a Super Mini Ring (SMR) packed column, ( For the system Zn/D2EHPA/Shellsol 2046, the overall extraction reaction is given as ( The equilibrium constant The value of the stoichiometric coefficient  The values of the constants  Mechanism 1. Reaction steps: Step (6) rapid, step (7) slow and step (8) rapid. This resulted in the following rate equation: Mechanism 2. Reaction steps: Step (6) rapid, step (7) rapid and step (8) slow. This resulted in the following rate equation: Statistical analysis ( The relation between the concentration in the bulk and at the interface can be related by mass transfer equations in each phase. The expressions are as follows: The D2EHPA dimer was in excess and the diffusivity of protons was far larger than the other species in the sysem, so assuming no resistance to transfer of the D2EHPA dimer Eqs. Combination of Eqs. Eqs.  For the system without NaSO Axial mixing in the column can be described by both the backflow and dispersion model. In the present work, the dispersion model has been used. Eq. The axial mixing of dispersed phase was not taken into account in Eq. The boundary conditions are: At the top of the column ( At the bottom of the column ( D2EHPA from Albright & Wilson Specialties Pty Ltd with a purity of approximately 99% was used without further purification. Kerosene, Shellsol 2046, was provided by Shell Australia. ZnSO For the equilibrium experiments, 20 ml of the aqueous and the organic solutions respectively were mixed and stirred intensively for 30 min at 20 °C with a magnetic stirrer. The two phases were separated after settling for 30 min and the pH value of the aqueous solutions measured. The organic phase was completely stripped with 1 M sulphuric acid (2 The experimental pilot-scale column is shown in The column was filled with the continuous aqueous phase and then the dispersed organic phase was introduced at a fixed flow rate through the base of the column. The pH of the aqueous phase was measured with a pH-meter by taking samples at the outlet of the column base. When the pH values were stable, fourteen samples of the aqueous and organic phase were taken. The samples were analysed as described in The equilibrium data are shown in The hold-up and the drop size of the dispersed phase were obtained using the shutdown ( The experimental data are shown in In order to model the current system the contact area, axial dispersion coefficient and mass transfer coefficients need to be determined. The contact area of the two phases in the column was calculated by the following relation: The axial dispersion coefficient of the continuous phase, This correlation was based on the data of The individual mass transfer coefficients of the zinc ions in the aqueous phase and the zinc complex in the organic phase were calculated using the relation ( This correlation was developed based on data obtained from various packed columns containing Raschig rings from 12.7 mm up to 38.1 mm.  Combining the dispersion model Eqs. The simulation was repeated by combining Eqs.   The variation of the extraction rate and the overall rate coefficient along the column height is shown in The interfacial concentrations of the protons and D2EHPA dimer were assumed equal to the bulk concentrations because of the assumption that no mass transfer resistance was present in the respective phase for the two species. The interfacial and bulk concentration profiles of the zinc ions and zinc complex are shown in According to Eqs. Seven experimental runs for the system Zn/D2EHPA/Shellsol 2046 under different conditions were conducted on a pilot-scale packed column. A simulation study using the dispersion model combined with the diffusion-kinetic model as proposed in the literature was also carried out. From the results, the following conclusions can be drawn: The concentration profiles predicted by the diffusion-kinetic model The proton concentrations are the main factor that influence the extraction rate. In the upper section of the column, the extraction rate decreased dramatically with the decrease in pH. Within 0.2 m from the top of the column, the variation of pH from 3.5 to 1.85 results in the extraction rate decreasing 4.2 times, and then both the pH value and the extraction rate decrease slowly. If the aqueous pH is less than 1.8, the extraction rate will be very slow. Based on the ratio of mass transfer to total resistance of the extraction process, the extraction rate is in the diffusion-kinetic regime for the ZnSO  specific interfacial area, m specific area of packed bed, m concentration of species kinetic model parameter in Eqs. constant in Eq. Sauter mean diameter of the organic phase drops, mm packing diameter, mm diffusivity of species voidage of the packed bed axial dispersion coefficient, m ionic strength, kmol/m individual mass transfer coefficient of species forward reaction rate constant of Eq. forward reaction rate constant of Eq. equilibrium constant, (mol/m overall rate efficiency for extraction defined by Eq. stoichiometric constant in Eq. ratio of mass transfer to total resistance reaction rate, mol/m superficial velocity in column, m/s characteristic velocity, m/s distance along column, m viscosity, cp density, kg/m hold-up of organic phase sphericity of packing interfacial continuous or aqueous phase dispersed or organic phase proton phase k D2EHPA monomer D2EHPA–zinc ion complex , ZnR inlet to column outlet from column The authors wish to thank the ARC funded Particulate Fluids Processing Centre at The University of Melbourne and the Chinese Scholarship Council for financial support, Tsinghua University, China for the SMR and Ernest H. Gutsa for the ICP analysis.