A combined quaternary ammonium salt was used as a collector for the flotation of quartz. It shows better selectivity and collectability than dodecyl amine chloride and cetyl trimethylammonium bromide for the flotation of quartz from magnetite and specularite, but the quebracho should be used in the flotation separation of quartz from specularite. By the measurement of zeta potentials, contact angles, and adsorption of the combined quaternary ammonium salt, the results show that the combined quaternary ammonium salt is preferred to adsorb on the surface of quartz, changes its zeta potentials and contact angles, and increases its hydrophobicity. The results of FTIR show that the combined quaternary ammonium salt adsorbs on the quartz surface in physical adsorption with no new products.The methods presently used in the industrial flotation of iron ores are direct flotation (where iron minerals are the froth product) and reverse flotation (where quartz is the froth product). There are reverse anionic and cationic flotations for the removal of silicated gangues from iron ore ( The recovery of iron from low-grade (31.6% Fe) Muro iron ore was investigated using reverse anionic flotation of quartz. The optimum results were obtained around pH 10 and 11, and cassava starch was superior to dextrin in depressing iron oxides. Investigating the effect of calcium ions on the activation and flotation of quartz with oleic acid revealed that a calcium ion concentration of 50–100 ppm was optimum ( Magnetite and hematite flotability are always lower than that of quartz under the same physico-chemical conditions. Decyletheramine is the main collector for quartz, and starch is the depressor for the iron minerals in the reverse cationic flotation, up to pH A concentrate containing 93.0% Al There are similar problems such as poor selectivity, cohesive bubble, and lower collectability at low temperature for using dodecylamine. The objective of this study was to find a new cationic collector with better selectivity and collectability than alkyl amine to complete the selectivity flotation of silica from iron ore. The pure quartz sample was obtained from Xinjiang Keketuohai Rare Metal Mine, and the magnetite and specularite samples were obtained from GongChangLing Iron Mine of AnShan steel company and NanFen Iron Mine, respectively. The samples were crushed, ground, and wet-sieved to obtain the − The C Using the free sessile drop method, contact angles on quartz, magnetite, and specularite samples were measured both in distilled water and 10 Zeta potentials were determined using Brookhaven Zeta plus zeta meter (USA). The mineral samples were ground to 0–5 μm in an agate mortar. The suspensions containing solids 0.05% (mass fraction) were conditioned in a beaker for 15 min and pH was measured at room temperature (22 °C). The micro-flotation tests were done using a XFG-type laboratory flotation machine with 30 ml of cell. Distilled water and 5 g of samples were used, and the pulp was stirred for 1 min with pH regulator and 2 min with collectors, and the flotation time was 3 min. The flotation products were filtrated, dried, and weighed for mineral recovery calculation. The flotation separation of mixtures was also carried out, and the flotation products were subjected to a chemical analysis for the determination of the content of total Fe and SiO Adsorptions of the combined quaternary ammonium salt (CS-22) on quartz, magnetite, and specularite were measured under various conditions of solution pH (2–12) and different concentrations of CS-22 (10 A single beam Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrophotometer Nicolet instrument was used to determine the products on the quartz after the adsorption of CS-22. The quartz sample was ground to − Dodecylamine chloride, cetyl trimethylammonium bromide, and CS-22 were used with the concentration 1 Dodecylamine chloride shows the same selectivity for the flotation separation of quartz from magnetite and specularite in the pH range of 6–12, and recovery of magnetite and specularite is closely 40%–60%, and the recovery of quartz is above 85% (see Cetyl trimethylammonium bromide shows higher selectivity than dodecyl amine chloride and CS-22 (see The results in In order to remove quartz from magnetite and specularite in the natural pH CS-22 was also used as a collector for the flotation separation of mixtures of quartz, magnetite, and specularite. The mixtures were prepared in different ratios between quartz and magnetite or specularite, and the additional parameters on flotation tests are also given in According to the results of micro-flotation tests, it is possible to use CS-22 as collector for the separation of quartz from magnetite by reverse cationic flotation, but it is difficult to complete the separation of quartz from specularite. So the quebracho, which obtained from NeiMeng in China, was used as the depressant of specularite. The results in The zeta potentials of the three minerals both in distilled water and 1 The value of negative charges on the surface of three minerals decreased in the presence of CS-22 in the pH range of 2–12 (see The effects of pH on contact angles of three minerals both in distilled water and 1 From The adsorption of CS-22 on the surface of quartz, magnetite, and specularite was measured by titrating the residual concentration of CS-22 in pulp. The results are given in The adsorption of CS-22 on the surface of three minerals increased with increasing pH. The adsorption of CS-22 on quartz is about 40–50 mg/g in the pH range of 4–12, but the adsorption of CS-22 on magnetite and specularite is under 20 mg/g (see It can be found that CS-22 is preferred to adsorb on the quartz surface from the measurements above. So the FTIR spectroscopy was also used to determine the products on the quartz surface after acting with CS-22, and the results are shown in From  CS-22 is a suitable collector for the flotation of quartz from magnetite and specularite than dodecylamine chloride and cetyl trimethylammonium bromide. The flotation of quartz from magnetite can be completed by using CS-22 only, but the quebracho should be used as a depressant in the flotation separation of quartz from specularite. CS-22 is preferred to adsorb on the surface of quartz, changes its zeta potentials and contact angles, and increases its hydrophobicity. The results of FTIR show that CS-22 adsorbs on the quartz surface in physical adsorption because there are no new products produced.