The ITER and DEMO projects are developing new Test Blanket Modules (TBM), where the Pb–Li alloy plays a key role in the new commercial fusion reactors functionality. The Breeding Blanket (BB) has to perform several functions which are essential for the reactor operation. The HCLL TBM is one of the Breeding Blanket concepts to be tested in ITER. It is cooled by He and uses the eutectic liquid metal LLE (Lithium–Lead Eutectic) as breeder material (enriched at 90% in 6Li).
                  Pb–Li eutectic alloy has no known uses outside of fusion technology, so the available databases of this material are currently incomplete. It is very important, within the material specifications, to have a complete characterization in order to define their chemical and physical properties, because any variation in the alloy composition has significant consequences in their behaviour, and therefore in their regenerative function inside the blanket.
                  The chemical characterization methodology developed and presented in this paper (useful for both Pb–Li alloys as any Pb alloy) is a key tool that allows performing standard quality control procedures for base material and/or monitoring the alloy during the reactor operation. This report provides a procedure to perform a wide material chemical characterization, assessing the concentrations of major elements, as well as a review of trace level elements that can be found both in the eutectic alloy and in starting materials. In this determination plays an important role the ICP-MS technique because, as a highly sensitive technique, allows very low detection limits.Nuclear fusion by magnetic confinement is considered a scientifically viable option for obtaining energy in a safe and inexhaustible way. The ITER project and its successor DEMO aim to develop economically competitive fusion reactor. One of the main technological challenges is the selection, development and characterization of both structural materials and the first wall, as the blanket components (Test Blanket Modules, TBM) capable of ensuring self-sufficiency of It can be described different TBMs types depending on the materials used. In ITER, European Union will install and test two TBMs types HCLL (Helium-cooled lithium–lead), it is cooled by He and uses the eutectic liquid metal LLE (Liquid Lead Eutectic) as a HCPB (Helium-cooled pebble bed), it is cooled by He and uses a ceramic solid (Li In the concept of HCLL BB, lithium–lead alloy plays a key role in the development and operation of future commercial fusion reactor. As liquid metal, it is necessary to highlight some of its advantages such as their immunity to radiation damage, their potential for self-sufficiency of Therefore, it can be said that establishment the exact Li-title and allowable impurities limits were at that time two of the main topics of the material's R&D. These characteristics should be established according to a nuclear-like material Quality Assurance (QA) requirements (ISO_3131/- 1,/-5, Light Metals and light alloying metal: methods for processing and treatment) and should take into consideration constitutive and compositional characteristics. Constitutive characterization refers mainly to the exact Li-title and control of structural Li micro-segregation. Li content is a constitutive specification impacting on the structural material properties and not compositional one. Compositional characterization emphasizes the content of impurities and their influence on physical and mechanical alloys properties. Given that some of the key material properties (e.g. tritium solubility in lead–lithium) can largely change through material deviations (e.g. Li aggregation or Li in excess in an supposed eutectic), characterization should be carried out according to QA requirements. Nowadays contract QA requirements from NET/EFDA to manufacturers were really basic in terms of specifications (approximate Li title, impurity levels, melting point and latent vapor) without other key database singular properties related with a high QA eutectic. In fact, the material specifications (assumed as possible industrial material characteristic) were proposed by the manufacturers when delivering the ingots. Furthermore, the EU (NET or EFDA) never generated a full material specification for lead–lithium. In the same way than manufacturing, the characterization routes of the material are not yet fully standardized. As example, most part of database measurements has been produced under unknown homologation conditions. The situation is really diverse for database entries. As mentioned above, for the fusion technology uses of LLE, the accurate determination of the eutectic point is a must. First studies to determine it were performed in 1927 by Czochralski et al. Regarding the impurities in the LLE alloy, there are no studies on any of the materials manufactured by Métaux-Spéciaux, Jost-Hinrich Stachov Metalhandel and the Institute of Physics, University of Lithuania (IPUL). One of the first documents setting out some requirements in terms of maximum allowable content of impurities in the production of eutectic Pb–Li is the EFDA Contract 05/998: “Procurement of the Pb–Li eutectic alloy for EBBTF dedicated facility for neutronics experiment and Annex A. Technical Specification” (see It is therefore necessary to determine the material specifications or requirements in terms of maximum allowable impurities levels, deviations in Li composition and the criteria of homogeneity as for maximum size and aggregate phase distribution of Pb–Li or Li. This will establish quality control systems for both alloy manufacturing and the analysis process and, as mentioned, it will be of great importance for the TBM's technological development. According to foregoing information, the main objective of this work is to develop a standardized quantitative analysis procedure for the determination of the lithium content and the impurity concentration with precision and accuracy. To this end, this paper proposes the use of Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS, considered as one of the most versatile techniques. This technique appears as a convenient method, in particular with enriched Standards with a concentration of 1000 Before proceeding to quantitative analysis, several qualitative analyses of the alloy samples were carried out in order to identify the possible presence of polyatomic interferences due to the matrix. When it was possible, quantification was performed using two isotopes (see Two ICP-MS instruments have been used, both with quadrupole analyzer and electron multiplier as detection system. These instruments are: Mass Spectrometer Perkin Elmer Elan 6000 (Perkin Elmer Sciex). Mass Spectrometer Thermo X Series II (ThermoFisher Scientific). It incorporates a collision cell (CTC) with kinetic energies discrimination (KED) and mass discrimination (NKED) modes. The CTC has been used for Fe determination. With these measurement conditions, procedure blanks were quantified, in order to determinate the detection limits of the elements (LOD).  The limit of detection achieved with this technique was excellent because the impurities concentrations were above. The 11 alloy samples studied have been obtained in the Department of Materials Science and Metallurgical Engineering from the Universidad Complutense de Madrid (UCM). Samples from Group I to V (PbLi 0 to PbLi 10) were obtained by remelting from an alloy manufactured by the Institute of Physics of the University of Latvia (IPUL). During the process parameters were varied such as shielding gas, crucible, temperature and fusion time (assay from PbLi 0 to PbLi 5) and some assays (PbLi 6–PbLi 10) have added salt eutectic LiCl/KCl. The sample LiPb (Group VI) was manufactured from pure lead and lithium and not by remelting the ingot IPUL as in the other cases. For alloys manufacturing a fusion reactor has been design constructed according to preliminary surveys made by several authors. Two cuts of each sample were selected for the study: one in the central inner section (C) and another in a lateral outer section (L). In order to remove surface contaminations due to handling, each sample was introduced separately in acetone, ultrasonicated for 5 Using the proposed method, Li content was determined in a solution aliquot. Results obtained are shown below ( This technique has the ability to use several calibration methods: external calibration and standard additions. In this work external calibration and internal standard has been applied. The    Fe analysis was performed using the collision cell (mode mass discrimination CCT-NKED) to eliminate potential isobaric interferences due to polyatomic ions ( A rapid analytical procedure for chemical characterization of LLE, based on the use of ICP-MS, has been established. This technique allows to perform both the constitutive (Li title) as the compositional characterization (minority and trace elements) of the eutectic alloy. This should allow monitoring the quality and composition of any alloy produced. Moreover, the proposed methodology can be used to measure the purity of the materials before the melting/mixing process and exclude unexpected results. The procedure developed improved detection limits by about an order of magnitude to those reported in previous studies of this material, carried out with instrumental analytical techniques such as ICP-OES and GFAAS The key steps of analysis, sample treatment and instrumental analysis are fast so that, the proposed procedure can be used to establish quality control in manufacturing this alloy bound for the fusion reactor and providing for the need of several tons. Finally, to the determination of impurities linked to both, Li and Pb, can be exploited for constitutive homogeneity assessments in order to perform the quality control of final product and to select and/or optimize the alloying method.