Solvent extraction (SX) of Zr(IV) from low acidic chloride solutions has been carried out with LIX 84-IC (2-hydroxy-5-nonylacetophenoneoxime) as an extractant. The extraction mechanism varies with acid concentration. At low acid (<1 M), it follows ion exchange type mechanism: MO(aq)
                     2++2 HA(org)↔MOA2(org)+2H(aq)
                     + where, M=Zr(IV); HA=LIX 84-IC. Plots of log D vs. log [H+] gave a straight line with a negative slope of 1.7, indicating the exchange of two moles of hydrogen ions and log D vs. log [extractant], M were linear with slope 1.7, indicating the association of two moles of extractant with the extracted metal species. With the addition of sodium salts, the percentage extraction of metal follows the order Na2SO4>NaSCN>NaNO3>NaCl. Stripping of metal from the loaded organic (L.O) with HCl, H2SO4 and extraction behavior of associated metals such as Hf, Ti, Al, Fe was studied.Zirconium and hafnium co-exist in nature, but they have opposite nuclear characteristics. Thus, they have to be separated prior to their transformation into pure metals. Continuous efforts are made to develop new extractants for the extraction and possible separation of Zr and Hf. LIX extractants are designed specifically for the selective extraction of copper from dilute copper dump leach liquors by solvent extraction (SX) The concentration of Zr(IV) and Hf(IV) in the aqueous phase was determined by the xylenol orange (XO) method Equal volumes of the aqueous and organic phases containing desired concentrations of metal and extractant were equilibrated for 30 min in shake flasks at room temperature (30±1 °C) excepting those involving temperature effect. Preliminary experiments on the kinetics of metal extraction showed that equilibrium was achieved in a <20 min contact. The concentration of the metal in the organic phase was calculated from the mass balance after aqueous analysis. When required, the metal concentration in the organic phase was determined by stripping a number of times with an aliquot of 5 M H The extraction equilibrium of Zr(IV) from hydrochloric acid solutions with LIX 84-IC as an extractant may be represented as: The extraction of zirconium(IV) with LIX 84-IC (0.1 M) as a function of HCl concentration decreases with increasing aqueous acidity up to 1 M and above this concentration zirconium extraction increases The effect of background salts such as NaCl, Na The effect of various diluents on the extraction of Zr (IV) was also investigated using the same solutions. The results clearly demonstrated that the extraction of Zr(IV) varies with the nature of diluent and decreases in the order: kerosene ( A variation of temperature in the range of 303–333 K (±1°) increases the extraction of Zr(IV) from 49% to 90% and increases the stripping of Zr(IV) from the loaded organic from 28% to 78%. The calculated values of Δ°H from the Arrhenius plots were −14.6 and −14.2 kcal mol Loading capacity of 0.1 M LIX 84-IC was tested by contacting repeatedly 10 mL of extractant with the same volume of aqueous containing 0.00025 M of Zr(IV) and 0.01 M HCl. After equilibration, the phases were separated and analysed zirconium content in the aqueous phase. The amount of zirconium transferred into the organic phase in each contact was calculated by difference and the cumulative concentration of zirconium in the organic phase after each stage of contact was determined. After five contacts, the loaded extractant concentration was 75.2 mg L  The experimental data of the three synergistic systems are presented in The extraction behavior of hafnium(IV), aluminium(III), titanium(IV) and iron (III) (0.001 M each) has been investigated as a function of HCl concentration using 0.1 M LIX 84-IC in kerosene as an extractant and the results are presented in Survey of literature revealed that LIX 84-IC has not been exploited for the extraction of zirconium. The present study on solvent extraction of Zr(IV) from acidic chloride solutions by LIX 84-IC revealed the transfer of metal follows cation exchange mechanism at low acid concentrations and a solvation or ion-pairing mechanism at >1 M acid. Variation of The authors express thanks to the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MOEF), New Delhi, India for the financial support. Sincere thanks to Dr. David Muir, Adjunct Professor, Parker Centre/CSIRO Minerals, Western Australia for his valuable suggestions on the manuscript. Thanks are also due to Cognis for LIX 84-IC and Cytec Canada for Cyanex 272 free samples. LIX® is a registered trademark of Cognis.