The present research investigates the effect of aluminum ions distribution on the removal of aluminum from rare earth solutions using saponified naphthenic acid. The effect of extraction type on the extraction rate of aluminum and rare earth was studied and the results indicated that aluminum influences the purity of rare earth seriously. For the removal of aluminum, the distribution fractions of aluminum ions and hydroxyl polymeric aluminum ions at different pH value at 0.15mol/L initial aluminum concentration were calculated by MATLAB software. The plot of distribution fraction of aluminum ions and hydroxyl polymeric aluminum ions with pH value are obtained. Based on these, the effect of pH value and saponification value on the extraction of aluminum and rare earth were studied. The results show that the extraction rate of aluminum was highest at pH value 3.0 at initial aluminum concentration 0.15mol/L in the absence of emulsification. This is consistent with the distribution of aluminum ions and hydroxyl polymeric aluminum ions. For the solutions containing low aluminum concentration, it is easy to separate aluminum from rare earth at 0.3–0.5 saponification value at pH value 3.Rare earth elements (REEs) as the vitamin of modern industry, have been widely used in various industries such as hybridcars, displays, nuclear energy applications and super conductors and so on In China, the main commercially significant rare earth sources, such as carbonate-based bastnasite and phosphate-based monazite, become limited, so the research focus shifted on the ion-adsorption rare earth ores as an alternative source. This source is mainly distributed in southern China, such as Jiangxi, Fujian, Yunnan, Hunan, Guangdong and Guangxi provinces. These rare earth ores grades are low (0.05–0.5 Clay minerals are part of the phyllosilicate class. According to soil aluminum sequential extraction method Solvent extraction method is mainstream for separating rare earth from impurities. Xiao et al. (2013) investigated the preparation of magnesium bicarbonate as a novel saponifier with the presence of At present, 2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid mono-2-ethylhexyl (P507) and naphthenic acid are the most widely used extractants in rare earth extraction process. Because of difficult stripping of rare earth from the organic phase and emulsion phenomenon in the extraction process caused by high pH values, 2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid mono-2-ethylhexyl (P507) is not chosen. Moreover, due to easy stripping, low acidity and low cost, the saponified naphthenic acid is used in this study. To date, the study on the effect of aluminum ions distribution on the removal of aluminum from rare earth solutions using saponified naphthenic acid has rarely been reported. This paper aims to investigate the aluminum ions distribution and the effect of aluminum ions and hydroxyl polymeric aluminum ions on the removal of aluminum. Naphthenic acid was supplied by Jinan Weizhen Chemical Co., Ltd, China. Sulfonated kerosene was supplied by Jiangyin Wuyang Chemical Co., Ltd, China. 2-Octanol (analytical reagent grade) and ammonia water were bought from Sinopharm Chemical Reagents Co., Ltd, China. Rare earth oxides (analytical reagent grade) were bought from Baotou Rare Earth Plant, China. The de-ionized water was used during the experiments. Rare earth solutions were prepared in the laboratory. A certain amount of rare earth oxides was put in the breaker, and then 4 Extractants was prepared in the laboratory. Firstly, 22% naphthenic acid, 18% 2-octanol and 60% sulfonated kerosene were mixed. Then. a certain amount of ammonia water was added into mixed organic phase, and the reaction is expressed as follows. The tests were carried out in a glass separatory funnel. The extractants and rare earth solutions (or aluminum solutions, or mixed solutions) with the phase ratio of 2:1 The rare earth content in the raffinate was determined by EDTA volumetric titration method using hexamethylenetetramine as buffer and xylenol-orange as indicator. The rare earth content in the organic phase was obtained by subtraction method. Aluminum content was analyzed by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy (Perkin Elmer Co., Ltd., OPTIMA 7000DV). The saponification value was determined as follows: a certain volume of saponified naphthenic acid solutions was diluted in a conical flask with 30 In order to prove the influence of aluminum on the extraction of rare earth, the extraction order of both was adjusted. The experiments were carried out at ambient temperature and pressure conditions. 0.15  The experimental data in Section In order to examine the effect of pH value on the separation of rare earth and aluminum, several tests were conducted at different pH values with 0.15  The distribution fractions of aluminum ions and hydroxyl polymeric aluminum ions at different pH value at 0.15  Naphthenic acid is a kind of organic weak acid, so the pH values of extraction of metal ions are usually higher. In general the highest extraction rate of metal ions can be obtained at about hydrolysis pH value. Because the hydrolysis pH value of aluminum is lower than that of rare earth, aluminum will be extracted firstly. However, the hydrolysis pH value of aluminum approximate to that of rare earth and at high rare earth concentration, and thus it is difficult to separate aluminum from rare earth. In order to solve these problems, such as high pH values in the extraction process, emulsification and long standing time, Zhang suggested that naphthenic acid was replaced by chloro-naphthenic acid and found that good separation efficiency of rare earth and aluminum with low concentration could be obtained at about pH In consideration of the aluminum concentration in the actual lixivium, 0.15 In order to investigate the influence of saponification value on the separation of rare earth and aluminum, the tests were conducted at different initial aluminum concentrations at pH value 3 at room temperature. The results are shown in In order to investigate the effect of organic phase/aqueous phase ratio on the separation of rare earth and aluminum, the experiments were carried out at 0.15 The results presented in The present research investigated the influence of aluminum on the separation aluminum and rare earth at different conditions, such as extraction type, pH value and saponification value. It was concluded that the extraction rate of aluminum was highest at pH value 3.0 at initial aluminum concentration 0.15 Aluminum in the solutions exists in the different forms in the different pH range at 0.15 When aluminum ions were extracted by saponified naphthenic acid, This work was financially supported by the Project of