The design of the biocomposites offers the opportunity to create grafting materials with excellent bioactivity, resorbability and improved mechanical properties. In this study, we are concerned with the preparation of calcium pyrophosphate (CPP) and its composites with polymeric matrix to enhance these properties. The fabricated biocomposites were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transformer infrared spectra (FT-IR), thermogravimetric (TGA) analyses and scanning electron microscope with X-ray elemental analysis (SEM-EDAX). The characterization results confirmed homogeneity, interaction and integration between the CPP filler and polymeric matrix. The mechanical properties of biocomposites had enhanced values compared to the original copolymer matrices and were comparable to those of cancellous bone. In vitro test results via calcium and phosphorous ions measurements, showed that the biocomposites had enhanced ability to accelerate the mineralization of calcium phosphate layer on their surfaces. FT-IR and SEM-EDAX post-immersion confirmed that the CPP/polymeric composites containing chitosan or chitosan–gelatin matrix had ability to induce a bone-like apatite layer onto their surfaces. Finally, a novel CPP/polymeric biocomposites have good bioactivity and suitable mechanical properties; therefore, they could be used in bone grafting and tissue engineering applications in future.Recently a great deal of interest has been directed towards creating bioactive ceramic/polymer composites to be used as a bone grafting materials and in tissue engineering applications. Bone grafts have been used to fill bone defects caused by disease or trauma, such as bone fractures, infections, and tumors Therefore, the development of biocomposites with good mechanical properties, excellent bioactivity and biocompatibility similar to natural bone to meet the need of hard tissue repair has been a hot topic for over 30 years Bioresorbable synthetic polymers have attracted increasing attention for their use as tissue engineering scaffolds and as a bone grafting materials in the last 10 years Recently much attention has been given to utilize chitosan in biomedical applications such as space filling implants Gelatin is a soluble protein derived from partially denatured collagen. Attractive properties of gelatin, such as good biocompatibility, low immunogenicity, promotion of cell adhesion and growth, and low cost, make it ideally suitable as a biomaterial for tissue engineering HA is known to exhibit limited osteoconduction and has a slow rate of degradation in physiological solutions because of its chemical stability Preparation of CPP filler powder from burshite powder was performed. The loading of CPP powder onto the polymeric matrix during the copolymerization process containing chitosan and/or chitosan gelatin for improving the bioactivity, biodegradation as well as the mechanical properties was carried out. The characterization of the prepared biocomposites to verify the homogeneity between two matrices, and Calcium hydrogen phosphate dihydrate (burshite) was purchased from (Fluka) Chitosan polymer (C CPP was prepared through the dehydration and decomposition of burshite by heating treatment. Briefly, burshite powder was compacted at 1200 Chitosan (0.15 Fixed weight (1.5 Chitosan polymer (0.075 The phase purity of sintered powder was examined by X-ray diffractometer Diana Corporation (USA) equipped with Co Kα radiation, The composites were tested to determine the effect of polymeric matrix on the mechanical properties of CPP filler. The hardness test was carried out using Zwick 3150 Hardness Tester, Germany. The average value for each test was taken for ten readings to confirm the results. The compressive strength was measured for the prepared composites by using tensile testing machine, Zwick Z010, Germany. The average value for each test was taken for three samples to verify the results. The shape of sample was cylindrical (1 Standard All samples analyzed in triplicate and the experiments were performed three times. Statistical analysis was performed using a The CPP compound is produced under the effect of thermal treatment of burshite powder at 800 The TGA data proved that the destruction of burshite started at about 350 The  FT-IR spectrum of grafted chitosan copolymer sample is shown in After the loading process, for CPP/chitosan composite, all the characteristic bands for CPP powder are still appeared in the spectrum of CPP/chitosan composite such as the sharp peaks of the asymmetrical terminal P–O stretching mode at 1186, 1170, 1157, 1138, 1102, 1086 and 1066 For CPP/chitosan–gelatin composite, the bands of CPP are still appeared in the spectrum of the composite, but they have a lower O.D. compared to the original CPP sample and CPP/chitosan composite sample (   While the CPP/chitosan–gelatin composite had minimum values for W.A % proving low affinity of this composite to water molecules due to the reduction in content of OH as a result of the diminishing content of chitosan at the expense of gelatin polymer. This result confirmed that the CPP/chitosan–gelatin composite had enhanced stability in distilled water compared to CPP/chitosan composite due to it has low content of OH molecules in its structure.   For copolymer, the O.D. of the polymer bands such as OH, C–H, amide group, C–O, C  The grafting, TGA, XRD, and FTIR results confirmed that the prepared composites containing CPP powder into the copolymer matrix containing the grafted chitosan or grafted chitosan–gelatin had enhanced coating from the copolymer matrix onto surface particles. Compressive strength of the CPP/polymeric composites had values comparable to those of cancellous bone. Water absorption property of CPP/chitosan–gelatin composite had high stability compared to CPP/chitosan composite proving low content of OH molecules in its structure resulting the stability of the produced composite.