We report on detailed laboratory experiments designed to illustrate the frictional behavior of granular volcanic debris. The materials include pyroclastic flow debris from Soufrière Hills Volcano, Montserrat, and from Stromboli Volcano, Italy, and lahar deposits from Mount St. Helens. Experiments were conducted in a servo-controlled, double-direct shear apparatus under conditions of displacement-control and with monitored temperature and humidity. The effects of loading velocity, normal stress, grain-size range, and saturation state were examined for normal stresses from 0.75 to 8 MPa. The Soufrière Hills debris was sampled in the field using a 2 mm sieve. Samples from Stromboli and MSH represent the original bulk material. The influence of grain-size and size distribution were examined in detail for the Soufrière Hills material for 1) two narrow size ranges (3–4 ϕ, 0.063–0.125 mm; and 0–1 ϕ, 0.5–1 mm), 2) a wide size range (3–0 ϕ, 0.125–1 mm), and 3) the natural size distribution in the range 0–1 mm. These four data sets show remarkably uniform properties: coefficients of residual internal friction varied from 0.62 to 0.64 and coefficients of peak internal friction varied from 0.66 to 0.69, with zero cohesion in each case. For the natural grain-size distribution, we find a small but clear increase in residual sliding friction with increasing slip velocity in the range 10 to 900 μm/s, i.e. velocity strengthening frictional behavior. For Soufrière Hills pyroclastic material the coefficient of internal friction changes very little when water saturated. The frictional characteristics were remarkably similar for the three volcanoes. For the natural grain-size distributions, the coefficient of residual internal friction ranged from 0.61 to 0.63 and peak internal friction values ranged from 0.65 to 0.66. Pre-loaded and over-compacted materials sheared at reduced normal stress gave peak coefficients as high as 0.80. Our results imply that granular volcanic debris should often fail via stable creep, but may exhibit stick-slip instability under some conditions.Pyroclastic density currents (PDC's) and lahars are two examples of rapid and far-reaching hazards associated with volcanic eruptions. The flow behavior of PDC's and lahars is influenced by inter-particle friction associated with solid particles that come into contact during flow ( Here we present well-constrained experiments ( The control variables used in this analysis: grain-size, saturation state, shearing velocity, and provenance, were chosen in order to explore a wide array of conditions under which granular volcanic material can be expected to fail. Variations in grain size were investigated to understand potential effects of site-source distance. Saturation of the grains was studied to determine if sub-aqueous or rain saturated deposits have different frictional properties than dry deposits. The dependence of frictional strength on shearing rate and transients in rate was studied to investigate whether the volcanic sediment could host unstable sliding. Stromboli volcano has been erupting almost continuously for thousands of years, and is characterized by frequent mild explosive activity typically taking place every 10–20 min ( At MSH, the 18 May 1980 eruption was triggered by a massive landslide, and accompanied by pyroclastic flows, a plinian eruption column, and lahars derived from snowmelt or from fluidized portions of the debris avalanche. The material used in our experiments was collected by BV from a lahar derived from fluidized parts of the debris avalanche. Soufrière Hills Volcano on Montserrat has been erupting recently since 1995. The eruptive behavior of SHV has been dominated by the build-up and failure of andesite lava domes, followed in some circumstances by explosive eruptions ( The mineralogy of the materials recovered from all three locations is roughly similar. The andesite from Soufrière Hills is dominantly plagioclase with some hornblende, and small amounts of pyroxene, oxides, and glass. Material from Mount St. Helens is similar but with more pyroxene, while the deposits from Stromboli are basaltic, dominantly plagioclase and pyroxene. Frictional characteristics may be influenced by the mean grain-size, size distribution, and grain roughness ( All of the material was sieved using stacked sieves of 0.063, 0.125, 0.25, 0.5, and 1 mm mesh size (4, 3, 2, 1, and 0 ϕ). For the Stromboli material a 3.36 mm (− Using the particle size distribution curves we calculate the sorting The grain-size distribution of the Stromboli material most properly fits within the realm of a pyroclastic fall ( Uniform experimental conditions were applied, including magnitudes of normal stresses, and shear rates; with contrasting grain-size ranges. These conditions were applied to determine the principal similarities and differences between the volcanic materials from several sites. Our experiments were run in a servo-controlled biaxial double-direct shear configuration (e.g., Samples were prepared by ringing the side blocks with a 5-mm deep “fence” of cellophane tape, and filling the so-contained area with test material. The block was then placed in a leveling jig and material spread to an even thickness over the block. The two side blocks were adhered to the center block with tape to provide enough mechanical strength for handling during set-up in the testing apparatus. Steel guide plates were then fastened onto the front/back of the sample to prevent loss of material during shear. Copper shims were added to the bottom of the sample to prevent leakage from the bottom during shearing ( In order to maintain a large ratio between the initial layer thickness and the maximum grain-size, which ensures that the layer is matrix supported rather than clast supported, only material smaller than 1 mm was used experimentally. There is a possibility that altering the natural field grain-size distribution to include only those materials smaller than 1 mm could influence the frictional strength of the material. However, the results of this work, and other studies (e.g., Once placed into the testing apparatus, normal and shear stresses were applied by servo-controlled hydraulic rams. Experiments were conducted by first applying the desired normal load (0.75, 2, or 8 MPa); the normal stress was then held constant using servo-control during shear. The center block of the double-direct shear arrangement was driven down through the layers, shearing the granular layers, at a constant velocity (here 10, 100, or 900 μm/s) ( The limits of the normal stresses we used correspond to granular deposits roughly 40–400 m thick. Limitations of the experimental apparatus and the geometry of our configuration prevented us from running tests at lower normal stresses. The mass of the granular layers was measured prior to each experiment, and along with a measured mineral density of the material, the total volume of granular solid material was calculated. Porosity was measured as the difference between the total space enclosing both layers, and the volume of granular solids comprising the layers. Calculated porosity after application of the normal load but before the onset of shear is given in Results from a typical shear experiment are shown in We conducted experiments with a wide variety of grain-size conditions, shear velocities, and material types. The SHV material was chosen for detailed studies of certain parameters and in these cases we used a standard shear velocity of 10 μm/s and material < We conducted experiments on the natural grain-size distribution of SHV material finer than 1 mm; a restricted size range from 0.125 to 1 mm; and two narrow grain-size ranges, one with relatively large grain-size of 0.5 to 1 mm, and a second with a smaller grain-size of 0.063 to 0.125 mm ( These experiments were conducted at a constant shearing velocity of 10 μm/s and normal stresses of 0.75, 2, and 8 MPa. Results were used to determine a Coulomb failure envelope and coefficient of internal friction ( where Coulomb envelopes for our experiments ( These experiments show good reproducibility with the largest difference in shear strength between duplicate runs of the same experimental parameters being ± Pore pressure has a significant effect on the frictional strength of materials ( We conducted saturated experiments using a latex sheath, which was folded around the sample and filled with water at room temperature. The sample was then left to fully saturate for approximately 20 min. The experiment was then run as normal. The Coulomb failure envelopes showing the difference between the dry and saturated materials with natural grain-size range ( Shearing velocity has been shown to have an important effect on the shear strength of materials, particularly for gouges representative of mature faults (e.g., In an effort to limit any influence on frictional strength from a change in grain-size distribution due to grain fracture during shear, a series of experiments was run, each at constant velocity. Shear velocities of 10, 100, and 900 μm/s were used in our experiments. Tests were, once again, conducted on the natural grain-size distribution < To test the possible variation in frictional strength of materials from differing geographic localities, we conducted experiments on pyroclastic material from Stromboli volcano, and lahar material from MSH in addition to the pyroclastic material from SHV. Tests were conducted at 10 μm/s and at normal stresses of 0.75, 2, and 8 MPa. As with the principal suite of experiments conducted on SHV samples, the Stromboli and MSH materials were sieved and only the < The results of our experiments are shown in the form of Coulomb failure envelopes ( As with the experiments on SHV material of variable grain-size, the limited peak strength data available for this suite of experiments suggests little quantifiable difference in the frictional strength of material from the three separate localities. The materials examined in this suite of experiments exhibited classical frictional response ( Also shown in The total work ( where The value d where For our configuration, in which nominal frictional contact area is constant, the term d  For shear of a granular material, with all other factors equal, the material with the widest grain-size range is expected to exhibit the greatest strength ( The current suite of experiments exhibited significant grain fracture at all normal stresses ( Experiments conducted on material from SHV ( Observed increases in shear strength with shear rate are congruent with the general observation that grain fracture is a rate strengthening process ( The relatively small increase in the coefficient of residual internal friction resulting from water saturation indicates that welding of the grains did not occur, which of course is not expected at the temperature and timescales of our experiments. Prior results have indicated time-dependent strengthening, due to welding and contact junction growth with extended hold periods (e.g., A common characteristic of volcanic sediments is that it may weather into clay rich material over time. This is an important consideration with regard to frictional strength because increasing the clay content of a sheared material can dramatically reduce frictional strength ( The behavior exhibited by pre-loaded sediments in our experiments is more or less typical ( Because of the small grain-sizes used in our experiments, the measured coefficients of internal friction, and their evolution with strain rates, are anticipated to be broadly representative of volcanic material in the initial stages of failure. We have not considered the complicating effects of elevated pore pressures, partial saturation, elevated temperature, or grain welding. The initial porosity as measured in our experiments (pre-shear and after applying normal load) has considerable bearing on the presence or absence of a peak in shear strength (e.g., In our tests, peaks in shear strength are commonly observed when initial Experiments conducted at shearing velocities of 10, 100, and 900 mm/s showed a velocity strengthening trend, suggesting that the material would be incapable of hosting unstable stick-slip sliding. In previous work, gouge material collected from the perimeter of a dacite plug at Mount St. Helens showed velocity weakening behavior ( Based on these experiments we conclude the following: Changing the grain-size range of the pyroclastic material tested had only a small effect on the coefficient of residual internal friction. The effect on peak strength also seems small although our test data are few. Possibly this reflects the limited differences between these size ranges with maximum clast size < The saturation of pyroclastic debris recovered from Soufriére Hills results in only a very small increase in the apparent value of internal friction. We cannot exclude the possibility that this effect could result from imperfect initial saturation, or the development of small negative pore fluid pressures with shear induced dilation. The main conclusion is that the coefficient of residual friction for volcanic debris changes very little, if at all, as a result of water saturation. Increasing shear velocity has a small but clear strengthening effect on the coefficient on residual internal friction, which increases with slip velocity from 0.62 at 10 μm/s, to 0.64 at 100 μm/s, 0.65 at 900 μm/s. This result suggests that the tested SHV pyroclastic material is incapable of hosting unstable stick-slip motion unless additional factors are involved. The samples from broadly dispersed geographical regions (SHV, MSH, and Stromboli) and different provenance and mineralogical compositions, exhibit surprisingly uniform residual and peak frictional characteristics. For the normal stress range from 0.75–8 MPa, the coefficients of residual internal friction varied only in the range 0.61–0.63. The peak friction values for pre-loaded materials could be as high as 0.76–0.80, although this topic has been explored only in preliminary fashion. The peak strengths will also vary as a function of relative density, but this topic has not yet been treated adequately with respect to strength tests on these materials. Absolute porosity values do not directly indicate whether a granular material is actually loose or dense. The key information can be obtained only by comparing the porosity of a given material sample with that of the same material in its loosest and densest possible states, as expressed by the term relative density. However we note that the standard procedure for this test may be strongly influenced by the small value of normal load used, in comparison with stresses of geological interest. Thus with the normal loads of 0.75–8 MPa used in our tests, initial relative densities almost invariably exceeded 100%, and yet, despite this indication of very high relative density, strength peaks were not invariably seen in shear tests. These issues are incompletely understood and require further research. This work was funded by NSF grants EAR-0337627, EAR-0196570, and EAR-0345813 (to CJM), and EAR-05-07324 and EAR-04-08709 (to BV). BV wishes to thank colleagues at the Montserrat Volcano Observatory, the US Geological Survey, and the Italian Departimento Protezione Civile Nazionale, for the assistance and helicopter support in carrying out deposit studies and sampling. We thank N.R. Iverson, and J.K. Morgan for the insightful comments, which improved the manuscript. We measured the maximum and minimum density of the experimental materials using ASTM Test Designation D-2049 ( Measurement of the maximum porosity was made by filling a 28.5 mm I.D., 50 mL graduated cylinder with granular material packed in as loose a state as possible. This was accomplished by using a Pyrex funnel with a 4.5 mm diameter opening, and maintaining an approximately 25 mm drop from the end of the funnel to the top of the gently accumulating sediment fill. The mass of the graduated cylinder was measured before and after it was filled with sediment to obtain the sediment mass, and density of the material was calculated for this loosest packed state. Once the minimum density had been calculated, material was compacted using a 27.5 mm diameter weight with a mass of 1014 g fitted on top of the granular material inside of the graduated cylinder. This mass corresponds to a pressure of approximately 2.4 lbf/in Relative density, where Table A1 Measurements of the maximum/minimum dry density, maximum/minimum porosity, maximum/minimum void ratio, made using a test similar to