Fracture parameters including fracture orientation and fracture density, work as significant information in the fields of the engineering and exploration geophysics. However, it nowadays still remains challenging to concisely and stably estimate those fracture parameters from seismic data due to the limited signal to noise ratio of the azimuthal seismic data. A method based on azimuthally anisotropic elastic impedance (azimuthal AEI) in terms of Fourier series variation with azimuth is proposed to characterize the fracture distribution. Firstly, the azimuthal AEI equation in terms of truncated Fourier series is derived to reduce the number of unknown parameters in the fracture parameters estimation. In addition, KL (Karhunen-Loève) transformation is used to extract the primary feature of reflection amplitude variation with azimuth and weaken the random noise for azimuthal pre-stack seismic data. And then the azimuthal AEI is estimated from KL transformed azimuthal pre-stack seismic data with the constrained sparse spike inversion method. The fracture orientation without 90° ambiguity can be estimated by an innovative azimuthal AEI equation incorporating the azimuthal AEI equation in terms of Fourier series and the fracture orientation prior information. And the biased estimate for the anisotropic gradient of the azimuthal AEI can be estimated from the second order Fourier coefficient to forecast the fracture density. Besides, we introduce a more convenient way, which is employing the standard deviation of the nature logarithm (SDNL) of the azimuthal AEI in the azimuth domain, than that based on the anisotropic gradient in the fracture density estimation. The synthetic cases demonstrate the rationality and robustness of the innovative primary wave azimuthal AEI equation and the fracture parameters estimation method even with sparse 30° sampling interval in the azimuth. A field data example demonstrates that the proposed method is effective and efficient in the fracture parameters prediction.Fracture parameters including fracture orientation and fracture density estimation play a critical role in civil engineering ( The VFI anisotropy is commonly orthorhombic, and it will be reduced to the HTI (transverse anisotropy with horizontal symmetry axis) for the rotationally symmetric fracture. One approach is utilizing the ellipse fitting theory ( The other approach is to directly estimate the fracture density and orientation using seismic reflection amplitude variation with azimuth inversion. Fortunately, compared to the reflection coefficient which is an interface property, the elastic impedance, a stratum property, can be more robustly inverted from the seismic data (  For the VFI media, the weights named Fourier coefficients (FCs) are The terms describing the AVA equation A VFI media model, as is shown in According to the definition of the elastic impedance proposed by By substituting Then taking the logarithm on both sides of equation In this case, the symbol The terms, which describe equation In practice, it is more advantageous for calculating the EIFCs to write the Fourier series as With the K regularly sampled data in the azimuth, the coefficients Likewise, the coefficients In It is the simplest case to regularly sample data in the azimuth. In fact, the method to calculate the EIFCs relies on the geometry. Fracture media can be considered as weak anisotropic media, thus the fracture information contained in the seismic data is relatively weak. It must be possible that the fracture information is confused in seismic data with large noise. K-L transformation is used to extract information about the seismic data variation with azimuth and attenuate noise for the VFI case. The formula of transformation is expressed as From equation A vertical fracture model whose magnitude of the n = 2 EIFC is The azimuthal AEI in any incident angle and azimuth can be inverted with the constrained sparse spike inversion method introduced by Substituting the inverted azimuthal AEI at the specific incident angle Since the coefficients of equation By neglecting the terms containing At a fixed incident angle In equation According to the Hudson theory ( A VFI model with rotationally invariant fractures is designed to demonstrate the proposed method reasonable and the parameters of the background media are displayed in With the proposed method, the anisotropic gradient and SDNL of the azimuthal AEI, fracture orientation can be estimated as respectively shown in The proposed method is used to process field data whose azimuthally sampling interval is 30°, including six partial azimuth stacked data. The azimuths of the six stacked data are severally from 0 to 30°, from 31 to 60°, from 61 to 90°, from 91 to 120°, from 121 to 150°, from 151 to 180°. For each azimuth, the seismic data whose angle of incidence is 24° is used to estimate the fracture parameters in the field. The We confirmed that the azimuthal AEI equation can be expressed in terms of the truncated Fourier series and its precision satisfies the requirement of seismic exploration. KL transformation is proven effective to extract main variation of the reflection amplitude with variation of azimuth generated by VFI anisotropy and attenuate random noise. Hence, the fracture parameters estimation method was introduced with the novel objective equation incorporating the azimuthal AEI equation in the form of Fourier series and the prior fracture orientation from the well log and geology in the paper. The fracture orientation could be estimated without 90° ambiguity. And the anisotropic gradient of the azimuthal AEI implied in the second order EIFC denoted fracture density. Besides, the SDNL of the azimuthal AEI in the azimuth domain, which was deduced as the function of fracture density, was a more concise indicator to predict fracture density. Synthetic and field data case studies demonstrated the rationality and stability of the fracture parameters estimation method for VFI anisotropy proposed in this study. However, this presented method cannot be applied to the more complicated anisotropy for fracture parameters estimation. In the future, the method proposed in this study can be suitable to the case of an aligned set of the vertical fracture in the transversely isotropic rocks with the vertical symmetry by slightly modifying the EIFCs. This work was supported by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at  The zeroth weight, In this case, In