This paper describes the role of vein structures to better understand and interpret the origin of mineral liberation based on random masking simulation. An HQ half core from a copper porphyry deposit was selected and was cut into semicircular slabs of 1cm thickness. Selected slabs were polished for MLA analysis. Classified MLA images were then subjected to image processing to identify and separate the veins from the disseminated grains. Random masking was applied on the images to simulate breakage and generate progeny particles from which liberation of sulphides was determined. Results of the simulation provided an indication of the contribution of veins in the liberation of minerals at coarser size and the increased degree of liberation. The work in this paper also suggests cutting drill cores and using slabs for texture analysis provides more intact textural features of the ore both at micro and mesoscale. Particularly, if veins occur to some extent, cutting the drill core into slabs is more suitable to preserve this structure providing a better understanding of the origin of mineral liberation.Ore texture displays the fundamental properties that will determine the ease of mineral liberation and the subsequent mineral separation ( Typical approach of sample preparation for quantitative texture analysis is by crushing the particles and choosing the coarse particle size fractions that approximately represent the unbroken texture of the valuable minerals ( This paper presents an alternative approach of texture characterisation to better understand the origin of liberation. This includes cutting the drill core into semicircular slabs and investigating the ore mesotexture. The paper was focused on the contribution of vein-hosted minerals to liberation based on random masking simulation. An HQ diamond drill core from a copper porphyry deposit with evident veining structure was selected as a sample. The drill core was cut into two along the axis. The half core was further cut to create semicircular slabs approximately 1 An example of original classified MLA image of a slab is shown in Random masking of the images was performed in eCognition Developer 64, a commercially available image processing software ( Comparison of the simulated liberation of sulphides from the different structures is shown in The table above also shows the grade of sulphides in the images with veins having the lowest grade. Despite that, it still yielded the highest degree of liberation. This provided an indication of the extent of the influence of veins on the ease of liberation. The estimated relative contributions of vein-hosted and disseminated grains in the overall liberation of sulphides (the liberation in the combined veins and disseminated grains) are shown in The two main outcomes of the simulation work carried out on the slabs are the following: The liberation of sulphides hosted in veins was predicted to be higher than the disseminated sulphide grains at all simulated fragmentation sizes. It could then be inferred that veins could contribute to an increased degree of mineral liberation. The liberation of sulphides hosted in veins started to appear at a coarse particle size. This suggests that veins could contribute to the occurrence of liberated minerals at coarser size. The results presented in this paper were based on simulated breakage by random masking of classified MLA images of a semicircular slab. Physical breakage of the slab must be carried out to validate the results. However, the simulation results showed the potential influence of the presence of veins on the ease of mineral liberation. Earlier simulation work of  Another important outcome from the simulation work is an alternative method of preparing drill cores for texture characterisation. Instead of crushing, it is proposed to cut the drill core and use slabs to characterise and quantify the ore texture. This provides more intact textural features of the ore both at microscale and mesoscale. Using slabs is particularly helpful in texture analysis when veins are dominant in the ore body. It aids in better understanding and interpretation of the origin of liberation. Logging of vein structures is therefore critical and should include not only the type of vein but also the extent of veining. Since veins can be identified from drill cores without the aid of sophisticated tools, it provides a rapid, cost-effective means of obtaining textural information relevant to mineral processing. And this can be acquired for the entire ore body therefore beneficial during geometallurgical characterisation. The use of veins as proxy to liberation could improve prediction of separation behaviour leading to an improved geometallurgical characterisation of separation performance of the ore body. The work of The simulation work performed on the slabs that were cut from a drill core shows the influence of mesotextures particularly the presence of veins on mineral liberation. The simulation result suggests that the presence of veins could influence the ease of mineral liberation in that it could contribute to an increased degree of liberation and could allow liberation to start at a coarser particle size. The work also showed that cutting the drill cores into slabs as an alternative method for drill core preparation could provide a more intact texture of the ore both at micro and mesoscale. Particularly, if veins occur to some extent, cutting the drill core into slabs is more suitable to preserve this structure. Hence, it could aid to better understand and interpret the origin of mineral liberation. Physical breakage of the slabs is recommended to validate the simulation results. The authors would like to express their gratitude to Dr. Cathy Evans, staff of MLA facility and pilot plant at the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre (JKMRC). They would also like to thank Xstrata Copper (now Glencore) for funding the project and AusAID (now DFAT) for financial assistance.