The chopping or mincing of meat and fat with curing salt and/or sugar together with spices, herbs and other plant material, followed by the stuffing of such mixture to form a ‘sausage’ that is left to dry is a practice dating back to centuries before the Common Era. Since these early beginnings, variations in ‘meat’ species, subjected to various degrees of mixing with other ingredients or additives and subjected to various temperature and humidity conditions have yielded at least 56 different ‘fermented meat products’. The shelf-life and safety, as well as the specific flavour, texture and colour of these products are determined by combinations, varying in relative importance, of acidulation brought about by lactic acid production and the lowering of water activity ( The simultaneous or successive combination of these processes is generally referred to as ‘fermentation’. The presence of salt, the lowering of Considerable recent research efforts have generated more detailed knowledge of the interrelated microbiological, biochemical, chemical and physical changes taking place during ‘meat fermentation’, emphasizing two major and apparently contrasting developments: The need for ‘starter bacteria’, well-characterized for acidifying, antioxidant and amino acid-degrading acidities. The importance of both proteolytic and lipolytic enzymes, present in the meat and/or fat raw materials used. The many intricate interactions between microorganisms, meat and fat enzymes and processing conditions determining sausage quality encompass more than the concept of fermentation and are therefore better referred to as ‘metabolism’. Industrial production, mainly in continental Europe, from where the technology was transferred to the United States and Australia, has narrowed down the many types of fermented meat products. These are classified in several ways, based on moisture content, moisture/protein ratio, weight loss, water activities, surface treatment, texture, fat particle size, and other parameters. The industrial production period, referred to as ‘ripening’, is separated into two consecutive periods: fermentation followed by drying. Technologies differ mainly in the length of the total ripening period in relation to that of the fermentation period. High initial rates of lactic acid production resulting from the use of lactic acid-producing ‘starters’ and/or high temperatures during fermentation are associated with short drying periods. The drying period may even be omitted, as in ‘summer sausage’, prevalent in parts of the United States and fermented at 38 °C. In Europe, a major distinction can be made between so-called Northern type and Mediterranean type sausages. Northern type sausages (NS) contain both beef and pork as raw meats, are ripened for short periods (up to 3 weeks) and are usually subjected to smoking. In these sausages, shelf-life and safety are mainly due to the fast drop to acid pH (<5.0 after 3 days) at temperatures >20 °C and to smoking rather than to drying. Mediterranean sausages (MS) mostly use only pork and are ripened for longer periods (several weeks or even months) and smoke is not so typically applied. Acidulation is slower, takes place at lower temperatures (<20 °C) and ends at higher pH values (>5 after 3 days). Shelf-life is mostly due to drying and reduced water activity. Chilled meats (frozen meat tempered to ca. −4 °C) and frozen (≤18 °C) porcine fats after removal of rind (e.g. lard) are most often mixed in a ratio of 2:1. Lard and sausage meat (ham trimmings, jowls and throats as well as shoulders and bellies) make up 10% and 20%, respectively, of the pork carcass. They are selected mainly on the basis of bacteriological quality, visual fat content, pH (<5.8) and unsaturation (<12% polyunsaturated fatty acids in fat) as well as oxidation status (minimal peroxide value) of the fat. Widely used additives (range of incorporation) are salt (2–4%) containing sodium nitrite (NaNO Raw materials and additives, including microbial starters, are added for mixing and chopping, often under vacuum, in a mincer or ‘cutter’. The cutter consists of a set of knives that rotate rapidly (1–3 × 10 In most industrial processes, the batter is immediately stuffed under vacuum into natural, semisynthetic (collagen) or synthetic casings that are permeable to water and air, and both ends are clipped. The sausage diameter (e.g. 2–15 cm) is related positively to the relative importance of fermentation (pH) versus drying ( The sausages are hung in racks and placed in natural or, mostly, air-conditioned fermentation chambers at high relative humidity (RH). Sausages are usually left for ripening in two consecutive stages: fermentation for bacterial growth and, mostly after transfer to another chamber, drying for development of sensory characteristics. Temperature–RH–time combinations during fermentation differ between Northern (20–26 °C/50–90%/62 h) and Mediterranean (5–24 °C/10–90%/100 h) types, whereas drying is carried out under similar conditions (14 °C/78%) for anywhere between 2 weeks (Northern) and several months (Mediterranean). It is recommended to have air RH values not more than 0.10 points below the associated At the end of the fermentation period, Northern type sausages are subjected to smoke, generated by controlled combustion of oak wood (300–600 °C) to minimize the production of polycyclic hydrocarbons. Smoke contributes to antimicrobial and antioxidant effects, besides generating specific flavour and colour components. Smoking is not used in the production of Mediterranean type sausages, except for Hungarian and Rumanian products, where a light smoking period precedes fermentation. Traditionally, fermentation was based on the selective development of the flora contaminating raw materials, sometimes reinforced with ‘back-slopping’, the addition of a previously successfully ripened fermented sausage. Such practices, however, may induce great variability in the ripening changes determining safety and quality. The need for standardized processing and safety assurance led in the 1950s, first in the United States and later in Europe, to the commercial use of starter cultures to ensure rapid acidulation. Although excellent fermented sausages can be produced without starter cultures, the majority of fermented sausage produced nowadays makes use of ‘combined’ starter inoculation (1–2×10 The major role of these starters is a fast and reproducible production of lactic acid, mainly from added glucose. The relative importance of homofermentative and heterofermentative pathways of lactic acid production is dependent on the species used, as well as on the processing conditions, and determines production of other compounds such as acetic acid, hydrogen peroxide and acetoin. The lag time and rate of lactic acid production should be adapted to the fermentation temperatures used: This group is mainly used for flavour development, with  Some typical Mediterranean type sausages have moulds on the surface, usually strains of It is now clear that the drop in pH during fermentation is brought about by the interaction of both lactic acid and ammonia formed with the salt-solubilized and partly hydrolysed muscle proteins. Lactic acid bacteria convert mainly added but also endogenous carbohydrate, as well as amino acids and lipid-derived glycerol, to lactic acid. A practically equimolar mixture of both Before colour and texture, flavour is usually the major sensory quality characteristic that convinces the consumer to buy the product again. During the combined, consecutive and interactive changes that take place during fermentation and drying, the specific colour, texture and flavour characteristices of the different sausage types are developed. The cured meat colour is due to the formation of nitrosylmyoglobin in a complex set of reactions involving the formation of nitrogen oxide (NO) and its subsequent reaction with myoglobin and metmyglobin, producing red and greyish colours respectively. The subsequent acid-induced denaturation of the globin moiety ensures the stable red colour. Northern and Mediterranean processing differ in the use of nitrite and nitrate, respectively. Nitrite initially acts as a potent oxidant, producing nitrosylated metmyoglobin upon mixing, which has subsequently to be reduced during drying. The rates of oxidation and subsequent reduction are determined by a complex set of factors including the level of nitrite used, the rate of pH drop, the use of antioxidant additives, the antioxidant activities of the starters used and the level of reducing compounds present in the meat. With nitrate, formation of the nitrosylating NO requires the reduction of added nitrate by Micrococcaceae, bacteria inhibited by pH values below 5.2. This hampers their use in Northern processing technology. Chopping solubilizes salt-soluble muscle proteins (mainly myosin) which, upon the drop in pH during fermentation, coagulate and form a gel surrounding fat and meat particles that is stabilized during drying. Acidulation during fermentation produces two opposing effects on gel strength: coagulation and the induction of proteolytic cleavage of the myosin molecule by cathepsin D, lowering its contribution to gel strength. Aroma (smell or odour) is considered to be the most important component within the combination of taste, smell and texture that determines flavour. It is determined by volatile compounds and is often considered separately from taste, which is determined by nonvolatiles sensed predominantly by receptors on the tongue. It should be realized, though, that both taste and aroma are sensed in an integrated manner. A sour or acid taste is the most relevant taste in Northern type sausages. Its intensity is correlated with the presence of Over 200 chemical compounds are present in the sausage ‘head space’. The majority are derived from spices and smoking in Mediterranean and Northern type sausages, respectively. Only a limited proportion are of sensory relevance, however, and contribute to the typical ‘fermented sausage’ flavour. They can be grouped as follows. Compounds derived from carbohydrate metabolism, represented by acetic, propionic and butyric acids, acetaldehyde, diacetyl and acetoin. Compounds with very low thresholds, derived from metabolism of the amino acids leucine, isoleucine, valine, phenylalanine and methionine. Some of the most important are branched aldehydes and alcohols like 2- and 3-methylbutanal, 2-methylpropanal, 2- and 3-methylbutanol, acids like 2- and 3-methylbutanoic and 2-methylpropanoic acids and esters like ethyl 2- and 3-methylbutanoate. Some of these branched-chain aldehydes could be formed abiotically through reactions such as Strecker degradations, but these require high temperatures and low water activities, conditions not normally present during sausage fermentation. Compounds derived from oxidation of higher fatty acids, e.g. beta-ketones formed by microbial activity. Compounds such as hexanal and other aldehydes are derived from chemical autooxidation, yielding a whole range of aldehydes, ketones, alcohols, etc. that are important for the rancidity in overall flavour. Paucibacterial meat incubations have clearly demonstrated the importance of acid-activated muscle and fat endogenous proteases and lipases during the fermentation period for provision of peptides, amino acids and fatty acids as flavour precursors to bacteria. The preferential release of polyunsaturated fatty acids because of the more important phospholipase activity in muscle and the specificity of fat cell lipases contributes to the promotion of lipid oxidation and thus flavour. Apart from amino acid-catabolizing activity, the antioxidant activity of starter Micrococcaceae is probably important in regulating such oxidation as well as in preventing rancidity. The microbial stability and safety of the sausage is obtained by the introduction of successive ‘hurdles’ for undesirable microorganisms. The lowering of the redox potential, due to the omission of oxygen by chopping under vacuum, is enhanced by addition of ascorbic acid or ascorbate. This inhibits aerobic bacteria and improves the bactericidal effectiveness of nitrite, a major hurdle. During fermentation, lactic acid bacteria inhibit undesirable bacteria mainly through the production of lactic acid and the associated pH drop but also by production of compounds such as acetic acid, hydrogen peroxide and – although probably of secondary importance – bacteriocins. The subsequent drying of the sausage continues the reduction in the water activity, due to addition of salt, to values that prevent growth of spoilage and/or harmful microorganisms (e.g. It has been confirmed repeatedly that the safety, shelf-life and sensory quality of fermented sausages are the result of an extremely complex set of interacting microbiological, physical and (bio)chemical changes during ripening, e.g. fermentation and drying. Some of the complexity of the physical and (bio)chemical characteristics of Northern and Mediterranean type of sausage, as well as their variability and differences, is illustrated in The technological control, evaluation and standardization of such a complex system of characteristics and changes (involving, for example, the use of non-meat proteins, spices, altered temperature/RH combinations, sausage diameter and type of casing, type of starter and carbohydrate) requires comprehensive knowledge of the many interactions involved. Failure to accept this may lead to the loss of traditional flavour of Mediterranean type sausages, for example, when active starter lactic acid bacteria and nitrite are used to ensure a rapid drop of pH. It is becoming clear that the flavour of Mediterranean type sausages is associated with a specific pattern of proteolysis, characterized by a lower peptide: free amino acid ratio as well as higher ammonia concentrations ( Analytical models describe linear or exponential kinetics of time-related changes in sausage metabolite concentrations or sensory quality characteristics. Mechanistic models relate weight losses to changes in DM content, in pH, in  