Particle size control in mineral processing is typically achieved using an index characterising the whole distribution, e.g. the sieve opening through which a given mass fraction of the population would pass. Although mineral liberation is the goal of size reduction, its use for monitoring and process control applications is not reported because its online measuring is currently not possible. This paper proposes to address this issue using a mineral liberation distribution estimator consisting in two models. The first one uses a polynomial expression to relate the size-by-size mineralogical distribution of every mineral species to that of the ore. The second model relies on a beta distribution function to sort the masses in every size fraction into liberation classes. The characteristic constants of the beta function are parameterised with the properties of the ore. Results demonstrate that the liberation estimator can represent liberation distributions of both fresh and processed comminution products.Mineral liberation is achieved through crushing and grinding to separate valuable species, and the general plant performance depends largely on it. However, monitoring mineral liberation remains nowadays an elusive objective since on-stream analysers have yet to be developed and marketed. Practitioners use instead indirect methods to estimate the degree of liberation for the processed ore, for instance observing the material particle size distribution which is easier to obtain. The most common practice to supervise and control the ore particle size distribution is to employ a characteristic index, for instance the sieve opening through which 80% of the mass of the population considered would pass, i.e. the Concerning mineral liberation modelling, its evolution can be traced back to the 30's when Gaudin [ The actual benefits of using mineral liberation instead of a single index that does not provide any indication on the spread of the material size distribution are currently unknown. In this regard, this paper presents a liberation distribution estimator that could enable investigating this issue. The liberation distribution estimator builds on the work of Pérez-García et al. [ The proposed estimator comprises two models: 1) a polynomial mineralogical or size distribution model to represent the size distribution of the mineral species, and 2) a liberation model based on a beta function that classifies that size distribution into liberation classes. Compared with the previous work, the authors took into account liberation distribution information instead of only global liberation. On the one hand, global liberation classifies the whole material in several degrees of liberation regardless of the size distribution. On the other, liberation distribution considers the size distribution. Even if the estimator was originally developed using liberation data from a fresh comminution product, results show that the model structure is flexible enough to represent the distribution of the products of separation processes as well. An important part of the discussion focuses on the model calibration procedure and the precision of the adjustable parameters. The calibration of the polynomial mineralogical model consists of a constrained least squares problem which is reformulated to relax such constraints and calculate the uncertainties of the parameters by standard methods. For the beta distribution liberation model, the problem implies the minimisation of the difference between a measured liberation distribution and the predicted one. This minimisation problem involves a The article is organised as follows. Mineral liberation can be defined as the degree of purity of a particle with respect to the species of interest. Knowing mineral liberation is essential in ore processing because it fundamentally determines the difficulty of separation of the valuable minerals from the gangue. Although perfect liberation may seem desirable for the concentration stages, it is infeasible in practice due to the tremendous amount of energy required as an extremely fine particle size would be necessary. Moreover, excessive milling can cause recovery, selectivity and dewatering issues in downstream stages. This highlights the compromise between achieving an adequate degree of liberation while avoiding overgrinding and excessive energy overconsumption. As mentioned in The estimator aims at integrating liberation information into particle size distributions in ore grinding processes. Leroux [ The estimator described here belongs to the decoupled type as it computes the liberation distribution from product the size distribution, overall grade, and mineral grain size. As mentioned in The size distribution model requires calibration to generate a prediction For every particle size Since the cumulative distribution curves could exceed the maximum value of 1 for the coarsest particle sizes, violating the definition of a cumulative function, the following constraint is added to the optimisation problem: The problem is formulated with a relaxed weighting approach [ The modeled liberation distribution depends on the ore and mineral size distribution, mineral grade and mineral grain size, which is defined as the average size of the coarsest fully liberated particles. The mass fraction of mineral A cumulative beta distribution helps to sort the material in every size fraction into the liberation classes [ The beta distribution curve offers a great flexibility due to its two characteristic parameters. However, to avoid an overparameterisation (i.e., the evaluation of every If this parameterisation appeared to be suitable for global liberation measurements, a finer analysis into detailed size-by-size data sets revealed that it required to be modified for calibration on liberation distributions, leading to The minimisation problem becomes however more complex than for the least squares approach applied in the polynomial model. Details are given in Appendix B. The objective function to be minimised is Agnico-Eagle Mines Ltd. LaRonde Division provided liberation distribution data from the process depicted in  The liberation distributions refer to size fractions by the upper bound. However, the particle sizes   The liberation estimator was originally developed using the characteristics of a fresh comminution product. To assess the validity for representing downstream products that underwent a mineral separation, 2 additional data sets (liberation distributions) from the copper flotation tailings are considered. They are labelled Results are presented in two parts, each of them for all the three data sets. In the first place, the fit of the polynomial mineralogical model is discussed from the point of view of the empiric coefficients that can be used and their precision. The second part examines the prediction of the liberation distribution compared with the measured values as well as the precision of the calibration parameters.    The liberation distribution and global liberation of the fresh comminution product is relatively well predicted for most classes as seen in  For validation, the liberation model part of the estimator has also been tested for samples The sphalerite calibrations follows the same trend, a higher grade leads to a greater R The ultimate goal of this mineral liberation estimator is its use in online monitoring and process control applications. An adequate modeling of the liberation of ground materials is thus necessary. The results obtained for the two mineral species suggest that the liberation estimator can represent liberation distributions of both fresh comminution and downstream processed products. As measured data correspond to a single plant operating condition, its applicability may be restricted to its close neighbourhood. To work around this limitation, one could measure liberation distribution in different operating conditions and even in transient states to validate and modify the model if necessary. This paper details the structure and calibration procedure of a mineral liberation distribution estimator for monitoring and process control applications comprising two models. The first model relates the size distributions of the ore and mineral, while the second one sorts them in liberation classes. Results from a case study demonstrate that it can represent the liberation distribution of both fresh and processed comminution products. The calibration of the first models consists in a relaxed-weighted least squares problem. The second one uses a nonlinear multivariate iterative optimisation approach. It is worth emphasising that the grade of the considered minerals could have an important impact on the quality of the calibration, lower contents could magnify sampling and measurement errors. Results show for the three analysed streams that the fit is weaker when the mineral grade is too low ( The estimator is able to represent realistic liberation distributions. Recommended future work to improve the estimator comprises the collection of replicated measurements that could statistically account for measurement errors. It is also desirable to obtain liberation measurements in operation conditions different than the nominal ones and even in the transient states between them. The limitation lies in the fact that this is a difficult task because of the effort and time needed to accomplish it. What is more, moving the process from its operation conditions implies economic losses for the companies, so there is no surprise that most of them prefer to avoid such complications. Developing online applications for monitoring, optimisation and control remains to be addressed. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors acknowledge the support: Dr. Raphaël Mermillod-Blondin, Senior R&D Metallurgist, Agnico-Eagle Mines Ltd., for the industrial data and precisions that were provided; Dr. Aurélie Chopard, Mineralogy and Geochemistry Specialist also in Agnico Eagle Mines Ltd., for her precious help in better understanding the procedure of QEMSCAN measurements; and lastly For the calibration of the polynomial mineralogical model, the complete constrained problem can be formulated as The relaxed weighting method [ For the calibration of the mineral liberation distribution model, an iterative nonlinear multivariate problem is implemented. A The weighting matrix The validity is also tested by dropping 10% of the observations and re-running the problem, if the parameters and their precision are similar, the solution is confirmed [ If 10% of data points are randomly dropped from the measured liberation distribution and recalibration is done, the evaluated calibration parameters and their uncertainty will not be similar to those of the complete data set. 