The liquid–liquid extraction process is well-known for its complexity and often entails intensive modeling and computational efforts to simulate its dynamic behaviour. However, rigorous mathematical models are usually impractical or are of limited usefulness for control system design. Therefore, there is a need to derive simpler models for this process. Reduced-order linear models can be derived through applying system identification on the input–output simulation data. As a first step, a rigorous model for dynamic simulation of an extraction process is developed. This model employs an improved detailed stage-wise mixing stage with backmixing and it takes into account the variation in hydrodynamics, mass transfer, and physical properties throughout the length of the extraction column. It also approximates end effects by incorporating two mixing stages at both ends in addition to calculation of mass transfer within calming zones through the use of a mass transfer weight factor. The model is validated with dynamic experimental data for a nine stage Scheibel extraction column of type I. The simulation model is shown to be accurate for prediction of process behaviour under different operating conditions. Dynamic analysis of the process is conducted on the developed rigorous simulation model. Then, system identification is applied to derive linear time-invariant reduced-order models, which relate the input process variables (agitator speed, solvent feed flowrate and concentration, feed concentration and flowrate) to the output process variables (raffinate concentration and extract concentration). The identified model predictions are found to be in a good agreement with the rigorous ones.Counter-current liquid–liquid extractors are very complex. The extraction process serves a wide range of applications including nuclear fuel reprocessing, separation of metals, aromatics, pharmaceutical, petrochemical industries, waste water treatment, hydrometallurgy and food processing. Their operation needs careful consideration. A need has emerged to focus on modeling and simulation of extractors for better control system design. This has also been triggered by the necessity to understand the process behaviour under start-up, shut-down and stable operation ranges of the column. Dynamic modeling studies of these contactors have started in the late sixties. Interesting reviews of previous work done have been given by Pollock and Johnson A non-equilibrium drop population stage model has been used for describing the hydrodynamics of the extraction column The pulsed-flow model A simpler hydrodynamic model based on Sauter mean diameter has been proposed to predict model parameters and flooding conditions Typically, the extraction models comprise a highly non-linear large number of differential and algebraic equations (DAE) and are very complex to solve. Consequently, they have limited use for control system analysis and design studies. One approach to deal with this difficulty is to use linearization around some reference steady state condition and employ linear control theory for the design of a conventional control system. This approach is hindered by the high non-linearity of the process which tends to limit the functionality of the designed controllers to the conditions under consideration only and any shift from these conditions causes the controllers to crash Efficient process models, however, can be derived confidently from plant testing data by using system identification techniques Motivated by the above considerations, a great need exists for adopting a modelling strategy that is capable of explaining the highly complex behaviour of the column efficiently over the whole range of operation under varying conditions of hydrodynamic and mass transfer conditions. These modelling difficulties can be tackled by using a rigorous dynamic model with variable parameters. The model parameters should be estimated as a function of operational parameters so that their values vary during simulation. This can be attained by correlating these parameters to the operating variables through a wide range of column operation. Model parameter estimation can be performed using non-linear optimisation techniques to minimise the difference between the model predictions and the experimental data. The target here is to derive a model that can be employed for transient operations and be adequate for further control system design and analysis studies. To address these challenges, we investigate modelling and system identification of a Scheibel extraction column. This column is chosen because of its simple design and its high efficiency for laboratory as well as pilot plant scales A schematic diagram of the experimental apparatus is shown in A test system of water–acetone–toluene was chosen for the experimental study. The feed streams are introduced counter-currently. The aqueous inlet stream is introduced at the top of the column 1.5 A dynamic version of the backflow stagewise model has been modified to handle end effects and mass transfer within calming zones. The current model has the following main features and assumptions: Flow non-idealities are handled by incorporating backflow streams opposite to the direction of the main flow streams. The values of these streams are expressed as fractions of the main flow streams. Mass transfer coefficient is calculated for each stage as function of physical properties, operational parameters and stage design specifications. Oscillating drop behaviour is assumed to model the dispersed phase due to the high degree of turbulence in the mixing zones. This assumption is adopted after careful monitoring of the dispersed phase drop behaviour using a photographic technique. The Rose–Kintner correlation To account for the mass transfer occurring in the settling zones, a weighting factor Equilibrium between phases at each stage is expressed as a distribution coefficient Hydrodynamics within stages is expressed as a fractional volume hold-up The physical properties of the two phases are considered as variables throughout the column and are calculated for each stage as functions of concentration, column geometry, and operational parameters. In order to approximate the damping and delaying action of the phase separation volumes (single phase) located between the interfaces and the contactor ends, a form of delay must be added to the theoretical model. This is attained by considering the volume between the interface and the sampling tube as comprising a perfectly mixed, single-phase stage without mass transfer. A schematic drawing of the modelled contactor with the flow arrangement is shown in Under the above assumptions, the model equations to predict flowrates and concentrations of both phases encompass the following sets of equations: The hold-up at each stage depends on the fractional hold-up coefficient For the mixing stages (stages 0 and The Solvent and the Feed can be assumed to be practically immiscible, hence a solute-free material balance can be performed over each stage to calculate the flowrates at each stage. After rearranging variables, the flowrates of the two phases at any stage The concentrations at each stage were calculated from a solute mass balance. The general equations are expressed as: For the stages 1 and No mass transfer is assumed in the mixing stages, and the single solute mass transfer rate at each stage is expressed as: Equilibrium concentrations are expressed as a function of the mass distribution coefficient at any stage as: Values of backmixing coefficients ( In the above equations, each combined mixing and calming zone is represented by a single stage in the model, the number of these stages The above model equations were solved numerically using the well-known The developed model includes some parameters which are estimated using empirical correlations. These parameters are chemical system and column geometry specific. They involve: fractional hold-up coefficient, Sauter mean diameter, mass transfer coefficient, distribution coefficient, mass transfer weight factor, backmixing coefficients and physical properties. The hydrodynamics in each stage is expressed in terms of fractional hold-up coefficient The extract phase fractional hold-up coefficient at each stage is correlated as a function of rotor speed ( For calculating the mass transfer interfacial area, an estimate of the average drop diameter is needed. The correlation given by Bonnet and Jeffreys The solute mass transfer from one phase to another depends significantly on the drop state. Using single drop models Al-Aswad et al. The overall mass transfer coefficient based on the raffinate phase is calculated by applying the two-film theory It is assumed that the interfacial area for mass transfer is equal to the total surface area of all drops, and hence the interfacial area coefficient at any stage As mentioned in the model assumptions, a weight factor is introduced in the calculation of mass transfer rate Due to lack of experimental measurements of the mass transfer weighting factor and backmixing coefficients, there is a need to estimate these model parameters using well-established estimation techniques. Non-linear optimisation methods are employed for the parameter estimation by matching the model prediction with experimental data. The experimental concentration profiles at different operating conditions were used to fit the model under consideration with the model parameters ( The values of the correlations parameters estimated over wide range of operating conditions are related to a set of operational variables in order to infer these parameters using simple correlations. The Mass transfer weight factor and the continuous phase backmixing coefficient are correlated to the rotor speed and phase flow ratio in the form of: For the dispersed phase backmixing coefficient ( In this work, a simple correlation is predicted for the mass transfer distribution coefficient ( The physical properties are considered to be variable and calculated throughout the column at each stage continuously. Before conducting the system identification technique, the rigorous model is tested to gain a good picture of the process behaviour in order to set the basis for the plant testing to be used for system identification. The rigorous extraction dynamic model is utilized here to study the dynamic behaviour of the process via step testing of each of the input variables and observing the transients of the output variables. The step for each variable is selected large enough to acquire the sought dynamics, and at the same time not to exceed the operational physical limits of the process under investigation. The same step is repeated in the negative direction in order to inspect the non-linear behaviour of the process. The profiles of each variable are compared for consistency. This technique gives a very good picture of the effect of each variable and the behaviour of the process under the presence of excitations. The liquid–liquid extraction process involves many variables, which contribute to its operation, and this makes it a multi-input multi-output (MIMO) process. These variables can be classified as follows: Input or manipulated variables (MVs) are chosen from those variables that have direct effect on the process performance, and practically easy to actuate. In our case, these variables are; rotor speed ( Studying the system dynamic behaviour under different operational conditions is a prerequisite to the good selection of the control scheme. This can be achieved by making some deterministic tests in the model that properly and adequately fits the actual process. The input–output relationships are studied using the open-loop dynamic response of the process, which can be determined from the process model by stepping different inputs (manipulated and disturbance variables) and recording output (control variables) responses. Starting from steady state conditions, each input is perturbed with certain magnitude that is enough to show the effect on the system dynamics. The directions and durations of amplitudes for the steps are chosen based on response strength observability, process settling time, normal operating range and measurement noise level. The above mentioned open-loop step testing methodology is applied on the simulation model developed in the previous section, which mimics the actual plant. The Tai-Ji ID The Tai Ji ID program accepts the input–output step testing data and provides a set of equivalent reduced order linear models such as discrete linear state space model, discrete linear transfer function model and continuous linear transfer function model. After selecting the identified model, it should be validated in order to make sure that the model is acceptable and can fit the plant data with minimum deviations. One way of doing this is by using the The validation of dynamic response of the rigorous model is performed through conducting positive and negative step tests on the five input variables namely; The operating conditions used in this work are as follows: rotor speed = 300, 400, 500 solvent flowrate = 250, 375, 500 raffinate flowrate = 250 solvent feed concentration = 0; feed concentration = 0.02 The two phases flowrates were selected to give phase flow ratios of 1, 1.5 and 2. For a pilot plant scale these operational data are relevant in terms of practicality and approach to flooding conditions. They provide a good basis for exploring the dynamics of the extractor. The values of fractional hold-up coefficient are given in The computer-logged raffinate phase concentration profiles are compared with the model predicted transient profiles of the model at the same conditions. In order to get an insight of how close these profiles are to each other statistically, the relative percentage error profiles for each of the previously mentioned runs are given in The effect of rotor speed and solvent feed flowrate step testing on the column outlet concentrations for both positive and negative directions is shown in Examining this figure reveals that the process reaches steady state after 10  The open loop step testing is performed on the rigorous model in the form of step changes train. Each one of the five input variables (manipulated and controlled) is tested while keeping the rest constant. The signals are alternating between positive and negative square steps with lengths and amplitudes appropriate to identify process gain and dead time. The number of these steps is chosen large enough to make sure of the efficient identification of the process with acceptable accuracy. Several positive and negative square steps are applied in each test, spaning a simulation time of 350 The problem of dynamic modelling and system identification of liquid–liquid extraction columns in general and the Scheibel column in particular is considered in this work. The topic has been investigated using experimental work, rigorous modelling, dynamic analysis and reduced order system identification approach. The dynamic simulations of the Scheibel extraction column model have shown a good agreement with the measured experimental data. However, mechanistic modelling based on the underlying physics and chemistry governing the behaviour of the liquid–liquid extraction process has been found to be complex and needs a considerable computation time. Accordingly, reduced order models have been generated from the simulation input–output data via a system identification technique. The reduced order models proved to be simple and accurate enough to capture the dynamic behaviour of the process. Therefore, the development of conventional and unconventional control schemes based on these models can be practiced with confidence.  interfacial area per unit height (cm cross sectional area of column (cm column diameter (cm) mass transfer weight factor phase flow ratio hold-up for the aqueous phase (cm hold-up for the organic phase (cm identity matrix overall mass transfer coefficient (cm/s) raffinate phase mass transfer coefficient (cm/s) mass transfer distribution coefficient stage number rotor speed (s volumetric mass transfer rate in aqueous phase (cm volumetric mass transfer rate in organic phase (cm raffinate phase flowrate (cm feed flowrate (cm raffinate phase outlet flowrate (cm Laplce operator extract phase flowrate (cm extract phase feed flowrate (cm extract phase outlet flowrate (cm time (s) stage volume feed concentration (wt. fraction) aqueous phase concentration at stage raffinate outlet concentration (wt. fraction) aqueous phase equilibrium concentration (wt. fraction) solvent feed concentration (wt. fraction) organic phase concentration at stage extract outlet concentration (wt. fraction) organic phase equilibrium concentration (wt. fraction) aqueous phase backmixing coefficient organic phase backmixing coefficient density (g/cm aqueous mixing stage stage number 1 acetone continuous phase dispersed phase feed stage number last stage Organic mixing stage exit matrix inverse matrix transpose equilibrium