Cyanidation is the most used method to recover gold and silver from their ores. In this process, other metals besides gold and silver may dissolve under certain circumstances and interfere with the efficiency of extraction. Copper is one of these metals, being able to reach concentrations as high as 1000mg/L. When the cyanide solution contains a high copper concentration, the extraction of precious metals decreases and the operating costs increase. In addition, the control of the process is more complicated because the free cyanide analysis performed by the operators by titration does not represent the actual cyanide available to dissolve gold and silver. This experimental work has two objectives: to evaluate the amount of copper–cyanide complexes that are measured when titration is used for free cyanide analysis, and to develop and propose a method for copper removal from cyanidation solutions. The method consists in the acidification of the solution with sulfuric acid, and the separation of the precipitated solid (CuCN) by filtration. The thermodynamics of the copper–cyanide system is discussed, and the hydrogen cyanide evolution (HCN) at pH acid is evaluated.
                  One of the main operating variables in cyanidation plants is the “free cyanide” concentration, that is, the amount of cyanide available to dissolve the precious metals. The usual method to estimate free cyanide is titration. When copper is present in the cyanide solution, the titration method not only measures the free cyanide but also part of the cyanide that is forming complexes with copper. It was demonstrated from the tests performed in this work, that for cyanide/copper ratios of 1–10, typically found in cyanidation solutions, around 10% of the free cyanide measured by titration corresponds to copper–cyanide complexes and is not available for gold and silver dissolution.
                  In order to recycle the solution to the process, it is necessary to remove part of the copper. A method of copper removal is proposed, based on the precipitation of CuCN when the copper–cyanide solution is acidified. The precipitated solid is separated from the solution by filtration and finally the clear solution is neutralized. The acidification/filtration/alkalinization of cyanidation solutions containing copper permits the removal of most of the copper present in the solution, thus allowing the recycling of the solution. For synthetic solutions containing 200–730mg/L Cu at different cyanide/copper ratios, it was found that 93–98% of the copper can be removed as CuCN at pH 2.5, releasing free cyanide to the solution. If a flotation stage is considered to remove the solid formed, the HCN formed by acidification should not represent a problem: the amount of HCN gas stripped at pH 2.5 when using the usual flotation gas flow rates (0.17cm/s, 0.28L/min, 1h for our experimental design) was only 6%, which can be easily controlled with conventional equipment.Most gold and silver cyanidation plants recycle the cyanide solution back into the process. When the copper concentration in the recycling solution is high, the solution is considered to be fouled and its efficiency of leaching decreases. This is particularly a problem when the minerals processed have readily-soluble copper minerals (e.g., azurite, malaquite, cuprite, chalcocite and bornite). High copper concentration in the cyanidation solution may cause the following problems ( Increase in cyanide consumption. Reduction of the extraction of precious metals due to the faster leaching of copper species. Adsorption of copper–cyanide complexes on the activated carbon, reducing its adsorption capacity for gold and silver-cyanide complexes. Increased zinc consumption (in Merrill–Crowe processes) to maintain the precipitation efficiency of precious metals. High copper concentration in the doré obtained, increasing the final purification costs. When the copper concentration is high, the cyanide solution cannot be recycled to the process and has to be treated before its disposal due to environmental regulations. There are some effluent treatments suitable to handle cyanide solutions, among others the SO For the recycling of the solution, several techniques have been applied in order to remove the copper and reuse the cyanide solution, notably: acidification–volatilization–regeneration (AVR), ion exchange-electrolysis and solvent extraction-electrowinning ( As the copper(I)-cyanide (CuCN) is a compact and non-hygroscopic solid with high copper concentration whose formation would release free cyanide into the solution (copper is present as In this work the thermodynamic constants of the copper–cyanide system reported in the literature were experimentally verified, and the effect of the copper concentration on the analysis of free cyanide by titration was evaluated. In order to recycle the solution to the process, the removal of copper was studied in four synthetic solutions with different copper/cyanide ratios. After the solid/liquid separation the solid formed was characterized, and the remaining copper and the cyanide solution were analyzed after alkalinization of the solution. Some experiments were performed in order to quantify the amount of hydrogen cyanide evolved during the acidification of the solution. In the presence of cyanide, cupric ions will reduce to cuprous ions and form The thermodynamic analysis of the copper–cyanide system permits to calculate the relative amount of the cyanocuprate ions in solution. This has an important practical significance since The equilibrium between copper, cyanide and their complexes is given by the following equilibria: There is a wide variation in the values of the equilibrium constants reported in the literature for the copper–cyanide complexes. As can be noticed, there is a substantial discrepancy in the value of The use of one diagram or the other may have important implications; for instance, when calculating the copper concentration in solution after decreasing pH, this value can change from 100 to 0.2 In order to select the most suitable equilibrium constant value for Eq. The results of these tests are presented in There are three main categories of cyanide as determined from analytic methods. These three categories are: total, weak acid dissociable (Wad) and free cyanide. Total cyanide includes all the cyanide compounds present in solution, including cyanide complexed with metals. The weak acid dissociable cyanide includes the free cyanide and weak and moderately strong metal–cyanide complexes (Ag, Cd, Cu, Hg, Ni and Zn). The free cyanide includes only the uncomplexed forms of cyanide, which are the cyanide anion and molecular hydrogen cyanide ( Distillation techniques for total and Wad cyanide are reliable and well established ( When the copper concentration in cyanidation solutions is high, copper interferes with the free cyanide analysis by titration, overestimating it and thus causing a misjudgment of the lixiviating strength of the solution. It has been reported that titration of copper–cyanide solutions with silver nitrate detects not only the free cyanide (CN In order to better control the cyanidation process it is important to know the amount of copper–cyanide complexes that is detected as free cyanide by titration. To estimate this amount the following methodology was followed: for solutions of In order to evaluate the feasibility of removing copper from cyanide solutions as CuCN by acidification, a study with synthetic solutions of compositions similar to those found in cyanidation plants was performed. As the CuCN formation depends primarily on the total concentration of cyanide and copper, and secondarily on the cyanide/copper ratio, four solutions with different cyanide/copper ratio were prepared for the tests (see The remaining copper and free cyanide in solution after solid separation by filtration with paper filter (Whatman, 2.5 The white solid formed was identified by X-ray diffraction as copper–cyanide (CuCN, Card No. 00-009-0152, It was demonstrated that by acidification-solid/liquid separation–alkalinization of copper–cyanide solutions, most of the copper present can be removed as a white-compact non-hygroscopic and high-copper content solid (CuCN), releasing free cyanide to the solution and enabling its recycling back to the process. The main shortcoming of this proposal is that the solid-liquid separation needs to be performed at acid pH with the inherent risk of HCN evolution. In order to evaluate the amount of hydrogen cyanide that could be released during the solid/liquid separation, some experiments were carried out. The main variables affecting the evolution of a soluble gas from aqueous solutions are temperature, time, pH and surface exposed; if a stream of gas is passed through the solution (as is the case in flotation), the gas flow rate will be the most important variable. The results obtained, presented in This paper deals with the problem of high copper concentration in cyanidation processes for gold and silver extraction. Two difficulties arise when copper concentration is high: the overestimation of the “free cyanide” analyzed by titration with silver nitrate, and the impossibility of recycling the solution to the process. The experimental work carried out with four synthetic cyanide solutions containing different amounts of copper supports the following conclusions. When copper is present in the cyanide solution, the free cyanide (CN The equilibrium constants for the copper–cyanide system may vary significantly depending on the reference consulted, in particular the equilibrium constant of the reaction It is possible to remove the copper present in the cyanidation solutions by acidifying the solution, filtering the CuCN solid formed, and realkalinizing the solution. When the pH of the copper–cyanide solution is decreased below 4, a white, compact, non-hygroscopic solid is formed. This solid, identified by X-ray diffraction as CuCN, has an average size of 10 A solid/liquid separation stage at acid pH has to be considered, with the consequent risk of hydrogen cyanide evolution. As flotation is one of the solid/liquid separation methods that may be used, the evolution of HCN gas was measured at the gas flow rate commonly used in effluent treatment (0.1 The authors thank CONACYT for the financial support received through project CB-2005-1-48826, and M.C. Omero Alonso González thanks CONACYT for the PhD scholarship provided.