The purpose of this study was to assess the accuracy and utility of the posteroanterior (PA) 15° caudad view of the clavicle to assess shortening of clavicular fractures. The first stage involved taking radiographs of an adult skeleton, centered on the clavicle, with the standard anterosuperior 15° cephalad view and the PA 15° caudad view. Additional images were taken in the 15° caudad view with a series of oblique rotational views and oblique images in the vertical plane. Metal markers were placed on the clavicle at 10-mm intervals. Clavicular length and the interval between markers were measured on the radiographs. The second stage involved obtaining the PA 15° caudad radiograph in 50 patients with clavicular fractures. The noninjured clavicle also underwent radiography. The lengths of the noninjured clavicle and of the fragments of the fractured clavicle were recorded. The length of the skeletal clavicle in the standard anterosuperior image was 149 mm, with up to 19 mm of variation on oblique views. The length in the PA 15° caudad image was 130 mm, with a maximum of 4 mm of variation on the oblique views up to 30°. The true length of the skeletal clavicle was 124 mm. Forty-five fractures were diaphyseal, and five were outer-third fractures. There was less than 5 mm of measured difference in the length of injured and noninjured clavicles in 38 of 45 patients with diaphyseal fractures (84%). We have identified a more accurate technique for the assessment of fractures of the clavicle in evaluating length and clavicular alignment. The PA 15° caudad clavicle radiograph technique is well tolerated by patients. (J Shoulder Elbow Surg 2003;12:170-2)Current clear indications for the operative treatment of clavicular fractures include compound injuries, associated neurovascular injury, and fragments causing overlying skin ischemia. There may be other situations in which early surgery is appropriate. Robinson For imaging clavicular shaft fractures, Craig We used an articulated adult human skeleton to assess different radiographic views of the left clavicle. Metallic markers were placed at 10-mm intervals on the anterior border of the clavicle. Radiographs of the AP 15° cephalad tilt and the PA 15° caudad tilt views were taken, with additional rotational views. In the horizontal plane additional views were taken in 10°, 20°, and 30° of medial and lateral angulation of the beam. In the vertical plane additional views were taken with the beam angled 15° cephalad and caudad to the two index views. These views were taken to assess the magnification discrepancies of the index views and the magnitude of error from imprecise radiographic technique. The x-ray beam was focused on the center of the clavicle in all radiographs. The PA 15° caudad radiograph was used to image 50 consecutive patients with clavicular fractures who were examined in the orthopaedic fracture clinic. The contralateral clavicle was imaged for comparison by the same technique. In each case the contralateral clavicle was normal. The length of each fracture fragment and the length of the contralateral clavicle were measured in each case. Measurements were made by the 2 authors, an orthopaedic surgeon and a radiology registrar. The total length of the fracture fragments was compared with the length of the contralateral clavicle. Magnification error was assessed by comparing the humeral head diameter on each side. The PA 15° caudad radiograph was taken with the affected arm in a sling and the x-ray cassette placed adjacent and parallel to the clavicle (Figure 1). The length of the clavicle on the articulated skeleton was 124 mm. The length of the skeletal clavicle was 149 mm (15% magnification) on the AP 15° cephalad radiograph and 130 mm (5% magnification) on the PA 15°caudad radiograph. The maximum measured difference between the index PA 15° caudad radiograph and the oblique radiographs was 4 mm (Table I). For determining the amount of clavicular shortening compatible with a good outcome, a simple, reliable method of imaging the clavicle is required. The PA 15° caudad radiograph more reliably assesses shortening than the AP 15° cephalad view. Magnification of the clavicle is minimized by reducing the film-to-object distance. The small film-to-object distance also allows a wide latitude of technical error with minimal change in film accuracy. Patients tolerate the procedure well, both in the erect position and in the sitting position, and radiographers found the procedure quick and easy to perform. The youngest patient in this series was 6 years old. We do not have experience with this technique in the younger pediatric age group. Weinberg et al