Use of mine tailings as an aluminosilicate precursor in alkali activation is becoming an interesting alternative to manage the high-volume of waste generated from mining industries. However, very few tailings have so far been studied for their mineralogical properties and alkali activation potential. This study aims at understanding the ability of mine tailings from phosphate, kaolinite and lithium mines for their efficient participation in alkali activation. Biotite, muscovite, kaolinite, albite, and quartz were found to be the major minerals present in them. The impact of variation in mineralogy on silica and alumina solubility of these tailings was analyzed. The solubility was found to be high in impure kaolinite compared to the other two. Effectiveness of thermal treatment (750 °C and 900 °C) on improving the reactivity of these tailings in alkaline condition was also investigated. It was observed from the results that the effect of thermal treatment on the crystalline structure and solubility of an aluminosilicate material mainly depends on the mineral structure of the material, as well as the treatment temperature. Interestingly, thermal treatment reduced the solubility of lithium tailings with albite and quartz mineral. Effort has been made to relate the strength attained by alkali activation of mine tailings to their solubility values. However, despite of the higher solubility offered by impure kaolinite, phosphate tailings gives the maximum strength improvement by 62%. This can be due to the presence of calcium compounds in phosphate tailings that resulted in additional hydration products.Geopolymers are materials obtained through alkali-activation of aluminate and silicate rich precursors. The aluminosilicate precursor contains the matrix-forming components that polymerize to form the geopolymer structure, and it can be any aluminosilicate material that contains soluble silicate and aluminate ( Various natural minerals, such as calcined kaolinite, albite or volcanic ashes have been used in geopolymer synthesis ( Mine tailings are the mineral residues gained from the refining process at the mining sites. It usually has a fine particle size (>100 μm) and is stored in dammed ponds. Mine tailings properties (like chemical composition) depend entirely on the mineralogy of the mining site and the used refining method. The tailings compose of a mixture of different minerals, which makes the characterization and utilization of a potential material even more difficult ( The heterogeneous nature of mine tailings is a challenge regarding their use as raw materials. Mine tailings, as well as other reused wastes, require more characterization than virgin raw materials ( The origin and main mineral components of the mine tailings studied in this work are listed in The crude samples were placed in aluminum trays and were dried in oven at 100 °C for 24 h. Batches consisting of 30 g of each sample were placed in corundum crucibles, calcined at 750 °C and 900 °C for 2 h and left to cool down in a Controller P320 furnace (Nabertherm, Germany). These samples were used for XRD analysis and solubility tests. Later calcination of new batches of 100 g of each sample for alkali activation were carried out with the same method except for a holding time of 3 h. Several hypotheses were involved while considering the samples for calcination. Sample K was presupposed to be the most promising sample of the series, since kaolinite is known to form highly reactive metakaolin (Al X-ray fluorescence analysis (XRF) was done to determine the elemental compositions. The analysis was made using fused bead test, where the sample was melted to form glass at 1150 °C. Hence, the results represented partly calcined samples, and the possible reactions during the bead preparation posed a risk of error in the calculations. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was carried out to observe changes in the material during the heating process, and hence exposed the possible reactions. The equipment used was PrepASH 129 (Precisa, Switzerland), and the temperature ranged between room temperature (23 °C) and 950 °C. The weight of the analyzed specimens were maintained below 7.7 g. XRF results were corrected by adjusting the results for a changed total mass. It was assumed that no measured components, especially Si or Al, was lost during the heating. The equation for calculating corrected values is presented as Eq. XRD analysis was performed to observe changes in the crystalline structure of samples during thermal treatment. Therefore, the analysis was carried out for each sample prepared in different calcination temperatures. Rigaku SmartLab (9 kW) with 40 kV and 135 mA radiations was used, and the crystalline structures were identified from the data by comparing the diffraction patterns on the ICDD database (the International Center for Diffraction Data). Cu-Kβ radiation was used with step interval of 0.02° per step and scan rate of 4°/min for a scan range of 5–110° (2θ). The solubility tests were carried out with 6 M NaOH solution. For each test 0.5 g of sample was mixed with 20 g of alkali solvent. The mixture was then shaken in a shaker mixer (KS 260 basic, IKA) at 150 rpm for 24 h. The solution was filtered through a polypropylene membrane with 0.45 µm pore size. The pH of the collected solution was set below 2 with 6 M nitric acid solution to prevent precipitation. The dissolved Si and Al amounts were determined from the collected solution by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) according to standard SFS-EN ISO 11885:2009. Geopolymers involving the alumino-silicate precursor and activator solution can be referred to as two-part geopolymers. One-part geopolymers are prepared by mixing the solid activators with the aluminosilicate precursor and can be activated with the addition of water. Hence, one-part geopolymers are ‘just-add-water’ products and suitable for situations, where the handling of liquid alkali activators would be problematic. In this study one-part geopolymerization process was adopted. Mine tailings and alkali activators (Na The samples for each mix were molded in to six cylindrical (25 mm diameter and 25 mm height) plastic molds and vibrated with the Vortex-Genie 2 vortex mixer (Scientific Industries, Inc., USA) for 10 s to remove the air captured inside them. The molds with the fresh alkali activated paste were placed in sealed plastic bags and cured at 40 °C for 24 h. After demolding, the specimens were stored at room temperature until testing. Three specimens of each mix were sulphur capped and used to measure the compressive strength. Zwick 100 testing machine (Zwick Roell Group, Germany) with the maximum load capacity of 100 kN and a cross head speed of 3 mm/min was employed. Water absorption was measured by immersing the specimens in water bath for 24 h in room temperature (23 ± 2 °C). After wiping with wet cloth, saturated mass of the specimen was measured (W The XRD results for sample P are presented in XRD measurements reveal that sample K consists of quartz, muscovite and kaolinite, as can be seen in The XRD graphs for sample L are presented in Relative solubility was calculated based on the ICP-OES results and XRF analysis, using formula  For all samples, the relative solubility of Al exceeds Si, but due to the large content of Si compared to Al in all the samples, the total dissolved amount of Si exceeds Al in almost all cases. For non-calcined sample P, elemental solubility of both Si and Al are very low, and probably not sufficient for a successful geopolymerization. The increasing solubility of sample P after the first calcination at 750 °C can be explained with the reduction of crystalline phases as detected with XRD ( Sample K had high silicate and aluminate contents (73% and 16% respectively) and with the exceptionally high Al solubility of the sample calcined at 750 °C, the total dissolved Al is highest among all the samples. On the other hand, the solubility of Si in the sample calcined at 900 °C is lower than the initial solubility. The increase in solubility during the first calcination stage supports Kaolinite transformation into metakaolinite. Also, the increase of total dissolved Al and Si appears roughly equal in ratio supports the hypothesis, since the Si/Al ratio of metakaolinite is approximately one. The decline in solubility after calcination at 900 °C may indicate the formation of amorphous inert components from metakaolin. Based on solubility, sample K appears to be the most promising sample for geopolymerization. The experiments with sample L support the hypothesis of the sample being inert. The partial decomposition of albite observed with XRD implies that some chemical reactions took place during the thermal treatment, and the declining solubility supports the interpretation. Therefore, the new phases that formed during the calcination appear to be amorphous but insoluble. The solubility decreases continuously as the calcination temperature rises, which implies the reaction occurs gradually as the temperature is increased. The setting of alkali activated mine tailings before and after calcination was observed visually and represented in The alkali activated SN (Na Compressive strength of SN and S series of the alkali activated mine tailings specimens are shown in Calcination of P tailings at 750 °C improved the strength by 62% and 75% in SN and S series, respectively. The high magnesium content of P tailing from Phlogopite mineral could be a reason for this behaviour. MgO is already known to improve the mechanical strength of alkali activated materials by the formation of hydrotalcite as the reaction product ( K tailings shows the highest strength among the three tailings that are studied here. The Muscovite and kaolinite mineral by itself participate in alkali activation even before any treatment. And calcination at 750 °C improved the strength by 25%. This can be related to the formation of metakaolin with the heat treatment of clay mineral present in this tailings ( In an effort to improve the reactivity of mine tailings from three different sources, calcination was applied as a treatment method and the effect on reactivity in alkali activation was studied. The following conclusions are drawn based on the material properties of the tailings acquired from this study: Mineralogical characterization of the mine tailings can be considered as an important identifier to categorize the material from its response to any treatment or its reactivity in alkali activation. The mineralogical composition of different mine tailings affected the Si and Al solubility. P and K tailings responded positively to calcination until 700 °C, beyond which it declined. Whereas, L tailings showed continuous reduction in the solubility values. Alkali activation was successful in tailings with carbonates (P) and kaolinite (K) even without any heat treatment. However, heat treatment resulted in the formation of CaO, MgO and metakaolin which helped in the dissolution of Si and Al at high pH and further strength improvement. Compressive strength improved with calcination of mine tailings with a maximum of 62% for P tailings and 25% for K tailings at 750 °C. Increase in solubility of Al ions at 900 °C is likely to affect the Si/Al ratio that lead to reduction in strength compared to calcination at 750 °C. However, it is important to fix the optimum treatment temperature of treatment to attain maximum strength. This is due to the possibility of recrystallization of amorphous content in the tailings at higher treatment temperatures. It can be concluded that in order to adopt a treatment technique and to improve the reactivity in alkali activation, mine tailings need location specific characterization. Detailed investigation on different treatment methods based on mineralogical composition would help in effective utilization of this material to a larger extend. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support received from the project “Novel synthesis methods for porous ceramics from mine tailings,” funded by