The world wide discussion on climate change caused by CO2 and other greenhouse gases (GHGs) attributable to human activities has put the focus on the energy intensive production technologies for iron and steelmaking. Taking into account the enormous production increase for these versatile materials in the last years, modern technologies with lower CO2 and GHGs emissions are imperative to keep at least today’s status, though a decrease is challenged.
                  Outokumpu Technology has developed direct reduction technologies that allow in combination with smelting reduction processes or electric arc furnaces a substantial lowering of CO2 emissions.
                  In the presented contribution to MMME 06 three examples will be given:
                  The Circofer® process, already demonstrated in pilot plant scale, uses coal as reductant in a two stage CFB (circulating fluidized bed)/FB (fluidized bed) reactor configuration to obtain a highly metallized product suitable for charging into smelting processes.
                  One possible application of Circofer is, in a single stage configuration, as prereduction unit in combination with HIsmelt®, a smelting reduction technology to produce hot metal using iron ore and coal fines. Using Circofer as prereduction step, the capacity of a given HIsmelt installation can be increased by the factor three to four compared to cold feed and CO2 emission can be lowered to values about 20% below the standard of a modern blast furnace, as this combination of technologies requires no agglomeration plant or coke ovens.
                  A second application of Circofer is the combination with an electric arc furnace (EAF) to produce steel directly from direct reduced iron (DRI). The direct charging of metallic fines into an EAF was successfully tested, observing no increased dust emission from the furnace. Charging hot DRI into an EAF decreases drastically electric power consumption and thus further lowers CO2 emission.
                  Applying Circosmelt, the combination of a single stage Circofer system with an electric reduction furnace for ilmenite processing, only half of the electric power consumption required today for titania slag production using cold, unreduced feed material is required.
                  A common additional advantage of all Circofer based routes is that a 99% pure CO2 stream is removed for process reasons from the process gas and can be used for enhanced crude oil production or sequestration methods.
                  The paper will report on the status of the different developments and its market introduction.
                  Outokumpu Technology GmbH (formerly Lurgi Metallurgie) has been involved in the development, design and supply of plants for processing iron bearing ores in fluidized bed reactor systems for more than 30 years.Climate change is recognized to be one of the most serious environmental issues facing the world in the 21st century. It is predicted that global average temperatures will raise by 1.4–5.8 To mitigate climate change a lot of different activities have been developed. The latest international activity with attempt to introduce legally binding constraints on greenhouse emissions has been the so called Kyoto Protocol ( The Kyoto Protocol came into force on February 16, 2005. As of July 2006, a total of 164 countries have ratified the agreement representing over 60% of emissions from industrialized countries. Notable exceptions include the United States and Australia. Other countries, like India and China, which have ratified the protocol, are not required to lower carbon emissions under the present agreement. As a consequence of the Kyoto Protocol emission trading has been established, which creates besides social and political also financial pressure on industries in the countries entitled according to the protocol to lower their emissions of greenhouse gases. The traditional technology for iron and steelmaking following the route of mining/beneficiation/blast furnace (BF)/oxygen converter (BOF) has been developed to a stage were substantial energy savings by improvements of the processes is very unlikely ( The iron and steel industry is emitting about 650 million tons CO The following investigations are limited to the process of making crude steel, starting from iron ore fines. The steps mining and beneficiation – if required – as well as further processing and finishing are not considered. During the production of crude steel about 2200  During coal based power generation 0.737 The carbon contents for coke and coal were taken as 89  The CO Using ore fines and fine coal in iron and steelmaking will avoid the steps of agglomeration and coking, with a potential of 20% CO Separate the energy intensive reduction step from the high temperature hot metal production by performing prereduction of the feed materials at lower temperatures. Based on more than 30 years development of fluidized bed processes for metallurgical applications Outokumpu Technology has developed production routes, combining the Circofer direct reduction process with smelting furnaces, allowing to follow the above strategy.   The Circofer core plant comprises the following main parts: Two-stage preheating system consisting of suspension preheaters and cyclones. Circulating fluidized bed (CFB) reactor as prereduction stage (stage I). Fluidized bed (FB) reactor as final reduction stage (stage II). Heat generator for partial coal combustion with oxygen, generating the required heat. Process gas treatment including waste heat boiler, dedusting system and CO Iron ore fines enter the CFB via two preheating stages, making use of the sensible heat of the offgas. Coal is directly injected into the heat generator operating as an expanded fluidized bed reactor. The coal is partly combusted with technical oxygen at a temperature of about 1050 The sensible heat contained in the offgas stream is used in a waste heat boiler to produce steam for the CO The absolute pressure in the system is about 5 The prereduced iron ore from the CFB is discharged into a FB reactor used as final reduction stage. There, it is reduced further to a metallization degree of more than 93% using recycle gas as reductant. After adjusting the carbon content by hot magnetic separation the produced DRI could be used as hot feed for an electric arc furnace to produce steel. As all reducing gas components are recycled and reused, the total carbon content of the coal, including the carbon contained in the volatiles, is utilized for the process. This distinguishes Circofer from processes without gas recirculation, where only the fixed carbon of the coal is used as reductant. HIsmelt is a modern smelting reduction process developed by Rio Tinto ( Within the smelter the injected iron oxides are reduced in the molten iron bath by means of fine coal also injected by side lances. Hot oxygen enriched air, which is blown from above, creates a high turbulent mixing zone, which enables the transfer of heat from the space above the slag and iron layers to the molten iron bath. Molten droplets of iron and slag are heated up there when the CO, generated during the reduction in the bath, is post-combusted. When falling back to the bath, the droplets transport part of the energy back to the bath, where it is used for the reduction process.  Ore preheating (Circoheat Circofer as front end would increase the production capacity of a HIsmelt SRV by the factor 3. The first industrial installation with a capacity of 800,000  The CO It is assumed that no additional coke is required for steelmaking as the carbon content of 4.7 As shown in A test performed at a German mini mill charging fine grained DRI into a 125  The shown small amount of CO  Titania slag is an important raw material for the production of TiO Outokumpu has patented the Circosmelt In the Circofer prereduction step the iron oxides in the ilmenite are reduced to a metallization degree of approximately 75% in a CFB reactor, whereas TiO  In addition, Circosmelt offers to operate the smelting furnace at a significantly higher unit capacity. This leads to capital and energy savings also for the furnace offgas cleaning system. As an industrial example for a direct reduction process using iron ore fines the first-of-its-kind Circored The first Circoheat For Circofer and Circosmelt extensive test campaigns have been performed in Outokumpu Technology’s 700 A changeover in steelmaking from the traditional route agglomeration/blast furnace/oxygen converter to the alternative routes Circofer/HIsmelt/oxygen converter or Circofer/EAF opens the potential for a substantial decrease in CO Producing titania slag according to the Circosmelt process offers significant savings in power consumption at nearly double the unit capacity compared to conventional smelting furnaces. The authors acknowledge the contribution of HIsmelt in the development of Circofer.