Many techniques exist for the analysis of aroma compounds in foods. This chapter highlights three techniques in particular: headspace solid-phase microextraction, solvent-assisted flavour evaporation and solid-phase extraction. Good practice in aroma extraction is focused upon, and the reasons for choosing a particular extraction technique are discussed. In particular, the analysis of the relatively polar aroma compound furaneol (4-hydroxy-2,5-dimethyl-3[2H]-furanone), using the three highlighted methodologies, is covered in detail.Aroma compounds vary widely in their structures and may contribute to the overall flavour of a food at concentrations below 1 part in 10 In general, aroma compounds have a relatively low boiling point and limited solubility in water. These are the two characteristics of aroma compounds that enable their extraction from the food matrix ( While most aroma compounds have limited solubility in water, there are numerous exceptions. The octanol–water partition coefficient ( Although numerous techniques exist for the analysis of aroma compounds in food, this chapter focuses on three techniques, which have become popular in the last 20 years. Firstly, solid-phase microextraction (SPME) is the most widely used technique for aroma extraction; it is easy to use and is a great technique for those new to aroma analysis. Secondly, solvent-assisted flavour extraction (SAFE) is widely regarded as being the technique providing an aroma extract most representative of the aroma in the food itself. Finally, solid-phase extraction (SPE), which is widely used in all aspects of analytical chemistry for the clean-up of analytes, has great potential for the analysis of more polar aroma compounds in low-fat foods. A useful review of many of the older techniques applied for the analysis of aroma is provided by When choosing an appropriate extraction technique for a particular analysis, there are numerous considerations. Are we examining the complete aroma composition of a foodstuff, or are we just looking at specific compounds, namely, character impact compounds or taints? Is the food under study perceived to be aromatic, such as coffee, or relatively bland, such as pasta? How much material is available? At what temperature should we extract the sample? Some foods that are solid at room temperature but liquid at higher temperatures – butter and chocolate – may be difficult to work with. How much time is available for the analysis? How experienced is the person performing the extraction? A homogeneous sample, representative of the food under study, is highly desirable. Because of their high ethanol content and zero solids content, distilled spirits can be analysed without extraction. Foods consumed as liquids can be extracted directly, with no preliminary preparation, although prior filtration may be necessary for solvent extraction of liquids containing particulates, such as orange juice. Liquid samples can be stirred, increasing the surface area, making the transition of a molecule from sample to solvent or headspace more efficient ( If accurate quantification of one particular aroma compound is required, the extraction method should be selected to maximise the extraction of that particular compound without generating that compound The food samples studied should represent as well as possible the population from which they are taken in order to obtain the best analytical data. Where possible, the provenance of all samples studied should be obtained. For example, if four bags of potatoes of the same variety are bought from four supermarkets, it may be difficult to explain why the volatile profile of one bag may be substantially different from the other three. However, if it is known that three of the samples were grown in clay soil and the one that was different was grown in sandy soil, this may provide a reason for the differences observed. As highlighted in the previous section, samples should be homogeneous to keep experimental error to a minimum. Also, to be confident in the results obtained, samples should be analysed an appropriate number of times. For example, a processed food has been formulated so that pack-to-pack variation is minimised so three analyses of such a food should suffice. However, unprocessed samples may show massive variability that warrants the extraction of at least five or six replicates. Solvents should be of the highest purity, and those solvents used for extraction should be redistilled, particularly if the extract needs to be concentrated before analysis. Diethyl ether is a commonly used extraction solvent, which often contains BHT as a stabiliser. Redistillation is necessary to remove the BHT; otherwise it may appear as the largest peak in the chromatogram of the aroma extract. However, BHT is present in ether for a reason. Redistilled ether should be used as soon as possible after preparation, because it is sensitive to light and air, forming peroxides, which can also form large background peaks in extracts. Preparing a blank sample is an essential procedure to ensure that only the aroma compounds present in the food are assessed. For a headspace technique, this could be an extraction from an empty vessel or a vessel containing those materials added to the sample prior to extraction, such as water or salts. For a solvent extraction, a blank could be prepared using the same glassware but with water replacing the food sample. The packaging that a sample is supplied in may have transferred volatile compounds to the surface of the food under study (usually hydrocarbons), and it may be desirable to analyse a portion of the packaging to see if such a transfer has occurred. Glassware used for aroma extraction should be kept as clean as possible; odourless detergents, such as Decon 90 (Decon Laboratories Ltd., Hove, UK), are essential. After washing, glassware should be rinsed with high-purity water before drying. It is important to extract at an appropriate temperature. High extraction temperatures may lead to sample decomposition or cooking. Compounds may be formed that were not present in the original food sample, while lipid oxidation, as a result of prolonged heating at high temperature, may give large aldehyde and alcohol peaks. However, higher temperatures may be necessary when using headspace techniques to enable the extraction of low levels of higher boiling aroma compounds. Concentration of the extract should be carried out at temperatures only slightly higher than the boiling point of the extraction solvent, in order to prevent losses of potentially important aroma compounds. Enzymes in the sample may be active, particularly after comminution of the sample. For example, lipoxygenase brought into contact with unsaturated fatty acids when crushing or cutting plant material may generate volatile compounds, particularly 6-carbon alcohols and aldehydes, such as ( Optimisation of the extraction process may need consideration. Variables such as extraction time, extraction temperature, stirring rate, amount of salt added and sorbent phase (where appropriate) will influence the quality of the aroma extract produced. Many workers have used response surface methodology in method development ( SPME was first developed around 25 years ago ( The amount of literature devoted to the use of SPME for the analysis of aroma is far greater than that on SPE and SAFE combined. Several reviews and book chapters have been published on the use of headspace SPME as a technique for the analysis of food aroma ( Autosamplers possessing the functionality for automated SPME include the Gerstel Multi-Purpose Sampler MPS (GERSTEL GmbH & Co.KG, Mülheim an der Ruhr, Germany) and the CTC PAL COMBI-xt (CTC Analytics, Zwingen, Switzerland). These devices are mounted on top of the gas chromatograph; the sampling device, containing the SPME syringe, travels along a beam between the injection port of the gas chromatograph, the sample tray and the incubator. A magnet at the base of the sampling device picks up the sample vials by their metal lids to transport them from the sample tray to the incubator. Samples are prepared off-line in 10-mL or 20-mL screw-cap glass vials and placed in the sample trays, which may be cooled to reduce the decomposition of unstable food samples. Sample trays contain 32 vials, and the autosampler may accommodate up to three trays. The SPME procedure is controlled by the operating software of the GC–MS system. A method is created that includes both the extraction and the GC–MS steps. A sequence may be prepared for the analysis of a set of samples. Immediately prior to extraction, the vials are transferred to an incubator where the sample is heated to a desired temperature for a defined period of time. After pre-incubation, the SPME syringe needle penetrates the septum in the screw cap and the fibre is lowered to allow extraction to occur. Prior to and during extraction, a motor in the incubator shakes the sample vials, increasing the surface area of the sample and facilitating the extraction process. After the extraction, the fibre is retracted and then desorbed in the injection port of the gas chromatograph, which contains a narrow-bore liner specific for SPME. Automated headspace solid-phase microextraction (HS-SPME) is a relatively recently introduced methodology and is only featured in a small proportion of papers where SPME has been used to characterise food aroma. When hazelnut aroma was analysed using automated HS-SPME with a GERSTEL MPS2 autosampler, a sample of only 1.5 Derivatisation has often been used for the analysis of aldehydes by HS-SPME. Aldehydes in beers were derivatised to oximes with An alternative method for derivatisation of aldehydes involves the SPME fibre being exposed to the headspace above a concentrated solution of the derivatising agent before the extraction of the sample takes place. For example, aldehydes in various types of fish were extracted onto a fibre saturated with PFBHA. A comparison of on-fibre derivatisation SPME with regular SPME showed that the former method was more sensitive for most aldehydes, particularly those with low boiling points. The mass spectra of the oximes gave peaks at Of great importance when performing an extraction is to determine if the aroma of the extract is representative of the aroma of the food from which it is derived. This is straightforward with a liquid extract but is more difficult with an SPME extract. HS-SPME has been used with some success for the analysis of polar volatiles such as furaneol. It was identified as being a key aroma compound in lychee and Gewürztraminer wine, using SPME with a PDMS fibre ( Solvent-assisted flavour evaporation (SAFE) evolved from high-vacuum transfer (HVT) techniques, in which volatile material is separated from non-volatile material in a system under vacuum by transferring the volatile material from an area of relatively high temperature to an area of very low temperature. Compared to HVT, greater thermal control and a more compact arrangement of the glassware means that SAFE is more efficient, resulting in higher yields of high-boiling and polar compounds ( In a typical SAFE procedure, a solvent extract of the food under study is prepared, usually by shaking the food with 2–3 volumes of solvent at room temperature. After extraction, the solvent is decanted from the sample and filtered. Diethyl ether is widely used as the extracting solvent, although dichloromethane is also an option. The latter does not require distillation before use and should be more effective at dissolving more polar material. If a large amount of solvent has been used in the extraction process, it may be necessary to concentrate the extract by fractional distillation before performing SAFE ( The solvent extract passes into the distillation chamber of the SAFE SAFE is widely considered to provide aroma extracts most representative of the food from which they derive. Many papers have been published in which SAFE was used to provide aroma extracts, which were then analysed by GC-O and AEDA (see The sensomics technique has also been used to identify the key compounds in roasted and raw hazelnuts ( Fractionation of the SAFE extract can provide more information about key compounds. Addition of 0.5 Although there seems to be no papers where SAFE has been ostensibly used for the quantification of furaneol, its presence has been reported in a large number of SAFE extracts. It was reported as being a major contributor to the aroma of soy sauce when SAFE was performed using dichloromethane as an extracting solvent ( SPE is a widely used analytical technique for the clean-up of non-volatile organic compounds in liquid samples. It is a one-step extraction and concentration procedure that gives a sample suitable for analysis, usually by high-performance liquid chromatography. A sorbent material within a small plastic or glass cartridge is conditioned with a solvent. Liquid sample is then loaded onto the sorbent. Compounds of interest are retained on the sorbent as the liquid passes through. The sorbent is then dried. There are then two different ways to proceed. The sorbent may be washed to remove impurities, followed by elution of the compounds of interest with a second solvent. Alternatively, the compounds of interest could be eluted directly, leaving the impurities on the sorbent ( The group of Vicente Ferreira at University of Zaragoza was arguably the first to suggest the use of commercial SPE cartridges containing styrene-divinylbenzene copolymers for the analysis of aroma compounds ( A recent paper compared the performance of a number of commercially available phases – not including LiChrolut EN – studying 21 compounds of various polarities found in wine, including terpenoids, C6 alcohols and vanillin ( Although its use in wine research is popular, SPE is not widely used for aroma analysis elsewhere. Strata-X cartridges (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA), containing a functionalised styrene-divinylbenzene polymer, have been used with some success for the analysis of polar aroma compounds in strawberries and melons. Methyl acetate was used as the eluting solvent. A number of compounds that are important in muskmelon aroma, including the polar aroma compounds homofuraneol (2-ethyl-4-hydroxy-5-methyl-3[2 More than 100 compounds were identified in musk strawberries, a type of wild strawberry, using LiChrolut EN and dichloromethane ( Ethyl acetate may also be a suitable eluting solvent; it was more effective than dichloromethane for the elution of methoxy and hydroxypyrazines from a LiChrolut-EN cartridge. These compounds are important contributors to the aromas of Cabernet grapes and bell peppers; the levels of 3-isobutyl-2-methoxypyrazine increased at the expense of 3-isobutyl-2-hydroxypyrazine as bell peppers ripened ( Furaneol has been measured successfully using SPE in a number of products. Pentane/dichloromethane (20:1) was used to elute less polar compounds from a LiChrolut EN cartridge; subsequent elution with dichloromethane resulted in an extract that was high in furaneol, sotolon and maltol (3-hydroxy-2-methyl-4-pyranone), allowing for their detection in red and white wines at levels below 1 Extraction with LiChrolut EN and elution with methanol was used to measure furaneol in clear juices from strawberry, blackberry, and raspberry. Levels of furaneol in strawberry were far higher than in blackberry and raspberry. When compared with Oasis HLB (Waters, Milford, MA) and ODS C18 (J.T. Baker, Phillipsburg, NJ) phases, LiChrolut EN performed better than both because it retained far less pigment and non-volatile material. Methanol also allowed the elution of furaneol glycoside from the LiChrolut phase, but not from the HLB and ODS phases where it was retained ( Although it is assumed that aroma extracts will be separated and analysed using GC–MS, the use of high-performance liquid chromatography as a separation technique may be an option. An appropriate methodology for the analysis of polar flavour compounds by SPE would be as follows: A suitable cartridge size would be about 6 The automated procedures described earlier in this chapter for SPME are also applicable to SPE, and the Gerstel multipurpose sampler MPS provides this as an option. No papers have been published so far using automated SPE with GC–MS for the analysis of aroma compounds, although this technique has been used to measure more than 200 pesticides in various fruits and vegetables ( Automated extraction methods will continue to increase in popularity. Those automated injector systems that perform SPME and direct headspace analysis can also be modified for the use of other syringe-based extraction techniques. One such technique is in-trap extraction (ITEX), where a sorbent material is contained within the upper half of the needle of a microsyringe ( The number of papers published using SAFE increases annually ( As for SPE, it will probably remain a niche technique for aroma extraction. However, the collection of a liquid extract is a significant advantage over SPME, and its relatively low cost and low usage of solvent make it a desirable alternative to SAFE for the analysis of low-fat foods.