The motion of a spherical inclusion (gaseous, liquid or solid) submerged in an infinite (continuous) viscous media with a constant temperature gradient is considered. The analysis is carried out by considering negligible values of the Reynolds and Marangoni (Peclet) numbers and some other certain assumptions. The formulae for the thermocapillary phoresis velocity of the inclusions with the surfactant films are derived and can be applied for emulsions containing spherical drops, systems of liquids with solid or gaseous inclusions, e.g. at flotation, metal foaming, steel refining from the inclusions.Surfactant admixtures that are placed in the system of liquid medium–foreign inclusions settle on the surface of the inclusions in the simplest case as ideal films. This process proceeds if the rise of such surface films decreases the interphase energy. For example, during the electrical discharge through a water solution with surfactant (tamol), the heating of plasma to 10 Let us consider the behavior of a spherical drop submerged in an infinite (continuous) liquid with a constant temperature gradient. In this model, one supposes that during steady movement in the temperature gradient direction the surfactant will be convected to the tail of the drop where the surfactant will form a stagnant cap at the interface ( Our purpose is to derive the steady migration velocity of an inclusion under the above conditions (thermocapillary phoresis velocity). The only driving force exerted on the inclusion in this situation – the thermocapillary force – is expressed by the equation If we make the equation The value When Eq. It is easy to see that the thermocapillary phoresis velocity in the cases of a rigid inclusion If the behavior of a gaseous inclusion (bubble) is considered then it is necessary to make in Eq. A bubble with a clean surface ( Eq. This result may be obtained from Eq. The results of calculation of the reduced velocity at the thermocapillary motion (phoresis) of bubbles (at The influence of a possible redistribution of surfactant inside the film (cap) can introduce some corrections to the above consideration describing regularities of the thermocapillary phoresis. The formulae for the thermocapillary phoresis velocity of spherical inclusions (rigid, liquid and gaseous spheres) with the surfactant films in a viscous media are derived. The application of the limiting transitions for the cases where either the surfactant is absent or where a complete surfactant coating exists, coincides well with the formulae derived by the authors earlier for moving inclusions (rigid, liquid, gaseous). Taking into account the inequality of the interfacial tension temperature coefficient of the clean surface and surfactant film, it will be possible to specify the theoretical analysis of the thermocapillary phoresis. The proposed theoretical approach is correct for dynamic conditions if the turbulence of viscous medium is ignored. For determination of rightness or irregularity of this approach for any inclusions (of different size, shape, viscosity and motion velocity) in any medium (of different viscosity, density) it is possible to be guided, for example, by diagram, which is close to the one of the shape regimes for bubbles and drops (