Laser-assisted machining has been considered as an alternative for hard-to-wear materials such as metallic alloys and ceramics. Machining of some materials such as high chromium alloys and high strength steels is still a delicate and challenging task and has received little attention. Conventional computer numerical control machines and cutting tools cannot adapt easily to such materials and induce very high tooling costs for operations of rough machining or finishing. This paper presents the results of research conducted on laser-assisted machining of one such hard-to-wear materials, high chromium white cast iron, used in making heavy duty mineral processing equipment for the mining industry. In particular, the effect of laser on temperature, cutting forces, surface profile, hardness and cutting chips are presented. Results show that laser-assisted machining causes more frequent shearing of material, less uniform surface formation, and the heat penetration increases as the distance between laser spot and tool increases. It also leads to reduction in cutting forces with expected improvement in tool life. The results indicate that laser-assisted machining of high chromium white cast iron shows potential to be a feasible alternative to hard machining of such materials.Laser-assisted machining combines laser technology with traditional machining methods such as cutting or milling. The laser is used to provide a concentrated heat source on the unmachined surface, directly in front of the cutting tool. The increased temperature in the shear zone softens the material so that it deforms in a more ductile than brittle manner thereby reducing the forces. Laser-assisted machining has been tried in many different forms on many different materials Investigations in laser-assisted machining have shown that under certain conditions, it also reduces tool wear. König and Zaboklicki Unfortunately cutting technology for machining hard-to-wear materials such as high chromium white cast iron has not developed quite as fast as the technology to create such materials. Laser-assisted machining can be used as a potential alternative method of machining such material, but literature reveals that laser-assisted machining has never been tried on this particular material. High chromium white cast iron is used in mining equipment because of its high hardness (650 One of the main applications of high chromium white cast iron is in slurry pump linings, which need to be especially wear resistant, because the sand in the slurries effectively acts as miniature cutting tools on the pumps inner surfaces. High chromium white cast iron has a typical structure of cast irons with hard chromium carbide rods surrounded by a softer ferrous matrix. Changing the size and volume of the carbide rods, done during the casting process, changes the overall hardness of the material. The variation of high chromium white cast iron used in this study has an overall hardness for 650HB, other variations are much harder than this, which make cutting them difficult and problematic. This paper presents the results from research conducted at the Swinburne University of Technology in laser-assisted machining of high chromium white cast irons using an Nd:YAG laser. Effects of laser on temperature distribution in work material, chip formation, cutting forces, hardness and surface profiles are presented. The research aims to determine if laser-assisted machining is a feasible alternative to conventional machining as a means of reducing machining costs by an increased tool life, as well as increasing the quality of such hard to wear materials. An experimental rig has been set up as shown in The work piece used is high chromium white cast iron (AS2027 Grade Cr27), which has a hardness of 650 The cutting speed used is 830 Experiments were conducted with varying depth of cut, laser power, temperature and axial laser position. During each cut, the cutting and feed forces and surface temperature were recorded and chips were collected. Hard turning experiments were also conducted as a standard to compare laser-assisted machining results against including experiments to measure tool wear. A thermal model program based on equations of transient heat transfer was used to calculate the temperatures on the surface and at depths within the work piece due to the laser. The model was used to determine the effect the laser has on the temperature of the work piece at the cutting point. It was also used to predict temperatures within the work piece generated during the laser scans used in hardness experiments. It has the capability to determine the temperature change due to the heat source at any point on the surface or within the work piece at any position in time. The model requires work piece material properties and laser operational parameters. Thermal conductivity and thermal diffusivity vary with temperature, so several iterations were done to determine the right parameters for the temperature calculated by the model. The initial values used were 30 The thermal model was used to predict the temperature change at various depths from the surface of the work piece and at various distances from the laser spot. This distance represents the distance between the laser spot and the cutting tool during laser-assisted machining. These predictions give an indication of the depth of heat penetration, due to the laser at the tool tip under various laser conditions.  The geometry of the chips produced by laser-assisted machining is evidence that the process is causing the material to deform differently. A scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used to observe the chips produced by a new tool edge for both hard turning and laser-assisted machining. In order to study the effect of laser power on cutting surface profile, a micrometer was used to measure and record the surface profile after both hard turning and laser-assisted machining cuts. The micrometer was mounted on a retort stand, which was mounted on the tool post of the lathe. The micrometer was in contact with the work piece surface at the start of the cut and set to zero. The measurement on the micrometer was recorded every 1  Previous study by Ben Salem et al. From our experiments, The force change is plotted against power density, which is calculated from the laser spot size and the laser power. This allows all cuts to be compared together. All cuts were made with 1.6 Results from experiments over all depths of cut give an average cutting force reduction of 8.3%, with a maximum reduction of 24%. The average feed force reduction was 12%, with a maximum reduction of 22%. These results prove that moving the laser spot closer to the cutting tool reduces turning forces, confirming that this distance is a critical factor in the success of laser-assisted machining. To study the effects of laser on hardness of the work piece, hardness tests were done after several laser scans with different laser power and laser spot sizes. Laser scans were conducted with the laser passed over the work piece without the cutting tool engaged. The equipment was set up in such a way that even though the tool was not cutting the work piece, the laser still tracked across the work piece when the feed was engaged. Once the scans were completed, the work piece was then sectioned so that the hardness could be measured at different depths below the surface. A microhardness tester was used to measure the Knoop hardness with a testing weight of 500  It is clear that, in general, the higher the laser power, the higher the hardness is near the surface of the work piece. There appears to be no clear correlation between the depth of heat penetration and the hardness. This result is independent of any changes to hardness caused by grinding or cutting of the sample or hardness variations due to casting. High chromium white cast iron is a very brittle material and cracks easily. As much as possible, cracks and large grooves were avoided when conducting hardness tests. Laser-assisted machining offers a possible alternative to current machining methods for machining hard to wear materials such as high chromium white cast iron. The temperature model results show that as expected the heat penetration increases as the distance between the laser spot and the cutting tool is increased, however, the surface temperature is reduced. This is because the heat has more time to dissipate into the work piece. Also increase in the laser power resulted in an increase in surface temperature and depth of heat penetration. Observations of chip formation indicate that laser is causing more frequent shearing of material, and surface profile results point to less uniform surface formation, due to laser-assisted machining. Laser-assisted machining of this material shows a maximum reduction of 24% in cutting forces and a maximum reduction of 22% in feed forces. Laser power increase tends to cause an increase in the hardness of near the surface of the workpiece. Authors acknowledge the ARC Linkage research grant awarded by