This paper presents results of an experimental investigation into the time scale of local scour and backfill for a subsea pipeline in changing flow conditions, modelled as two consecutive but different flow conditions and as uniformly increasing flow velocities. Unidirectional current flow, waves and combined waves and current flow are all considered. Based on the results of the experiments, effective time scales of the scour and backfill are quantified and algorithms to predict the scour process in changing flow conditions are derived by accumulating the effects of the different flow conditions. It is found that these algorithms may be used to predict the scour observed in the experimental data reasonably well.Considerable progress has been made in the area of scour around subsea pipelines and cables in the past four decades due to the rapid growth of the offshore oil and gas industry and the offshore renewable energy industry (including, for example the development of additional offshore wind farms). Most early investigations into local scour below subsea pipelines focused on a single flow conditions (i.e. the flow condition did not change during scour). These investigations have included two-dimensional physical model experiments to measure the extent and rate of scour in steady current However, despite these earlier studies, scour development under time-varying flow conditions is arguably of more concerned for offshore pipeline design. This is because scour development may be most critical, for example, during the development of a storm in which seabed velocities are changing. Several researchers have therefore investigated scour around pipelines and other marine structures in time-varying flow conditions. For example, Fredsøe and Sumer Zhang and Draper The experiments undertaken in this investigation were performed in the O-tube flumes at The University of Western Australia. The O-tube flumes are fully enclosed recirculating water tunnels with a rectangular test section and a propeller-type pump driven by a motor. Two different size O-tubes were employed in this study, the large O-tube (LOT) and the mini O-tube (MOT) respectively. The test section of the LOT is 17.6 The MOT facility is approximately 5 times smaller than the LOT. The MOT facility is 2.5 A SonTek Acoustic Doppler velocimeter (ADV) was used to measure the velocity at a sampling rate of 50 For waves only, as well as combined waves and current, flow conditions, the ADV was located centrally 2 For increasing (ramp-up) flow condition in unidirectional currents the ADV was also located at the same point as that described above for the waves only and combined waves and current flow condition test. The ramp-up rate For ramp-up waves only and ramp-up combined waves and current flow conditions, the ADV was again located at the same point as that used for the waves only and combined waves and current flow condition test. The ramp-up rate To monitor the scour depth in the LOT a 2 Scour profiles were also obtained from video images recorded during the LOT and MOT tests. The final scour profile of each experiment in the LOT was also scanned using a handheld three-dimensional (3D) scanner based on Microsoft Kinect. The 3D profile is captured by an infrared (IR) emitter and an IR depth sensor equipped in the scanner. The emitter emits infrared light beams and the depth sensor reads the IR beams reflected back to the sensor. The reflected beams are converted into depth information measuring the distance between an object and the sensor. The resolution of the resulting 3D depth image is up to 640 The final scour profile in the MOT was measured using a SICK Ranger 3D camera with ±−0.1 Experiments under consecutive flow conditions were conducted in the LOT. Each of this type of experiment was divided into two stages. The first stage started from a flat seabed, with no gap/embedment between the pipeline and seabed. The pipeline was fixed in position and the test was run until scour reached an equilibrium conditions. For the second stage of the test, the pipeline was again held fixed in position, but a different flow condition was introduced until a new equilibrium scour profile was reached. At the end of each stage the scour profile was scanned by the handheld 3D camera. The ramp-up experiments were conducted in the MOT facility. Each ramp-up experiment consisted of a ramp-up stage and a constant flow stage. The test was started with a flat seabed and no gap between the pipeline and the seabed. Ramp-up flow conditions were then introduced for a fixed period of time. Following this, the pipeline was maintained at this original position, and the peak flow was held constant for a fixed period of time. The conditions and results of the experiments under consecutive flow conditions are summarized in For the steady current experiments listed in The pipeline Reynolds number in unidirectional current is defined as: The viscosity of water is taken to be 1 Likewise, the Shields parameter in unidirectional current For the waves only experiments listed in the tables, The Keulegan–Carpenter number is defined as: The wave Shields parameter Here, In the case of a hydraulically smooth bed ( For the combined waves and current flow conditions, the flow ratio The maximum Shields parameter-in combined waves and current has been calculated according to: The mean shear stress, The velocity time history experienced by a pipeline installed on a seabed over many years is quite complex and can include tidal currents, solitons and storms with different return periods. Different flow conditions lead to different scour profiles around the pipe, such as symmetric scour profiles (see In combination, a series of different flow conditions and flow intensities will therefore alter the evolution of the scour depth underneath the pipe. The increase of the approaching flow intensity normally causes the sediment transport capacity underneath the pipe to increase. Consequently, the scour depth underneath the pipeline may become deeper, and such a transitional process may be called a continued scour process. We consider this continued scour process in this section, presenting results for both types of experiment where scour was observed to increase (or continue) throughout the experiment. To investigate the influence of the increase in approach flow intensity, the case of a sequence of two different, yet constant, flow conditions are examined first. This scenario resembles one step change in flow conditions. For the time scale of scour below subsea pipelines under current only and waves only regimes, Whitehouse Now, considering each of the two consecutive flow conditions in turn, the scour development for the initial flow condition can be expressed as: The scour due to the second flow condition develops from the equilibrium scour profile reached after the first flow condition. Therefore, if we adopt a step model the scour depth may be expressed as: For Here, For Here, We now compare Eq. The scour depth time histories during the whole process, including the scour process of the first stage and the scour process of the second stage, are plotted in For For The time elapsed to reach the equilibrium scour depth in the second flow condition was calculated using Eq. The results in For completeness, The second type of continued scour process that has been simulated is a uniformly increasing flow condition, or a ‘ramp-up’ flow. This scenario is important to understand because, in practice, it can be used to simulate the ramp-up phase of a storm. The whole period of a storm normally contains three stages, the ramp-up stage, the peak and the ramp-down stage. In this section, the first two stages during a whole period of a storm are considered. As noted in Section Assuming that the scour development with time can be defined by Eq. For For Taking a ramp-up current case as an example, if the current velocity increases at a constant rate of The time scale for each time step is dependent on the current Shields parameter, corresponding to the current velocity in each time step. For  The For the combined waves and current ramp-up case, the time interval was also set to the wave time period or several wave time periods. The equilibrium scour depth in each time step was estimated using the empirical formulae proposed in Here,  Overall, the scour depth development time history has been predicted in the present study reasonably well. The method with The previous two sections demonstrated that the equilibrium scour depth is increased due to a change in the flow conditions. However if a scour hole is generated by one flow condition and the second flow has a lower intensity, the scour hole formed in the first step may be backfilled. This is because the decrease in the approach flow intensity causes the sediment transport capacity of the flow underneath the pipeline to drop. Consequently, the sediment may accumulate underneath the pipeline, and the scour depth may become shallower. Such a transitional process is so-called a backfilling process. For a substantial amount of backfill to develop, a certain amount of time must elapse. This time can be described in terms of the time scale of the backfilling process. To quantify this time scale, a general formula introduced by Sumer and Petersen Two tests related to the backfilling process were performed in the present study to investigate the backfilling process and access the analysis method. These tests included LB1-2 and LB2-2, respectively. The final equilibrium scour depth and the time scale of the backfilling process were obtained by curve fitting to the experimental data. Due to the limited amount of test data, it is impossible to demonstrate the best fit coefficient  For test LB2-2 ( Based on the present experiments, it appears that the scour profile always transforms from one related to the initial flow conditions to one related to the final flow conditions. This transformation happens simultaneously with the scour depth increase (continued scour process) or decrease (backfilling process). However, if a dramatic change in scour profile needs to be achieved such as in test LB2-2, it may take a long time before the scour depth becomes stable. In this paper, local scour below a pipeline has been investigated experimentally for two consecutive flow conditions and uniform ramp-up flow conditions. The following conclusions can be drawn from this investigation: Continued scour beneath a pipeline occurs when the flow climate changes from a relatively weak flow (with small equilibrium scour depth) to a relatively strong flow (with larger equilibrium scour depth). Furthermore, the final scour profile is determined by the final flow condition. The scour depth development in continued scour processes can be predicted by accumulating scour depth in each successive flow condition. The scour depth and dimensionless time scale empirical formulae obtained in previous papers The backfilling of a scour hole beneath a pipeline occurs when the flow climate changes from a relatively flow condition conducive to large scour, to a flow condition conducive to relatively small scour. Furthermore, the final scour profile is determined by the final flow condition. The time scale of the backfilling process is completely different from the scour process. The time scale of backfilling is much larger than that of the scour process in the present test results. There is a transformation period in both the continued scour process and the backfilling process. If the overall scour morphology around the pipeline changes due to the second flow condition (i.e. the width and depth change), the transformation can take much more time to accomplish. The following symbols are used in the paper: diameter of the pipeline median grain size of bed sediment friction coefficient in waves acceleration due to gravity Keulegan–Carpenter number Nikuradse roughness number of cycles of the oscillating flow empirical coefficient amplitude Reynolds number Time-varying scour depth equilibrium scour depth corresponding to the first flow condition equilibrium scour depth corresponding to the second flow condition equilibrium scour depth corresponding to the current component at the level of pipeline centre in the combined waves and current flow conditions initial scour depth corresponding to the initial flow condition final scour depth corresponding to the final flow condition equilibrium scour depth corresponding to the increased flow conditions for each increment equilibrium scour depth corresponding to the wave component at the level of pipeline centre in the combined waves and current flow conditions equilibrium scour depth in combined waves and current flow condition relative density of the sediment characteristic time scale of the scour process time scale corresponding to the first flow condition time scale corresponding to the second flow condition characteristic time scale based on characteristic time scale based on time scale of the backfilling process characteristic time scale based on Eq. characteristic time scale based on Eq. oscillatory flow period non-dimensional time scale based on non-dimensional time scale based on time time elapsed for the second flow conditions to achieve the scour depth of the first flow condition time corresponding to time corresponding to current flow velocity maximum velocity in uniformly increasing current flow oscillatory flow velocity maximum oscillatory flow velocity in uniformly increasing wave flow combined waves and current flow velocity average instantaneous flow velocity friction velocity in current friction velocity in waves bed roughness length initial rate of increase of free stream amplitude ramping rate Shields parameter current Shields parameter maximum Shields parameter wave Shields parameter von Karman's constant kinematic viscosity of water shear stress current shear stress mean shear stress maximum shear stress wave shear stress phase angular frequency of the oscillating flow This work was supported by an