A series of non-ionic alcohol ethoxylated surfactants (with HLB within the range of 11.1–12.5) were used as dispersants during flotation of mondisperse hydrophobised silica particles (representing ink particles) in de-inking formulations. Laboratory scale flotation experiments, contact angle, dynamic surface tension and thin film drainage experiments were carried out. The reduction in dynamic surface tension at the air/solution interface (which is dependent on the adsorption kinetics) followed the order C10E6>C12E8≈C12E6>C14E6 and these values were lower than sodium oleate, which is commonly used in de-inking systems. In addition the non-ionics adsorbed on the hydrophobised silica particles reducing the contact angle. These results indicated that the non-ionic surfactant with the highest CMC (C10E6) gave (a) the highest rate of adsorption at the air/solution interface (b) the froth with the greatest water content and higher froth volume (c) the lowest reduction in contact angle and (d) the highest flotation efficiency at concentrations above the CMC. It was also observed that flotation occurred, in spite of the fact that thin-film measurements indicated that the adsorption of non-ionic at the air/solution and silica/solution interfaces reduced the hydrophobicity of the particles, as indicated by an increase in stability of the aqueous thin film between the particle and air-bubble. This result suggests that the bubble-ink particle captures mechanism (occurring through rupture of the thin aqueous film separating the interfaces) is not the only mechanism controlling the flotation efficiency and that other parameters (such as the kinetics of surfactant adsorption, foaming characteristics, and bubble size) need to be taken into account. The kinetics is important with respect to the rate of adsorption of surfactant to both interfaces. Under equilibrium conditions, this may give rise to repulsive steric forces between the air-bubble and the particles (stable aqueous thin-films). However, a lower amount of surfactant adsorbed at a freshly formed air bubble or inkparticle (caused by slow adsorption rates) will produce a lower steric repulsive force allowing effective collection of particles by the bubble. Also, it was suggested that the influence of alcohol ethoxylates on bubble-size could effect the particle capture rate and mechanical entrainment of particles in an excessively buoyant froth, which will also play an important role in the flotation recovery.The role of fatty acids as agglomeration and flotation agents, which act to separate the ink particles in the froth flotation deinking cell, has been clearly established in recent years. In fact, it has been shown from both laboratory de-inking experiments and fundamental surface force measurements that calcium soap particles are produced from the precipitation of these long chain anions with calcium ions In addition, non-ionic co-surfactants such as alcohol ethoxylated surfactants are also frequently added to the pulper in combination with sodium hydroxide (always added) to improve the detachment of the ink film from the fibres. The surfactants added tend to work as dispersing agents for the ink and sticky particles and therefore help ink detachment but also stabilise the bubbles and improves the characteristics of the foam in the flotation cell Further investigation on the aggregation of ink particles have failed to correlate contact angle with flotation but from these studies it was concluded that flotation efficiency is drastically influenced by the particle size To summarise, it may be concluded that the influence of the non-ionic alcohol ethoxylate co-surfactant on the detachment, dispersion and floatability of the ink particles has not yet been completely resolved, although it is well known that chemicals with dispersing properties such as carboxy methyl cellulose, starch and lignosulponates decrease the flotation efficiency The studied dispersing agents were selected from a homologous series of linear alcohol ethoxylate surfactants with a wide hydrophobic/hydrophilic range. They were supplied by Nikkol and are listed in Samples of process water from full-scale industrial de-inking lines were analysed and the results compared with the model experimental systems. The samples were taken both from the inlet and outlet to the flotation cell and collected during routine flotation operations. Solids were removed from the sample by centrifugation. Four different sets of samples were collected from different plants throughout Europe. Silanised silica glass spheres (ballotini, 100–160 μm) were chosen as models for the ink particles. In order to produce a silanised hydrophobic surface the spheres were chemically treated as follows: Eight gram silica particles were covered with bichromate sulphuric acid mixture in a small beaker. The mixture was then reacted for 15 min at 60°C. The particles were then filtrated and rinsed with MilliQ water in a glass filter unit and then rinsed first with ethanol and then with toluene. The rinsed particles were transferred to a small beaker. The remaining toluene was removed with a pipette and by evaporation at room temperature. Dimethyl dichloro silane was then added until the particles were covered and the beaker was covered by a petri dish and left for 24 h. The particles was rinsed first with toluene and then with ethanol into a glass filter funnel. The particles were then transferred to a beaker with ethanol. Excess ethanol was removed with a pipette while the remaining ethanol was allowed to evaporate. The dynamic surface tension was measured using the maximum bubble pressure method using an electrical bubble frequency sensor γ=Surface tension of the solution, Δ The surface tension as a function of time is recorded by changing the life time of the bubbles by decreasing the gas flow. Using the DST equipment measurements were carried out in the millisecond range. For the equilibrium surface tension measurements, a Noüy ring tensiometer was used following standard procedure. In the flotation experiments a column cell was used, diameter 5.5 cm, height 16 cm with a size 3 glass fritt (pore size 15–40 μm) in the base. A stirrer bar magnet, 4 cm, was used for agitation. A suspension of hydrophobised particles (0.8 g in 200 ml MilliQ water) was prepared in a beaker and the chemicals added. The suspension was then stirred and conditioned for 1 h. The particle suspension was poured into the flotation cell and diluted to 400 ml. The particles were then floated at a gas flow to 100 ml min The equilibrium contact angle was measured by microscope technique using the Mingins–Scheludko method A plane parallel optically polished silica plate was hydrophobised with methylation with dichloro dimethyl silane, following the same procedure as with the silica particles. The plate was supplied by TEBECO, Galmstadt. The method used to study the properties of thin wetting films has been developed by Scheludko et al. The kinetics of TPC expansion of the dewetting step are represented by the The froth was collected from the surface of the liquid over different time periods extending up to 3 min. The frothability was expressed as the volume (ml) of liquid removed in the froth phase. Since the froth was unstable, this value was determined for the amount of liquid remaining after the froth had collapsed. This liquid was then filtered and the amount of solid determined. The flotation efficiency was then expressed as the solids content (%) of the liquid, which was extracted from the froth. Flotation is a dynamic process and therefore surface tension measurements carried under relatively short time scales gives valuable information concerning the mechanism of flotation. The results relating the surface tension to the time (at 10 At first sight these results would appear to suggest that the increases in dynamic surface activity is due to the higher diffusion rate of the smaller molecule at the air/water interface. However, this is probably not the main reason and it is important to take into consideration the influence of the surfactant concentration in relationship to the CMC values for the non-ionic systems. The CMC follows the order C This concentration effect can be further demonstrated from the plots of the normalised surface tension under both dynamic and equilibrium conditions as displayed by In fact, the surface activity appears to be governed by the amount of free monomer in solution and the higher this concentration, then the greater the amount capable of diffusion and adsorption at the air/solution interface reducing the surface tension. However, in the case of the equilibrium surface tension versus concentration data, the surfactants show almost identical behaviour with the minimum in surface activity corresponding to the CMC. These results indicate the importance of the free surfactant monomer concentration in determining the dynamics surface activity. It is also interesting to note from This can be explained by the diffusion of surfactant to the interface. Under short time scales, the fall in surface tension is diffusion controlled but over longer time periods the concentration of surfactant begins to build- up at the surface. This causes an accumulation of a second layer of surfactant below the surface until its concentration is high enough to overcome the potential energy barrier. However, in the case of anionic surfactant, then a negative surface potential is built-up which slows down further diffusion due to a repulsive potential. This causes deviations from the simple diffusion model, due to the surface charge. A model has been developed to take account of these changes In order to investigate the influence of hydrophobic particles on the surfactant solution properties, the surface tension for the surfactants were measured before and after addition of hydrophobised particles. From the results, no significant changes in surface tension were detected indicating that the bulk concentration was not affected by the presence of particles under the experimental conditions. The surface tension of process circulation water was measured. This enables a comparison to be made of the influence of surfactants in the plant and in the laboratory. The surface tension results from the process water from four different de-inking lines are shown in Equilibrium surface tension: Line 1 inlet 47.3 and outlet 50.6 mN m Line 2 inlet 51.9 and outlet 52.8 mN m Line 3 inlet 48.6 and outlet 50.7 mN m Line 4 inlet 43.4 and outlet 48.8 mN m These results indicate a fairly rapid, initial reduction in surface tension, although the surfactant concentration did not seem to be very high. The process waters seemed to behave rather similar to the non-ionic systems at the intermediate concentration (about1×10 Another interesting conclusion can be made by comparing the inlet and accept values. In all cases, the surface tension was higher after flotation, although the difference seemed not be very large (maximum 5–6 mN m During disintegration of old paper in the pulping process, the fibre concentration is usually between 10–15% dry weight fibre, while later in the process during flotation the system has been diluted to approximately 1% fibre content. This indicates that a fairly high amount of surfactant can be added during pulping (to improve ink detachment or wash de-inking) without seriously affecting the flotation performance, since during flotation this concentration will be diluted to one tenth of the concentration in the pulper. Finally, it is of interest to note that the different flotation line behave rather similarly. The only exception was Line 2, which had the highest equilibrium surface tension on approaching equilibrium and where there was almost no surfactant consumption taking place during flotation. The results of the contact angle measurements on hydrophobised particles dispersed in the non-ionic ethylene oxide surfactant series are shown in For the C The behaviour can be explained by the stronger adsorption of that the more hydrophobic tails of the surfactant on the hydrophobic particle exposing the hydrophilic tails in the aqueous phase. At higher surfactant concentrations (10 Thin films can be used as a model for studying the interaction between the interfaces. The stability of a thin film between an air bubble and surface provides useful information on the effect of surfactant silica on the structure and change in hydrophobicity of the adsorbed layer. The results from the measurements of the thin film stability, the film lifetime and the TPC expansion rate are shown in In pure water, an unstable film was observed with infinite lifetime. Film instability in the case of pure water on methylated silica has been explained by non-DLVO forces. According to Schultze At extremely low surfactant concentrations (in the order of 10 One explanation for the stability of the film at high concentration is the formation of the surfactant monolayer on the silica surface with the hydrated ethylene oxide chains extending from the surface into the solution. A similar ethylene oxide layer of the bubble surface creates a repulsive force between the two surfaces. The floatation was plotted versus the volume of liquid remaining in the froth. The flotation results from the experiments with hydrophobised silica particles can be seen in In Comparison of thin films measurements with contact angles suggests that contact between air and the hydrophobised particles should not be possible at a surfactant concentration of 10 Under these circumstances, it is important to take into consideration the influence of the dynamic surface tension on the frothing and the bubble size in addition to the bubble/particle contact mechanism. In fact, control of the froth through the surface tension is a very important parameter to consider. In general, a low surface tension value has certain advantages in that it reduces the bubble size and stabilises the froth. In fact, a large amount of small bubbles increases the flotation rate. In addition, they should be a sufficient excess monomer in solution to facilitate the Gibbs–Maragoni effect which is one of the main mechanisms stabilising the froth. However, excess monomer causes too stable froth and excess frothing. In the opposite case, a high surface tension reduction may counteract the flotation since the force of adhesion between an ink particle and an air-bubble is directly proportional to the magnitude of the surface tension, see  In addition to true flotation, which involves direct collision between the bubble and particle causing rupture of the thin aqueous film and direct contact, there is also a secondary mode of transport of particles from the pulp to the froth zone known as entrainment. This is the mode of transport usually occurring for smaller particles but with buoyant froths (as in the case of the low CMC and low HLB systems). It can be very important for smaller particles and this mechanism is non-selective (it is not a function of hydrophobicity). Entrainment is the process where particles enter the base of the flotation froth and are transferred up and out of the flotation cell suspended in water between bubbles. In the practical de-inking systems, it can be detrimental to the selectivity of the process causing fibre and other matter to be removed with the froth Entrainment depends on such factors as the specific gravity, particles size, residence time of air in the froth and froth structure. Froth structure in turn depends on frother type, concentration and water chemistry. In general, there is a direct relationship between the recovery of entrained solids and the recovery of feed water (above a certain minimum water recovery). The degree of entrainment has been defined as the ration of the entrainment recovery of solids and the recovery of water. The frothing characteristics of the solution needs to be closely controlled so that there is sufficient surfactant to produce a froth layer stable enough to entrap the ink particles but the lifetime of the froth should be sufficient to cause separation from the pulp slurry. However, excessive amounts of stable froth can cause operational problems, fibre loss and entrapment. These experiments illustrate the critical nature of the inter-relationship between surface tension, contact angle, foaming and flotation efficiency in the de-inking system. Rao and Stenius In addition, foam half-life declined steeply with increasing HLB in agreement with the study carried out by Garrett and Gratton It is clear from the results that the floatability is related to dynamics of adsorption of alcohol ethoxylates at the air/liquid and liquid/solid interfaces. Rapid surfactant adsorption at the air/liquid interface leads to a reduced floatability of the particles. The importance of the kinetics of surfactant adsorption at the interfaces is displayed by the clear relationship between dynamic surface tension, floatation and frothability. It should also be noted that the flotation data was found to correlate with what is expected from adsorption measurements of this type of surfactants on hydrophobic surfaces. The adsorption rate increases with increasing hydrophobicity of the surfactant with a saturation adsorption being reached close to the CMC In fact, from thin film results and contact angle, it can be suggested that the adsorption of non-ionic on the hydrophobic surface and the bubble-particle dewetting process are not the only mechanisms controlling flotation efficiency and that non-ionic surfactant can have an important influence on the bubble size and froth stability. Under these circumstances, the entrainment process can play an important role. Finally, it must be noted that these experiments have been performed in a small laboratory cell with a short retention time for the air bubbles. In an industrial process, flotation is performed in the presence of 1% (dry weight) in large flotation tanks with a much longer retention time for the air bubbles under turbulence. This indicates that in this case the thin-films measurement might give us a better indication of the effect of the dispersing agents. It has been claimed that the retention time for an air bubble in a pulp suspension may be in the time frame of minutes rather than seconds. Also, it is important to note that de-inking is carried out at surfactant concentrations below 10  The kinetics of the surface tension reduction for three different alcohol ethoxylated surfactant throughout the concentration from 10 Data obtained from dynamic surface tension measurements on industrial flotation cell waters show similar surface tension characteristics as the alcohol ethoxylated surfactants at a concentration of 10 The floatability for the different surfactants at 10 The thin-film and contact angle measurements show that the increase in surfactant tends to increase the thin film stability and reduce the flotation. This result also suggests that the bubble-particle capture mechanism (occurring through thin film rupture) is not the only mechanism involved in the flotation process. In addition to bubble-particle capture, the removal of the hydrophobic particles from the de-inking cell with high concentrations of dispersing agents may also occur, partly by an entrainment mechanism within the froth phase and will be also influenced by the size of the bubbles. This work was financed by The Swedish Pulp and Paper Research Foundation and the Bo Rydin Foundation. Thanks also to Maria Johansson and Dr Jerzy Kizling for their assistance with some of the laboratory experiments.