 The roots of quantitative geology were explored by In 1958 Bill Krumbein and Larry Sloss published the first computer program for use by geologists in solving some of their problems ( The computer revolution from that time on then swept the geological sciences after introduction of the IBM 650, the first commercial computer. The University of Kansas obtained one of these amazing machines in 1957 and by 1962 it had been replaced with an IBM 1620. One of the problems was the distribution of numerical data and computer programs to analyze those data. Many of the quantitative aspects of the subject were not in the realm of the qualitative practitioners of the time, so how to distribute the data and programs and educate those in their use?  The Kansas Geological Survey (KGS) heard the call and began publishing programs with trial data sets in the early 1960s in their The computer revolution was underway and happening fast so speed in publication was of the essence. Each computer SDP publication consisted of an introduction, program description, listing of the program, sample input and output, an example, and references if appropriate. At the end of the publication was a program abstract containing all the pertinent information necessary to run the program described in the publication. These publications proved valuable and popular and in addition to the publication, the Survey made the programs available on punched cards for a nominal fee. Around 13 papers were published in this SDP series from 1963 to 1966 before the Survey's dedicated Fifty CCs were published between 1966 and 1970 containing programs with sample data, applications of quantitative techniques to solving geological problems, and proceedings from a symposia series on The computer programs were in a variety of languages as they were developed, including Balgol, Algol, Fortran II and IV, and APL. The programs with sample data were distributed by the Survey on punched cards and later by magnetic tape. The programs were written to run on IBM 1620s, 7040s, 7094s, the CDC 3400, 3600, and 6400, GE 625 and 635, and the Univac 1108. As the computers got larger in capacity and faster, languages were developed to take advantage of these improvements and became more sophisticated. The format and presentation of the KGS computer series were patterned after the short-lived IBM computer publication series started and guided by Bill Peikert, who headed the petroleum geology group at IBM and was one of Bill Krumbein's students from Northwestern University. About 40,000 of these CC publications were distributed worldwide. In 1971 the first program appeared in In those 10 issues the subjects covered included mathematically defined surfaces, probability of success in locating elliptical targets, maximum likelihood estimation, geochemical similarity analysis, discriminant classification of spatial data, simulation slope profile development, spline-surface interpolation and contour map production, and correspondence analysis ( The Colloquia started at Kansas were continued at Syracuse University under the title of Geochautauquas and then traveled to numerous other venues before being incorporated into the annual meeting of the IAMG (  In 1975 the Indiana Geological Survey (IGS) started a similar series entitled Sessions with a heading such as  There were four issues per year until 1989 when it was enlarged to six issues and the last issue Vol. 7, No. 6, was dated December '92, January '93. Most of the early issues contained information of upcoming meetings, availability of software, and news of interest. Starting with volume 5 number 5 the journal carried authored articles about hardware and software of interest to earth scientists.  The IAMG has sponsored many meetings since founding in 1968 and several with the IGC (  The IAMG, founded at the ill-fated International Geological Congress in Prague in 1968 ( Starting with volume 40 in 2008 the name was changed to   Although MG is mainly oriented toward mathematics and statistics that can be used to help solve geological problems, C&G publishes programs and algorithm of computer code to help solve those problems as well as research and application papers (  In 1992, Dick McCammon founded another IAMG journal—  In 1984, the IAMG founded The Association began having annual meetings in 1994 and every four years in conjunction with the International Geological Congress (IGC). At the IGC the IAMG usually had sponsored several sessions ( APCOM meetings are internationally sponsored after being started by the Mining Department at the University of Arizona in 1961. They were held annually at first and then biannually and on an ad hoc basis. Although primary for those working in the mineral industry, sessions also are organized and held on geology and geological applications ( As a result of the computer revolution, books on the use of statistics and mathematics to solve geological problems and computer programs to implement the analyses started to appear ( Titles of the books indicate that statistics were and are used extensively in the analysis of sediments (e.g., Griffiths and Krumbein/Pettijohn) and paleontological problems (e.g., Sokal/Sneath and Reyment; I thank Janice Sorensen, information specialist at the Kansas Geological Survey, for help in locating difficult-to-find publications and helping to obtain needed information. Sean Dessureault in the Mining Department at the University of Arizona kindly provided data on the APCOM meetings. JoAnne deGraffenreid provided additional information and critically read the manuscript. James Merriam of Derby, Kansas, kindly provided the graphics.