Geometallurgy offers significant value to the minerals industry and as a result, Namakwa Sands, a South African heavy mineral sands operation, has implemented a systematic geometallurgical strategy that is integrated with its existing mineral resource management processes. This paper reports on the advanced ore characterisation of the Namakwa Sands deposit, and aims to define the constituent ore types in terms of bulk geochemistry and mineralogy, including the mineral characteristics that could possibly affect recovery. A novel geometallurgical template model was developed at Namakwa Sands to study and quantify the penalties that deleterious mineral characteristics could potentially impose on the recovery of the ore minerals. In addition to enhanced mineral resource definition, this geometallurgical template model allows mineral resource scoring and ranking based on potential mineral recoveries. The generic structure of the geometallurgical template model makes it potentially viable for general application in the mineral sands industry.The practise of geometallurgy has gained significant popularity over the past five years and major advances in materials characterisation together with increased computer modelling capabilities have contributed to increased research output in this multidisciplinary subject area ( Numerous case studies have been published the last few years describing the geometallurgy of various commodities including base metals ( As a pro-active measure, Namakwa Sands, a South African heavy minerals operation, has implemented a systematic geometallurgical strategy that has fundamental tenets in ore characterisation and process mineralogy. This paper focuses on the advanced ore characterisation part, and is aimed to define the various ore types of the Namakwa Sands deposit in terms of bulk geochemistry and mineralogy, including the mineral characteristics that could possibly affect the recovery of the valuable heavy mineral fraction. A novel geometallurgical template model was developed to study and quantify the penalties these mineral characteristics could potentially impose on the recovery of the valuable mineral fraction. As a result, for the first time, the mineral recovery potential for all discrete ore types that constitute the Namakwa Sands deposit has been estimated. In addition to enhanced ore classification, this geometallurgical template model also allows for mineral resource scoring and ranking, which are critically important to improve mineral resource management processes. Namakwa Sands, currently operated by Tronox Limited, is a heavy minerals mining and beneficiation business located on the west coast of South Africa ( The commercial beneficiation of saleable heavy mineral products requires the physical separation of individual particles, which is accomplished by exploiting the differences in four key mineral characteristics: density, size, magnetic susceptibility and electrical conductivity ( The Namakwa Sands geometallurgical study was designed to integrate with the current mineral resource management processes and follows two routes, namely process mineralogy and ore characterisation ( Geological samples used in this study were collected by means of reverse circulation percussion (RCP) drilling. RCP drill samples were collected at 1 Namakwa Sands makes extensive use of wet high intensity magnetic separators (WHIMS) at the secondary concentration plant (SCP) and acquiring information about the magnetic properties of the current heavy mineral suite is therefore of great consequence. Laboratory scale magnetic equipment operated under similar conditions as the WHIMS was used to characterise the sample suite magnetically. Yields were recorded for the resultant magnetic, middlings and non-magnetic fractions, which were subjected to further analysis to determine mineral deportment. Hot acid leaching and wet mechanical attritioning are critical processes used at Namakwa Sands to enhance mineral separation and to reduce mineral surface contaminants. These processes are directed to improve mineral liberation and surface exposure as well as bulk chemical quality. Laboratory scale equipment, operated under conditions similar to those used in the plant, was employed to attrition the magnetic fractions, while the non-magnetic fractions were subjected to hot acid leaching. These processed samples were subjected to further analysis to evaluate attritioning and leaching efficiencies. An analytical framework for comprehensive material characterisation was developed. The analytical strategy was structured into three tiers, representing increasing analytical resolution. Tier 1 comprised bulk analysis by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) and X-ray diffraction (XRD). Tier 2 involved mineral assemblage analysis where isolated heavy mineral or magnetic mineral fractions were analysed using optical microscopy and QEMSCAN. The focus of Tier 3 was on mineral-specific analysis, where key heavy minerals were targeted for single grain analysis using electron microprobe (EMP) and laser ablation techniques (LA-ICP-MS). XRF analysis was primarily performed in-house, whereas QEMSCAN and XRD analysis were performed by Anglo Research. The Council for Geoscience and the University of Cape Town provided EMP analysis. Stellenbosch University made their LA-ICP-MS facilities available. SGS Lakefield Africa rendered verification services. Instrumentation detail, their operating conditions as well as the analytical results are available upon request. The Namakwa Sands geometallurgical model is structured generically and is based on four templates that contain key variables relevant to the component it represents. Firstly, spatially defined geological, assay and mineralogical data were merged to produce an ore characterisation template that synoptically portrays the various ore types. The minerals processing template features the quantified relationships between ore characteristics, throughput, output and mineral recovery that were assembled from an 18 Namakwa Sands pre-mining mineral resources are estimated in excess of 1.1 The Namakwa Sands deposit consists of two neighbouring, but distinctly different, ore bodies called Graauwduinen East and Graauwduinen West ( The bulk ore characteristics that were considered to impact mineral recovery include oversize, slimes, heavy mineral composition and mineral grades. The ore characterisation template was systematically populated with this data ( Oversize, the fraction coarser than 1 The effective removal of slimes (−45 Rutile, zircon, garnet, pyroxene and a diverse Fe–Ti oxide mineral assemblage form the major components of the heavy mineral suite at Namakwa Sands. Various other heavy minerals are present in minor and trace quantities. Ilmenite and leucoxene, an alteration product of ilmenite, constitute the bulk of the Fe–Ti oxide mineral fraction, which also contains lesser amounts of hematite and magnetite. The heavy mineral assemblages of the two ore bodies are conspicuously different. Graauwduinen East is characteristically devoid of pyroxene, contains very little garnet, and features heavy mineral assemblages dominated by Fe–Ti oxides, followed by zircon and rutile in order of decreasing abundance. The valuable heavy minerals constitute more than 80% of the THM contained at Graauwduinen East. By contrast, only 50% of the THM assemblage of Graauwduinen West is valuable ( These gangue minerals tend to affect separation processes to different degrees at the various processing plants. Firstly, the variability in heavy mineral composition results in strikingly diverse density profiles for the different ore types. The Graauwduinen West ore, particularly the OFS and strandline deposits, which are highly elevated in gangue minerals, have the potential to disrupt the control of PCP West, which is operated at a fixed density cut-point of 3.6 The concentration of total heavy minerals (THM) varies considerably and ranges from a fraction of a percent to exceptionally high values in the Namakwa Sands deposit ( Titanium and zirconium, the metals of primary economic interest, exhibit strikingly linear-positive correlations and reach anomalous concentrations in the two strandline deposits. TiO In 2010, Namakwa Sands abandoned the industry norm of THM control (cf. The particle characteristics that were considered to impact mineral recovery include mineral liberation, size, shape, magnetic deportment, mineral surface exposure and particle chemistry. The data were condensed into the ore characterisation template ( Primary concentrator plants employ spirals to accomplish separation based on the differences in specific gravities of particles, and generally the higher the density of a particle the better its recovery ( In this study liberated particles are defined as those that contain more than 90 The hydraulic behaviour of particles on a spiral is influenced by particle size and heavy minerals reporting to the −45 Mineral assemblages of Graauwduinen East are significantly coarser than its Graauwduinen West equivalents. Generally, median particle sizes (d Particle shape distributions for all mineral types analysed are consistently unimodal and are mostly inclined towards the rounded, spherical class ( The purpose of the secondary concentration plant with its WHIMS circuit is to magnetically split the primary concentrate into separate magnetic and non-magnetic concentrates for further treatment. A middlings route alleviates gangue rejection. The magnetic susceptibility or behaviour of a particle subjected to WHIMS separation is largely a function of its average iron and manganese content. The bulk of the ilmenite is therefore expected to report to the magnetic fraction, whereas leucoxene, rutile and zircon would find their way into the non-magnetic concentrate. More than 90% of ilmenite, rutile and zircon report predictably ( Garnet, the most abundant gangue constituent in the primary concentrate, complicates SCP separation and degrades both the magnetic and non-magnetic concentrates since it has the propensity to respond positively across a range of magnetic field strengths. A positive relationship between the iron content and magnetic susceptibility of garnet was established, which explains the 60:40 percent distribution to the magnetic and middlings fractions respectively. Other mineral contaminants, including monazite, apatite, kyanite, titanite and cassiterite, report preferentially to the non-magnetic fraction. Mineral surface exposure, which is the inverse of mineral surface coating level, plays a critical role in electrostatic separation ( The secondary concentration plant (SCP) utilizes three-stage attritioning and desliming to remove siliceous coatings from the magnetic concentrate. In addition to SCP attritioning, the mineral separation plant (MSP) employs hot acid leaching to reduce the ferruginous matter from zircon surfaces. Laboratory scale attritioning improved the ilmenite surface exposure by as much as 30% and correspondingly reduced the SiO Final beneficiation of the secondary concentrates to saleable products is achieved by dry magnetic separation, mainly using electrostatic separators, at the mineral separation plant (MSP). At this stage particle chemistry, describing the bulk chemical composition of a particle, becomes an important recovery driver due to the sensitive trade-off between stringent product quality specifications and mineral recovery. At the MSP quality control applies to specific desired elements to which minimum specifications pertain, whereas maximum specifications are applied to penalty elements. The penalty elements occur in two major forms and can either be discrete, which describes fully liberated contaminants, or locked with the valuable mineral of interest. The locked form is sub-divided into three types, namely structurally as part of the crystal structure, included minerals or phases and lastly surface related contaminants. Mineral product compliance is defined as the percentage of the valuable mineral of interest that meets the saleable product specifications, inclusive of the desired elements and locked penalty elements. The Namakwa Sands deposit hosts a Fe–Ti oxide mineral assemblage dominated by ilmenite. The alteration of ilmenite (FeTiO Ti and Fe are the desired elements in the ilmenite product, whereas the chief penalty element is Si. Laboratory attritioning managed to reduce SiO Overall, the various ore types portray clear differences in ilmenite product compliance, which is defined as the mass percentage of particles meeting the final ilmenite product specifications in terms of Fe Saleable rutile products comprise a mixture of rutile (TiO Rutile comfortably meets the rutile product specifications, compared to the majority of leucoxene mineral groups that are off-specification ( Rutile product compliance, which is based on contents of SiO Zircon (ZrSiO Surface coatings are the most significant contributor to iron contamination in zircon products. Hot acid leaching followed by attritioning dropped the Fe Zircon product compliance, which incorporates the Fe The effects of individual ore characteristics on mineral recovery were examined in isolation as far as possible. QEMSCAN, with its filter and categoriser functions, was particularly instrumental in accomplishing this. The standard two-product formula was used for all recovery calculations ( It was determined that of all the ore characteristics studied, only mineral grade, liberation, magnetic deportment, particle size and particle chemistry meaningfully influenced mineral recoveries. It was also evident that mineral grades had an effect on the recovery performance of all processing steps. Liberation affects mostly the primary concentrator plants (PCPs), magnetic susceptibility upsets mainly the secondary concentration plant (SCP), whereas particle size and particle chemistry influences both the SCP and mineral separation plant (MSP). The mineral recovery potential for the valuable mineral fraction was markedly different for the two ore bodies. For the Graauwduinen East ore, the calculated recoveries were better for ilmenite than zircon, whereas the opposite was true for Graauwduinen West ore. Graauwduinen East was confirmed as the better ore body, as its ilmenite recovery (68%) was more than double and its zircon recovery (61%) was a third better compared to Graauwduinen West ore ( Mineral grade manifested as the biggest recovery penalty for all the valuable minerals and subtracted more than 20% from potential recoveries. This was the result of unfavourable grade–recovery curves as well as the influence of other mineral characteristics that reduce the recoverable mineral portion. Magnetic deportment, particle chemistry and liberation in that order of increasing significance, inflicted total penalties of up to 50% on ilmenite and rutile/leucoxene recoveries. These three particle characteristics were intricately related to duricrust cementation, which was more pronounced for Graauwduinen West ore. The intrinsic chemistry of zircon limited its recovery considerably, but compared to the Fe–Ti oxides the bulk of contamination was not present as surface matter, but was locked structurally or occurred as included phases, which are inaccessible to conventional processing interventions. Recovery losses associated with particle size amounted to less than 5% for rutile/leucoxene and were even lower for ilmenite and zircon. Evaluation of the different ore types using pooled mineral recoveries indicated that for both ore bodies the RAS outperformed the OFS, whereas the strandline deposits demonstrated intermediate potential. Two additional scoring and ranking systems were considered ( The relative financial viability (RFV) score adds financial parameters to the MGR score across the life of mine and is effectively a function of contained mineral resources and current commodity prices. RFV and MGR ranks appear inversely related. By means of the RFV scores, the OFSM of both ore bodies rank the best, RAS from Graauwduinen East takes a distant third place, whereas the other ore types lag notably. The potential downstream application of this study offers enticing prospects to improve overall mineral utilisation. A specific drive to further reduce losses to tailings involves continuing efforts to improve grade control, investigations to better match the mineral resource with appropriate technology and studies to optimise the process flow sheet. Addressing the issue of unfavourable particle chemistry follows the value-in-use principles, which focuses both on metallurgical interventions as well as marketing opportunities. As an example, additional attritioning would improve ilmenite recovery significantly, whereas zircon and rutile recoveries could benefit from product diversification in terms of applications and specifications. The Namakwa Sands mega-deposit hosts a diverse heavy mineral assemblage that exhibits striking variations in ore characteristics. Variable mineral grades, contrasting VHM–THM relationships, unfavourable mineral liberation characteristics, miscellaneous clay minerals, varied magnetic susceptibilities, wide particle size distributions as well as considerable oversize and slimes quantities indicate a challenging processing character. Mineral grades, in context of steep grade–recovery curves, represent potentially the most significant recovery penalty. Particle chemistry in relation to stringent product specifications is another key recovery constraint. Post-depositional cementation of the mineralised sands affected the valuable minerals to various degrees and the related mineral coatings are a key contributor to the Fe, Al and Si contamination of products. However, the bulk of the penalty elements such as Fe, U and Th in zircon, Mn in ilmenite and Si and P in leucoxene are locked in the crystal lattice and cannot be removed during beneficiation. As a result, an appreciable proportion of the valuable mineral resources are rendered unsuitable for recovery to saleable products. Mineral sands processors should take specific note of the importance of intrinsic particle chemistry, which often dictates physical behaviour, but also presents a substantial trade-off between stringent product quality specifications and mineral recovery. For the Namakwa Sands deposit the estimated recovery potential increases in the order leucoxene/rutile, ilmenite to zircon, but it is also clear that the optimal recovery for all valuable minerals cannot be accomplished simultaneously. The calculated mineral recoveries vary for the different ore types and an inverse relationship between the magnitude of contained mineral resources and potential mineral recovery performance was highlighted. Proper blending of the different ore types is therefore imperative to optimise mineral resource utilisation across life of mine. Future applications for the current geometallurgical template model include the evaluation of exploration prospects, contributions to feasibility studies and providing assistance to optimise metallurgical processes. The geometallurgical template model could also be useful to the mineral sands industry as it is generically structured and could be modified to accommodate other ore types and different processing flow sheets. The authors thank Tronox Namakwa Sands for their financial sponsorship and for granting permission to publish this paper.