Two types of laboratory mills, planetary and vibratory, were used to activate sulphide mineral concentrates mechanically before thermophilic (bio)leaching. These samples were analysed in terms of particle size, surface area, density, SEM, XRD line profile analysis and reactivity. The product particle size distributions indicated different particle breakage mechanisms of the two mills. The surface area for pyrite milled with the planetary mill was three fold that milled in the vibratory mill for the same length of time. Planetary milled samples showed lower densities, up to 4% less for pyrite samples, compared to vibratory milled samples. Particle surface oxidation, observed by SEM, occurred post milling. Surface oxidation products were more prevalent with planetary milled sulphide samples. XRD line profile analysis showed more line broadening effects with the planetary mill. This indicated that more bulk particle-related structural defects were present in the planetary milled samples. The reactivity in acidic solution was measured in terms of the generation of toxic reactive oxygen species (ROS): hydrogen peroxide and hydroxyl radicals. The ROS generation from milled sulphides, normalised to constant surface area loading, increased with increased mechanical activation. The planetary milled samples generated greater ROS per sample surface area than vibratory milled samples, more than 4-fold for pyrite after 60min of milling. Increased ROS generation was postulated to result from increased surface area defects, solubilisation of iron oxidation products and bulk particle-related defects.
                  The effect of mechanical activation on performance on thermophilic leaching and bioleaching tests was investigated using milled samples at 2% (w/v) pulp density. Short mill times improved leach rates from both mills, up to 7-fold cf. unactivated feed leach rates. Poor bioleaching performance resulted following long periods of mechanical activation (20–60min). Pyrite and chalcopyrite bioleaching performance decreased dramatically above surface area loadings of 25 and 125m2/L respectively. Planetary milled samples were less amenable to bioleaching. For pyrite milled for 20 and 60min and chalcopyrite milled for 40min, no viable cells were observed following inoculation via fluorescence microscopy, suggesting culture death supported by compromised ferrous iron oxidation. The generation of ROS was postulated to cause poor bioleaching performance under these conditions.The effect of sulphide concentrate re-grinding on the performance of tank biooxidation or bioleaching systems is not understood clearly despite being widely practised in industry. Some hydrometallurgical advantages of mechanically activating concentrates via fine milling include increased leach rates, increased metal extraction efficiencies and decreased pulp retention times ( The mechano-chemically induced changes of milled sulphide particles can be measured at the surface ( Another mechanism has been characterised for pyrite induced ROS generation in solution ( ROS is particularly toxic to cellular life. Free radicals such as In this study two sulphide concentrates, pyrite and chalcopyrite, have been subjected to batch mechanical activation experiments for different time intervals using two laboratory mills: a planetary agate ball mill and a vibratory corundum microniser mill. Milled samples were analysed for changes to particle size distribution, surface area and X-ray diffraction line broadening. Sample reactivity in acidic solution was measured by the generation of ROS. Finally, feed and milled samples were used in thermophilic batch bioleaching tests to investigate the effects of mechanical activation. The objective of this study was to understand the different macro and micro surface characteristics of the milled concentrates generated using the planetary and vibratory mills and their effect on reactivity, ROS generation, abiotic and biotic leach rates as well as the activity of microbial cultures used in (bio)leaching experiments. Two sulphide concentrates were used: a non-gold containing pyrite (90.2% w/w) concentrate, produced for research purposes, and a copper containing chalcopyrite (65.9% w/w) concentrate. Samples were divided representatively using an auto-sampler into 20 Mechanical activation of sulphide concentrates was achieved via batch milling using two different laboratory mills: a planetary agate ball mill (Retsch) and a vibratory microniser mill (McCrone). The application of the planetary ball mill is for general laboratory preparation of small samples whereas the vibratory micronising mill was specifically designed for use in powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) sample preparation. Volumetric particle size distributions were determined using laser diffraction (Malvern Mastersizer 2000). Uniformity, span and specific surface area were calculated to characterise these distributions, according to: Uniformity ( Span ( Specific surface area (SSA) (Eq. Sample surface area was measured using the 5-point N The degree of crystallinity ( The fluorescence detection method for measuring reactive oxygen species (ROS), combination of hydrogen peroxide and hydroxyl radicals, in acidic solutions was adapted from Milled samples were bioleached in duplicate for up to 14 Initial iron and copper solubilisation rates ( Analysis of the head sulphide feeds ( The production of fine (<10 The measurement of surface area is important when studying the reactivity of sulphide particles. Mechanically activated sulphides react on exposure to air at ambient conditions to form secondary layers that coat particles over time. A study by Sample densities were measured ( XRD spectral line profile analysis (LPA) can be used to determine crystal lattice microstrain from the reduction of diffraction peak intensity and line broadening ( A measure of crystallinity can be calculated from line profile analysis using a reference sample, usually a head sample or a sample as received from the supplier (  In the biohydrometallurgical treatment of mechanically activated concentrates, it is important to monitor sulphide reactivity with respect to the generation of toxic reactive oxygen species which have the potential to inhibit acid and Fe  Biotic (bioleaching) and abiotic leaching data are summarised in The bioleaching tests showed great improvement in initial leach rates and extents for inoculated samples, where microbial activity was observed, for pyrite and chalcopyrite. Cp-P Comparing leach rates of milled bioleached samples as a function of SAL ( A lack of microbial activity was observed for Cp-P Previous studies conducted by Baláž and co-workers showed that inhibition of bioleaching performance of mesophile Hydrogen peroxide formed at defect sites from dissolved oxygen and water on pyrite surface ( Putting these results into context with ROS generation data it is possible to approximate the potential ROS concentration at the start of the flask experiments. Not only did samples which have been intensively milled have a larger SAL values, the ROS generation experiments showed that intensively milled surfaces generated more ROS than briefly milled samples. These conditions lead to the accumulation of toxic hydrogen peroxide and hydroxyl radicals in solution and may reach cell damaging concentrations or even result in cell death if the cell is unable to respond and adapt to the oxidative stress conditions. Other thermophilic bioleaching studies, using classified samples prepared via wet sieving or gravity separation, conducted with A key factor in developing applications for the use of thermophilic micro-organisms in treating sulphide concentrates, such as the BioCop™ process, is the solids loading tolerated. Increased sensitivity of thermophiles towards high solids loading compared to mesophilic species has been reported. However, the potential for using thermophiles in leaching copper from chalcopyrite is driven by the elevated temperatures needed for faster leach rates and better extraction efficiencies compared to bioleaching chalcopyrite at mesophilic temperatures. Hence an understanding of this sensitivity has been sought. Milling and re-grinding are typical feed preparation operations prior to tank feeding, hence understanding sulphide mechanochemistry and the extent to which sulphide mineral reactivity is affected and affects the micro-organisms implicated in thermophilic bioleaching is important for improving thermophilic leaching technologies. This study has shown that the pre-treatment of pyrite and chalcopyrite concentrates via wet milling increases the reactivity of the sulphides to an extent that is dependent on the type of mill used. Although not the focus of this study, it is acknowledged that charge acceleration and the specific energy consumed by the two laboratory mills are important variables and thus likely to have an influence on sulphide mechanical activation. Similarly, solution conditions within the mill such as redox potential and dissolved oxygen concentration are equally important with respect to chemical reactions that occur while milling sulphides. Increased surface area and disordering of the sulphide crystal structure as a result of increased milling time were demonstrated. This was more prevalent for planetary milled pyrite and chalcopyrite compared to the vibratory milled samples. On contact with acidic solution, planetary milled samples were also observed to generate significantly more reactive oxygen species (ROS) compared with the vibratory milled samples. It is not yet understood clearly how changes to sulphide crystal structures contained within particles govern this reactivity. The large difference in ROS generation compared between pyrite and chalcopyrite samples, threefold for unactivated feeds, may also indicate an inherent difference in the ROS generation potential of different sulphide minerals. More work needs to be done to understand the significance of ROS formation as a potential source of oxidants in leaching reactions and its application in treating finely milled sulphides. However, the formation of ROS has the most significance for bioleaching performance of finely milled sulphides. Both abiotic and biotic leach rates were improved by milling of the concentrates. Biotic rates exceeded abiotic rates by two to three fold under most conditions. On extensive milling using the planetary mill, inhibition of biotic leaching was demonstrated. This was confirmed by an increasing lag time, negative growth rate and decrease or absence of microbial cells under these conditions. Microbial inhibition or lysis was attributed to oxidative stress caused by presence and accumulation of ROS in solution. The gains of mechanical activation of concentrates prior to (bio)leaching must be weighed against the cost of re-grinding sulphides and the ability to treat post-leached solid waste streams with different solid–liquid separation characteristics. The hydrometallurgical benefits of mechanical activation combined with the ability of bioleaching microorganisms to adapt, within limits, to changing solids conditions may widen the applicability of bioleaching technologies to different and more refractory metal containing sulphide ore bodies. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the National Research Foundation (NRF), the Department of Science and Technology, South Africa through the SARChI Research Chair in Bioprocess Engineering. The authors would like to acknowledge the technical support of Miranda Waldron of the Electron Microscope Unit, University of Cape Town.