The purpose of this study is to present the results of Marchetti nailing in humeral shaft delayed unions. Fifteen humeral shaft delayed unions were treated with the Marchetti nail. The average age of patients was 52.3 years. All had been treated initially by conservative methods. Delay from trauma to surgery averaged 4.8 months. The nailing technique was retrograde, and reaming of the fracture focus was always performed. Bone graft was not added. Thirteen patients achieved union, in an average of 3.3 months. Two patients require further surgery to gain union. Shoulder and elbow motion was excellent in 10 patients, moderate in four and poor in one. The functional result was excellent in nine patients, good in two, fair in two, and poor in two. Marchetti nailing seems to be an acceptable alternative for humeral shaft delayed unions.To date, there have been few reports of the use of intramedullary nailing to treat humeral delayed unions. Pritchett Pietu et al. Lin et al. We have successfully used the Marchetti-Vicenzi nail in humeral nonunions, obtaining fracture healing in all cases. In this study, we report our experience in treating humeral shaft delayed unions with the Marchetti-Vicenzi nail without bone graft. This nail has been used in fresh humeral fractures From 1993 to 2000, 15 delayed unions of the humeral shaft were treated by the Marchetti-Vicenzi nail (Zimmer, Warsaw, Ind). The period from fracture to nailing ranged from 4 to 6 months, averaging 4.8 months. There were six males and nine females ( The fracture was located in the middle third in nine cases and in the upper third in six. The fracture type was classified according to the AO classification: nine A1 (five A11, four A12), three A2 (one A21, two A22), and three A32. We used this technique mainly in type A fractures because we thought that they would be more suitable for nailing with the Marchetti-Vecenzi nail than more comminuted fractures, since the nonunion already provided significant stability. Reaming of the fracture site was always performed. Closed nailing was difficult in 11 fractures; a guide wire was inserted under radiologic control and when it reached the fracture site, closed reduction manoeuvres were needed. After guide wire insertion, reaming of the medullary canal was performed repeating the reduction manoeuvres when the reamer reached the fracture site. The fracture site and the humeral shaft were extensively reamed with the 9 Shoulder and elbow range of motion was graded Thirteen patients achieved union ( An excellent range of motion of both joints was obtained in 10 patients. The range of motion of the shoulder was moderate in four cases and poor in one: there were two cases of loss of abdution of 10°, one case of loss of external rotation of 20°, one case of loss of 20° of abduction and 25° of external rotation, and one case of loss of 30° of abduction and 40° of external rotation. The range of motion of the elbow was moderate in four cases and poor in one, because of the loss of extension, in two of them of 10°, in two of 20° and in one of 35°. The functional results were excellent in nine cases, good in two, fair in two and poor in two. The cause of fair results was shoulder and elbow stiffness. The cause of poor results in two patients was nonunion that required a reoperation. One of them finally achieved an excellent result after reoperation. The other had a poor result after grafting because of the limitation of shoulder and elbow motion, although the fracture united. The alignment was good in 13 cases. There were two cases of varus malunion, both located in the upper third of the humerus, one of them of 5° and the other of 10°. No infections or iatrogenic radial nerve palsy were noted. Two patients did not unite after nailing. The first was a 66-year-old male whose fracture was nailed 6 months after the injury. The nail broke 3 months after the nailing ( The second patient was a 74-year-old man with a proximal humeral delayed union which was nailed 6 months after the fracture ( Intramedullary nails have been successfully used in acute fractures, The Marchetti-Vicenzi nail has been successfully used in fresh fractures Anterograde nailing may cause impairment of shoulder function due to subacromial impingement because of the nail, locking screws protruding into the deltoid muscle, or rotator cuff irritation from the approach. The indication for bone grafting has been a controversial issue in treating nonunions. Thomsen et al. Svend-Hansen et al. Crolla et al. Lin et al. Other authors have not added bone graft in delayed unions treated by intramedullary nailing. Pritchett We have not added bone graft and our union rate has been high. We think that reaming the fracture focus would be enough to stimulate callus, being open bone grafting unnecessary in delayed unions. In nonunions, we agree with other authors