The design of a fire resistant coating for tunnel passive fire protection and its performance under thermal loading are presented. The material falls under the class of potassium based geopolymers (K-geopolymer) and was prepared by mixing ferronickel (FeNi) slag, doped with pure alumina, with a highly alkaline potassium hydroxide aqueous phase. The physical, mechanical and thermal properties of the K-geopolymer were determined and compared to those of some commercially available fire resistant materials. Its behavior upon exposure to fire was assessed by subjecting a concrete slab, coated with a 5cm thick K-geopolymer layer, to thermal loading under the RijksWaterStaat (RWS) temperature–time curve, which is considered as the most severe prescribed tunnel fire scenario. During the test, the geopolymer/concrete interface temperature remained under 280°C, which is 100°C lower than the RWS test requirement, proving the effectiveness of the material as a thermal barrier. In addition, the K-geopolymer retained its structural integrity after the test, without any significant macroscopic damage.A number of serious tunnel fires have been reported worldwide causing injuries and life loss(es), heavy damage to the concrete lining and significant restoration time, during which the tunnels were unavailable for traffic. Fires in tunnels can seriously damage their concrete lining thus threatening the stability of the tunnel structure and rendering it to collapse. The damage is caused particularly by the spontaneous great amount of heat release and aggressive fire gases, resulting to spalling of concrete. Spalling is described as the breaking of layers or pieces of concrete from the surface of a structural element when it is exposed to the high and rapidly rising temperatures experienced in fires. The most severe kind of spalling is the so called explosive spalling. This is described as a violent showering of hot concrete pieces having a detrimental effect on concrete lining. Additionally very serious problems may be encountered by the fire fighting service personnel rendering their work substantially more difficult and dangerous. The spalling phenomena are expected at several temperatures depending on the strength and the densification of the concrete. According to In addition to the concrete damage caused by a tunnel fire, special attention requires also the damage caused to structural steel rebars that often reinforce the concrete lining. Structural steel (especially some plain carbon and alloy steels) exhibit both an increase in strength and a substantial decrease in ductility upon their heating at temperatures between 250 Therefore, both steel and concrete should be viewed as fire sensitive construction elements. They require passive fire protection in order the tunnel lining to be able to withstand the anticipated temperatures of a serious tunnel fire incident, for an appropriate period of time without losing their stability. Passive fire protection methods are generally divided in two categories: external (insulation) and internal (concrete design) ones. The former are more advantageous being applied in new as well as in existing tunnels and consist of the cladding of the concrete by a fire resistant material which creates a protective external insulation envelope. In the external method there are plenty of materials used. The most common used are two cementitious mortars, MeycoFireshield 1350 and FireBarrier 135. The main properties of these materials are shown in The efficiency of passive fire protection materials is commonly assessed by passive fire protection testing. According to the EFNARC (European Federation of National Associations Representing producers and applicators of specialist building products for Concrete) guidelines ( In this manuscript, the development, characterization and passive fire testing of a high performance fire resistant material, for external passive fire protection of concrete tunnel linings, is presented. Development of the material is based on alkali activation/geopolymerization of an industrial by-product, the FeNi slag generated during the reductive smelting of laterites. Design of the material synthesis and selection of the activating alkali were based on thermodynamic calculations and expected phase transformations near the targeted temperature of 1350 Geopolymer is the common name of the family of synthetic aluminosilicate materials formed by alkali activation of solid aluminosilicate raw materials ( The geopolymerization reaction is exothermic and takes place at atmospheric pressure and temperatures below 100 The geopolymerization process has gained an increased scientific interest during the last decades, mainly due to the large variety of existing solid aluminosilicate raw materials. Among these, industrial minerals, such as kaoline, feldspars, and perlite ( Geopolymers possess excellent physicochemical, thermal and mechanical properties, like low density, micro- or nano-porosity, high mechanical strength, notable surface hardness, thermal stability, fire and chemical resistance ( Fire resistant geopolymers have been developed since 1970 when J. Davidovits carried out research into new heat resistant materials as an aftermath of catastrophic fires in France ( The FeNi slag used in the present study was provided by the metallurgical plant of the Greek company LARCO G.M.M.S.A. that treats laterites to produce ferronickel. The slag is generated during the reductive smelting of laterites in electric arc furnaces and is granulated using a flash water cooling process. For the synthesis of the geopolymer, an adequate quantity of granulated slag was grinded to <90 The FeNi slag was doped with pure metallurgical alumina, with mean particle size (d Target of this work was the design of a FeNi slag-based geopolymer that could be used as a fire resistant material for passive fire protection of concrete tunnel linings. The design of such a material with excellent thermal performance at temperatures higher than 1300 The most known geopolymers are the sodium based ones, which are produced by using a sodium hydroxide/sodium silicate solution as the activating phase. Although Na-based geopolymers from FeNi slag can be produced easily (e.g. For high temperature applications the K-based geopolymers are advantageous. The addition of potassium in an aluminosilicate system ( Therefore, the geopolymerization of an aluminosilicate material rich in FeO This above strategy was studied theoretically through thermodynamic calculations by using the FactSage 6.4 equilibrium package, as is shown in Increase of the liquidus temperature from 1025 Substantial decrease in the amount of molten K-geopolymer at the temperature of 1350 At the molar ratio of 1.32, which is very close to the theoretical value, the amount of molten K-geopolymer at 1350 The specimens for material characterization and testing were prepared with the following procedure. A homogeneous viscous paste, with the % w/w composition of The mechanical properties of the K-geopolymer that were studied in this work include the uniaxial compressive strength, tensile strength, flexural strength, Young’s modulus and shore hardness. Compressive strength was measured using cubic specimens of 50 The physical properties of the K-geopolymer that were studied in this work include cold water absorption, porosity and density. The cold water absorption was determined following the procedures described in the EN 771-1: 2003 standard. The material density was calculated by measuring the dimensions and the mass of the specimens, with a precision electronic caliper and a precision balance, respectively. Finally, the open porosity was measured according to Archimedes method. The thermal properties of the K-geopolymer were assessed through its thermal conductivity, which was measured according to EN 12667:2001 on a 15 The performance of the K-geopolymer under thermal loading was assessed by subjecting the material to passive fire protection testing. To facilitate the experiments, a test furnace was designed and constructed according to the EFNARC guidelines ( During the test, the surface of the geopolymer material was exposed to a heat flux simulating the RWS fire load curve. The temperature at the geopolymer/concrete interface was measured by using a “K”-type thermocouple ( In The compressive strength of the K-geopolymer specimens was increased from 6.2 The 28-days compressive strength of the K-geopolymer is substantially inferior to the several types of concrete as it is shown in The hardness of K-geopolymer was measured equal to 70 shore A, rating it as a medium hard material, which is good enough for a superficial coating material. In comparison to the commercially available fire resistant cementitious coatings of The thermal conductivity of the K-geopolymer was measured equal to 0.16 Finally, the density of K-geopolymer was measured equal to 1800 In As it is observed, the temperature at the geopolymer/concrete interface was lower than 280 During the first 5 The temperature at the unexposed surface of the concrete slab did not exceed 70 As it is seen in The steel anchors used to enhance the adhesion of the K-geopolymer with concrete proved to be adequate, since no serious detachment at the materials interface was observed, as is seen in The concrete slab protected by the K-geopolymer did not appear any form of spalling or other mechanical damage and remained as it was initially before the fire test ( It was clearly observed by a simple comparison of K-geopolymer before and after the fire test ( Three distinct different thermal zones were identified across the K-geopolymer coating and the X-rays difractograms of the material for each zone are shown in In conclusion the performance of the K-geopolymer to passive fire protection testing with the RWS fire load curve was excellent. The material proved to have the ability to put an efficient heat flux barrier protecting the tunnel concrete lining as well as the steel reinforcement from the most severe fire scenario proscribed in the relevant international codes. In addition, its macroscopic integrity after the fire test, without showing any mechanical damage or deformation, suggests that there would be no need for serious repairs on the superficial fire resistant K-geopolymer after a fire incident. The developed fire resistant potassium based geopolymer from ferronickel slag demonstrated the following attributes: Its 28 The thermal conductivity of the K-geopolymer is 0.16 The geopolymer has a density of 1800 The behavior of the K-geopolymer during the fire test with the most severe RWS fire load curve was excellent. The maximum temperature at the concrete/geopolymer interface was 280 The material after the end of the fire test remained on top of the concrete specimen without any macroscopic damage or deformation and with improved mechanical properties. Therefore, in the case of a fire incident, only minor interventions are expected to be required, thus minimizing the time where the tunnel will not be available for use. As a final conclusion, the designed K-geopolymer has been proved through small scale passive fire protection test to possess excellent fire resistant properties. This anticipated behavior should also be verified with large scale as well as pilot tests before any application in practice. This research has been co-financed by the European Union (European Social Fund – ESF) and Greek national funds through the Operational Program “Education and Lifelong Learning” of the National Strategic Reference Framework (NSRF) - Research Funding Program: Heracleitus II. Investing in knowledge society through the European Social Fund.