Metsäteho Oy surveyed the industrial supply chains used in the production of forest chips in 2006 in Finland. The Metsäteho study also conducted a survey of the production machinery of forest chips used by energy plants in 2007, and provided an estimate of industrial supply chains and future machinery requirements for forest chip production in Finland.
                  The majority of the logging residue chips and chips from small-sized thinning wood were produced using the roadside chipping supply chain in 2006. The chipping at plant supply chain was also significant in the production of logging residue chips. The majority of all stump wood chips consumed were comminuted at the plant, and with only around one fifth comminuted at terminals. The role of the terminal chipping supply chain was also significant in the production of chips from logging residues and small-sized wood chips. It was predicted that the roles of both terminal chipping of logging residues and chipping at the plant will increase by the year 2010. Regarding the production of chips from small-diameter wood, it was estimated that the role of chipping at the plant will also increase in coming years. The proportion of roadside chipping in the production of small-sized wood chips and logging residue chips is expected to decrease.
                  The study estimated that a total of 1100 machine and truck units were employed in the production of forest chips for energy plants in 2007. Increasing forest chip consumption will create considerable demand for additional forest chip production resources in the future.The use of forest chips has increased very rapidly throughout the beginning of the 21st century in Finland. In 2000, the total use of energy generated from forest chips was 1.8 TWh (0.9 mill. m Of the forest chips used in energy plants (6.1 TWh), the majority (57%) were produced from logging residues in final cuttings in 2006 In 2006, forest chips were burnt by 580 heating and power plants in Finland by 10 TWh year by 16–24 TWh year by 24 TWh year These targets are not unrealistic, because there are large potentials for the production and use of forest chips in Finland. According to the latest calculations (e.g., Metsäteho Oy has annually surveyed the industrial supply chains used in the production of forest chips in 21st century in Finland The study material was collected using three questionnaires: Industrial Supply Chains of Forest Chips in 2006; Visions of the Production and Use of Forest Chips in the Future in Finland; and Production Machinery of Forest Chips in 2007. The supply chains of forest chips were investigated in the questionnaire of Industrial Supply Chains of Forest Chips in 2006, which covered the production of logging residue chips, stump wood chips, and chips from small-sized thinning wood. In the surveys, the supply chains were determined as follows:      The industrial supply chains of forest chips in 2010 were investigated in the questionnaire on Visions of the Production and Use of Forest Chips in the Future in Finland. Twelve representatives of major industrial forest chip suppliers took part in the “Visions” survey. Both questionnaire surveys were carried out in March 2007. There were from one to two representatives from each of the eight major supplier companies in the surveys. The positions of representatives were either director or manager in their companies. The response rate in both surveys was 100%. The study also inventoried the forest chip production machinery used by each industrial forest chip supplier in valid contracting agreements in May 2007. In addition, the machinery and equipment held by manufacturers and sellers of harvester heads, stump lifting devices, and chippers were also surveyed. The material for the “Machinery” survey was compiled during May to August 2007. The following major industrial forest chip suppliers were involved in all three studies (in alphabetical order): Hyötypaperi Oy, Koskitukki Oy, L&T Biowatti Oy, Metsäliitto Group, Stora Enso Wood Supply Finland, Turveruukki Oy, UPM Forest, and Vapo Oy. The total energy value of forest chips supplied in 2006 by these companies was 4.8 TWh, of which logging residue chips accounted for 3.3 TWh, stump wood chips 0.9 TWh, and chips from small-sized wood 0.6 TWh ( The best sites in Finland, and therefore those mainly used for recovering logging residues, are Norway spruce (  More than one-quarter of the logging residues were comminuted at power plants in 2006 ( In Finland, stumps for energy generation are extracted almost exclusively from spruce-dominated, final felling stands. The typical stump wood removal has an energy value of approximately 150–180 MWh ha Intensive development of stump and root wood harvesting began in Finland in the early 2000s. Today, stump wood is a competitive wood fuel, especially for large power plants. This is clearly evident in the stump chip supply chain figures: about 80% of all stump wood chips used for energy generation in recent years were produced at power plants ( Chips from small-sized thinning wood are produced in Finland from small-diameter (mainly d Roadside chipping still maintains an important role in the production of chips from small-sized thinning wood: nearly three quarters of all the chips from small-sized wood were chipped at roadside landings in 2006 ( The industrial forest chip suppliers predicted that the role of both terminal chipping and chipping at the plant in the production of logging residue chips will increase by 2010 ( The forest chip suppliers predicted no major future changes in the relative proportions of the stump wood chip supply chains ( The industrial forest chip suppliers estimated that the role of chipping at the plant in the production of chips from small-sized thinning wood will increase in the coming years ( The study estimated that a total of 1100 machine and truck units were employed in the production of forest chips for energy plants in 2007 ( In Finland, two mechanized harvesting systems are used for small-diameter thinning wood: i) the traditional two-machine (harvester and forwarder) system, and ii) the harwarder system (i.e., the same machine performs both cutting and forest haulage to the roadside) A total of 12 slash bundlers were used in the bundling of logging residues at final cutting sites. In addition, one whole-tree bundler was also used in the bundling of small-diameter wood in early thinning stands. More than 100 tracked excavators were used in stump lifting, and excavators under 20 tonnes and over 20 tonnes were used. Less than half of all stump lifting devices were fitted with a splitting knife. Where no splitting knife was used in stump lifting, the weight of the excavators typically exceeded 20 tonnes. More than 300 forwarders were used in the forest haulage of energy wood. The forwarders were either medium-duty (carrying capacity 10–12 tonnes) or heavy-duty (14 tonnes). Of these, one fifth was used exclusively for energy wood forwarding, which was therefore typically carried out as a secondary operation in connection with the forest haulage of industrial roundwood. In total, less than 200 mobile chippers and crushers were used in the production of forest chips utilized by energy plants. These were used for chipping at roadside landings, terminals, and power plants. Half of all the mobile chipping machinery consisted of truck-mounted drum chippers. Crushers accounted for one third, and tractor chippers for less than one fifth of all the mobile chipping machinery. In addition, six fixed stationary crushers at power plants were employed in forest chip production in 2007. Some 200 vehicle units were used in the long-distance transportation of energy wood and forest chips. Two thirds of these were chip trucks. Over one third of all chip trucks were also used for the long-distance transportation of fuel peat and industrial wood-based by-products. Energy wood trucks (i.e. loose residue/stump trucks) accounted for less than one third of all the long-distance transportation vehicles used. Increasing forest chip consumption will create considerable demand for additional forest chip production resources in the future. If the consumption of forest chips by energy plants reaches 15 TWh in 2015 (i.e., about 7.5 million m At an energy plant producing 25 TWh of power from approximately 12.5 million m Each supply chain has its own strengths and weaknesses ( As As the supply volumes of forest chips increases, more intensified procurement will be necessary and harvesting operations will have to expand to include smaller and poorer sites (i.e., sites with less available wood, more difficult terrain, and longer forwarding distances). It is also likely that road transportation distances will be somewhat longer in the future than today. All these factors mean pressures on the total supply costs of forest chips. In the future, the management of supply costs in all phases of the logistic system will hold the key position In Finland, the roadside chipping supply chain is the most common supply system when producing chips from logging residues and small-sized thinning wood. Roadside chipping is also a very frequently used supply chain in many European countries Industrial forest chip suppliers estimated that chipping will move from roadside locations closer to the heating and power plants, either to terminals or directly to the plants themselves. This will undoubtedly prove to be the case because, in approximate terms, the closer to the plant chipping is performed, the more cost-efficient it is. Differences will nevertheless remain among forest chip suppliers regarding the volumes of forest chips produced in terminals and at the plant. When drawing the estimate of the future need for forest chip production machinery in this study, it was predicted that chipping at the power plant to produce chips from small-diameter wood, logging residues, and large-sized, rotten roundwood, will increase significantly in coming years (see As the volumes of road transportation of uncomminuted raw materials for forest chips will greatly increase in the future, more efficient long-distance transportation solutions are required. The status of the terminals will also become more important, although it may not be profitable to increase terminal chipping significantly in the future as the supply chain costs of chipping at the terminal tend to be somewhat higher than those of other options (cf. Even if the relative proportion of roadside chipping decreases, according to the estimates of industrial forest chip suppliers, it is likely that more than 40% of forest chips used in heating and power plants in 2010 will still be produced by roadside chipping. The share of chipping at the plant will be less than 40% and the proportion of terminal chipping about 20% of all the forest chips used in heating and power plants in 2010. The growing consumption of forest chips will mean a considerable need for additional forest chip production resources in the future. This can be met in part by raising the utilization degree of existing machinery and transportation equipment. In this case, however, we should also take into account the fact that the existing capacity which is redirected into the production of forest chips will, in turn, be directed partially away from other work, such as industrial roundwood harvesting, long-distance transportation of fuel peat, and chipping and long-distance transportation of industrial wood-based by-products. However, the machines and vehicles that would otherwise be standing idle can, to some extent, be employed in forest chip production. Further development of machine and equipment technology, new technical and mechanical innovations and rationalisation of working methods will help to boost the operating performance of machine and vehicle units. In contrast, less favourable harvesting conditions and lengthening transportation distances are obstacles to increasing the annual workloads per machine and vehicle units. Some quantitative figures regarding forest chip production machinery have been presented in Finland since 2000. For instance, Asikainen Forest chip production will affect nearly all forest machine and truck entrepreneurs in the future. While energy wood harvesting and forest chip production remains a side business for many, more and more contractors are becoming specialised in the sector of forest chip production. 