The Bosworth injury occurs when the distal fibula becomes entrapped posterior to the posterior tibial tubercle, usually as a result of a supination external rotation injury. This uncommon occurrence is a recognized cause of an irreducible ankle dislocation. A pilon fracture is usually a high-energy injury caused by the talus being driven upward into the tibial plafond. The resulting bone and soft tissue injuries often require a staged approach to management. The present report is the first in the medical data to describe a Bosworth injury complicating a pilon fracture. We also discuss a management approach for this rare fracture.In 1947, Dr. David Bosworth published a report of 5 cases of fracture dislocation of the ankle with fixed displacement of the fibula behind the posterior tibial tubercle A 41-year-old male with a history of alcohol and drug abuse was admitted after a fall of approximately 6 ft. after jumping off a wall. He described immediate pain and deformity to his right ankle and was unable to bear weight. The ankle was grossly swollen and had extensive bruising, in keeping with a Tscherne type III closed fracture and soft tissue injury. He had no neurologic deficit, and the peripheral pulses were present. The initial radiographs showed a bimalleolar ankle fracture dislocation with a comminuted fracture of the tibial plafond. An attempt at reduction was made in the emergency department, which improved the position of the ankle but did not fully reduce the fracture. A pilon fracture was diagnosed, and the patient was taken to the operating room the same day for application of a spanning external fixator ( After this damage control surgery, the soft tissues were not amenable to any surgical intervention for the pilon fracture. A nonurgent computed tomography (CT) scan of the ankle was taken to facilitate preoperative planning. The CT scan showed a pilon fracture in association with a severely comminuted fracture of the lateral malleolus ( This Bosworth injury was not recognized until the CT scan was obtained, and at this stage, the soft tissues were still not suitable for early surgery. During the period of immobilization in a modular external fixator before surgery, the patient was carefully monitored for the clinical signs and symptoms of compartment syndrome. At 6 days after the injury, the soft tissues had improved sufficiently to allow open reduction and internal fixation. At surgery, significant bone loss from the tibial plafond and a severely comminuted lateral malleolus fracture were found. In keeping with the CT scan findings, the proximal fibula was trapped behind the tibia. It was reduced by applying significant force using bone levers. The pilon fracture was fixed through an anterior approach using 2 screws applied anteroposteriorly, with a posterior distal tibial plate applied anteriorly. Medial and lateral incisions were made over the malleoli. The medial malleolus fracture was reduced and held with 2 screws, and the fibula fracture was reduced and fixed with a variable angle locking plate ( Postoperatively, a plaster cast was applied, and the patient was advised to be non-weightbearing for a period of 6 weeks. At 12 weeks, signs of clinical and radiologic union were present, and the patient was fully weightbearing and returning to his normal activity level. At 18 months, the patient was struggling owing to pain in the ankle that developed clinical and radiologic post-traumatic arthritis. The present case report is to our best knowledge, the first in the medical data to demonstrate a Bosworth injury associated with a pilon fracture. Bartonicek et al In 1983, Perry et al In the present case, the likely mechanism was intermediate between an axial load and SER type 4 injury. We hypothesized that the axial load caused the pilon fracture, and the simultaneous external rotation resulted in a Bosworth injury through the mechanism described in the previous paragraphs. It is unclear why no reports have been published of this combination before our study, because combined axial load and rotation injuries to the ankle are not uncommon. One potential explanation is that in more extensive pilon fractures, the comminution of the metaphyseal tibia might involve the posterior tubercle of the tibia; thus, the fibula cannot become entrapped behind it. Alternatively, the lateral collateral ligaments might rupture before they pull the fibula posteriorly. Both pilon fractures and the Bosworth injury are associated with a soft tissue injury component. Only 4 reports have been published of compartment syndrome associated with Bosworth injuries The current data recommend that a Bosworth injury should be treated by early open reduction; however, in the presence of a coexisting pilon fracture, the detrimental effect of surgery to the associated soft tissue injury could cause problems with wound healing and infection Reviewing our case in retrospect, it might have been possible to detect the associated “axilla sign” of the Bosworth injury, such as reported by Khan and Borton In conclusion, the “Bosworth-pilon” fracture is a rare injury that requires a careful approach to manage the soft tissue and bony components of the injury. Our experience suggests that CT scanning can confirm the diagnosis and facilitate preoperative planning. Early open reduction might not be appropriate for a “Bosworth-pilon” fracture.