Thermal decomposition and phase transformation for the mixture of Bayan Obo rare earth concentrate (BORC) and sodium carbonate (Na2CO3) roasted at different temperatures with weight ratio of 100:20 were studied in detail in our study. The aim of our study is to reveal the nature of roasting reaction between BORC and Na2CO3 and thus providing a new method for processing BORC. The results indicate that BORC can be decomposed completely with Na2CO3 at around 600 °C after 3 h. During the calcination process, Ce0.5Nd0.5O1.75, NaF, Na3PO4, and a rare earth double phosphate phase Na3RE(PO4)2 are formed after the decomposition of BORC with Na2CO3. In addition, the thermal decomposition mechanism is determined in the paper. Based on these facts, a clean technique processing BORC was developed. And a CeF3 powder, whose composition was measured and stability was also evaluated, was obtained for some potential application from the new technique. This research is of significance in terms of the Na2CO3-roasting BORC solid reaction study and sheds a light on a potential clean technique for BORC.With the rapid development of society, there is an increasing demand for rare earth elements (REEs), due to their particular physicochemical properties. REEs have a wide application in many fields, such as permanent magnets, electronics, superconductors, medical and nuclear industry. So far, the main treatment for BORC applied industrially has always been the concentrated sulfuric acid roasting method. The main steps are: oxidation roasting of bastnaesite and sulfuric acid baking/alkaline attacking of monazite to decompose BORC, and then sulfuric acid leaching of roasting product to obtain a liquor containing Ce(IV)-F-P, extraction of liquor with Cyanex 923. A lot of researches have reported that Ce(IV) and F can form stable complex which could be extracted by different types of extractant. In this paper, the thermal decomposition and phase transformation mechanism of BORC roasted with 20% Na Bayan Obo RE concentrate (BORC) was provided by Baotou Iron & Steel Rare-Earth Hi-Tech Co., Ltd. in China. The chemical compositions of raw material were measured and are listed in BORC was dried at 105 °C for 24 h and ground (∼200 mesh) using a planetary ball mill (QM-3SP2). The ground BORC was blended completely with a certain amount of Na About 10 g of roasted products at different temperatures were washed with 500 mL of deionized water in a reactor holding in a constant temperature heating magnetic agitator (DF-101S, GongYi, China) at 90 °C for 1 h. Then the reacted product was filtrated in time and the filter cake was washed with hot water of 90 °C until the pH value of filtrate was close to 7–8. The obtained water leaching liquor was used to analyze the concentrations of F and P. The obtained filter cake was leached with 11 mol/L nitric acid at 90–95 °C for 1 h. After filtration, we washed the wet leach residue with 5% HNO The extraction condition is as follows: Organic phase: 30% Cyanex 923∼heptane solution; aqueous phase: sulfuric acid liquor; phase ratio ( Stripping experiment: 10 mL loaded organic phase was contacted with 10 mL 2% H The total REO content of solution was determined by standard oxalate gravimetric method. The concentration of Ce(IV) in aqueous solution was titrated with standard (NH Thermo-gravimetric (TG-DTG) analyses were performed simultaneously by a thermal analyzer (STA 449F3, NETZSCH, Germany). 20 mg of sample was taken in a corundum crucible with a blank crucible as a reference. The measurements were conducted from ambient temperature to 800 °C at a heating rate of 10 °C/min under an air flow of 20 mL/min. A quadrupole mass spectrometer (MS, QMS 403D, NETZSCH) coupled with the thermal analyzer was used for the analysis of escaping gases. The mass signals of the masses being 18 and 44, which should be H An X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectrometer (D8 ADVANCE, BRUKER) was adopted for the determination of the mineral phase compositions of the roasted samples. The scanning was performed within the range of 10°–70° with a 8 (°)/min scan speed. A FTIR spectroscope (VERTEX 70, BRUKER) was used to record the Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra of the roasted samples. The spectrum of each sample was recorded within the range of 4000 to 400 cm The REO leach rate ( TG-DTG/MS analyses were adopted to find out the thermal decomposition processes of BORC in the presence of Na With regard to the mixture of BORC and Na In order to investigate the phase transformation in calcination process, the XRD test of the obtained products of BORC and Na XRD analyses results indicate that BORC was decomposed and transformed into Ce With regard to bastnaesite, there were four vibration absorptions for As far as monazite is concerned, there are three kinds of vibration absorptions for In order to further reveal the nature of thermal treatment process of BORC with Na As indicated in Based on the above researches, it can be found that the optimum decomposition temperature of BORC with Na A new technology for processing BORC reacting with Na Roasting of BORC with Na Water washing of the roasted product with Na Sulfuric acid leaching of the obtained residue after leached by hydrochloric acid; Solvent extraction of Ce(IV) from sulfuric acid liquor with Cyanex 923.   After BORC roasted with Na The results listed in The H In order to measure the stability of powder, the powder was roasted in air at different temperatures from 30 to 700 °C. From the above results, it can be seen that the obtained powder was very stable CeF Thermal decomposition and phase transformation for the mixture of BORC and sodium carbonate (Na