The best processing methods for recovering gold are determined essentially by the mineralogy and particle size distribution of the gold. Therefore detailed and quantitative mineralogical work is essential for process optimization. This paper describes the process mineralogical study carried out for pilot testwork feed and products of Jokisivu gold ore. The occurrence of coarse and liberated gold particles favors gravity separation, the ensuing bulk sulfide flotation recovering the remaining sulfides. The gold lost in the tailings occurs mainly as fine-grained inclusions in silicates and also rarely as coarse grains that by-passed the gravity circuit and did not float.Gold concentration processes usually consist of gravity concentration, flotation or cyanidation or a combination of these processes. However, the best processing methods for recovering gold are determined by the mineralogy and particle size distribution of the gold ( The Mineral Processing Division of the Technical Research Centre of Finland (VTT) carried out pilot plant testwork on Jokisivu gold ore in early 2002. Outokumpu Mining Oy commissioned the pilot testwork, the main purpose being to establish the grade and recovery of gold. The concentration flowsheet consisted of a gravity circuit, with a spiral and shaking table, and a flotation circuit with rougher–scavenger flotation and one cleaning stage. Cyanidation was used to clean the flotation tailings. The amount of processed gold ore was 260 tonnes with a head grade of 28.3 ppm Au. This paper describes the methods used and the results of a process mineralogical study on the Jokisivu pilot process feed and products. The sieve fractions of process feed, flotation concentrate and flotation tailings and bulk samples of gravity concentrate and cleaned gravity concentrate from the shaking table were analyzed for their main components, and polished sections were prepared from each sample. Selected fractions from tailings were also combined and separated by methylene iodide ( The favorable optical properties of gold, such as its color and extremely high reflectance, enable effective use of automated optical image analysis. The optical image analysis system at Outokumpu Research consists of Zeiss Vision KS400 image analysis software integrated with a Zeiss Axioplan2 optical microscope equipped with motorized Märzhäuser stage and a ProgRes3008 color digital camera. The image analysis applications used were gold particle search and the measurement of the grain size and shape of gold. The image analysis procedures used are similar to those described by The grain size of gold was measured as the maximum and minimum diameters of a particle, and the shape by a factor (4 The liberation of the main minerals was measured from process feed and flotation concentrate samples with a Link eXL EDS-analyzer integrated with a Cameca SX50 electron microprobe. The Link eXL-Cameca SX50 is used for measuring mineral and phase proportions and mineral liberation in cases where neither optical nor back-scattered images (BSE) can be satisfactorily used (see e.g. The main minerals in the feed are quartz, albite, biotite, actinolite with some feldspars and pyrrhotite. Based on chemical assays it was estimated that the amount of silicate material is about 96 wt%, and the main non-silicate mineral is pyrrhotite (2 wt%). The main accessory minerals are chalcopyrite, arsenopyrite and löllingite. At Jokisivu the native gold occurs mainly alloyed, silver being the principal alloying element ( Bismuth and telluride minerals, such as pilsenite (Bi In the process feed, gold occurs mainly (94%) as liberated particles, whereas by the number of detected gold particles, only 50% is liberated and the other 50% is locked, mainly with silicates. The coarsest gold grain encountered in the feed sample was 154 μm in size. The coarsest grained gold particles, up to 744 μm in size, along with tellurides and arsenides reported to the gravity concentrate. The gold content of the gravity concentrate was about 10% Au, and 61% of all detected gold grains are coarser than 250 μm ( In the gravity concentrates, gold grains occur mainly as free, liberated grains, but also as locked particles with (1) enclosing silicates, (2) locked at the rims of sulfides and arsenides, (3) exsolution e.g. inclusions in arsenopyrite and (4) minute inclusions in pyrrhotite ( The cleaning of the gravity concentrate decreased prominently the amount of liberated pyrrhotite and other sulfides in the concentrate ( The flotation stage used bulk sulfide flotation, in which most of the sulfides and the remaining gold were floated into the concentrate and the remaining tailing was essentially devoid of sulfides. The flotation concentrate consisted of 62.6 wt% pyrrhotite, 11.4 wt% pyrite, 2.13 wt% chalcopyrite and 1.5 wt% arsenopyrite and löllingite, and contained 250.7 ppm Au. About 85% of the gold grains are coarser than 75 μm, the coarsest particles being 177 μm in size ( The grain size and shape of gold grains from the sieve fractions of the flotation concentrate are shown in The gold content of the flotation tailings is 3.5 ppm Au, and the main minerals are quartz, biotite, feldspars, actinolite and chlorite. The amount of non-silicate minerals in the tailings is 1.7%, wt%, and they occur mainly in the finest −20 μm sieve fraction. Based on the distribution of gold between heavy ( The mode of occurrence of gold is a bonus for liberation and beneficiation by gravity separation and bulk sulfide flotation techniques. The coarsest grained gold particles reported to the gravity concentrates, and cleaning of the gravity concentrate can produce exceptionally high-grade gold concentrate. The coarsest gold grain floated and detected from the sieve fractions of the flotation concentrate was elongated, with shape factor of 0.08, and 177 Because of the intense locking of gold by silicates in the +75 μm fractions of the flotation concentrate and in the flotation tailings, a finer tertiary grind was recommended to increase the liberation and recovery of gold. I thank Reijo Anttonen from Outokumpu Mining Oy for permission to publish the results, and Markku Klemetti from Technical Research Centre of Finland (VTT/MIN) for valuable comments and suggestions.