Separation and purification of lanthanum from other rare-earth (RE) elements are highly complex processes comprising several steps of extraction using organic solvents or ion-exchange resins at high costs. In order to study the biosorption process as an alternative for conventional lanthanum recovery, this work investigated some basic aspects of lanthanum–Sargassum biomass interactions in batch equilibrium contact. The dynamics of biosorption, influence of pH, and the desorption of this RE were investigated. Maximum biosorption coefficient (q
                     max) increased from 0.05 at pH 2 to 0.53 mmol g−1 at pH 5 for lanthanum sulfate. When lanthanum chloride was used, a higher q
                     max at pH 5 (0.73 mmol g−1) was observed as compared to the sulfate salt (q
                     max=0.53 mmol g−1) at the same pH. Adsorption and desorption curves pointed out a complete recovery of metal adsorbed in the Sargassum fluitans biomass, showing a reversibility of this process and indicating the potential of biosorption for lanthanum removal and recovery.Similar physical and chemical behavior of metals from the rare-earth (RE) group makes it difficult to separate individual elements. Several extraction steps are necessary for the purpose using organic solvents or ion-exchange resins. These physicochemical processes are rather expensive. Due to biosorption characteristics close to that observed in the ion-exchange columns process, it can be considered as a potential alternative, economically attractive for rare-earth recovery or separation. From the RE elements, lanthanum has currently garnered special attention due to its technological importance because of increasing demands for advanced new materials. Current applications of lanthanum as a pure element or in association with other compounds are in super alloys, catalysts, special ceramics, and in organic synthesis. In solution, this element has a stable valence of +3 and its ionic radius is very close to that of the calcium ion (+2), which might substitute this ion in inorganic compounds or in some biomolecules Biosorption of heavy metals by microbial cells has been recognized as a potential alternative to existing technologies for removal of these contaminants from polluted waters. This phenomenon is generally described as retention of ions from solution by microbial cells and this metal uptake is normally very efficient and frequently selective The uptake of metal ions by microorganisms has been shown to occur in two ways: passive and/or active uptake. During the passive uptake (biosorption), the metal ions are quickly adsorbed onto the cell surface of the biomass during its contact with the metal solution (physical adsorption or ion exchange at the cell surface). The active uptake (bioaccumulation) is a slower process involving the transport of ions across the cell membrane toward the cytoplasm occurring only in living cells From the biomass that can be used in biosorption, brown seaweed has been normally selected due to its high performance for ionic adsorption and availability. The algal cell walls contain biopolymeric substances that could provide binding groups for metal sorption such as amino, carboxyl, phosphate, and sulphate anions acting as a cationic resin. The nitrogen and oxygen from amino and carboxyl groups in the peptides could be available for characteristic coordination bonding with metallic ions. Such bond formation could be accompanied by displacement of protons dependent in part on the extent of dissociation of these groups as determined by the pH in an ion-exchange mechanism Despite their strategic and economic importance, RE elements have not been much evaluated regarding their potential to be concentrated and eventually separated by the biosorption process. Only in the last few years have some investigations been published on this matter. In the present study, some basic aspects of biosorption and desorption of lanthanum by nonliving biomass of The brown seaweed Lanthanum stock solution was prepared by dissolving lanthanum oxide (Aldrich, 99.99%) in concentrated sulfuric or hydrochloric acid to a final metal concentration of 35 mmol l The time required for establishing the sorption equilibrium in contact systems was assessed from preliminary sorption experiments as described in the following. Batch biosorption experiments were carried out in 125 ml Erlenmeyer flasks by mixing 0.1 g of pretreated After the sorption system reached equilibrium, supernatant samples were withdrawn after decantation for lanthanum analysis by ICP-AES (Thermo Jarrel Ash, Trace Scan). The lanthanum biosorption uptake ( Desorption experiments were carried out using 0.1 g of biomass previously loaded with lanthanum sulfate at pH 5 as described above. The loaded biomass was drained to remove all lanthanum solution, washed with 20 ml of distilled water at pH 5.0 and then resuspended in 50 ml of hydrochloric acid 0.24 mol l Biosorption of metals by nonliving biomass is normally a rapid process; its overall rate is known to be limited by the intraparticle mass transfer The pH value in these experiments was not controlled in order not to disturb the equilibrium. From the initial value of 4.0, the pH decreased to 3.7 (values measured in the first and last flasks) due to the exchange of lanthanum for protons from the biomass binding sites. The literature has demonstrated that the carboxyl groups present in the biomass have a very important role in metal biosorption, being responsible for around 90% of the metal immobilization in the process The sorption equilibrium is dependent on the pH because it affects the dissociation of these groups (p As indicated in the literature and in the present work, biosorption is a reversible ion-exchange equilibrium. In this way, desorption of metal ions can be obtained by shifting the ion-exchange equilibrium in order to release the metal bound to the biomass. Many chemicals can be used to achieve this displacement such as EDTA, salts, acid or bases The binding of lanthanum ions by nonliving algal biomass is influenced by other ionic species, such as anions, present in solution. A higher In the case of lanthanides, the formation of complexes with chloride or sulfate affects the coordination sphere of metal, leading to an influence on the net charge of the cation. Chloride ions are reported to have an outer sphere character with a less disturbance in the hydration sphere. On the other hand, sulfate and carboxylate anions present inner sphere character more pronounced in the complex formation with lanthanum The uptake of lanthanum from sulfate-containing solutions seems to be more sensitive to pH because The aim of this work was to study some basic aspects of lanthanum biosorption using nonliving Desorption of lanthanum loaded onto the biomass was complete using a hydrochloric acid solution. The coincident behavior of adsorption and desorption isotherms confirms the reversibility of this equilibrium and the complete removal of the bound metal. The two chemical systems investigated (chloride and sulfate salts) presented higher biosorption uptakes at higher pH values and the use of lanthanum chloride resulted in higher biosorption uptakes than observed with lanthanum sulfate. However, biosorption of the lanthanum using sulfate system was more extensively investigated in this work because it is usually present in solutions obtained from rare-earth extraction processes. The chloride system was used to compare the biosorption performance in some of the best conditions in order to observe that chemical anionic effect. As the results suggest, biosorption onto nonliving We acknowledge the Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP) for a doctoral fellowship (M.C.P.) and the Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientı́fico e Tecnológico (CNPq) for a research fellowship to O.G. Jr. We also acknowledge W.A.N. Meneses (IQ) and W.C. Costa (CNEN-MG) for their technical assistance.