Purpose
                  To evaluate intraoperative and early postoperative clinical outcomes using the Nice knot as an auxiliary reduction technique in displaced comminuted patellar fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Thirty-nine patients with unilateral closed displaced comminuted patellar fractures received open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF), utilizing either Nice knot (the NK group, 24 patients) or traditional reduction (the TR group, 23 patients) techniques, were retrospectively reviewed in this study. Intra-operative surgical time and peri-operative hemoglobin were recorded. Post-operative clinical outcomes were measured using visual analgesic score, range of motion of the knee joint and the Böstman scales, and radiographic outcomes were used to evaluate fracture healing. Complications including infection, bone non-union, implant loosening, fragment displacement and painful hardware were also assessed.
               
                  Results
                  In-hospital records indicated significantly shorter surgical duration (32.6 min) in the NK group than in the TR group (63.9 min). Intraoperative blood loss was also significantly decreased in the NK group (64.7 ml) compared to the TR group (189.1 ml). Patients in the NK and TR groups were followed for mean of 12.9 months and 12.5 months respectively. The union rate was 100% (24/24) in the NK group and 91.3% (21/23) in the TR group. In the TR group, there were two non-unions, including one infected non-union. There was no difference in the visual analgesic score, the range of motion of the knee joint or the Böstman scale at last follow-up between the two groups.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The sliding, self-stabilizing Nice knot was associated with reduced surgical time, decreased intraoperative blood loss, and satisfactory postoperative outcomes in the treatment of displaced patellar fractures. Future studies are needed to ensure the generalizability of these findings to additional patient populations at other institutions.The patella is a crucial component of the extensor mechanism of the knee that functions to increase the moment arm of the quadriceps extensor mechanism A variety of fixation techniques have been described for treatment of displaced comminuted patellar fractures, including headless compression screws and wiring, the nitinol patellar concentrator, fixed angle plates, and low-profile mesh plates The Nice knot – a new type of sliding and self-locking double-stranded knot – has been recently proposed for tuberosity osteosynthesis in the management of proximal humeral fractures and arthroscopic transosseous rotator cuff repair Therefore, the objective of this study was to evaluate intra-operative and early post-operative clinical outcomes using the Nice knot as an auxiliary reduction technique in the treatment of displaced comminuted patellar fractures. We hypothesized that the application of this simple, low-cost, and easily performed technique would be associated with shorter surgical duration, more favorable post-operative clinical outcomes, and fewer intra-operative and post-operative complications. After obtaining approval from our institutional Ethics Committee, we retrospectively reviewed a consecutive series of 24 patients who had undergone open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) of unilateral displaced comminuted patellar fractures with auxiliary Nice knots (NK) reduction from September 2015 to June 2018. As the control, 23 patients with similar unilateral displaced comminuted patellar fractures undergone the same procedure with traditional reduction (TR) and fixation were enrolled in this study during the same time period. Patient demographics including age and sex were recorded. Patients were selected for inclusion based on fracture morphology, including patients with (i) unilateral closed displaced comminuted patellar fractures involved the patellar articular surface with an articular incongruity (step-off) of more than 2 mm; (ii) fractures with multiple fragments and/or a separation of the fragments of more than 3 mm; or (iii) fractures that disrupted the quadriceps mechanism All the operations were performed with the same surgeon (T. X.) without the application of tourniquet. In the traditional reduction (TR) group, after incision of the skin and exposure of the whole patella, the periosteum enclosing the patellar fracture fragments was opened and the bone fragments were exposed and reduced gradually with the help of towel clamps. In the Nice knot (NK) group, the periosteum holding the “package” of fragmental patella was left intact. Instead, the medial or lateral retinacula of the patella (as determined by the position of the main fracture line) was opened, and the double-stranded Nice knots were introduced to surround the package in several directions as needed. Once surrounding the package, the Nice knots were then sequentially tightened in a sliding, self-stabilizing fashion. Accurate reduction of the articular surface was confirmed by placing the surgeon's finger through the opened medial or lateral patellar retinaculum and directly palpating the patella undersurface ( In both TR and NK groups, reduction was followed by internal fixation with anterior tension-band wiring techniques involving both longitudinal and transverse Kirschner wires, as well as titanium plates and cerclage wires as needed. Temporary “de-tensioning” wires (used by some surgeons in treatment of comminuted fracture patterns) were not utilized in this study. Surgical time (min) was recorded routinely as the beginning of skin incision to the closure of the wound. Intra-operative blood loss (ml) were recorded as well. Anterior-posterior and lateral radiographs were obtained at day 2; week 6; and months 3, 6, and 12 postoperatively. Fracture healing was defined as absence of local pain or tenderness, walking well without help, and evidence of trabecular bone across the fracture line Of all patients with patellar fractures that met inclusion criteria, 24 patients underwent Nice knot (NK) reduction, and 23 patients underwent traditional reduction (TR). There was no difference in patient age or sex between groups ( Operative time was significantly shorter in the NK group (32.6 ± 4.6 [range 25–40] min), compared to the TR group (63.9 ± 8.3 [range 53–86] min, Mean follow-up was 12.9 ± 1.2 (range 11–16 months) in the NK group and 12.5 ± 1.2 (range 11–15 months) in the TR group. All patients in the NK group progressed to union uneventfully (24/24, 100%). In the TR group, 21 patients achieved union (21/23, 91.3%). Non-union was observed in two patients in the TR group (2/23, 8.7%), one of which was found to be infected. The infected patient received a secondary debridement and repeat fixation procedure one and a half months after the first surgery, and bone union was observed at 2.5 months after the second surgery. The other patient without infection received a secondary debridement and autologous bone implant surgery 6 months after the first surgery, and bone union was noted 3 months thereafter ( The Böstman scales at last follow-up were 27.3 ± 1.2 (range 26–30 points) in the NK group and 27.1 ± 2.6 (range 19–30 points) in the TR group without a significant difference between groups. Knee range of motion and visual analog scale pain were also recorded separately and were not significantly different between the TR group (mean VAS: 1.3 ± 0.4; mean ROM: 120.3 ± 13.2) and NK group (mean VAS: 1.2 ± 0.4; mean ROM: 114.3 ± 21.2) at the last follow-up. Reduction and fixation of displaced comminuted patellar fractures is crucial for restoring the extensor mechanism of the knee and the articular congruity of the patella; however, in particularly complex fracture patterns, partial patellectomy is sometimes inevitable [ Consistent with our hypothesis, the Nice knot reduction (NK) was associated with significantly shorter surgical time compared to traditional reduction (TR). Importantly, average surgical time using traditional reduction technique (without the auxiliary fixation of Nice knots) in the present study was 65 min, which is comparable to previous reports in the literature of 50–70 min using traditional reduction strategies [ In the current study, several double stranded Nice knots were arranged in multiple directions and tightened progressively. This approach is similar to one described by Boileau et al. in 2011, in which Nice knots were used for proximal tuberosity fixation of the proximal humeral fractures and were shown to achieve favorable clinical outcomes An association between intraoperative Nice knot reduction techniques and early postoperative clinical outcomes was also described in the present study. In both NK and TR groups, post-operative clinical outcomes were satisfactory. Bone union was achieved in most patients at 3 months (24/24 [100.0%] in the NK group and 21/23 [91.3%] in the TR group) without implant loosening or fragment displacement. According to the clinical evaluations, favorable results were also obtained in both groups, the mean VAS score, mean ROM of the knee joint and the mean Böstman scales were satisfactory for NK and TR groups at final follow-up. However, two non-unions were observed in TR group (2/23, 8.7%), including one post-operative infection and another aged female with severe osteoporosis. Both of these patients required a second debridement procedure and re-fixation of the patella. Inevitably, the post-operative joint function was also compromised due to extended immobilization of the knee. The surgical time for these two patients in the TR group was 72 and 85 min respectively, which may be attributed to the complexity of reduction of the fragmented patella. Additionally, in the case of the patient with osteoporotic bone, traditional reduction strategies might have inadvertently created a greater number of fracture fragments, which may have ultimately resulted in a compromised blood supply. Therefore, it is possible that both a prolonged surgical duration and greater risk of fracture fragmentation associated with traditional reduction of the fractured patella (especially in the case of osteoporotic bone) may have contributed to infection and/or nonunion in these two cases [ The use of non-absorbable sutures for reduction and fixation of displaced comminuted patellar fractures is not a new concept and in previous studies has mostly achieved favorable clinical outcomes [ This study is not without limitations. Firstly, the current study is a short-term and retrospective study which involved a limited number of patients at a single center, and thus the short-term generalizability of these findings is limited. Future studies featuring additional institutions with randomized treatment arms would help to confirm the results of this study and clarify the utility and feasibility of the Nice knot as a useful reduction tool in the treatment of displaced patellar fractures. Moreover, although decreased intraoperative blood loss was observed in the NK group, it was not clear if this difference was clinically significant. Finally, although postoperative follow up exceeded at least 16 months for all patients included in the study, further observation might be useful for identifying other potential long-term complications (e.g. post-traumatic arthritis) or differences associated with the different reduction techniques. In conclusion, this study presented the intra-operative and early post-operative clinical outcomes of ORIF of displaced comminuted patellar fractures utilizing the Nice knot as an auxiliary reduction aid. Compared to traditional reduction techniques, the use of Nice knots was associated with reduced surgical time and decreased blood loss with potentially enhanced recovery after surgery. Clinical outcomes associated with Nice knot reduction of patellar fractures were satisfactory and comparable to traditional reduction techniques. Future studies are needed, however, to ensure the generalizability of these findings to additional patient populations at other institutions. All the authors in this study (M. C., X. J., G.W.F., W. Z., S. Y., G. L., T. X.) report no conflict of interest concerning the materials or methods used in this study or the findings specified in this paper.