A study on the pressure drop in pulsed extraction columns with internals of immobile discs and rings, usually called Discs and Doughnuts Columns (DDC) is carried out. The local pressure at a desired level of the column is obtained by resolving of turbulent flow model based on Reynolds equations coupled with k–ɛ model of turbulence. Consequently, the pressure drop for a column stage or for a unit of column length is determined. The results are used for development of correlations for determination of pressure drop as a function of plate free area, interplate distance and pulsation parameters – amplitude and frequency. Good correspondence to experimental data is observed. The developed quantitative relations are useful for non-experimental numerical optimization of stage geometry in view of lesser energy consumption.Pulsed extraction columns with internals of discs and rings (usually called Discs and Doughnuts Columns – DDC) have revealed themselves as promising devices for extraction processes in liquid–liquid media. They are used in different area, mainly spent nuclear fuel recycling ( A principal scheme of a DDC apparatus is shown in Alternated internals of immobile discs and rings (doughnuts) are mounted in a vertical cylindrical apparatus body. They are placed horizontally and centered with respect to the column axis. A stage is formed by two rings and a disc between them. The outer edge of the rings is extended to the column wall. Two passages for the flow are formed – a central passage through the ring aperture and a peripheral passage through the annular aperture between the disc edge and column wall. A pulsing device is coupled to the column body, which induces reciprocal up and down movement of the fluids. The pulsation is characterized by its amplitude The column contains a number of equivalent stages. The geometry parameters of a stage are shown in  Pressure drop is a basic parameter, which supplies information about the energy consumption associated to apparatus type and operational conditions, and is an important design parameter. Usually it is obtained experimentally by tests on pilot columns. The purpose of this study is to derive a correlation for numerical determination of pressure drop as a function of stage geometry and pulsation intensity, based on hydrodynamic description of a pulsed flow in DDC. There are some previous studies on pressure drop in this type of columns. They concern one-phase flow.   In order to obtain the pressure drop in a pulsed column based on measurements in non-pulsed regimes, It is seen that the attempts to measure or describe quantitatively the pressure drop in a single-phase pulsed DDC assume equality of permanent and pulsed flows. All previous experimental studies on DDC with permanent flow have shown that for this type of equipment is valid the fundamental equation In our opinion, when consider pulsed one-phase flow, instead of regarding it as a permanent flow with velocity equal to the mean velocity of the pulsed flow, it is more realistic to account for the periodical velocity changes due to imposed pulsation. The instantaneous pulsation velocity created by a piston mechanical device is: The instantaneous velocity of the liquid in the column The mean flow velocity In practical situations the periodical component dominates over the permanent one. For DDC their ratio  Introducing pulsed velocity expression It is seen that the pressure drop of a permanent flow (Eq. Now our task is to find how the pressure drop will change when vary the geometry parameters of the stage and pulsation parameters. Two dimensionless parameters characterize the stage geometry: Plate free section The ratio of distance between two adjacent plates In order to obtain results for pressure drop at different stage configurations of DDC in pulsed turbulent single-phase flow, we have used turbulent flow model based on averaged equations of Navier–Stokes (Reynolds equations) coupled with the classical In the model equations, besides the terms characterizing the state of turbulence (turbulent kinetic energy and its dissipation rate), there is a term accounting for the pressure. The simulation solutions supply results for its local values, which have been used to calculate the corresponding mean values. The pressure drop has been determined as a difference between the mean pressure values at two different levels in the column, placed at the stage entry and exit.  For all stage configurations, the pressure drop in a pulsed DDC is a linear function of the square of mean pulsation velocity, which is in agreement with the general equations ( The attempt to correlate directly  Introducing in The above Eq. As it is seen, the pulsed flow pressure drop coefficient The measurement of pressure drop operating with a permanent single phase flow is a standard task. Using a differential manometer, the level difference Δ By use of Eqs. Introducing the relation Δ The experiments are carried out in a in a column of total height 3.50 A single phase (water) has been fed at the top of the column, and measurements of height loss Δ  Calculations through Eq. The deviation of calculation from experiments is in the frames of 10% and could be considered as fairly good. It is also a positive test for the reliability of starting Eq. A numerically obtained relation for determination of pressure drop in pulsed DDC is proposed in Eq. Regarding the results of Among the column extractors, the most similar to our case are these with perforated plates. They are of two types – with immobile plates and pulsed flow, and with reciprocating plates and permanent flow. The first type is hydrodynamically closer to our column, which also has immobile plates with pulsed flow. Similarity with the second type can also be assumed because of the analogous process of movement of liquid through the plate, although the source of the movement is different – flow pulsation in the first case and plate movement in the second one. There are a number of correlations for determination of pressure drop or power dissipation in column extractors with perforated plates, and it might be useful to test their applicability to columns with internals of discs and doughnuts. Below are given the most important correlations.  Eq.   All authors above assume no pressure recovery downstream of the plate. Some modifications are made by    Surprisingly, the pressure drop is not quadratic but linear function of the velocity When apply Eq. The correlations They supply expressions for Concerning the only relation that shows dependence of  The results obtained by the correlation of Thornton The configuration Generally, in most cases the predictions of correlations for perforated plates differ significantly from our correlation developed especially for discs-doughnuts plates. It is not very surprising and might be expected, because there are some important differences between these two types of plates. The doughnut plates offer not many small perforations but one single opening. Although most authors have based their developments for perforated plates on the assumption that their resistance is equal to the resistance of an orifice plate with the same open area, this is shown to be not very correct because of rather different hydrodynamics – single jet contracts suddenly in a single orifice and then suddenly leaves and enlarges as single jet, while in case of sieve plates a single jet is split in multiple separate jets, and it creates deviations from pressure drop predictions based on orifice equation ( It is shown that at the same velocity the mean pressure drop in case of a pulsed flow in DDC is not equal to that of a permanent flow. Based on simulations with turbulent flow model, a correlation for calculation of mean pressure drop in a pulsed extraction column with internals of discs and rings is developed as a function of stage geometry parameters and pulsation regime. The results of this study of pressure drop as depending on plate free area and interplate distance are helpful for non-experimental optimization of stage configuration in view of lesser energy consumption. Partial financial support of the