Low grade dumped limestone sample having high silica of 8.1%, 36.8% CaO, and 3% Al2O3 has been studied with the aim to reduce the silica level to below 3% for its utilization in iron making. Beneficiation study of the sample was initiated with desliming of the feed sample of −100 µm to remove the siliceous ultrafine particles and to improve the feed quality. Flotation study was carried out by column flotation technique varying the collector dosage, superficial air flow velocity and froth depth to assess their effect on silica reduction and CaO recovery. It was observed that increased collector dosage and superficial air velocity increases the recovery of CaO, and increase in the froth depth reduces the mass flow and silica content in the concentrate. The best result was found at 1.25 cm/sec superficial air velocity, 25 cm froth depth, 1.25 kgpt collector dosage and concentrate assayed 47.3% CaO, 2.8% silica with 72% CaO recovery.Limestone is a sedimentary rock. It is majorly comprised of calcite and other associated gangue minerals containing alumina, and silicate minerals like feldspar, pyroxene, mica etc. Limestone is used by multiple industries which include cement, plastic, paper and metallurgical industries. In the process of iron production, it acts as a flux material which reacts with impurities like silica and alumina to form slag. However, the desired quality of the material needed varies according to its application. Limestone having minimum 44% CaO, 4% MgO and 6% SiO In India, limestone beneficiation plant follows crushing, screening, scrubbing, grinding, and classification. The fines contain high silica and alumina. The density difference between calcite and the associated silicate bearing mineral is negligible which makes the gravity separation ineffective. Flotation is a physico-chemical process where the surface property of the calcite is modified by adding suitable reagents to differentiate from the gangue minerals. Flotation technique adopted can be direct or reverse flotation depending on the materials to be floated which is decided based on the characteristics of the sample under consideration. In direct flotation, calcites are floated using surfactants having an anionic group like sodium oleate by depressing the silicate minerals using sodium silicate. In reverse flotation cationic reagents are used to reduce the silica content in the limestone sample. For low-grade limestone where the liberation is at a finer size, mechanical cell does not respond effectively due to the larger size of the bubbles. The effective bubble-particle collision reduces with the increase of bubble size in the mechanical cell and thereby decreases the efficiency of the process in terms of the recovery and grade. For the flotation of finer particles, column flotation cell is found to be effective as the smaller bubble size aids to increase the bubble-particle contact with the finer feed particles The present investigation deals with the effect of process variables in the processing of the high silica containing dumped limestone to produce a concentrate having less than 3% silica for iron making application using column flotation cell. The limestone sample used for the present investigation was a dumped sample (<10 mm), rejected after the size classification and lying over the years. The chemical composition of the feed sample is presented in The characterization of the feed sample prior to beneficiation plays a decisive role in making the strategy for beneficiation. It involves the chemistry of the sample, identification of the valuable and gangue minerals (major, minor and trace minerals), textures of the mineral phases and their liberation size. The polished thin-section of limestone sample was studied under the optical petrological microscope (Leica) using plane polarised transmitted light. The rhombohedral cleavage pattern, anisotropy and the twinkling effect under crossed nicols identifies the calcite grains ranging from 5 µm to millimetre sizes ( The scanning electron microscopic (SEM) analysis revealed the distribution of the impurities in the calcite body. Both the quartz and clay grain occur mostly at finer sizes <20 µm ( From the above observations, it could be inferred that most of the contaminant minerals occur in finer grain-size (below 50 µm) in the interstitial grain boundaries of calcite (average grain size is ~100 µm). Therefore, it was expected that an adequate liberation could be achieved below 100 µm size. Based on the optical microscope and SEM study, it was found that adequate liberation size is around 100 µm. The chemistry of the different fractions of the feed sample indicated in From The Diester flotation column having 3 m height and 7.5 cm diameter was used for the experimentation. It comprises two bubble generating spargers. One sparger is fitted just below the feeding point and the other one at the bottom of the column, near the discharge end. Both the spargers are separately connected with the airflow meter and gate valve to supply air bubbles into the column. The upper sparger provides support to the mineralized bubble from the drop back which is very accentual at high froth depth. There is counter current flow of the feed and air bubbles. It operates under steady state and plug flow conditions with regulating degrees of axial dispersion with higher bubble particle contact time. Column flotation studies were carried out at different froth heights, collector dosage and airflow rate. Froth heights were adjusted using a PID controller. Flotation studies were carried out using emulsion of sodium oleate to float calcite minerals, and sodium silicate was used as a depressant for the silicate minerals. The dosage of sodium silicate was also kept constant at 1.75 kgpt. The conditioning time with sodium silicate was 3 min and with sodium oleate was 2 min. The recovery and the grade of CaO in the concentrate essentially depend on the collector dosage, froth depth and superficial air velocity. The dosage of oleate was varied from 1 to 1.75 kgpt. Froth depth was maintained between 10 and 52 cm and the superficial air velocity (SAV) in the range of 0.75–1.5 cm/sec. Slurry feed rate and rate of wash water flow were kept constant at 1.5 and 0.5 l/min respectively. Peristaltic pumps fitted with adjustable drive were used to control the rate of the slurry feeding and tailing discharge. Froth depth was maintained by adjusting the rate of tailing discharge. The concentrate was collected in the form of froth using a collecting duct fitted at the top of the column. Products collected from the concentrate and tailing stream were dried and analyzed for %CaO and %SiO Initially, the effect of froth depth was studied keeping the collector dosage at 1.5 kgpt and SAV at 1 cm/sec. The results obtained at different froth depth are shown in The mass drainage from the froth zone to the pulp phase is called drop back which can be estimated by the difference between 100% and The superficial air rate is the volumetric airflow rate per unit cross-sectional area per unit time inside the column. The airflow rate has a significant role in determining the flotation rate constant and also in the creation of the froth layer. The effect of SAV on the recovery of calcite, grade of silica and calcite was studied keeping the froth depth at 25 cm and collector dosage at 1.5 kgpt. There is an increasing trend of recovery of CaO and silica content with increasing of SAV; however, the grade of CaO in the concentrate decreases ( The sodium oleate is used to float the calcite mineral as it acts as a collector cum frother. The effect of collector dosages was studied keeping the froth depth at 25 cm and superficial air velocity at 1.25 cm/sec. The relation between collector dosage on CaO, SiO When the particles are sufficiently hydrophobic, the liquid film between the bubble and the particle thins and ultimately ruptures as a result of the attractive surface forces The probability of attachment ( Eq. The beneficiation study was carried out for waste dumped low-grade limestone by column flotation technique and varying the process parameters like collector dosage, air flow rate and froth depth. The results of effective responses are presented in The present study highlights the prospects of dumped low-grade limestone sample for their application in iron and steel making. This study will be useful for the beneficiation of the low-grade sample and to conserve the natural resources. The findings of the above studies are highlighted below: The higher froth depth improves the quality of the product. However, recovery decreases significantly. Consequently, superficial air velocity and collector dosage play a significant role to improve the recovery at high froth depth. The higher SAV causes entrainment of the particles size. It increases because of increased bubble size, and increases the recovery of silica in the concentrate. The silica recovery in the concentrate could be reduced by using less collector dosage. The better recovery could be achieved at lower collector dosage and at high superficial air velocity. The product necessary for iron making could be produced by reducing the silica content in the concentrate to 2.8% with 72% CaO recovery at 1.25 kg/ton collector dosage, 1.25 cm/sec superficial air velocity and 25 cm froth depth.