Powder filling is challenging to measure in industrial mills. In this paper, three estimation models of powder filling are evaluated. The first is built around the crescent-shaped load; the second is empirical while the third exploits residence time distribution.
                  In terms of supporting data, total mass content, ball filling, slurry density, load orientation, power draw, and material transport through the mill were measured under various conditions. The residence time distribution was then characterised and used in computing powder filling. Measured powder filling was compared against predictions and possible sources of discrepancy were discussed.The material content of a ball mill can be defined either as powder filling or as material hold-up. Powder filling is the fraction of the total volume of interstices between balls at rest inside a mill filled with powder ( The focus is on powder filling, a parameter difficult to measure in full-scale mills with existing estimation models being either empirical or phenomenological. Empirical models are simple but only apply to the range of conditions tested. In contrast, phenomenological models are more complex but can be extrapolated. In this article, powder filling data was collected around an overflow mill to test the empirical model by The mill under consideration is of overflow design run in open circuit and used in the secondary grinding of a platinum ore. The following should be noted: ore feed density In terms of fieldwork, particle size distribution, slurry concentration, and flow-rate were measured at the feed and product streams. A pair of Sensomag® sensors ( The experimental work is summarised in Note the other measurements listed in Powder filling can be formally defined as follows ( For wet milling, if the slurry mass hold-up, Eq. The second technique calculates the volume of powder assuming that the volume of slurry is known: Slurry volume, The substitution of Eqs. The third technique relies on the RTD of the mill: Here, powder content is the product of solids feed-rate, The last technique is the empirical model by Here, In this section, Shi’s, Austin’s, and the RTD-based estimates are compared against mass-based powder filling. Slurry mass hold-up, slurry mass concentration, ball filling as well as mill diameter and length were used in the calculations.  As far as Austin’s model is concerned, it can be said that Eq. The significance of results in Differences between Shi’s predictions and measurements were observed at lower ball filling (see With Austin’s model, poor performance was noted at slurry mass concentrations below 70%. Eq. Lastly, consistently low values of powder filling were observed throughout in Three predictive models of powder filling were tested on a full-scale mill. Shi’s predictions were first compared against mass-based powder filling with ±8% discrepancy noted; this figure doubled at low ball filling. RTD-based predictions were next with low estimates matching Shi’s predictions only at low ball filling. Austin’s model was last with 40% errors below the mean at low slurry density. But, high-density slurries produced predictions comparable to Shi’s. Shi’s model is therefore recommended for powder filling estimation. However, better description of load orientation is needed at low ball filling with the anticipated benefit of a robust phenomenological model of powder filling. The authors are indebted to the University of South Africa, the University of the Witwatersrand, the Waterval mine technical staff, Dr Chris Rule, Dr Augustine Makokha, Prof Aubrey Mainza, Prof Michael Moys, and Magotteaux (Pty) Ltd.