A non-linear Unified Strength criterion for rock material is presented. It is the development of the Unified Strength Theory (in: M. Jono, T. Inoue (Eds.), Mechanical Behaviour of Materials-VI (ICM-6), Pergamon, Oxford, 1991, pp. 841–846) and the modification of the Hoek–Brown strength criterion (Underground Excavations in Rock, The Institution of Mining and Metallurgy, London, 1980). The effect of intermediate principal stress on rock strength is considered in the non-linear Unified Strength criterion. The Hoek–Brown criterion is a single-shear strength criterion that forms the lower bound, and the non-linear twin-shear strength criterion forms the upper bound in the deviatoric plane. All the failure criteria ranging from the Hoek–Brown criterion (lower bound) and the non-linear twin-shear criterion (upper bound) and a series of criteria ranging between these two bounds may be introduced by the non-linear Unified Strength criterion. The theory can also be generalized to rock mass strength.shear and normal stress components, respectively major, intermediate and minor principal stresses, respectively hydrostatic stress or mean stress first invariant of stress tensor second invariant of deviatoric stress tensor octahedral-shear stress octahedral normal stress generalized shear stress stress angle maximum principal shear stress intermediate or minimum principal shear stress intermediate or minimum principal shear stress normal stress acted on the normal stress acted on the normal stress acted on the shear strength uniaxial tensile strength parameter uniaxial compressive strength parameter strength ratio of tensile and compressive strength, material constants Hoek–Brown criterion parameters Unified Strength Theory parameter cohesion in Mohr–Coulomb criterion and Unified Strength Theory friction angle in Mohr–Coulomb criterion and Unified Strength Theory Rock is a geotechnical material with high difference of tensile and compressive strengths. Its properties vary with rock type. The rock in underground engineering is often acted under complex multiaxial stress state, and sometimes yield and failure in extreme circumstances. The main objectives of the study of strength theory (yield and failure criteria) are to understand the materials’ intrinsic response to loads, to identify the failure conditions in different stress states, and ultimately, to formulate necessary design criteria for proper development of these construction materials. Numerous strength criteria (failure criteria) have been developed in the last Century The strength criteria may be classified into three main series ( A Unified Strength Theory that covers all the regions from the lower bound to upper bound was proposed by Yu in 1991–1994 A lot of strength criteria for rock materials have been proposed Axisymmetric triaxial compression test was developed by Prandtl-von Karman-Böker, 1910–1913, and is widely used in engineering. A number of experimental results of this kind of tests were given in literature The development of the strength theories is closely associated with the development of rock testing equipment and techniques under the complex stress states. In the 1960s, a great effort was dedicated to the development of true triaxial testing facilities, and the facilities were then used to test engineering materials. Some representative efforts were made for rocks at the Tokyo University and Imperial College, etc., for soils at the Cambridge University, Karlsruhe university and Kyoto University. Some typical results of the true triaxial test on granite and marble were given by Mogi at the Tokyo University Mogi's persistent effort revealed that rock strength varied with the intermediate principal stress ( A general observation confirms the essential effect of the intermediate principal stress on the strength of geotechnical materials The Tresca yield criterion for metallic materials (one-parameter criterion) and the Mohr–Coulomb strength criterion for rock (two-parameter criterion) form collectively the inner (lower) bound for all the possible convex limit surfaces coincided with the Drucker postulation in the deviatoric plane in stress space. This series of strength criteria considered the maximum shear stress It is evident that the effect of the intermediate principal stress Various strength criteria for rock and concrete have been proposed The typical octahedral-shear failure criterion is the Drucker–Prager criterion, which is independent of the stress angle. Based on the Drucker–Prager criterion, the n-type criterion proposed by Pariseau (1994) The disadvantage of the Drucker–Prager criterion was pointed by Zienkiewicz and Pande (1974) The Lade–Duncan criterion is The Lade–Duncan criterion was rewritten by Bandet The stress angle dependence of LDMN (Lade and Duncan, 1975 as well as Matsuoka and Nakai, 1974) criterion and other criteria were given by Bandet The failure criterion proposed by Desai A multiaxial-stress criterion for short- and long-term strength of isotropic rock media was proposed by Aubertin and Simon In fact, most of the smoothed ridge models are the approximation of the non-linear single-shear stress failure criteria. Their failure surfaces are higher than one of the Mohr–Coulomb criterion (the lower bound of strength theories). The twin-shear strength theory proposed by Yu in 1961 and 1985 The twin-shear strength theory has pushed the strength theory to a new status by forming the upper (outer) bound for all the possible convex yield surfaces, which coincided with the convexity of the Drucker postulation in the deviatoric plane in stress space. The two bounds and a smooth curve situated median the two bounds are shown in The Unified Strength Theory was proposed by Yu It is able to reflect the fundamental characteristics of rock, i.e., different tensile and compressive strengths, hydrostatic pressure effect, the effect of intermediate principal stress and its zonal change and material dependence. It has a clear physics and mechanics background, a unified mathematical model, and a simple and explicit criterion which includes all independent stress components and simple material parameters. It is also suitable for different types of rocks under various stress states, and is consistent with the triaxial test results that are reported in the literatures by other researchers. It is easy to be applied to analytical and numerical modelling. Rising from the existing knowledge of the strength theories, collectively contributed by numerous researchers since the beginning of the 1990s of the last Century, a strength theory that possesses fundamentally all the above expected characteristics is proposed as the Unified Strength criterion. The mathematical modelling are expressed as follows: The Unified Strength Theory reduces to the single-shear strength criterion (e.g., the Mohr–Coulomb) when In general, the failure surface of the Unified Strength Theory is a dodecahedral-shaped cone about the hydrostatic axis. The deviatoric plane of this failure surface is shown in In brief, the Unified Strength Theory is a system of strength criteria that is capable of describing most types of materials. The Unified Strength Theory embraces most of the existing theoretical strength criteria. The Unified Strength Theory is easy to apply to analytical solution of plasticity. It can also be expressed in terms of stress invariant, and it is hence convenient for computational implementation. For more detailed discussions, interested readers are referred to references It is seen in Li et al. For rock, most of the experimental failure envelops fall in between the deviatoric plane loci with The limit locus of this criterion For a general case, the intermediate stress parameter Second, the Unified Strength Theory can be applied to a particular case by substituting this The detailed description of the Unified Strength Theory and its applications can be found in The Mohr envelope of rock material is linear at a low stress level, and become non-linear at a high stress level ( Another group of strength criteria of rock is the extended Mohr–Coulamb criteria. They may be expressed as follows: In the above equations, The comparisons of the Hoek–Brown criterion with experimental data were given on the basis of the axisymmetric triaxial test. However, the Hoek–Brown criterion, as well as other empirical criteria, does not take into the consideration of the effect of intermediate principal stress. The true triaxial tests on rock by Mogi The Unified Strength criterion is described as follows: It is evident that the intermediate principal stress is taken into account in the non-linear Unified Strength criterion. The non-linear twin-shear failure criterion can be introduced by the non-linear Unified Strength criterion when the parameter The non-linear Unified Strength criterion can be generalized to a more generalized criterion as follows: The stress angle can be expressed as follows The relations between the three principal stresses and stress invariants are written as The non-linear Unified Strength criterion can also be expressed in terms of the first invariant of stress and the second invariant of deviator stress as follows: When When  According to the above equations, the loci in The non-linear Unified Strength criterion considers the difference of tensile and compressive strengths of rocks (through The failure surface of the non-linear Unified Strength criterion can be determined. This is confirmed by five sets of true triaxial compression test data produced by other researchers The first set of true triaxial compressive test data were obtained by Xu and Li The second set of test data were obtained from confined compression tests and confined tension tests on the Dunham dolomite, the Westerly granite and the Solnhofen limestone by Mogi The third set of test data is also given by Mogi Fourth set of test data is taken from Micheles The fifth set of test data was produced by Gao and Tao Analysis of the above five sets of true triaxial test data show that the error between theoretical values and experimental values for most test data is small, and that  The Mohr–Coulomb strength theory has been widely used in geomechanics and other branches of applied mechanics. However, the influence of the intermediate principal stress is not taken into consideration. This is contrary to the experimental results. The limit surface of the Mohr–Coulomb theory is the least convex surface. However, most experimental results are more than this surface. Many failure criteria for rock have been proposed in the last Century, and they can be categorized into three series: single-shear strength theories, octahedral-shear strength theories, and the twin-shear strength theories. All of these strength theories are the single strength theory suitable for only one kind of material, respectively. They form the inner (lower) bound, outer (upper) bound and the curved loci mediated between the two bounds. The limit surface of the twin-shear theory is the largest one of all the convex limit surfaces. The Unified Strength Theory is a new strength criterion system that embraces many established criteria as its special or asymptotic cases, such as the Tresca, the von Mises, and the Mohr–Coulomb, as well as the twin-shear yield criterion (Yu, 1961) Many failure criteria for rock material have been developed in the last Century. They can be categorized into three series: single-shear strength theories, octahedral-shear stress (three-shear) strength theories, and twin-shear strength theories. All of these strength theories can be included in the Unified Strength Theory. The Unified Strength Theory may be expressed in linear or non-linear forms. The Hoek–Brown criterion can be considered as a non-linear single-shear strength criterion. A non-linear Unified Strength criterion for rock is proposed in this paper. The strength parameters can be determined from a conventional triaxial compressive test. However, the effect of intermediate principal stress has been take into account in the criterion. The non-linear single-shear strength criteria forms the lower bound, and the generalized non-linear twin-shear strength criteria forms the upper bound, and the curved loci mediated between these two bounds. The non-linear Unified Strength Theory can therefore be used to describe various types of rocks. The failure loci at a different stress angle can be estimated from the non-linear Unified Strength Theory. The non-linear Unified Strength criterion agrees rather well with the experimental data. The parameters of the non-linear Unified Strength Theory are the same as those in the Hoek–Brown criterion, which can be obtained from the general triaxial compression test for a rock material. The Hoek–Brown criterion can be derived from the non-linear Unified Strength criterion. The non-linear Unified Strength Theory can therefore be applied to intact rock materials as well as to jointed rock masses. The Unified Strength Theory and the non-linear Unified Strength Theory are a completely new strength system. It can be easily applied to analytical and numerical methods for rock mechanics and engineering. This project is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Project No. 5-8770402, 5-9779028, and 5-9924033) and the Ministry of Education of China.