The natural Mg-vermiculite (VB) from Brazil and its Na-form (Na-VB) was studied after milling in ball, jet and vibrational mills. The morphology of vermiculite samples was studied using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and the changes of vermiculite structures were monitored using X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. The particle size (PS) changes were characterized by the median particle size (d
                     50), volume-weighted mean diameter (d
                     43), mode diameter (d
                     m) and span value. The surface changes of vermiculite samples were evaluated using ξ-potential measurements as a function of particle electrophoretic mobility (μ). The electrophoretic mobility (μ) of the VB and its milled samples was in the range of 1.16 to 1.96×10−4
                     m2/Vs and of the Na-VB and its milled samples were in range of 3.44 to 4.25×10−4
                     m2/Vs. The range of the difference in the ξ-potential of the VB was from −15.1 to −25.4mV and Na-VB was from −55mV to the −44.5mV. Samples containing small particles and homogeneous particle size distribution showed a low value of ξ-potential.Clay minerals have still significant commercial importance for their low cost and relatively easy access. Various areas of industry concerned with the preparation of the nanocomposites have increased interest in clay minerals kaolinite Vermiculite is a mica-type silicate which possesses a layered structure. The reduction of the size and thickness of vermiculite particles allows their use in many fields of nanocomposites materials. The application of vermiculites is very common as organofillers into polymeric matrices Two particular characteristics of clay minerals are generally considered for nanocomposites preparation: (1) the ability of their particles to disperse into individual layers (delamination process) and (2) the desired specific surface chemistry through ion exchange reactions with inorganic cations and/or organic molecules. These two characteristics are interrelated and intensively depended on the particle size of layered silicates The milling methods represent one of the most popular approaches to produce the required clay particles by the mechanical way. The clay particles are normally carried out in the energy intensive grinding mills such as planetary ball mill Reducing the vermiculite particle size using the treatment by high power ultrasound is an alternative method. During the ultrasound process, air cavities are formed which act as the air microjets. Their shockwaves impact and interact with the particles. The ultrasound process allows reduction of submicron and nanometric vermiculite particles with a relatively narrow particle size distribution without modification of the crystal structure. Ultrasound produces an increase of the surface area while the amount of micropores remains almost unchanged It is known that the functional properties and application of vermiculite to the nanocomposites depend on the preparation method of desired vermiculite particles and modification with acids or salt solutions to activate their surface area and interlayer. Activation affects the layered clay mineral structure, the particle morphology and contributes to the development of a high specific surface area and porosity. As a result, these processes help to increase the particles' ability to absorb organic molecules The value of the ξ-potential is another characteristic of the particles, which is required in many industries from pharmaceuticals to mineral processing. The ξ-potential is the charge on a particle at the shear plane. This value of surface charge is useful for understanding and predicting interactions between particles in suspension, dispersions and/or emulsions. The ξ-potential of a sample is most often used as an indicator of dispersion stability. Large ξ-potential predicts a more stable dispersion. The mobility of particles is readily determined from the known applied electric field and measured particle velocity. The particle mobility is readily determined. The measurement software automatically calculates the electrophoretic mobility (μ) of the particles and converts it to the ξ-potential using the Smoluchowski equation The aim of the present study was to characterize the influence of different milling techniques on the resulting particle size, morphology and surface of natural Mg-vermiculite and its sodium form, which is often prepared in a laboratory for studying the characteristics of the layered structures. Natural Mg-vermiculite from Brazil (supplied samples from fy. Grena, Czech Republic) was ball milled for 5 Ball milling was carried out in Fritsch Pulverisette 7 planetary mill, consisting of a cylindrical carbide wolfram container (10.7 A natural and milled vermiculite samples were converted to their homoionic Na-vermiculite forms by repeated saturation with 1 The chemical composition of natural Mg-vermiculite VB was obtained from elemental analysis by the X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy (SPECTRO XEPOS new energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence spectrometer) and atom absorption spectrometry (UNICAM 989 QZ). The X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed using the diffractometer INEL (a curved position-sensitive detector CPSD120, CuKα The morphology of the vermiculite samples were investigated using scanning electron microscope (SEM) Philips XL 30 The samples were coated with a gold/palladium film in order to avoid problems with electrical charging. SEM images were obtained using a scattered electron detector (SE). The particle size (PS) was determined by using laser diffraction particle size analyzer (HORIBA LA-950 instrument) with a two short-wavelength blue and red light source in conjunction with forward and backscatter detection to enhance sizing performance in the range 0.01-3000 Zeta potential (ξ-potential) was measured by a nanoparticle analyzer (HORIBA Nanopartica SZ-100) equipped with a microprocessor unit to directly calculate the ξ-potential. The system measures the sample conductivity, applies an electric field, and then measures the motion of the particles using electrophoretic light scattering. The 0.5 The chemical composition of the natural Mg-vermiculite, sample VB, in wt.% from the elemental analysis is: SiO The XRD powder diffraction patterns of VB and Na-VB in The particle size and morphological changes after mechanical and chemical procedures are evident in the scanning electron micrographs ( The ball milled vermiculite particles (VBb) did not significantly differ in morphology from the VB particles. The smaller particles were slightly agglomerated and bigger separated from each other. The jet milled particles (VBj) showed rounded and corrugated edges and their sizes were more homogeneous than that in the VB sample. The differences in morphology were created due to the different condition of grinding. Ball milling is based on the friction process between the grinding balls and vermiculite particles and causes spreading of surface flakes in directions parallel to their superimposing on each other and breaking of the sharp edges. Jet milling of the particles in the air vortex produces in the sample VBj particles with rounded and frayed edges. The short time vibratory milled particles of the sample VBv2 were in the particle morphology and size relatively identical with the particles of the sample VBb. Prolonged vibratory milling led to the stacking of small particles into clusters in the sample VBv15. The particle characteristic shape disappeared probably after their friction deformation between milling chamber and a milling disc. The particles of the sodium vermiculite form, the sample Na-VB, showed an irregular shape with corrugated edges ( The particle size (PS) parameters were measured by the laser diffraction method in liquid mode. The parameters used from the particle size distribution data were: the volume-weighted mean diameter (De Brouckere mean diameter (  Ball and jet millings provide approximately the same values of the parameter A wide range of particle size distribution according to the span values 3.42, 3.17 and 3.58, respectively, was determined in both ball milled samples VBb and Na-VBb as well as in the long-time vibratory milled sample Na-VBv15, respectively. The particle size distribution (PSD) in their volume content between 1 and 100  The electrophoretic mobility (μ) of the VB and its milled samples was in the range of 1.16 to 1.16 The dependence of ξ-potential on the mean vermiculite particles diameter ( The milling of natural Mg-vermiculite in different mills brought the following new findings: Vermiculite particles after short time vibratory and ball millings were in the particle morphology and their sizes were relatively identical. Prolonged vibratory milling led to the stacking of small particles into clusters. The jet milled particles showed rounded and corrugated edges and their sizes were more homogeneous that in the original vermiculite sample. The destruction of the layered structure of vermiculite after 15 The original large particles of vermiculite after conversion to the Na-vermiculite become thinner and the edges waved and fringed. Short-grinding in the vibratory mill caused further thinning of flakes with relatively smooth surface. Longer-grinding in the vibratory mill resulted in very small particles. The sodium forms of vermiculite in comparison with the original vermiculite contained smaller particle size parameters that were only slightly reduced after grinding. The particle size distribution was more homogeneous in all differently milled sodium vermiculites than in original vermiculites. The low ξ-potential values were confirmed for the vermiculite small particles and homogeneous particle size distribution. The results showed that jet and short-time vibratory millings are effective procedures to obtain the desired particle size, homogeneous particle size distribution and high ξ-potential values. These parameters are crucial for the preparation of required vermiculite/clay nanocomposites. natural Mg-vermiculite from Brazil VB jet milled VB ball milled VB vibratory milled for 2 and 15 Na-form of the VB Na-VB jet milled Na-VB ball milled Na-VB vibratory milled for 2 and 15 scanning electron microscopy scattered electron detector X-ray powder diffraction particles size particle size distribution particle diameters [μm] electrophoretic mobility [m viscosity [Pa·s] conductivity [S/m] Zeta potential [mV] This work was supported by the project no.