Three-dimensionally ordered macroporous (3DOM) LaFeO3 perovskite-type oxides were synthesized using a polystyrene colloidal crystal templating method. The obtained 3DOM LaFeO3 was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). The reactivity of the perovskite-type oxides was evaluated using temperature-programmed reduction and multicyclic redox reactions by exposing them to an alternating methane and air atmosphere. The methane oxidation performance of the oxides was investigated in a fixed-bed reactor. The effect of the self-assembly method on the structure of the polystyrene template was also studied. A vertical deposition method yielded a more uniform and orderly polystyrene template than those obtained by centrifugation and evaporation techniques. The solvent and concentration of the precursor solution were the major factors to affect the prepared 3DOM perovskite. SEM analysis showed that samples synthesized with ethanol precursor solvent exhibited a better 3DOM structure than those produced with ethylene glycol, and that 1.0 mol/L may be an optimal precursor solution concentration. XRD and FTIR results suggested that the obtained 3DOM LaFeO3 was pure crystalline perovskite. Two kinds of oxygen species were found to exist on the 3DOM perovskites: surface adsorbed oxygen and bulk lattice oxygen. The surface oxygen contributed to the complete oxidization of methane to CO2 and H2O because of its higher reactivity, while the bulk lattice oxygen tended towards partial methane oxidation to H2 and CO. The available oxygen in the 3DOM LaFeO3 was higher than that of the same mass of non-3DOM LaFeO3 during the partial oxidation of methane. Methane was partially oxidized into syngas with a H2/CO ratio of around 2:1 in a wide time range of the reactions. The generated H2/CO = 2 syngas was suitable for subsequent gas-to-liquids processes, such as Fischer-Tropsch and/or methanol synthesis.Chemical-looping combustion (CLC) involves the use of a metal oxide as an oxygen carrier to transfer oxygen from the combustion air to the fuel, hence avoiding direct contact between air and fuel. CO Perovskite-type complex metal oxides are a series of mixed oxides with general formula ABO Three-dimensionally ordered macroporous (3DOM) materials with uniform pore size in the sub-micrometer range (> 50 nm) have attracted much attention in the last decade because of their potential applications in catalysts, catalyst supports, photonic crystals, and separation. The macropores of these materials are interconnected through windows that form as a result of contact between the template spheres prior to infiltration of the precursor solution. Thus, 3DOM materials have a high porosity, as much as ca. 74% theoretically [ In the present work, 3DOM LaFeO All chemicals used were of reagent grade. PS spheres are typically synthesized by emulsion polymerization, soap free emulsion polymerization, or seed emulsion polymerization. The soap free emulsion polymerization method was used to prepare PS spheres in this work because it yielded PS spheres with good monodispersity. Washed and distillated styrene was slowly added to a four necked round-bottomed flask equipped with a magnetic stirrer and filled with deionized water (800 ml) heated to 70 °C using a hot water bath. A thermometer and a water-cooling condenser were attached to the flask, and pure N Lanthanum nitrate hydrate (La(NO The crystal phases of the oxides were analyzed by XRD using a Japan Science D/max-R diffractometer with Cu The reactivity of the 3DOM LaFeO Reduction-oxidation (redox) multicycles were conducted in a thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA), as reported in detail elsewhere [ The methane oxidation activity of the oxides (1 g in each test) was evaluated in a fixed-bed quartz reactor (10 mm i.d.) under atmospheric pressure at 850 °C. A mixture of 40.0 vol% methane with nitrogen as balance was used as the feed gas, and its flow rate was set at 20 ml/min. The product gases from the reactor were collected with gas bags and analyzed by gas chromatography (Shimadzu GC-20B-1 gas chromatograph). Styrene addition and polymerization time are the crucial factors affecting the size of PS spheres during their preparation. In our previous work, we discussed the effect of these two factors on PS sphere diameter in detail [ As shown in The microstructure of the colloidal crystal template prepared by vertical deposition is shown in To synthesize 3DOM perovskite-type metal oxides by the present colloidal crystal templating method, the three-dimen- sionally ordered colloidal crystal templates were impregnated with the precursor solution and then dried in air overnight. Finally, the dried precursor/template mixtures were calcined in air to remove the polymer templates. The solvent and the precursor solution concentration were the important factors affecting the resulting 3DOM materials. The SEM images indicate that the sample prepared using ethanol as precursor solvent exhibited a good 3DOM structure containing an interconnected macroporous framework. The next layer of the macroporous structure is clearly visible in the enlarged SEM image and the voids are interconnected through open windows, which formed because no precursor solution was present in the contacting areas between the polymer spheres. However, the materials obtained with ethylene glycol as the precursor solvent exhibited apparent agglomeration and no obvious ordered macroporous structure. It is supposed that this was caused by the fact that ethylene glycol solution has a higher viscosity, resulting in the solution being unable to wet and penetrate the PS templates very well. Therefore, thin and defective walls were produced in the interspace between the microspheres because the precursor solution could not fill the entire void in the PS template. The solid walls did not have enough strength to support themselves and tended to collapse easily during calcination. Sadakane and co-workers [ Besides the type of solvent, the concentration of the precursor solution is another important factor that affects the formation of a 3DOM skeleton. A low precursor solution concentration is beneficial to allow the precursor to penetrate into the voids in the PS template. However, if the concentration of the precursor solution is too low, repeated filling may be necessary to form an interconnected network. Otherwise, the reduced filling content of the precursor may result in thinner solid walls which cannot self-support and easily collapse during calcination. Conversely, if the concentration of the precursor solution is too high, it is difficult for the precursor to occupy all the interstitial space inside the template because of its higher viscosity, and the ordering and regularity of the macroporous structure is weakened. As-prepared and used 3DOM LaFeO The measurement of vibrational frequencies by FTIR is a fundamental technique in the determination of the crystalline structure of a material [ It is well known that the higher surface area of perovskite is beneficial to its performance in catalytic and other applications. The surface area of the 3DOM LaFeO TPR was performed to study the reducibility of the prepared 3DOM LaFeO It can be seen that the TPR profile of the 3DOM LaFeO In comparison, a slight shift towards lower temperature was observed for the reduction peaks of the 3DOM LaFeO To test the redox multicyclic reactivity of the 3DOM LaFeO The perovskites were tested for twenty redox cycles at 850 °C. Stable reactivity was observed for both types of oxygen carrier during the twenty cycle test. The degree of oxidation of 3DOM LaFeO As shown in Isothermal methane oxidation tests were conducted in a fixed-bed reactor using the synthesized 3DOM LaFeO A low amount of unconverted methane fraction (9.2%) was detected at the initial stage. The methane fraction increased dramatically at 1–4 min and then declined rapidly thereafter. This increase of methane concentration could be attributed to the release of bulk lattice oxygen in the oxygen carrier being too slow to compensate for the high rate of surface adsorbed oxygen consumption. After 7.5 min, the methane fraction remained at a low value of around 20%, and the fractions of H The 3DOM structure of the present LaFeO The vertical deposition method presented a more uniform and orderly PS template than those obtained by centrifugation and evaporation techniques. The perovskite synthesized with ethanol as precursor solvent exhibited better 3DOM structure than that produced with ethylene glycol solvent, while 1.0 mol/L may be the optimum precursor concentration. The obtained 3DOM LaFeO