Lanthanum and cerium were synergistically extracted and separated in chloride medium using a mixture of 2-ethylhexylphosphonic mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (HEHEHP) and di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) with lactic acid (LA) and citric acid (H3cit) as the complexing agents. Synergistic effects were observed for the extraction of La and Ce with the mixed extractant; and the maximum synergistic coefficients were obtained at X
                     HEHEHP
                     =0.8. A maximum β
                     Ce/La of 8.88 and the maximum extraction capacity of 53.48g/L were obtained in the presence of two complexing agent. Organo–Ce complexes in organic phases were examined based on FT-IR, 1H, and 
                        31
                     P NMR spectra. The cation-exchange mechanism and coordination effect between Ce and P=O ligands were verified. Results showed that the mixture system in the presence of complexing agents exhibited a higher extraction efficiency and selectivity during the extraction and separation of adjacent rare earths.Rare earths (REs) and their compounds have gained considerable demands in astronavigation, luminescence, nuclear energy, and metallurgical industries because of their unique and superior physical and chemical properties ( Synergistic extraction is a branch of solvent extraction widely used to separate and purify trivalent lanthanides and actinides ( Complexation-enhanced separation has been used in solvent extraction, electrodialysis, and liquid membranes ( Synergistic extraction is another method to effectively separate and purify REs. Addition of water-soluble complexing agents to an aqueous phase enhances the extraction selectivity of REs. Synergistic and complexation-induced extraction is gaining research interest, but few papers have focused on the combination of both methods. In this work, we demonstrated the efficacy of synergistic complexation to enhance the selectivity of La and Ce extraction. The experimental results and data elucidated the design of synergistic and complexing extraction to separate and purify the La and Ce. HEHEHP, D2EHPA and sulphonated kerosene were supplied by Zhengzhou Qinshi Technology Co. Ltd (Henan, China). The sulphonated kerosene was a special solvent oil, and was sulphonated with sulphuric acid and its flash point was A pH–3E pH meter (Leici, Shanghai, China) calibrated daily with 4.00 and 6.86 standard buffer solutions was used to adjust and measure the pH before and after extraction. IR spectra were collected with an IRAffinity-1 spectrometer (Shimadzu) to analyse the extraction mechanism from 400 The distribution ratios (D) and separation factors (β) of the solutes were determined by contacting equal volumes (20 Following the extraction, Ce concentration was standardised by titration using a standard (NH Eqs. In our previous studies, the D, β and extraction capacities are increase with the increase of the LA concentration in single HEHEHP and D2EHPA systems. So we determine the optimum conditions by orthogonal test when the concentrations of lactic acid and citric acid are 0.60 The effect of synergistic extraction in the HEHEHP–D2EHPA mixture in chloride medium on La and Ce extraction was analysed by continuous variation method. The concentration in this section was measured by Prodigy XP high dispersion ICP spectrometer. The competitive effects of different solution components in the mixed system were investigated during the extraction and separation of La and Ce. The complexation effect of LA in the synergistic system was studied in detail based on the synergistic effects on La and Ce, and one important indication was  We investigated the complexation effect of the coexistence of H To further elucidate the extractability of the mixed complexing systems, we calculated the extraction capacities of La and Ce in different systems under similar conditions in single-stage extraction. Several observations were drawn from the data in In order to verify the superiority of the new system, we have carried out the multistage extraction experiment. Using the same organic phase to extract fresh aqueous phase for several times until the organic phase generate emulsification, and then calculate the  In our previous studies, the two complexing agents, lactic acid and citric acid, can be effectively recycled and more than 99% ( We analysed the synergistic extraction mechanism of improving system performance. The extraction abilities of HEHEHP or D2EHPA were considerably restrained because of the intermolecular hydrogen bonds from dimers. A series of experiments were carried out to determine the synergistic extraction mechanism in the mixed system. First, the FT-IR was used to examine the organo–Ce complexes.  HEHEHP–D2EHPA mixture exerted synergistic effects on La and Ce extraction, and The FT-IR, The mixture exhibited enhanced extraction amounts and high separation factors following the addition of D2EHPA to pure HEHEHP ( The financial support by the