Although the life cycle greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions associated with Canadian oil sands have been investigated in recent years, questions remain regarding the source and impact of variability in emissions in this industry over time. This study combines publicly-available data from the fifteen largest operating in situ extraction projects, i.e., cyclic steam stimulation (CSS) and steam assisted gravity drainage (SAGD) with a statistically-enhanced life cycle model to investigate variability in well-to-wheel (WTW) GHG emissions. We estimate that the WTW GHG emissions from CSS-derived gasoline range from 99 to 114 g CO2eq/MJ (80% confidence interval), 6–22% higher than the RFS2 baseline. The corresponding range for SAGD-derived gasoline is 98–133 g CO2eq/MJ, 5–42% higher than the RFS2 baseline. SAGD-derived gasoline has more variability as some operators “upgrade” their crudes, emitting GHGs, whereas no CSS operator employs upgrading. Without upgrading, the 90th percentile for SAGD emissions would be 114 g CO2eq/MJ. Upstream variability in GHG emissions drives the positively skewed WTW GHG distributions. This demonstrates the importance of understanding the nature and magnitude of variability and uncertainty in decision making.Alberta’s oil sands represent the third largest proven oil reserves in the world at 177 billion barrels, after Venezuela and Saudi Arabia [ Life cycle-based GHG emissions policies, such as the California Low Carbon Fuel Standard (LCFS) [ These novel regulations require a reduction in the WTW life cycle GHG emissions intensity of transportation fuels sold in the jurisdiction during a set timeframe. These regulations use point estimates of GHG emissions to characterize each fuel pathway. However, it has been demonstrated that oil sands life cycle pathways exhibit variability due to reservoir characteristics, energy requirements unique to each project, etc. [ Several well-to-tank (WTT) and WTW studies have estimated the GHG emissions of different oil sands-derived transportation fuels including peer reviewed publications [ Several research groups have investigated the variability associated with life cycle GHG emissions from the production and processing of Canadian oil sands bitumen [ Previous work has demonstrated the variability in GHG emissions from refining crudes with different properties (e.g. Ref. [ Understanding both upstream and downstream drivers of variability in GHG emissions helps prioritize decisions about how to reduce GHG emissions across the full life cycle and provides a baseline against which to compare new technologies (e.g., in situ technologies that provide alternatives to steam injection, [ In this paper, we quantify variability and uncertainty of life cycle GHG emissions associated with in situ oil sands products – synthetic crude oil (SCO), diluted bitumen (dilbit), and synthetic bitumen (synbit). We extend our statistical model that estimates upstream GHG emissions developed in Ref. [ Life cycle tools, described subsequently, are expanded and combined to obtain probabilistic WTW GHG emissions for each in situ oil sands pathway (where the bitumen produced through either SAGD or CSS is diluted with condensate/naphtha, diluted with SCO, or upgraded to SCO to create six distinct in situ pathways). This is accomplished through statistical enhancement of an integrated upstream model (originally published by the authors in Ref. [ GHOST [ Upstream, midstream, and downstream models are linked by the properties of crude produced in each pathway. For upgrading processes in the GHOST-SE model, hydrogen consumption is linked to ranges of hydrogen and natural gas consumption from currently operating upgraders. For each crude type modeled (dilbit, synbit, SCO), the API gravity of the crude is converted to density and used as an input to COPTEM. Representative crude assays are obtained from PRELIM’s assay inventory and used to model the refining stage. A single point estimate is assumed for combustion emissions (vehicle use stage) rather than a distribution. This simplified representation of the vehicle use stage is chosen as the focus is the investigation of the uncertainty and variability in the WTT stages, but a full WTW calculation allows for comparison with baseline values and other literature sources. TTW emissions for each refinery product (e.g., gasoline, diesel) will vary depending on the properties of the refinery product. This is a source of uncertainty and variability not accounted for in this study; see Section  Crystal Ball® is used to characterize uncertainty and variability within the integrated WTW model. Of key importance is its ability to facilitate Monte Carlo (MC) simulations to generate representative distributions of WTW GHG emissions. Through trial and error, we assess that the distributions stabilized when more than 10,000 trials are conducted, i.e., when 10,000 estimates of life cycle GHG emissions were calculated for each in situ oil sands pathway. Data sets and distributions sampled via MC for each stage of the oil sands pathways are described below. GHOST-SE estimates GHG emissions as a function of operating parameters, including natural gas consumption, electricity supply and demand, flared and fugitive emissions as documented in Refs. [ This application of GHOST-SE is different from Ref. [ To be transported via pipeline, bitumen is either “upgraded” to make SCO, diluted with lighter petroleum products such as Alberta condensate to make “dilbit”, or diluted with SCO to make “synbit”. GHOST-SE may be used to assess both dilution and upgrading pathways. It features two upgrader technologies: delayed coking with hydrotreating and hydrocracking with hydrotreating. The calculations account for the upgrader’s fuel consumption, electricity source, diluent consumption, hydrogen requirements, etc. Per volume of SCO produced. GHOST-SE includes a range of upstream emissions intensities for diluent supply, representing a range of diluent sources. However, GHOST-SE does not model recycling of diluent at the refinery for re-use as diluent. All diluent molecules are assumed by GHOST-SE to ultimately end up in fuel products at the refinery. For the Monte Carlo simulation in GHOST-SE, diluent upstream emission factors and diluent-crude oil ratios are modeled as uniform distributions with lower and upper limits obtained through expert consultation [ For “synbit pathways”, estimates of the impacts of SCO production are required. To this end, we employ GHOST-SE for surface mining and in situ pathways featuring cogeneration. 10,000 Monte Carlo simulations of SCO production were conducted, assuming 50% of upgraded bitumen was produced via surface mining and 50% produced via in situ methods, yielding an empirical distribution function for the GHG emissions associated with the production of SCO. This function was then sampled in each MC simulation of the synbit pathways. We adopt the COPTEM model [ The statistical enhancement of the GHG emissions estimates in COPTEM is completed by fitting parameters to probability distributions or direct data sampling. These probability distributions are informed by an inventory of pipeline data collected by Choquette-Levy et al. [ The Petroleum Refining Life Cycle Inventory Model (PRELIM v1.2.1) [ Refinery featuring a Fluid Catalytic Cracker (FCC) and a delayed coker (Deep Conversion: FCC) Refinery featuring a Gas oil Hydrocracker (GO-HC) and a delayed coker (Deep Conversion: GO-HC) Refinery featuring both a FCC & GO-HC (Deep Conversion: Both), as well as a delayed coker Refinery featuring a FCC without delayed coking (Medium Conversion: FCC) Refinery featuring a Gas oil Hydrocracker without delayed coking (Medium Conversion: GO-HC) Refinery featuring a FCC & GO-HC without delayed coking (Medium Conversion: Both) These six configurations selected from PRELIM are idealized configurations and are not intended to represent any specific refinery. To assess the range of emissions associated with the refining of oil sands crudes, the model uniformly randomly selects the refinery configuration each crude is processed in so that each would have an equal probability of being selected. A uniform probability is assumed due to lack of public data on the configuration of refineries processing individual crude types. To estimate GHG emissions associated with refining, PRELIM requires both a refinery configuration and a crude assay. For each type of crude (SCO, dilbit, and synbit) we employ representative assays. For SCO, an “industry wide average SCO blend” was developed by volume-weighting the assays of each operating project (i.e., by its annual production) using PRELIM’s crude assay blending tool. Assays for Cold Lake dilbit and “Synbit Blend” available at Crude Monitor are used to represent dilbit and synbit, respectively. PRELIM offers users the ability to hydrotreat either the hydrocarbons We also employ PRELIM to investigate the effect of alternative approaches for allocating GHG emissions to the refined products. Whereas many LCAs employ a “plant level” allocation – allocating the total refinery GHG emissions among the refined products in accordance with their relative flowrates within the refinery, PRELIM offers users the ability to allocate emissions to refined products by tracking flows through each process unit (“process unit level” allocation). PRELIM can also allocate emissions by mass, energy content or hydrogen content of refinery products. In our base model we employ energy content allocation at the process unit level to prevent the emissions burden from GHG-intensive process units being shifted to refinery products that are less GHG-intensive to produce, as recommended by Wang et al. [ In Monte Carlo simulations, refinery GHG emissions for a crude type and refinery configuration are modeled as log-normal distributions. The mean of this distribution is the refinery-configuration-specific GHG emission obtained from PRELIM ( FCC: Fluid Catalytic Cracking; GO-HC: Gas Oil Hydrocracking; FCC & GO-HC: Fluid Catalytic Cracking and Gas Oil Hydrocracking. Assumes process-unit level allocation of GHG emissions to refinery products on an energy basis (sensitivity to these assumptions is explored in a sensitivity analysis). In the WTW model, a uniform probability of selecting each of the six refinery configurations is assumed. Refinery emissions estimates for specific assays in specific configurations are presented in In GHG emissions associated with the combustion of fuels are determined in part by the fuel compositions. PRELIM v1.2.1 calculates these compositions using properties of the crude assay and unit operations characteristic of the refinery configuration. In some cases, the compositions (weight fractions of hydrogen and carbon) of gasoline and diesel calculated by PRELIM vary whereas those from other LCA models do not. This should result in variation in tank to wheel (TTW) emissions estimates as well. However, in this analysis we fix the TTW emissions (73.2 and 75.6 g CO We report distributions of WTW GHG emissions for the six in situ extraction pathways producing gasoline ( The median increase in WTW GHG emissions from dilbit to synbit pathways (median difference of +5 g CO Over their life cycles, the median GHG emissions associated with gasoline refined from SAGD and CSS dilbit are 9.3% (80% confidence interval, CI: 4.5–19.5%) and 11% (80% CI: 5.7–18.5%) higher than the EPA RFS2 gasoline baseline, respectively, i.e. gasoline refined from SAGD dilbit results in a median of 9.3% higher GHG emissions relative to the “average” gasoline in the U.S. in 2010. For SCO pathways, we estimate the carbon intensity of gasoline refined from SCO to be 27% (80% CI: 19.5–41.9%) higher than the RFS2 baseline. Currently, no operators produce SCO from CSS-extracted bitumen. However, if they were to do so, we estimate the carbon intensity of gasoline from a CSS/SCO pathway to be 29.1% (80% CI: 21.7–40.9%) higher than the RFS2 gasoline baseline. The range of variability in GHG emissions among extraction and upgrading pathways (102–121 g CO Our model also yields estimates of life cycle GHG emissions for oil sands-derived diesel ( In As previously discussed, we did not model uncertainty and variability in the combustion stage to compare WTW GHG emissions with other models. Of the variations considered in this study, the upstream operations are responsible for most of the variability in life cycle GHG emissions, ranging from 9.0 to 21 g CO The contributions of upstream and refinery uncertainty and variability have the combined effect of driving the breadth of the distributions illustrated in This assessment of uncertainty and variability highlights the need to incorporate and acknowledge the variability in both the upstream and refining components of these types of pathways. Understanding this variability helps us to better understand the nature of the industry, identify best practices and opportunities to reduce emissions, and track progress to meet emissions reduction targets as an industry. For example, tracking progress and the likelihood of reducing the emissions of a particular pathway will not be uniform across the industry. The skew of distributions observed in the upstream portion of the life cycle, when propagated across the full life cycle, may persist and should be considered in decision making. That is, while the probability of encountering the conditions (including reservoir characteristics and operator choices) that lead to the skew (very high life cycle emissions) are relatively small, they should be understood. This may be explored using sensitivity analysis.   The method of allocating refinery GHG emissions has a strong effect on the carbon intensity of gasoline and diesel refined from oil sands bitumen extracted via current in situ technologies (Base Case is process level allocation). Allocating refinery emissions at the “refinery level” results in emissions ∼5 g CO The six different WTW pathways display normal distributions with a slightly positive skew and a comparable ranges of GHG emissions for in situ pathways with those estimated in our previous study (see Appendix Section 3.6 for comparison to our prior work [ Accounting decisions can make a material difference to the results of LCAs of products refined from petroleum. In this paper, we have adopted process-unit-level allocation to avoid burden shifting among refined products (e.g., allocating emissions from process units to fuel products that are not produced by those units). When practitioners use data from heavily energy-integrated refineries, process-unit-level allocation may be challenging or impractical. Variations in combustion emissions due to factors such as fuel characteristics and vehicle efficiency will affect the ultimate service provided for every g of CO The ranges of WTW GHG emissions associated with gasoline refined from oil sands extracted using in situ technologies are driven by both variability and uncertainty. For refiners interested in conducting LCAs of oil sands-derived gasoline, diesel, etc., produced in their refineries, it may be possible to reduce the uncertainty and variability associated with the refinery GHG emissions by using facility data. In situ oil sands operators interested in conducting LCAs will find reductions in temporal variability more challenging to implement, as much of the variability will be driven by reservoir properties that in turn drive the time evolution of the SORs required to produce bitumen. However, they may be able to utilize reservoir models to assess longer term steam requirements for continued production from a project, and thereby assess the temporal variability in the upstream GHG intensity to (potentially) come. For other stakeholders interested in understanding the WTW GHG emissions of oil sands products, this analysis demonstrates the role that the nature and impact of uncertainty and variability in life cycle stages play in overall uncertainty and variability. Notably, the variability in upstream GHG emissions from in situ oil sands operations drive overall life cycle uncertainty and variability and therefore should be considered in any decision-making that makes use of LCA results.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We acknowledge financial support of ExxonMobil Research and Engineering, The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at