The obtained results showed that the addition of biochar to the mixture of sewage sludge and wheat straw prior to composting facilitated the growth and reproduction of Eisenia fetida during laboratory vermicomposting of this mixture. After 4 weeks of vermicomposting the average number of produced cocoons in the mixtures amended with biochar increased by 13% for SS+ST+4%B and 66% for SS+ST+8%B. Also, the number of juvenile earthworms was higher in the mixtures amended with biochar. However, the total weight of earthworms declined with the depletion of organic matter after 18 weeks of the experiment. Amending sewage sludge mixtures with biochar for vermicomposting resulted in higher reproduction rates, and thus could allow faster and more efficient conversion of sewage sludge into vermicompost.In recent years the interest in the application of vermicomposting for organic waste management has been rapidly increasing and vermicomposting as a method for treating organic waste (including sewage sludge) has been extensively studied by many researchers worldwide ( Vermicomposting is defined as a decomposition process that allows conversion of organic waste by worms and microorganisms into stable humus-like material referred to as vermicompost ( Therefore, appropriate organic by-product management is needed to achieve an optimal use and valorization of such materials. Concerning horticulture, potential targets to be studied are: fertilization, organic amendment, biostimulants against plant stress and production of growing media ( The overall goal of this article is to present the results obtained from a 25-week study on the activity of Materials used in the experiment included sewage sludge, wheat straw and biochar. Sewage sludge (dewatered and anaerobically stabilized) was sampled from a municipal wastewater treatment plant (Częstochowa, Poland). Wheat straw was collected from a local farm, air-dried and cut into 4–5 Sewage sludge (SS) was mixed with wheat straw (ST) (20 All initial mixtures were composted in 40 The obtained composts were then vermicomposted. The vermicomposting system consisted of the 2.5  The process of laboratory vermicomposting lasted 25 weeks. Moisture content (MC) in vermicomposting bins was monitored on weekly basis and maintained at 60–70%. Earthworm activity, i.e. survival rate, weight, and number of cocoons and juvenile earthworms, was monitored on week 0, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 18, 20, 25. Cocoons, juvenile and adult earthworms were separated from the mixtures, washed out with water, hand sorted, counted and weighted. Then, the earthworms were returned to the mixtures. After the completion of vermicomposting all earthworms were separated from the vermicompost. Mixtures, compost and vermicompost were tested for moisture (oven drying in 105 Prior to composting, the mixtures amended with biochar showed higher content of organic matter (OM), higher pH values and lower N content ( Biochar added to SS and ST had an effect on the activity of    The addition of biochar to SS and ST mixture had an effect on the chemical properties of the obtained vermicomposts ( Ash content is an important parameter for decomposition and mineralization of organic material. Ash content during vermicomposting increased in all mixtures (   The mixtures amended with biochar showed lower concentrations of heavy metals in comparison to the mixture with no biochar. The results from the presented study on the effect of biochar on activity of the amendment of sewage sludge and wheat straw mixtures with 4% and 8% of biochar facilitated the reproduction rate of the average gain of the total earthworm biomass when biochar was added was around 28% (8 weeks of vermicomposting), due to the fact that the production of biomass and reproduction of earthworms is related to the concentration of heavy metals, the observed higher reproduction rate could result from lower concentrations of heavy metals in the mixtures with 4% and 8% of biochar, the addition of biochar to sewage sludge and wheat straw mixtures prior to composting could provide higher contents of potassium, the composts and vermicomposts showed low pH that would be a key favorable point to use this product as a horticulture growing medium–this fact may boost the marketability of the product, future studies should focus on understanding and explaining the mechanisms of immobilization of heavy metals during vermicomposting of sewage sludge mixtures amended with biochar. This study was supported by the statutory grant No.