Wear is an important technical and economic parameter in the assessment of cutting performance of diamond tools. It is influenced by many parameters and, the material hardness of the cut surface is one needs to be examined. The current work presents a study of correlation between the Cerchar hardness index (CHI) of hard granite rocks and wear of diamond wiresaw beads. Further the correlation between CHI and wear of large diameter circular disc cutter segments is investigated. Moreover, the linear least regression models for the dataset is developed to grasp the statistical relationship between rock hardness and diamond tool wear. This work may provide significantly valuable insights to the stone and diamond tool manufacturing industry.Indian dimension stone industry mainly granite and marble has witnessed a significant growth in recent years. With growing demands in international markets, the industry has opted for diamond cutting tools to achieve its production targets. In natural stone quarries, the diamond wire sawing machines are ubiquitously deployed to extract raw stone blocks of varying shapes and sizes. Diamond wire consists hollow cylindrical diamond beads threaded over a steel stranded wire rope. Similarly, the large diameter circular disc cutters are used in stone processing plants for block slicing and manufacturing of regular shaped slabs and tiles. Cutting Performance of stone sawing machine is a measure of its cutting rate and wear of cutting tools Granite with variations in grain size distribution, color, surface texture and roughness were selected for the study from the locations given in Diamond wire saw machine assembly consists three major components – diamond wire for rock cutting, 45 KW motor, gear and pulley system to provide rotation and thrust to diamond wire, and electric control panel for control system. Diamond wire is a steel stranded wire threaded with diamond beads as presented in Diameters of diamond beads were measured before and after the stone cutting with the help of a digital micrometer. Area of the block cut surfaces were measured using the measuring tape at the quarry site. Unit wear of the diamond wire was calculated using the following equation.    Disc cutter machine assembly has three major components – large diameter cutter disc, 45 KW motor and gear box, and electric control panel. Cutter disc with diameter 2.10 m has capacity of slicing the stone blocks into slabs of size Wear of the diamond segments are calculated by calculating the cutting area and the reduction in height of segments using the following equation.    Cerchar hardness index (CHI) is a measure of resistance offered by rock material against the tool penetration due to surface hardness of rock material. The index can be useful in selection of appropriate tool and machinery for excavation and determination of drilling rate index. The test setup of CHI is shown in A tungsten carbide bit of 8.5 mm diameter is allowed to penetrate in rock specimen under a static load of 400 N. Rotational speed of bit is kept contestant at 200 rpm. The depth of penetration is recorded as a function of time. Penetration history is analyzed for the slope of the curve and then converted to CHI from a calibration graph which is obtained during the test. Rock cuttability Statistical analysis was performed on the dataset using open source software package R and RStudio® CHI values for hard rock granite have a considerable variation in the above data. Categorization of rock on the basis of rock cuttability falls under difficult to vary difficult. Similarly, the value of wear of diamond wire beads is observed to have a data variation from 3 to 6 µm per square meter of stone cutting. Basic summary statistics of the dataset is given in the Correlation between observed values of wear and experimental values of CHI is given in Linear least square regression model is developed between the variables to understand the strength and direction of a mathematical relationship. The model provides a linear equation to estimate the wear from the input CHI values. Statistical summary of the regression models is presented in The first regression model shown in The The study investigated statistical relationship between the Cerchar Hardness Index and diamond tool wear of diamond wire saw beads and disc cutter segments. Highly significant positive correlation is observed between the rock hardness and tool wear (R = 0.81, 0.84). Moreover, the developed linear regression model from the dataset has a good prediction efficacy with a significant regression coefficient (R The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.