Damage on rock fracture surfaces during shear process changes the mechanical and hydrological properties of the fractures, and therefore affects solute migration in fractured rocks. Laboratory experiments on this issue are rarely reported in the literature due to technical difficulties in measuring asperity damage and gouge generation. To conceptually investigate the effects of rock fracture surface damage on solute sorption during shear, we present a retardation coefficient model considering the effect of wear. The particle mechanics model was employed to investigate the effects of gouge generation (abrasive wear) and microcrack development in the damaged zones, on the solute retardation coefficient in rock fractures. The results from demonstration examples show that the shear process significantly increases the retardation coefficients, by offering more sorption surfaces in the factures due to gouge generation (wear), microcracking and crushing of gouge particles. Conceptually three damage zones are classified to characterize the various wear impacts on the solute transport in single fractures. Outstanding issues of the present model and suggestions for future study are also presented.It is experimentally observed that friction and wear usually occur at the rock fracture surfaces undergoing compression and shear, which is the main cause of gouge material generation (the sheared-off or broken particles) from asperities of opposite fracture surfaces in contact ( Field observations and in-situ experiments of fault gouge in the field of structural geology may provide some useful but mostly conceptual insights to the wear debris size distribution and microcrack development in sheared rock fracture at small scales, e.g. The objective of this paper was to derive an expression of retardation coefficient considering the effects of gouge particles and microcracks generated during a shear process of a rock fracture. A particle mechanics model was used to study the wear and surface damage process in a single fracture undergoing shear. The effects of wear process on the solute transport in the fractures were investigated by combination of the retardation coefficient expression and the simulation results. The content of this paper focuses on the solute migration through the single fracture in which gouge particles and microcracks were generated by shear. The matrix diffusion through fracture surfaces into the rocks is beyond of the scope of this paper. Models to account for retardation by sorption on and in particles in flow paths with a particle size distribution have been developed in Shear dilatancy also occurs with the shear displacement of rock fractures and plays an important role on the flow and transport process in fractures According to the fundamental microscopic wear mechanisms between two rough surfaces in contact, as defined in contact mechanics, the friction/wear/damage processes can have four mechanisms: adhesion, abrasion wear, corrosion and surface fatigue Abrasion occurs when the contacting asperities, on the opposite two fracture surfaces of a rock fracture, plough through each other to generate gouge of relatively larger sizes (two-body abrasion or three-body abrasion in terms of contact mechanics) during a shear process ( The stress concentration at the close contact area can initiate and propagate the microcracks into the intact rocks in either tensile or shear modes ( The influence of surface damage on the mechanical or transport behaviors of rock fracture depends on the roughness of the fractures and the loading conditions Both the immobile gouge particles and the microcracks can provide additional surfaces for solute sorption in the fractures, so as to increase the fracture sorption capacity. The microcracks mentioned here refer to those in the nearby rock matrix but connected to the fracture space and filled with solutions, i.e. the solutes can directly come into contact with the surfaces of these microcracks. As for the microcracks in the matrix but far away from the fractures, solutes in the fractures cannot contact them immediately, but, the surfaces of those microcracks will eventually be reached by the solutes through molecular diffusion. This effect was not considered in the model, because they are related to the matrix diffusion. By using The governing equation of solutes transport in a single fracture is Using It can be seen that the retardation coefficient increase factors due to the roughness and shear process are actually equal to the surface increase factors, i.e. The present paper focuses on the mechanisms of abrasion and microcracking. As for adhesion wear and crushing, their impacts on solute retardation coefficient are not included in the modeling, but briefly discussed in Both the abrasive particles produced by the cut or plough of interlocked asperities, and the microcracks developed in the disturbed zones are complex processes that have not been quantitatively investigated by laboratory or field experiments so far, to the authors' best knowledge. Therefore a generic numerical model was adopted to investigate their impacts on solute transport in rock fractures, because of the important role they may have on solute retardation processes. We chose the particle flow code, PFC, as a tool to numerically study the process of abrasive particle generation and microcrack evolution during a shear process of a typical rock fracture. The PFC or other particle flow codes (see for example, YADE) have been applied to predict the mechanical behaviors of single rock fractures during the direct shear tests Basically, a PFC model represents the rock matrix as an assembly of rigid two-dimensional circular disks or three-dimensional spheres bonded in the normal and shear directions at all contacts, which possess finite normal and shear stiffness and tensile and shear strengths as shown in When particles in the PFC model representing fracture surfaces lose all contacts with its neighbor particles during shear, they are regarded as abrasive gouge particles cut or ploughed by the opposite asperities (dark particles in When the corresponding component of contact force exceeds either the tensile or shear strengths, the contact bond fails. The space between the two particles connected by the failed contact previously was treated as a microcrack ( Compared with the area of reference planes, the surface increase factor from the microcracks can be calculated as, Two synthetic fracture samples were assumed here to demonstrate the effects of wear during the direct shear tests on the solute retardation coefficient in single fractures. One was macroscopically relative smooth planar fracture with roughness at microscopic scale ( Under the different constant normal stress conditions with a servo control algorithm Here, we took the smooth fracture sample under a constant normal stress of 1.0 Both the relatively smooth fracture sample and the rougher saw-tooth shaped sample were simulated to be sheared till a maximum displacement of about 5.0  With the increasing normal stress, the thickness of the damage zone increased, which is indicated by the decreasing percentage of microcracks in the shallow zones close to the fracture surfaces ( For the fracture sample with saw-tooth profile, the microcracks developed mainly along the two contact sides of teeth, and the abrasive particles mostly located at other sides of the teeth, due to the fact that the shear dilatancy made the initially full contact area of the sample to reduce and restrict to the contact sides only (  Consequently, the retardation coefficient increase factors shown in The adhesion wear is usually assessed by the volume of gouge material formed Thus one has, Eq. Although experimental results show that the size reduction of abrasive particles is an important process during the shear test even under small normal stress The retardation coefficient is inversely dependent on the average fracture aperture, because of the larger surface-area-to-volume ratio for a fracture with smaller Then the retardation coefficient decrease factor due to the shear dilatancy is given by From the PFC model simulation performed in this study, the values of fracture dilatancy were obtained. For the relative smooth fracture sample, after a shear displacement of about 5 The derivation of the present model is based on a two-dimensional conceptual model with a relatively small thickness with respect to the length and height of the model, but this study is basically a generic investigation of the effects of surface damage on solute sorption in single rock fractures. It is easy to extend such study and models to three-dimensions, which can consider the contact area and asperities of fractures more objectively regarding the fracture geometry and roughness features, with considerable increase of computational power demands. In reality, the assumption of disk shaped abrasive particles and idealization of microcracks as smooth parallel plate models, most probably underestimates the sorption surfaces added by them. Additionally, the particle shape, size distribution and packing pattern could influence the amount of gouge particles and microcracks generated during shear processes, these factors have to be calibrated when the method in this study is applied in practice. The adsorption of a solute on the fracture surfaces and wear particles was assumed to be a reversible reaction with a constant distribution coefficient, when deriving the solute retardation coefficient model (Eq. The gouge particles filling the fracture void spaces could reduce the effective fracture aperture and permeability, and influence the flow velocity. They may also increase the solute residence time and the opportunities of diffusion into the rock matrix. Even though this issue is beyond the scope of the current study, it is an important issue for performance assessment of underground projects and environmental safety, such as radioactive waste repositories. In General, solute transport in rock fractures is a complex process with mechanisms of advection, dispersion, adsorption, matrix diffusion and other physical or chemical reactions. All of them may be affected directly or indirectly, by the process of shear-induced damages on the fracture surfaces. In order to improve the reliability of predicting the solute transport process and their impacts on performance/safety assessments, the relevant retardation mechanisms should be identified. The approach and results presented in this study show that shear induced surface damage can have significant impact on solute retardation. The matrix diffusion may also be significantly influenced by shear induced surface damage, because the opened microcracks would offer more available flow wetted surface for solute diffusion into the matrix, and other microcracks far into the matrix may enlarge the surfaces of micropores. An expression for the solute retardation coefficient in the fractures undergoing shear was derived, considering the surface damage mechanisms of abrasion, microcracking, adhesion wear and crushing. The derived retardation coefficient model and the results from the demonstration examples presented in this paper provide some insights for considering the influences of shear induced surface damage on the solute retardation in the rock fractures. Their significant influences show that the laboratory or in-situ experiments on these issues are critically needed to support the theoretical model establishment and their validations.    For the future study, the particle mechanics model can be further developed to include the fluid flow simulation, and we can study the effects of fracture surface damage on the fluid flow and solute transport in single fractures. The experimental techniques that can accurately measure the surface area and the location of the gouge particles and microcracks generated in the direct shear test should be developed to calibrate the model proposed in this study. 