Froth depth is currently measured in industrial flotation columns using a float coupled to an ultrasonic sensor, and less frequently using pressure transducers. The use of the conductivity profile in the upper part of the column has been proposed by some researchers but never used in plants on a regular basis. As compared to traditional ones, this method has the advantage of providing information that could also lead to the evaluation of other internal variables such as the bias rate. In this work, an exhaustive revision of the conductivity-based methods and the most important improvements recently introduced, are presented. Particularly, a novel approach based on a weighted average interpolation is presented, which greatly improves the precision and the smoothness of the estimations.Undoubtedly, froth depth (also named pulp level or pulp-froth interface position) is the most used variable (if not the only one) for regulatory process control of industrial flotation columns. The position of the pulp-froth interface sets the height of the collection zone and therefore, is directly related to the time available for collection of hydrophobic particles on the air bubble surface, the other factor is the tails flow rate. Consequently, it is partially responsible for the valuable mineral recovery. However, large froth depth set-point changes would be necessary to obtain a significant effect on recovery, making its use for recovery optimization purposes rather limited. Instead, the gas flow rate, and through it, the bubble surface area flux available for collection, is preferred. Nonetheless, pulp-froth interface position is an important control variable since its constancy is a guarantee of stable column operation: a continuously moving interface is certainly undesirable since it implies the risk of feeding the column in the middle of the froth zone or to deepen it so much that a risk of froth collapse may exist. Pulp-froth interface has been historically monitored using manual floats, pressure transducers (one to three), Metritape A completely different approach, based on measurement of the conductivity profile across the pulp-froth interface was first proposed at McGill University ( Moreover, the availability of such a conductivity profile also allows estimation of the internal downward flow of water (bias rate), a variable otherwise difficult to measure ( In the following paragraphs, a critical review of some of these methods is made followed by description of the conductivity-based method. A combination of a float and an ultrasonic sensor to measure the froth depth is now commonly used in industrial operations, mainly because of the simplicity of its concept and non-invasive implementation (sensor electronics are not in contact with the pulp). Even though its accuracy is limited by the assumption of uniform pulp and froth density and absence of solids accumulation on the float gauge, its use seems satisfactory to industrial flotation column practitioners. Pressure gauges have also been used to measure froth depth. Theoretically, a single pressure transducer should suffice for its estimation, as long as the average value of collection-zone and froth-zone specific gravity Unfortunately, The use of multiple pressure transducers partially solves this problem since it provides the extra necessary information to estimate the average value of both densities at prevailing operating conditions. The most common practice makes use of three pressure transducers, one located in the uppermost part of the froth zone, and the other two in the collection zone, one close to the interface and the other well below ( Despite the improvement in froth depth detection introduced by this method ( By using a system of four pressure transducers, two of them multiplexed to provide two pressure readings each, Diaz–Delgado experimentally measured the pressure profile (six points) for various operating conditions ( Another problem of the three pressure-transducer method arises from the influence that the pressure tap location could have on the estimation of the froth depth value, as shown in The method would then report a froth depth estimate of about 60 cm instead of the actual value of 85 Finally, Results clearly indicate that froth depth estimates deteriorate as the actual value increases. This could be explained by the larger deviations from uniform froth-density assumption encountered as froth becomes deeper. One could be tempted to assume that a linear relationship exists between the error and the actual position, which might help in correcting it. However, the error generated in each set of operating conditions is different (not seen in the figure since the curves corresponding to each set of conditions were not drawn to avoid overcrowding), which invalidates this option. To overcome these problems, some researches have looked at methods based on intensive properties of the pulp involved. To cope with the large differences in water content observed in the pulp and froth zones, different approaches using conductivity measurements have been proposed. To solve the accuracy problem of the largest-slope method, To describe the nonlinear conductivity profile across the interface (S-shape), In order to avoid the determination of linear equations in each conductivity cell of the probe or the extensive experimentation associated to ANN training, Grégoire proposed a semi-analytical method in which the cell containing the interface is represented as a series of two electrical resistances, froth and pulp, as it is shown in The electrical resistance of the cell containing the pulp-froth interface is: From Eqs. Considering that The value of resistivities As previously mentioned, the detection of the cell containing the interface is a pre-requisite for using this approach. This is done through an iterative procedure where the first step is to detect the location of the largest change in the conductance profile. Extensive experimental work has shown that this cell does not necessarily correspond to the interface position, as is currently supposed. Eq. It has been observed though, that near the electrodes, Grégoire’s method leads to estimate discontinuities as a results of the conditional selection algorithm. This effect is shown in To correct the above mentioned problems, a new algorithm was developed. While keeping the main features of Grégoire’s algorithm, it substantially improves its smoothness when the interface is near an electrode or moving from one conductivity cell to another, by considering a weighted average between the two possible values of froth depth determined by the largest slope method. The steps of the algorithm are the following: Calculation of the conductivity change profile. Determination of the possible cells containing the interface, i.e., where the largest conductivity change occurs. The following variables are defined: The Then, the two possible froth-depth values are given by: The weighted average froth depth estimate is then calculated as: That is to say, the froth depth is determined as a linear combination of the two possible froth depth values, where the parameters The pilot column flotation used for the validation of this method is located at the COREM (Mineral Processing Research Consortium) pilot plant in Québec City. The column is made of 5.1 To measure the froth depth, the uppermost section of the pilot flotation column is implemented with eleven stainless-steel conductivity electrodes, 5.1 Local control loops are implemented to regulate all flow rates (feed, tails, wash-water and air). Slurry and water pumping is done via variable-speed Masterflex™ peristaltic pumps. All flow rates are measured using appropriate flowmeters (magnetic, turbine, etc). The tests described in this paper were performed with a three-phase system (air-water-silica, at 10% solids). Data acquisition was performed by a SCADA software (iFIX™) working under Windows XP™ operating system.   The detection of the interface position in flotation columns using three pressure-transducer measurements is strongly dependent on the assumption of uniform specific gravity for both collection and froth zone. This assumption is highly questionable and might lead to important errors in the froth depth estimation. Intensive properties such as temperature or conductivity have been used to cope with this problem. In this paper, a review of the methods to determine the froth-depth value from conductivity measurements was presented. In particular, a new method to estimate the froth depth based on a weighted average interpolation of the two possible froth depth values calculated from the “largest-slope method” was proposed. The experimental results showed that the proposed method gives very good froth depth estimates, improving accuracy and smoothness, which makes this sensor very attractive for control and optimization purposes. The availability of a conductivity profile in the upper part of the column also opens the door for the evaluation of the bias rate. The authors would like to acknowledge the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, Algosys Inc. and Société Minière Raglan du Québec for providing the necessary funding for this project.