Centrifugal concentrators have been widely used to recover fine gold over the past few decades, the main drawback being the large volume of water required during the operation. As water is an increasingly important commodity, investigating dry processing to reduce water usage is of great importance. This work investigated using a laboratory scale Knelson Concentrator with a dry feed, and air being used to replace water as the fluidising medium and size-by-size testing of material. A synthetic ore comprised of tungsten and quartz was used to mimic a gold ore. Response surface methodology and central composite design were used for modelling and optimisation with the experimental variables being the motor power (MP) (%), air fluidizing pressure (AFP) (psi) and solid feed rate (SFR) (g/min). The observed results of the three size classes indicated that amongst the three variables; the motor power had the greatest impact when comparing to the other two variables. Different optimum conditions had been found for −425+150μm, −150+53μm and −53μm size fractions and these are 30% MP, 200g/min SFR and 10 psi AFP, 50% MP, 160g/min SFR and 11psi AFP, 65% MP, 200g/min SFR and 11psi AFP, respectively.Gravity concentration, which can be described as one of the oldest separation techniques, relies on the density differences of minerals to facilitate a separation. For fine particle separations, an applied centrifugal acceleration is imparted onto particles to increase the settling rate thus enhancing the separation. The Knelson Concentrator is one of the most common centrifugal concentrators for gold processing. It currently operates on a wet basis, and processing 24 The possibility of dry processing using a Knelson Concentrator has been shown to have potential by It has been established that a synthetic tungsten/quartz ore can be used to substitute gold ore in gravity separation ( A modified KC-MD3 laboratory Knelson Concentrator as shown in For +106 Due to the different operating conditions, results of +106 The concentrate of each test for +53 Central composite experimental design (CCD) was used in this experimental study. According to literature, CCD is the widely used and the most popular response surface method (RSM) design and it fits well to a second-order response surface ( The motor power (%), solid feed rate (g/min) and air fluidising pressure (psi) were chosen as independent variables, with five levels (± The required number of tests for the CCD can be calculated by using Eq. The total test number for three variables ( The coded and corresponding actual values were calculated as shown in For each test, 1 The mathematical relationship between the variables and response can be approximated by a second order model such as Eq. The statistical software package “Minitab® Statistical Software 17” from Minitab Inc. was used to estimate the coefficients, At the end of the experiments, using experimental data based on recovery, a second-order regression model which describes concentration was produced. Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was used to determine the regression coefficients and to detect the harmony of the second-order regression model. Statistical importance of each variable on the response was found at the 95% confidence level by using the Fischer ( After conducting 20 experiments for each size fraction, the recovery was calculated and listed as shown in From the experimental results, the second order response function, based on the polynomial function in Eq. In order to estimate the significance of the developed models, ANOVA ( The normal probability plot of the residuals and the plot of the residuals versus the predicted tungsten recovery are presented in Once the model had been verified, the Student’s  From the overlaid contour plots of MP/AFP for −425 From In the overlaid contour plots of MP/AFP from From the overlaid contour plots of MP/AFP in To determine the optimum conditions for all size fractions, the response optimizer function in Minitab was used. The parameters were calculated by setting the target recovery at 99.99% and the results are detailed in The optimum conditions were determined by using the operating conditions ranges shown in the overlaid contours and the response optimizer results. For −425 After conducting 20 experiments for each size fraction, the recoveries were calculated and listed as shown in The model equation produced from coded values of factor levels for the recovery ( The calculated The normal probability plot of the residuals and the plot of the residuals versus the predicted response for tungsten recovery are presented in According the the Student’s  From the overlaid contour plots of MP/AFP for −106 From the overlaid contour plots of MP/AFP in It can be seen that high recovery area requires motor power within 48–63%, air fluidising pressure should be between 6 and 11 The target recovery in the response optimizer function was chosen as 99.99%, 98% and 95% which are the maximum values of the predicted models for −150 After investigating the overlaid contours and comparing the findings with the response optimizer results, the chosen optimum conditions were: 50% for motor power; 160 Once the optimum operating conditions for each size fraction were obtained, to confirm the validity of the proposed equations, further experiments were carried out. The validation test for each size fraction was repeated five times. The comparisons between the actual and model predicted data for every size fraction are presented in Motor power dominated the effect on recoveries regardless of the sizes. The order of importance of the variables can be shown as MP (%) In this research, air fluidising pressure is higher compared to the previous investigations ( Solid feed rate does not show any effect until the particle size become fine. For the coarse sizes (−425 Response surface design experiments examined the effect of motor power (%), solid feed rate (g/min) and air fluidizing pressure (psi) on the tungsten recovery for a dry separation in a Knelson Concentrator size-by-size. The main conclusions are as follows: The empirical regression equation as a function of the independent process variables was derived by the RSM model for the recovery of the tungsten. The analysis of the variance (ANOVA) showed that the calculated The regression model for each size fraction has Validations test results show that all mono size fractions could be separated into three size fractions. −425 The order of importance of the variables can be shown as MP (%) Surface plots confirmed that lower motor power (<30%) with high pressure (>10 From the optimization studies, it can be found that the optimized values for the concentration with the highest recovery of motor power, solid feed rate and air fluidizing pressure are 30%, 200 The authors would like to acknowledge the