In this work, the machining performance of an electrostatic minimum quantity lubrication (EMQL) technology in grinding of Cr12 die steel was systematically investigated in terms of grinding temperature and forces and grinding ratio, as well as surface quality and microstructures. The intensity of charging voltage was varied in order to obtain an optimal grinding performance. A model of capillary penetration of lubricant droplets to the abrasive-workpiece interface was proposed to reveal the lubrication mechanism of EMQL. It was found that EMQL at an electrostatic voltage of 4 kV significantly reduced the grinding forces and surface roughness, but increased the grinding ratio by 24.8% in comparison with a conventional MQL technology. The improved performance was attributed to the fact that EMQL promoted the penetration of lubricant droplets, achieving a better interfacial lubrication with low friction and grinding heat. The EMQL was also believed to reduce the surface micro-hardness of workpiece materials by enhancing the migration of dislocations, hence improving the cutting effect of abrasive grains.In the past decade, minimum quantity lubrication (MQL) technologies have been widely used in the grinding process of steels, as they have a relatively good lubrication performance and are environmentally friendly [ To achieve a low-cost and high-performance machining, a static electricity assisted MQL technology, called electrostatic minimum quantity lubrication (EMQL), was developed and investigated in previous studies [ In addition, some studies [ In this work, the capillary penetration of charged lubricant droplets to the wheel-workpiece interface was analysed. The grinding performance of EMQL was systematically evaluated in terms of grinding temperature and forces and grinding ratio, as well as ground surface quality and micro-hardness. The intensity of electrostatic voltage was also varied to obtain an optimal machining performance. Through analysing ground surfaces, the machining mechanism of EMQL in grinding of Cr12 die steel was revealed.  The schematic illustration of measuring the potential between the charged droplets and the workpiece surface was shown in The grinding performance of EMQL at different voltages of 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 kV was investigated on a precision plane grinder [ After testing, the ground specimens and wheel were ultrasonically cleaned in DI water for 10 min. Surface roughness of the specimens was measured perpendicular to grinding direction using a surftest (SJ-210, Mitutoyo, Japan). The measurement was performed at five special points with a sampling length of 0.8 mm. The grinding ratio (G) that was defined as the ratio of volume loss of the material to that of the grinding wheel [ The effectiveness of grinding fluids mainly depends on their capability of penetrating into the wheel-workpiece interface via the capillaries that are dynamically generated at the interface owing to grain sliding and rubbing [ The capillaries generated at the grinding interface were cylindrical in shape with micro-sized dimension, and were distributed along the contact line of the wheel and the workpiece. A single capillary was a cylinder with an opening at one end, and its inside was under a vacuum condition. The length of capillaries was about 1/3˜2/3 of the contact length of the wheel and the workpiece, whereas their radius was set at 0.5 × 10 With these assumptions, a model of droplet penetration to a single capillary is proposed, as shown in According to the During grinding process, the penetration depth of fluids was dominated by the capillary driving force Combining Eqns. The values of wetting angles and surface tension of fluids droplet produced using EMQL at different voltages are listed in    The SEM images of the ground surfaces generated using MQL and EMQL are shown in   Based on the above analyses, a schematic illustration on how the EMQL influenced the surface micro-hardness and microstructures is shown in The ratio of volume loss of the material to that of the wheel wear, which is defined as grinding ratio [   The penetration property of lubricant droplets in EMQL grinding was investigated, and the machining performance of EMQL in grinding of Cr12 die steel was systematically evaluated in terms of grinding temperature and forces and grinding ratio as well as surface quality and microstructures. The results showed that EMQL considerably improved the capillary penetration of grinding fluids to the wheel-workpiece interface, therefore resulting in a significant reduction in the grinding force and surface roughness, but an increase of 24.8% in the grinding ratio, in comparison with MQL. In addition, the EMQL was found to reduce the surface micro-hardness of workpiece materials and improve the surface microstructures by enhancing the migration of dislocations, hence enhancing the cutting effect of abrasive grains. No conflict of interest exits in the submission of this manuscript, and manuscript is approved by all authors for publication. I would like to declare on behalf of my co-authors that the work described was original research that has not been published previously, and not under consideration for publication elsewhere, in whole or in part. All the authors listed have approved the manuscript that is enclosed. This study was financially supported by