Flotation of a low grade pentlandite ore containing large amounts of serpentine minerals from Western Australia was conducted with process water having high ionic strength. Nickel recovery was low in the flotation of both fine and coarse fractions. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis indicated that oxidation occurred on both fine and coarse pentlandite particles. To reduce pentlandite oxidation, sodium hydrosulphide (NaHS) and dithionite (Na2S2O4) were added during grinding. It was found that NaHS improved both pentlandite and serpentine mineral flotation and deteriorated pentlandite separation from serpentine, whilst Na2S2O4 improved pentlandite flotation without affecting serpentine flotation and therefore increased pentlandite separation from serpentine.Pentlandite flotation in Western Australia has historically been difficult due to a low nickel grade and large amounts of serpentine minerals ( In this study, the reduction of pentlandite oxidation in flotation was investigated to further improve the nickel recovery in Western Australian operations. It was observed that the dissolved oxygen (DO) in the pulp was high in flotation. It was hypothesized that pentlandite oxidation might occur. Therefore, the objective of this study was to characterise pentlandite oxidation and improve pentlandite flotation against serpentine through the control of surface oxidation. The pentlandite ore sample with 0.58% Ni was crushed to a size of −2.36 Sodium ethyl xanthate (SEX) and H407 (polypropylene glycol ether blend), industrial grade, were used as collector and frother, respectively. Other inorganic chemicals such as sodium hydrosulphide and dithionite were AR grade. One kilogram crushed sample was ground in a laboratory stainless steel rod mill at 40% solids to obtain 80% particles passing 125 Flotation was carried out in a 2.5 XPS measurements were carried out with a Perkin-Elmer Physical Electronics Division (PHI) 5100 spectrometer with an Mg Ka X-ray source operating at 300 The solid samples from the filtration of cyclone overflow and underflow were passed to a laboratory Falcon centrifugal concentrator. The enriched concentrates (about 10% of the feed) were washed with the process water to remove any detachable species and introduced into the fore-vacuum of the spectrometer. The samples were first examined in survey mode to identify all the elements present then the various elemental regions were scanned in order to extract information on chemical bonding and oxidation stages. Flotation tests indicated that pentlandite flotation from the fine fraction was slower than from the coarse fraction. In 32 The Eh and DO values during the different stages of preparation of fine and coarse flotation feeds were measured. After grinding, the Eh was 172  XPS analysis shows that pentlandite oxidation occurred in the preparation of flotation feed. More metal oxidation species were exposed on pentlandite particles than metal sulphide species, and fine particles might be more oxidised than coarse particles. The reduction of pentlandite oxidation may improve nickel flotation recovery. To increase the flotation of oxidised minerals, the classical method involves controlled potential sulphidisation at a value between −450 and −550   The current study indicates that oxidation occurred on both fine and coarse pentlandite in the flotation of a complex nickel ore in saline water. The flotation of both fine and coarse fractions could be improved by adding NaHS or dithionite during grinding. However, NaHS increased serpentine flotation while dithionite did not. As a result, dithionite is more effective than NaHS for enhancing pentlandite separation from serpentine. The authors gratefully acknowledge the supply of ore and water samples from BHP Billiton Nickel West.