The ballistic compaction and penetration of ceramic powder targets has been studied experimentally and computationally using powder compacts of different initial densities and thickness. Using a non-deforming conically-nosed projectile, confined alumina powder compacts have been penetrated at velocities of ∼ 375 m/s and ∼ 900 m/s. We present a computational model that has been used to successfully predict the compaction of an alumina powder at slow (quasi-static) loading rates as well as dynamic (ballistic) rates. For compacts where the initial density increases linearly for a decreasing thickness, both experimental and computational results show that there is very little difference in the resistance to projectile penetration. Furthermore, it was shown that increasing the density of the compact for a given thickness was shown to have more of an effect on ballistic resistance than increasing the thickness for a given density.The brittle nature of ceramics dictates that on impact and penetration by a projectile, a rapid drop-off in strength in the material around the penetration zone is anticipated. The penetration of a projectile results in the crushing or ‘comminution’ of the material – which, when sufficiently compacted can offer resistance to penetration [ Damage accumulation in ceramics under conditions of high compression and high strain rate has been studied by Shih and co-workers [ Apart from understanding the strength and behaviour of comminuted materials during ballistic penetration, the dynamic compaction of ceramic powders has been studied to develop techniques for processing material prior to sintering [ In this study, we have developed constitutive constants for integration into compaction models available within ANSYS AUTODYN® to investigate the ballistic compaction of a ceramic powder. Here, our focus is the behaviour of the material in Zone 3 ( Aluminium oxide (Al The powder was cold-pressed in situ into 36-mm deep 70-mm diameter dural (Al 6082-T651) cups with internal diameters of 50 mm. The densities achieved ranged from 2.0 g/cc to 2.6 g/cc. Two different base thicknesses were used depending on the front confinement that was to be offered during the ballistic tests. The base of the cup was 2-mm thick for the polycarbonate ballistic (low-velocity) tests and 6-mm thick for the aluminium (high-velocity) ballistic tests. Once pressed, the resulting compact was sealed with a thin layer of epoxy resin to hold it firmly in place. The cup was then milled to the height of the pressed ceramic disc. The complete assembly (including the pressed sample) was then adhered to a polycarbonate or Al 6082-T651 plate such that the base of the cup now became the cover plate (and impact face) for subsequent ballistic tests. The powders were pressed to 70 tonnes (maximum). Comparison of the ‘before and after’ pressing images of 105NS, shows that the proportion of smaller particles of 105NS increases (as more pressure is applied) and that the larger pieces have been broken apart by the pressing process. Furthermore, as the pressure is increased rounding of the angular edges of the particles appears to occur. However, the basic morphology of individual elements has remained angular and the particles appeared solid. To investigate the ballistic compaction of this alumina powder and to provide validation for the computations, two types of depth-of-penetration test were carried out. Firstly, a saboted FFV core was fired at the confined alumina compacts of different densities, backed by 100-mm diameter polycarbonate bar, at ∼ 375 m/s using a 22-mm bore 2-m barrel single-stage gas gun. Secondly, a modified FFV bullet was fired at confined alumina compacts, backed by multiple 25-mm thick Al 6082-T651 plates at ∼ 900 m/s. The total thickness of the backing-plate materials in both cases was sufficient to discount rear bulging (i.e., they were semi-infinite). The bullet was modified by removing 11 mm of material from the tip of the gilding jacket. This was done to aid jacket removal during the early stages of cover-plate penetration. Ballistic impact experiments were also carried out into the aluminium and polycarbonate targets alone to measure their ballistic behaviour and to validate the computational model for the back-plates; with the PC bar, a 2 mm aluminium plate was adhered to the impact face to simulate the presence of the 2 mm front-plate confining the alumina compact. A schematic of the four sets of ballistics tests is provided below in Compressed powder compacts exhibit pressure–dependent strength behaviour [ The first step is to develop a suitable pressure–density isothermal equation-of-state. To describe this behaviour we have used a compaction model based on the The elastic loading and unloading relationship shown in Additionally, we have examined how the bulk sound speed varies with density for several fully dense alumina tiles. These correspond to the limit of elastic behaviour for the ceramic. The longitudinal ( The shear modulus ( The results including the tile names and % purity are presented below in Quite strikingly, there is a clear linear relationship between the calculated To simulate the elastic–plastic characteristics of the ceramic powder we have adopted the MO Granular model. This has been previously used to simulate the dynamic compaction of sand [ This yield function is described as two sets of The linear relationship between the equivalent (flow) stress and mean stress (pressure) shown in The rationale for the addition of a density-dependent yield strength to the pressure dependent yield relationship is that powder compacts have an inherent compressive strength for a given density when From previous studies on powder compacts the evidence suggests that it is not a simple case of assuming the elastic modulus of the sample based on fully dense material. Studies on powder compacts by Martin et al. [ Powder compacts have very low tensile strengths [ All simulations were carried out in ANSYS AUTODYN in 2D axi-symmetric space. Simulations were carried out using a Lagrangian description with a 0.25 mm × 0.25 mm cell-size for all parts. In each case the projectile core was assumed to be non-deforming. Where appropriate, the jacket of the projectile was modelled using 1006 steel. All materials (apart from the ceramic powder and polycarbonate) were assumed to follow a Mie-Grüneisen equation-of-state with a linear shock Hugoniot reference relationship according to the following equation [ Direct correlation for both the back-plate and cover materials between computations and experiments was established. However, it was necessary to define the cell size, erosion strain and failure models for the powder. Consequently, sensitivity studies were carried out on the cell sizes, choice of erosion strain and failure model for the powder. Computations were compared to a ballistic experiment where a WC projectile was fired into a powder-faced PC plate. The resulting experimental depth-of-penetration was 28 mm. Incrementally increasing the erosion strain in the powder resulted in good agreement with the experimental data at a strain of 2.5 (250%). Equally, reducing the cell size to 0.25 mm resulted in good correlation with the experimental data. Consequently, these values were chosen for subsequent simulations. The tensile failure limit ( Using the material model data for the ceramic powder outlined in Metco 105NS ceramic powder was cold-pressed in situ into a 36-mm deep 70-mm diameter dural (Al 6082-T651) cup with an internal diameter of 50 mm. The base of the cup was 2-mm thick and supported on a rigid structure. The powder was pressed to a maximum of 70 tonnes corresponding to 350 MPa. A computational model was set up in AUTODYN with a boundary condition applied to replicate the stress due to the piston used in the compression process. Six simulations runs were carried out with initial (pre-compaction) densities of ∼ 1.67 g/cc. The computational set-up and the results (compared with experiments) are shown below in Initially, the ballistic behaviour of Al-faced polycarbonate was examined. This was necessary to validate the computational model for the cover layer and backing layer. Experiments were carried out where a 2-mm thickness of Al 6082-T651 plate was adhered to the front of the PC bar and impacted by the saboted FFV core at four different impact velocities. The experimental and numerical results are shown in The powder-gun test comprised of firing modified armour-piercing bullet at the contained powder compacts at ca. 900 m/s. However, in this case the residual penetration into Al 6082-T651 was recorded. Initially, firings were conducted into the Al 6082-T651 alone by the modified FFV bullet. The recorded DoPs along with the simulated DoPs are detailed in Again, results show fairly good correlation between computation and experiment. Gu and Ravichandran [ Horsfall et al. presented results where a 7.62 mm × 51 mm FFV projectile was fired at a compressed alumina powder ( To check that the response of the aluminium back-plate could be correctly modelled a simulation was carried out of an impact into the back-plate alone using a FFV projectile. Using data for another 7000 grade of aluminium alloy (7075-T6) [ Applying a radially confined 9-mm thick alumina compact ( Equally, simulations into a 37.5 mm compact were carried out as reported in [ Finally, we have analysed the role of density on the ballistic performance of the ceramic compact. The results are shown below in Notably, the ballistic efficiency offered by the ceramic-powder compacts was poor (see There is some evidence that the Al-backed targets appeared slightly more ballistically efficient than the PC-backed targets. However, the results are not statistically significant and would be expected given the higher strength of the Al material [ The model appeared to work well in simulating the ceramic powder's performance and work is underway to examine whether the complete formulation can be adapted to simulate the degradation of strength and stiffness of an intact ceramic material during projectile penetration (i.e., to replicate the behaviour of the ceramic as the material strength degrades in each of the zones (see In this work, we have derived constants for a constitutive model for application within a continuum code for the comminuted material that would be expected to exist at the radial periphery of the penetrator. This model assumes pressure-dependent compaction behaviour. Several validation cases have been presented of a non-deforming projectile penetrating confined powder with different powder sizes and morphology. These have shown that the model works well for the angular particulates (that most likely represent the finely comminuted powder at the periphery of the penetrator). However, it appeared to work less well for confined spherical particles subjected to ballistic impact. Nevertheless, when comparing with experimental data for the spherical particles the difference in residual penetration was shown to be less than 12%. The work has also shown that the confined powder compacts offered poor ballistic behaviour resulting in ballistic efficiencies of approximately 1.0 irrespective of the compaction density (ranging from ca. 2.0 g/cc to 2.6 g/cc). Furthermore, increasing the density of the compact for a given thickness was shown to have more of an effect on ballistic resistance than increasing the thickness for a given density. This is due to the increase in the strength of the compact. Further work is ongoing to link the behaviour of the fully interlocked material behaviour with the behaviour of the powdery comminuted material response. We would particularly like to thank Mr. Andy Roberts and Mr. Dave Miller of Cranfield University for supporting the experiments. The experimental results for this paper were gathered during the course of Steven Toone's Explosive Ordnance Engineering MSc project at Cranfield University (Shrivenham). The data are entered into ANSYS AUTODYN in pairs in a piecewise fashion. See