This study attempted to characterize the ability of thermoreversible gelation polymer (TGP) to induce differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC) into osteoblasts. Using a long oligo microarray system consisting of 3760 genes, we compared the expression profiles of the cells in 2-dimensional (2D) culture, 3D culture in collagen gel, and 3D culture in TGP with or without osteogenic induction. Compared to 2D culture, the gene expression profile of hMSC showed almost the same pattern in TGP without osteogenic induction, but 72% of genes (2701/3760) were up-regulated in collagen gel. With osteogenic induction, hMSC showed higher ALP activity and osteocalcin production in TGP as compared to 2D culture. Moreover, up-regulation and down-regulation of osteogenic genes were augmented in 3D culture in TGP as compared to 2D culture. As TGP is chemically synthesized and completely free from pathogen such as prion in bovine spongiform encephalopathy, these results suggest that TGP could be applied clinically to induce osteogenic differentiation of hMSC.Human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC) can selectively differentiate into osteogenic, chondrogenic, or adipogenic lineages depending on the conditions of the medium in which they are cultured. When hMSC are cultured with dexamethasone, ascorbic acid-2-phosphate, and β-glycerophosphate, they differentiate into an osteogenic lineage and form mineral There is a large difference between a flat layer of cells and a complex 3-dimensional (3D) tissue, and the development of biological materials for 3D culture is a key area in regenerative medicine. For 3D culture, many researchers have used collagen gel In this study, we examined the osteogenic differentiation of hMSC in TGP and compared comprehensive gene expression with that in a 2D culture system. We report here that osteogenic differentiation was augmented in 3D culture in TGP, and TGP is a potential clinical biomaterial for bone regeneration from hMSC.     In mammalian tissues, cells connect not only with each other, but also with a support structure called the extracellular matrix (ECM). ECM contains collagen, elastin, laminin, fibronectin, etc., and these proteins contain specific motifs that are particularly favorable for cell attachment and function. On the other hand, TGP contains no such motifs as a scaffold, and nothing is known as to whether this affects cell function or not. When hMSC are cultured in control medium in 2D culture, they slowly proliferate without differentiation. Accordingly, we examined the gene expression profile of hMSC cultured in 3D culture (TGP and collagen gel) in control medium. In TGP culture, scattered plots of gene expression were evenly distributed in both the upper left (1959 genes: 52%) and lower right (1801 genes: 48%) areas. On the other hand, scattered plots of gene expression in collagen gel were mainly distributed in the upper left (2701 genes: 72%), indicating that collagen gel itself stimulated gene expression of hMSC without any induction. Next, we examined the gene expression profile of hMSC in osteogenic culture medium for 14 days. In 2D culture, unexpectedly, scattered plots of gene expression were evenly distributed in both the upper left (2026 genes: 53.8%) and lower right (1734 genes: 47%) areas, and this was also the case in TGP culture with osteogenic medium (1896 and 1864 genes, respectively). Next, we confirmed whether osteogenic differentiation could be induced in 3D culture in TGP. Human MSC were cultured in 2D or TGP with osteogenic medium for 14 days, and osteogenic differentiation was demonstrated by mineralization stained using the von Kossa method. As shown in Among 3760 genes, we examined the up-regulation of typical osteogenic genes such as type I collagen 3D culture techniques are expected to play a key role in regenerative medicine, especially in the field of tissue engineering, but several conditions are required for the culture material. First, it should be free from pathogens such as prion. Collagen gels are usually made from bovine tissue, and it is impossible to rule out the possibility of BSE completely. Matrigel is made from animal tumors. On the other hand, TGP is a chemically synthesized material and completely free from pathogens. Second, to optimize the conditions for lineage-specific differentiation, the material should be able to keep stem cells in an inactive stable condition without induction. Matrigel contains several unidentified growth factors. Collagen gel alone activated gene expression of hMSC without any induction, but TGP did not ( Recently, Doi et al. analyzed the gene expression profile during the mineralization process of hMSC by means of a cDNA microarray system consisting of 23,040 genes, and confirmed up-regulation of 55 genes and down-regulation of 82 genes. As shown in In summary, 3D culture in TGP is able to maintain hMSC in a stable inactive condition without induction and augment osteogenic differentiation of hMSC cultured with dexamethasone, ascorbic acid-2-phosphate, and β-glycerophosphate. TGP is completely free from prion and may be able to induce a morphogen gradient in the differentiation process in 3D culture. Our results suggest the possible clinical application of TGP for regenerative medicine, especially for bone regeneration by hMSC. This study was supported by a grant from the Open Competition for the Development of Innovative Technology and the Mochida Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd.