This work presented a new strategy to comprehensive utilization of hydrochloric acid leaching solution of anode slime bearing fluorine, arsenic, and antimony. Firstly, the fluorosilicic acid and fluorosilicates in the leaching solution were removed by barium chloride. Then the arsenic and antimony in the defluorinated leaching solution were separated by distillation. Finally, AsSb alloy was electrodeposited from the electrolyte prepared with the distillates. Results show that the defluorination efficiency is 97.81% under optimum condition and the residual fluorine concentration decreases from 21.46 to 0.47 g/L. The distillation recovery of As(III) is 97.44% in the defluorinated leaching solution. AsSb alloy can be electrodeposited from the electrolyte containing 5 g/L As(III), 1 g/L Sb(III) and 4 mol/L HCl. The obtained AsSb alloy shows an amorphous structure with a composition of 84.48 wt% As and 15.52 wt% Sb. Moreover, after electrodeposition of AsSb alloy, the electrolyte can be returned to the leaching process and a closed loop for the solution treatment is achieved.Lead anode slime is generated from the electrolytic refining of crude lead, which mainly contains antimony and large amount of fluorine and arsenic. Pyrometallurgy, hydrometallurgy ( In our previous studies, SbCl On the other hand, arsenic contamination has become increasingly serious ( This work provides a new strategy to remove fluorosilicic acid and fluorosilicates from the leaching solution of lead anode slime by barium chloride. The influences of barium chloride dosage, reaction time and reaction temperature on the defluorination efficiency were investigated. Then the defluorinated leaching solution was distilled to separate arsenic and antimony, herein the distillation behavior of arsenic was deliberated. Finally, As Chloridization leaching solution of lead anode slime was provided by a metallurgical plant located in Guangxi Province, China. The main composition of leaching solution was as follows (g/L): Sb(III) 488.6, Sb(V) 0.6, As(III) 32.5, F 21.46, Pb 4.27, Cu 9.1, Bi 24.72 and Ag 0.71. And the concentration of hydrochloric acid ranged from 3 to 5 mol/L.  Defluorination experiments were conducted in 200 mL chloridization leaching solution at certain temperature under magnetic stirring. In detail, barium chloride with various stoichiometric ratios to fluorine was dissolved in deionized water, which was then added to the leaching solution when the system reached desired temperature (20, 30, 40 and 50 °C). During the defluorination procedure the stirring rate was kept at 1200 r/min and every 1 or 2 h, 1.0 mL solution was taken out to examine the remanent fluorine concentration. Finally, the leaching solution was transferred to a Buchner funnel to filtrate the sediments. After defluorination treatment, 1000 mL leaching solution was poured into a three-neck round-bottom flask for distillation. The distillation apparatus was established and shown in As During the defluorination experiments, a fluorine ion selective electrode was employed to detect the fluorine concentration in the leaching solution. The total amount of As and Sb in electrolyte and the contents of As(III) and Sb(III) in HNO In our prior studies, we have investigated the effect of NaCl on removal of fluorine from leaching solution, concluding that the defluorination efficiency is only 87.7% under optimum condition ( The effects of stoichiometric ratio of barium chloride to fluorine and reaction time on the defluorination efficiency have been investigated in detail. According to Eq. Results show that the fluorine concentration decreases with the increasing of stoichiometric ratio of barium chloride to fluorine at 20 °C ( Besides, the residual fluorine concentration decreases with the extension of reaction time. All curves perform a rapid decrease at the initial 2 h and then gradually reach stable. This can be attributed to the fact that most of the fluorine is precipitated to barium fluosilicate at the initial period. The extension of reaction time promotes the residual fluorine to react with barium chloride and accelerates the transformation of other fluosilicates to barium fluosilicate. However, the effect of reaction time is limited and the residual fluorine appears to be constant after stirring for 5 h. It is obvious that the equilibrium concentration of fluorine is only dependent on the stoichiometric ratio.  After the defluorination and filtration process, the leaching solution was sent to distillation. The influence of hydrochloric acid concentration and distillation temperature on the distillation behavior of As(III) was investigated ( The influence of HCl concentration on the distillate efficiency of As(III) is displayed in The distillation behavior of Sb(III) from leaching solution was also investigated ( Based on the above results, the separation of As(III) and Sb(III) was conducted in temperature range of 115–180 °C with HCl concentration of 5 mol/L. The composition of distillate collected at 115–140 °C is listed in The separated As(III) and Sb(III) from distillation process were used for As Obviously, As(V) and Sb(V) will be produced as the electrolytic reaction progress due to oxidation of As(III) and Sb(III) on the graphite anode ( The variation of cell voltage during electrodeposition is shown in  The composition of deposit, current efficiency and the amount of stibine and arsine produced during As A new and environmental friendly technology was proposed to treat the chloridization leaching solution bearing fluorine, arsenic and antimony. Comprehensive recovery and utilization of arsenic was achieved by a series processes, including defluorination, distillation and electrodeposition of As Fluorine in the chloridization leaching solution of lead anodic slime can be removed by barium chloride. Defluorination efficiency is effected by the dosage of barium chloride, reaction time and temperature. Under optimum condition, the residual fluorine concentration decreases from 21.46 to 0.47 g/L with defluorination efficiency of 97.81%. HCl concentration has great effect on the distillation behavior of As(III). The distillation efficiencies of As(III) and Sb(III) are 97.44% and 2.08%, respectively, at optimum hydrochloric acid concentration, i.e., 5 mol/L. By distillation process, As(III) and Sb(III) can be separated and used for the following electrodeposition process. Amorphous As This work was financially supported by the