In this paper, multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) were decorated with silver nanoparticles which have been successfully synthesized by chemical reduction of Ag cations on the acid treated MWCNTs surface by sodium hydroxide. Ag/MWCNTs were characterized by TEM and XRD. The results indicated that silver nanoparticles were homogeneously dispersed on the outer surface of MWCNTs. The dispersibility of pristine, acid treated and decorated carbon nanotubes in distilled water were investigated by zeta potential and optical image. The results revealed that the dispersion of acid treated carbon nanotubes in distilled water was better than those of pristine MWCNTs and Ag/MWCNTs.Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) were first discovered by Iijima in 1991 Naturally pristine carbon nanotubes are hydrophobic and tend to aggregation in water and organic solvents due to the presence of high van der waals forces between tubes. Functionalization is an efficient technique to prevent carbon nanotubes aggregation. Covalent and noncovalent functionalization are two effective methods to improve dispersion in solvents In the present study, we applied a simple and effective approach to decoration of multiwall carbon nanotubes with silver nanoparticles based on the wet chemistry reaction. We chose sodium hydroxide (NaOH) as a reducing agent to prepare Ag-MWCNTs. Ultrasonication is applied to homogeneously decorate carbon nanotubes with silver nanoparticles. As well as we studied the dispersibility of pristine, acid treated and decorated carbon nanotubes with silver nanoparticles in water. Multi-walled carbon nanotubes were obtained from Shenzhen Nanotech Port Co., Ltd. (Shenzhen, China) with a purity of >95%. Their diameter and length were 40–60 nm and 5–15 μm respectively. NaOH (99%) and silver nitrate (98%) were purchased from Merck. 0.1 g Pristine MWCNTs were suspended in 50 concentrated HNO 50 mg functionalized MWCNTs ultrasonicated in 20 ml deionized water for 2 h. Then 20 ml aqueous solution of 0.1 M AgNO X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained by PC1800X diffractometer using K FTIR is used as a qualitative technique to characterize the samples for the identification of surface functional groups on the outer surface of MWCNTs. TEM is a powerful technique to characterize the morphology and microstructure of Ag/CNTs nanocomposites. Typical TEM images of decoration carbon nanotubes with silver nanoparticles are shown in The structure and chemical composition of Ag/MWCNTs was verified by XRD and result is shown in TEM and XRD characterization demonstrate that Ag nanoparticles successfully have been decorated on acid treated MWCNTs. Zeta potential is the electric potential difference between charged carbon nanotubes and a liquid medium. The value of zeta potential can be related to stability of aqueous carbon nanotubes suspension. The zeta potential represents the repulsion force between carbon nanotubes in dispersed medium. Colloids with high zeta potential (negative or positive) above ±15 mV are stable while those with low zeta potential tend to coagulate  In summary, we have successfully prepared Ag decorated MWCNTs by a simple method. The TEM and XRD results confirmed that silver nanoparticles loaded on the surface of MWNTs homogeneously. The results of zeta potential and sediment photograph show that the dispersion of carbon nanotubes in distilled water with acid treatment increased but decoration carbon nanotubes with silver nanoparticles decreased.