Background
                  Comminuted patellar fracture reduction and articular reconstruction is surgically demanding situation to deal with, as patellar articular surface is complex with two diverging facets separated by a median ridge.
               
                  Purpose
                  The objective of this study is to evaluate functional outcome of OTA-34 C2, C3 comminuted patellar fractures treated surgically by methodical reduction and fixation.
               
                  Methods
                  We prospectively analyzed 12 patients of OTA-34 C2, C3 patellar fracture operated by our technique in 2 female and 10 male patients. We obtained three dimensional patellar articular facet reconstruction, by direct observation and reduction of articular surface and fixation with mini fragment screws and cerclage wire. The knee outcome survey – Activity of Daily Living Scale (ADLS) was used to assess functional outcome and follow-up X-rays were taken to assess radiological outcome of the fracture fixation.
               
                  Results
                  In all cases fracture union was achieved at an average of 10.83 weeks (2.49 months). The mean age was 43.58 years, average follow-up was 27.83 months and mean knee outcome survey ADLS – 90.08%. Functional knee range of motion was achieved by the end of 12 weeks (mean ROM – 119.08°). None of the patients had any infection, avascular necrosis of patellar fragments; implant cut out or patellofemoral arthritis. Three patients with associated ipsilateral long bone fracture showed delayed return to work.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Three dimensional patellar articular reconstruction and restoration of extensor apparatus is possible in comminuted patellar fracture with good clinical outcome by accurate and meticulous surgical reduction and fixation.Patellar fractures constitute about 1% of all skeletal injuries. We prospectively analyzed 12 patients with 34-C2, C3 type comminuted patellar fractures (AO/Orthopaedic Trauma Association Classification) who sustained it following road traffic accident/direct fall on the knee during February 2011–July 2014. The mean age was 43.58 years (range 29–53 years) and included 2 females and 10 males ( The patellar fracture was exposed through a midline approach in closed fracture and in case of open fractures extending the laceration. Thorough wound wash was given to clear the blood clots from the knee joint, across fracture surface to define fracture geometry and to delineate major/larger fragments and smaller fragments by atraumatic blunt dissection. For convenience of reduction, patellar fragments was divided into upper and lower pole fragments. Upper pole fragments were everted and articular surface visualized, they were methodically reduced and, held temporarily by 1.2 In this study there were 8 patients with 34-C2 type and 4 patients with 34-C3 type fractures. The average follow-up was 27.83 months (13–49 months) and average knee outcome survey ADLS was 90.08% (range 78.98–97.11%). Complete union was seen in all the cases by 14 weeks (mean 10.83 weeks). All patients achieved functional range of movements for routine daily activity and average knee range of motion at final follow-up was 119.08°. Three patients had restricted knee movements (less than 120°) due to poor compliance of patients for rehabilitation due to ipsilateral long bone fracture. None of the patients had knee extensor lag. There was no implant cut out, non-union, or avascular necrosis of the bony fragments observed. One patient had delayed wound healing and superficial infection in open fracture, which settled with regular dressing and antibiotics. All patients returned to work within 2 months of surgery, while 3 patients who had ipsilateral long bone fractures showed delayed recovery. During the last follow-up, all patients were completely pain free and only 2 had minimal swelling of the knee, which did not affect their daily activities. Nine patients could squat, climb and descend stairs without any problem whereas 3 patients who had other associated fractures had difficulty in squatting and had to use a railing occasionally while climbing stairs. Patella plays an important role in extensor apparatus of the knee by acting as a pulley and reducing the quadriceps force required for extending knee giving mechanical advantage. With increase in high velocity motor vehicle accidents, comminuted patellar fractures are becoming common these days. The amount of comminution and articular damage determines the need for salvage of the entire patella/partial or total patellectomy. Haxton In an attempt to preserve the length of the patella and allow earlier motion, various techniques have been described in literature to preserve rather than excise patella in comminuted fractures. The recommended fixation for comminuted fractures of patella is modified tension band, which can be combined with a cerclage wire or lag screws Reudi, But there is no technique described in literature to completely salvage comminuted patella by attending to the details of fragments and soft tissue. With high velocity injury associated with patellar comminuted fracture, there is always a retinacular injury which is seen. Hence everting fragments are possible and adequate articular reduction can be achieved. In our surgical technique we have given utmost care during handing major/minor fragments with the soft tissue attachments. Atraumatic blunt dissection was carried out in all our cases while everting the fragments and during reduction (by direct observation of articular reconstruction and fixation). We have shown that it is possible to achieve good articular reconstruction by good technique while handling the major and minor fragments with soft tissue attachments. 1.2 Open reduction and external fixation using superior and inferior pins placed transversely, adjacent to the proximal and distal poles and connected externally to compressive clamps have been used successfully to treat transverse and comminuted fractures. Liang and Wu Marya et al. We had no implant cut out and fracture healing issues in any of our patients. Since mini fragment screws are placed within the fracture and within the patella, they are not feasible to remove after fracture union. Further, since the screws are intraosseus they do not cause any implant related issued (such as skin impingement, implant propagation, discomfort and pain). The lack of a uniform surgical technique or a standardized assessment scale limits the utility of the reported outcomes of operative fixation of comminuted patellar fracture. As a result, the literature provides generalization about “good” or “excellent” outcomes Patellectomy is no longer considered a primary option for the treatment of patellar fractures unless there is severe articular comminution with multifragmentary articular fragments where reduction of the fragments is impossible. Good three dimensional articular reconstruction of patellar facet is possible by directly observed fragments reduction and by meticulous handling of soft tissues. By this methodical reduction technique good functional results can be achieved for comminuted patellar fractures. Small study group and short-term follow-up are limitations of this study. Long-term follow-up is required to know about patellofemoral arthritis. The authors have none to declare.