In order to understand the magnetic-aligned compaction process, we develop a three-dimensional (3D) discrete element method for simulating the motion of hard magnetic particles subjected to strong compression and magnetic fields. The proposed simulation model also considers the exact magnetic force involved via the calculation of the magnetic moment. First, to validate the simulation model, single-action compaction in the absence of a magnetic field was calculated. The calculated compaction curves are in good quantitative agreement with experimental ones. Based on this simulation model, the alignment behavior of Nd–Fe–B particles during compression under the application of a static magnetic field. The developed simulation model enables the visualization of particle behavior including the misorientation of the magnetization easy axis, which provided the quantitative relationships between applied pressure and particle misorientation.Most of the recently developed bulk permanent magnets are produced by powder metallurgical approaches, which include the preparation of magnetic powder, magnetic-aligned compaction, and sintering. Among these processes, the magnetic-aligned compaction process, which yields a green compact with the crystallographic alignment of particles, is very important to maximize the potential magnetization of magnetic powders. This is because the use of a highly oriented green compact results in a sintered magnet with a high remanence. Current magnetic-aligned compaction techniques have been empirically developed to manufacture highly oriented anisotropic sintered magnets. On the other hand, while high-coercivity magnetic powders composed of very fine crystallites are being continually developed in recent years, the requirement of high coercivity makes it difficult to prepare highly oriented green compacts. Therefore, the development of an advanced magnetic-aligned compaction process is necessary to prepare new magnetic powders. For further development beyond the present technique, it is important to visualize the location of orientation disorder sites and the reason as to why misorientation increases when preparing highly oriented green compacts. A deep understanding of the motion of the constituent particles will enable the development of an advanced technique along with determining the optimum conditions including the optimum magnetic field, compressive load, and morphology of the powder. Numerical simulation is the preferable approach to analyze particle behavior in the compaction process, which is difficult to observe experimentally. The prevailing approach to analyze powder compaction involves the use of the finite element method (FEM), which is accessible as well as mature We presently intend to develop a practical simulation technique for dynamic particle motion in the magnetic-aligned compaction process based on 3D DEM. As a first step, this study is aimed at constructing an extended 3D simulation model that considers the exact angle between the easy axis of each particle and the magnetic field. In the study, prior to the magnetic-aligned compaction simulation, we compare the compaction simulation results with the experimental results for the case in which no magnetic field is applied. Based on this initial simulation platform, the simulation technique for the magnetic-aligned compaction process was developed. As a final step, the dynamic motion of particles subjected to magnetic-aligned compaction is visualized using the developed simulation model. In this study, all particles are assumed to be elastic spheres. This is a reasonable assumption since recently developed permanent-magnet materials such as Nd–Fe–B and Sm–Fe–N alloys are not easily deformed at room temperature. The translational and rotational motions of each particle are tracked using the DEM. The contact force acting between particles In this study, the normal component,  The translational and rotational motions of each magnetic particle are obtained by solving Eqs. The magnetic moment Our development of the simulation model for the magnetic-aligned compaction process proceeded in two stages. First, we constructed a reliable simulation model for powder compaction without the application of a magnetic field, which was designed to be the platform for the magnetic-aligned compaction model. For this development, the single-action compaction model, illustrated in Following the validation of the analytical platform, the simulation for magnetic-aligned compaction was conducted. This simulation model considered the same compaction setup except that the particle properties were of the same dimensions as the previous model indicated in We first examined the validity of our simulation model of uniaxial compaction in the absence of a magnetic field. In this simulation, the friction coefficient of the particles was tentatively set to 0.5. In order to quantitatively validate the simulation model, the calculated load–stroke curve was compared with the experimental results, as shown in Since the developed simulation model was confirmed to accurately predict the motion of metal particles in compaction, the simulation model was implemented to calculate particle motion during magnetic-aligned compaction. As shown in In addition, we performed a quantitative analysis using the obtained simulation results. In this study, we developed a practical three-dimensional discrete element simulation technique for examining magnetic-aligned compaction. For accurate simulation of the motion of magnetic particles, our extended simulation model included a term corresponding to the exact magnetic moment of the particles. For validation of the simulation model, a comparative examination between calculation and experiment was carried out for single-action compaction without a magnetic field. The simulation results were in good quantitative agreement with the experimental results. Using this simulation model, we subsequently simulated magnetic-aligned compaction. The developed DEM simulation model aided in clearly visualizing the orientation of the particles in a magnetic field and the alignment disorder caused by compressive pressure. This paper is based on results obtained from the future pioneering program “Development of magnetic material technology for high-efficiency motors” commissioned by the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO).