Aluminum sulfate type alkali-free liquid accelerator is widely used in shotcrete. For obtaining a better understanding of the accelerating mechanism, the effect of the accelerator on the hydration of C3A + gypsum, C3S and C3S + C3A + gypsum was investigated. The hydration products were analysed using X-ray diffraction, themogravimetric analysis and scanning electron microscopy. The results show that, after the accelerator's addition, it reacted with Ca(OH)2, C3A, and gypsum in the cement to accelerate the formation of ettringite, which typically formed on the surface of C3S particles that were not fully hydrated, thus slightly delaying C3S hydration at a later stage.Sprayed concrete, also known as shotcrete, is extensively used in railway, tunnel excavation, hydraulic engineering and mining engineering Based on different construction methods, accelerators can be divided into powder and liquid accelerators. Compared with liquid accelerators, shotcrete mixed with powder accelerators suffers from problems such as poor adhesion to rock and uneven water–cement ratio The primary mechanism of alkali-free accelerator is to accelerate the formation and growth of ettringite in cement pastes An alkali-free accelerator which uses aluminum sulfate as a main component and an inorganic or organic acid as a stabilizer is added to the cement for research. During this process, Lootens determined the ionic enrichment of Al Salvador explored whether a proper C Clinker and different setting regulators were the main research objects for experiment in the past studies. The interaction between the various mineral components and accelerator has not been extensively analyzed  The setting time test was performed under laboratory conditions at 20 ± 1 °C. The test method conformed to Chinese standard GB/T 35159-2017 (ISO 9597: 2008), and the cement paste formulation is shown in Preparation of samples refer to the Chinese standard GB/T 35159–2017 (ISO 679: 1989). Therefore, the mortar was prepared using 900 g of Portland cement, 1350 g of standard sand, and 450 g of water (including water in the accelerator). The amount of the accelerator was 6–9 wt. % with respect to the cement weight. The mortar was made into rectangular rhombus samples of 40 mm × 40 mm × 160 mm and were used to test the effect of accelerator incorporation on the cement mortar's strength. The strength tests of the AG, S, and SAG systems were carried out using the mixing ratios listed in The hydrated product formed by cement and cement minerals after incorporating the accelerator was subjected to XRD analysis using a D/MAX-3C Rigaku X-ray diffractometer. The types of hydration products formed were measured, and the samples were immersed in a mixture of acetone and methanol (1:1 vol ratio) to terminate hydration. After the samples broken, they were immersed in a mixture of acetone and methanol (1:1 vol ratio). The samples were obtained after 10 min, 1 day, and 28 days after adding the alkali-free liquid accelerator. The samples were filtered through a filter, and the solid samples were dried under vacuum at 25 ± 1 °C for 24 h. After the solid samples were dried, it was passed through a 0.08 μm sieve. TGA was carried out using a SDTQ 600 TA thermogravimetric analyzer at a heating rate of 10 °C/min in a nitrogen atmosphere. For the AG system, the content of ettringite and gypsum in the samples was mainly tested. It is known from the literature that the peak weight loss at 25–100 ° C could be caused by the water loss of ettringite M M M M For C M M M Morphological analysis of the hydration products of individual minerals (incorporating accelerator and undoped) were performed using a field emission scanning electron microscope (Gemini SEM 300). The effect of the accelerator’s incorporation on its morphology was investigated, and the matching of the samples is shown in    Using XRD, the samples of the cement paste were analyzed when hydrated for 10 min and 1 day. Note that the control group was a system without accelerator, and the result is shown in Using XRD, the samples of the AG system were analyzed when hydrated for 10 min, 1 day, and 28 days. The control group was a system in which accelerator was not incorporated, and the result is shown in Using XRD, the samples of the S system were analyzed when hydrated for 10 min, 1 day, and 28 days. Note that the control group was a system without accelerator, and the result is shown in Samples of the SAG system were analyzed by XRD at 10 min, 1 day, and 28 days, and the results are shown in When the AG system was hydrated for 10 min and 1 day, TGA analysis was performed on different amounts of accelerator samples, and the results are shown in  When both the S system and the SAG system were hydrated for 10 min, 1 day, and 28 days, TGA analysis was performed for different amounts of the accelerator samples, and the results are shown in    The abovementioned studies show that the mechanism of action of accelerator is primarily by the introduction of a large amount of Al  With increase in the amount of accelerator, at 1 day strength of the mortar increased, but the strength slightly decreased at 28 days. Accelerator consumed gypsum from the AG system to form ettringite. If the amount is very large, it will lead to an excessive amount of sulfate ions in the solution, which will hinder the dissolution of gypsum. Thus, the calcium ion concentration was quite low, and it was difficult to form ettringite, which caused the AG system to retard. Accelerator consumed Ca(OH) The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper This work was supported by the