This paper deals with the numerical analysis of the influence of bioethanol addition to diesel and biodiesel fuel on the injection process. The considered fuels are; neat mineral diesel, neat biodiesel from rapeseed oil, and bioethanol–diesel and bioethanol–biodiesel blends up to 15% bioethanol concentration (v/v) with an increment of 5%. The flow through a single assembly to one cylinder is investigated numerically by using a one-dimensional mathematical model. The fuels are experimentally investigated in a fuel injection M system at full load (FL), at several pump speeds (1100, 800 and 500rpm), and at ambient temperature in order to verify the mathematical model. On the basis of the numerical results, the influence of bioethanol addition to diesel and to biodiesel fuel on the injection characteristics, especially on fuelling, injection timing, injection duration, mean injection rate, and maximum injection pressure, is investigated in view of harmful emission reduction. It has been shown that the determined empirical expressions for density, sound velocity and bulk modulus enable satisfactory numerical modeling of the injection process for all tested fuels. The numerically obtained characteristics were generally in good agreement with the experimental ones. The analysis of numerical results shows that for all operating regimens simulated, the addition of bioethanol to biodiesel and to diesel reduces fuelling, injection timing, injection duration, mean injection rate and maximum injection pressure.Fuel injection system simulation is a very useful tool since it can offer a low-cost analysis of the influence of alternative fuels on injection characteristics and consequently on exhaust emissions. In general, very accurate simulation is not an easy task because of the complexity of the physical phenomena involved in the fuel injection process. Several previous investigations have been based on simulating the injection system of a diesel engine with high accuracy; both, for an in-line pump The most common biofuels today are biodiesel (made from vegetable oils) and bioethanol (made from sugar and starch crops). Biodiesel is the most widespread fuel that can substitute diesel fuel totally or partially in a diesel engine. But diesel fuel, blended with low concentrations of bioethanol, can also run a diesel engine; this is also valid for bioethanol–biodiesel, and bioethanol–diesel–biodiesel blends. The combustion and emission formation modeling in an ethanol–diesel feed engine has been studied in One of the main problems of blending two different fuels is that their chemical composition can lead to their separation. It has been demonstrated that bioethanol–biodiesel blends remain stable in a wide range of temperatures An important advantage of biofuels is related to their oxygen content, which is not present in fossil fuels. The oxygen presence in biofuels represents a potential for the reduction of particulate emissions Many investigations are now focused on the influence of biodiesel and their blends with mineral diesel fuel as well as biodiesel–ethanol–diesel fuel blends on engine performance and exhaust emissions. They show a slight decrease in engine power, an increase in thermal efficiency, and an increase in NO In the efforts to achieve the reduction of engine emissions and fuel consumption, while keeping other engine performances at an acceptable level, the injection system plays an important role. Fuel injection characteristics depend on both, the type of injection system and fuel properties In the present study a mathematical model has been used to predict the injection characteristics of an in-line injection system when up to 15% bioethanol blends with diesel and biodiesel are used to run a diesel engine. This model is a modified version of the mathematical model originally developed by Kegl In order to be able to simulate the injection characteristics, the physical and chemical properties and the sound velocity (at various pressures) of each sample were determined experimentally. The details are described in previous studies of the authors: the properties of neat diesel and bioethanol–diesel blends are described in The tested samples were: net mineral diesel fuel (D100), 5% bioethanol/diesel blend (v/v) (E05D95), 10% bioethanol/diesel blend (v/v) (E10D90), 15% bioethanol/diesel fuel blend (v/v) (E15D85), neat biodiesel (B100), 5% bioethanol/biodiesel blend (v/v) (E05B95), 10% bioethanol/biodiesel blend (v/v) (E10B90), and 15% bioethanol/biodiesel blend (v/v) (E15B85). Bioethanol was purchased in Carlo Erba Company (Milano – Italy); it was produced from the fermentation of sugars and its main properties are shown in The neat fuels are conforming to their respective standards; diesel fuel is conforming to the European standard EN 590, neat biodiesel is conforming to EN 14214, and bioethanol satisfies ISO 9001 specifications. Eight samples were tested in a mechanically controlled fuel injection M system in order to verify the numerical model for fuel injection system simulation. This system consists of a plunger-in-barrel assembly, a high-pressure (HP) tube, and an injector. The scheme of the experimentally investigated system, which includes the transducers for pressure, needle lift and injection timing determination, is shown in The injection M system was mounted on Friedmann–Maier type 12H100_h test bed for a conventional fuel injection pump. The test bench and fuel injection system were instrumented in order to measure the basic parameter characteristics of system operation ( A computer-aided measuring system was used to acquire electric signals from the applied sensors. The system incorporates a personal computer (Pentium III 600 LabVIEW software was used to build the computer applications for data acquisition, data analysis, and control algorithms. These applications were used to control the operation of the multifunction card (data acquisition, DC voltage output) and for data logging and postprocessing. The following parameters (variables) were measured: Pressure Pressure Needle lift Fuelling (mm It should be noted that throughout this paper it is assumed that the pump load is not determined by the fuelling but by the rack position. This means that for a single operating regime the use of various fuels will cause the fuelling also to vary slightly. An operating regime is defined by load (rack position) and pump speed. For each regime, the pressure at the first monitoring point of the fuel injection system  In the present study the sound velocity was also experimentally determined. The measurement of this property is based on the principle of pressure wave propagation on a specified length of the high-pressure (HP) tube, which was instrumented by two piezoelectric-based pressure transducers, located at both ends of the tube. The length of the tube was measured before bending it, and the calibration was performed by means of two known fluids: distilled water and ethanol. The reference values were obtained from The sound velocity was measured at various pressures up to 700 bars for all tested neat fuels, biodiesel–diesel fuel blends, bioethanol–diesel blends, and bioethanol–biodiesel blends. The results are graphically shown in Section A mechanical control fuel injection system consists basically of a jerk pump, a high-pressure (HP) tube, and an injector. The whole injection process in our mathematical model is described by the following quantities: the fuelling, the pressures in the barrel chamber, in the delivery valve chamber, and in the injector chamber as well as the lifts and velocities of the delivery valve, and of the needle, the vapor volume in the delivery valve chamber, HP tube and injector chamber The instantaneous fuel properties introduced into the mathematical model are: the sound velocity, bulk modulus of elasticity, and density of single-phase (fuel) and two-phase (fuel–vapor) fluid. The proposed improvements do not affect the complexity of the model significantly, but have a noticeable influence on the calculated response of the injection system. Previous researches have shown the dependency of fuel properties on pressure and temperature and have provided databases with values of these properties, such as density, bulk modulus, speed of sound, viscosity and vapor pressure, at different pressures and temperatures mainly for diesel fuel and biodiesel In the present study, the density computation for various fuels was based on the previously developed equations for diesel fuel A similar expression can be constructed for bioethanol density. If one approximates the data set provided by Watson et al. Because the concentrations of diesel  On the basis of the experimental results, obtained according to the specifications described at the end of Section Eq. Eqs. The bulk modulus of elasticity is calculated as In order to verify the mathematical model, the numerically obtained injection characteristics have been compared to the experimental data. To be able to better compare numerical tests with experiment, the calculated response was used to evaluate the pressures In The numerical simulation is performed for neat diesel D100, neat biodiesel B100, and their blends with bioethanol up to 15% at full load (FL) for various pump speed values (1100, 800 and 500 For each injection characteristics and operating regime simulated, the numerically obtained results have been written in relative form and summarized in-line graphs in order to get a better comparison between each fuel. These results are presented in the following subsections. Throughout this paper, the term The comparison of fuelling ( Fuelling variation is obviously dominated by the variation in bulk modulus. The higher fuelling of B100 is a consequence of the fact that its bulk modulus is the highest among all tested fuels. Since fuelling is directly related to injection timing and injection duration, the next sections discuss how these two injection characteristics are influenced by the fuel properties. Injection timing ( According to According to a previous study The injection duration ( Regarding bioethanol–biodiesel blends, E15B85 yields results being the closest to those of D100. Mean injection rate (MIR) at FL and various pump speeds is shown in In general, the influence of bioethanol addition on MIR is more evident in biodiesel than in diesel fuel. Almost in all cases, bioethanol–diesel fuel blends show lower MIR than D100; meanwhile bioethanol–biodiesel blends show the opposite tendency except at FL-1100 The simulated results of maximum pressure ( Regarding the bioethanol–biodiesel blends, E15B85 gives the best results, because they are the closest to those of neat diesel. The influence of fuel properties of several renewable blends on the most important injection characteristics of a fuel injection M system were investigated by numerical simulation and experimental testing. The numerical simulation was performed at full load and various pump speeds (1100, 800 and 500 The employed empirical expressions for fuel density, sound velocity, and bulk modulus enable satisfactory numerical modeling of injection process for neat biodiesel (B100), neat diesel fuel (D100) and their blends up to 15% with bioethanol, addressed in this paper. The numerically obtained injection characteristics such as fuelling, injection pressure histories and needle lift history were generally in good agreement with the experimental ones. The analysis of numerical results shows that the fuelling, injection timing, injection duration, mean injection rate, and maximum injection pressure decrease by increasing bioethanol concentration both in diesel fuel and in biodiesel. For all operating conditions studied, an increment of bioethanol concentration in biodiesel has a beneficial effect, because bioethanol addition brings biodiesel injection characteristics nearer to those of diesel fuel. Regarding bioethanol–biodiesel blends, it seems that the blend containing 15% bioethanol in biodiesel (E15B85) gives the best results because, in general, its injection characteristics (fuelling, injection timing, injection duration, maximum injection pressure) are the closest to those of diesel fuel. The retarded in injection timing and the decrement of maximum injection pressure caused by bioethanol addition is expected to decrease NO In general, mean injection rate varies almost negligible when bioethanol is added to diesel fuel or to biodiesel, because the lower fuelling is compensated by the shorter injection duration. An exception are bioethanol–biodiesel blends at low pump speed. This research was supported by the European Community’s Sixth Framework Programme in the scope of the Civitas II Mobilis project. Authors are also grateful for the provision of Research Mobility Grants from “Junta de Andalucía, Spain IAC10-II-7555” to E. Torres-Jimenez and from “University of Jaén, Spain” and to R. Dorado.