One substantial benefit of ultrasonics in mineral processing can be the removal of surface coatings of clay and iron oxides from mineral surfaces. This is mainly achieved through the large, but very localised, forces produced by cavitation. The application of sonication to the reduction of iron oxide in a silica sand from 0.025% to less than 0.012% Fe2O3 — the difference between material suitable for clear glass container ware and that suitable for table ware — is presented. The ultimate reduction in iron oxide contamination is dependent on the sonication power, whereas increasing the concentration of Na2CO3 in the suspension, up to 0.2%, shortens the sonication time to approach this limit.Sound travels through a fluid as a three-dimensional pressure wave consisting of alternating cycles of compression and rarefaction. The frequency range of 20–100 kHz represents that most commonly used for power ultrasonics, while the range above 1 MHz is mainly used for diagnostic, non-intrusive purposes (medical scanning, non-destructive examination, particle size determination etc). During the rarefaction cycle, the negative pressure developed by power ultrasonics is sufficient to overcome the intermolecular forces binding the fluid, resulting in the formation of microbubbles. The succeeding compression cycle can cause these bubbles to collapse almost instantaneously, releasing a very large but very localised burst of energy. This process is known as cavitation and is the same as the formation and collapse of bubbles in the proximity of impellers, where cavitation was first observed. Temperatures of 5000 K and pressures of up to 1000 atm have been estimated for the collapse The simplest effect of the energy released by cavitation is to help clean the surfaces of minerals suspended in a slurry. A more complex effect may be to alter the surface chemistry of the mineral, thereby mediating its response to other substances in solution or to physical separation regimes such as high tension roll (electrostatic) separation. Finally, when used before or during flotation processes, cavitation may also change the chemical composition of some of the reagents and of the water itself (through the formation of peroxides). The effect of cavitation on solutions of dissolved chemicals has given rise to the relatively new field of sonochemistry, where highly localised, high temperatures and pressures generate radicals resulting in reactions normally afforded only by imposing extreme conditions. This paper deals with the surface cleaning effect and some of the parameters affecting it. The use of ultrasonic cleaning baths ranging from the small laboratory and jewellers' units of 100–200 W to large industrial cleaning tanks of several kilowatts is well known. The same effect can be utilised to clean the surfaces of particles suspended in a slurry. Ultrasonic power can be applied externally as in a cleaning bath or by the insertion of an ultrasonic horn (a solid probe) into the slurry itself. The probe is particularly useful for introducing higher power (500 W) at very high intensities (0.5–2 kW/cm The aim of this work was to ascertain whether a lower iron, higher value silica sand, suitable for the manufacture of table ware, could be produced from an existing source of container grade silica sand and, therefore, the potential for rendering higher iron deposits suitable for glass making. The equipment used was a Misonix XL-2020 Sonicator (cell disruptor) equipped with a 12.7-mm tip diameter high-intensity horn and operating at 20 kHz. Sonication was carried out in a round bottomed glass tube, approximately 65 mm diameter and 100 mm long. By aligning the sonic horn centrally to the vertical axis of the container The cup horn is able to transfer a greater amount of power into the system due to its larger diameter: 330 W as against 176 W for the 12.7-mm inserted horn. However, the maximum intensity ( The following series of experiments on the reduction of Fe (i) comparison of attritioning versus sonication in water, dilute sulphuric acid, sodium hydroxide and sodium carbonate solutions; (ii) the effect of varying sodium carbonate concentration and sonication power; (iii) the relationship between sonication power and particle size of surface coating removed; and (iv) the effect of sonicating at different solids concentrations. Silica sand typically assaying 0.025–0.30% Fe The results comparing the attritioning and ultrasonic treatments are shown in Tests were carried out on the same sand product over a range of sodium carbonate concentrations (0.05%, 0.10%, 0.20% and 0.30%) and for sonication periods ranging from 15 to 180 s. These results are shown in The effect of sonicating at different concentrations of sodium carbonate and at different intensities was further investigated using a higher iron sample, collected from an intermediate process stream. This material was chosen in order to produce larger changes of iron reduction when varying the treatment of the sample. The tests for varying sodium carbonate concentrations were run at full power for 1 min, using the 12.7-mm probe, but deliberately falling short of the maximum iron reduction level for each set of conditions, so as not to confuse the effect of changing concentration. In The tests for varying ultrasonic power were run for 2 min, since previous work had shown this to be more than enough to reach maximum iron reduction possible at each power input. In addition, some of the lower power tests (55 and 220 W) were run for a period where the total work done would be at least equal to that at full power for 2 min (12 and 3 min, respectively). This was done in order to ascertain whether it is the amount of power or the total work input that determines the level of iron reduction. The cup horn configuration was used for these tests, since using the probe would not have provided sufficient ultrasonic streaming to keep the particles in suspension at the lower power inputs. The results for iron reduction as a function of sonication power — at constant Na The results of the work on varying power input indicated that for any one system, as the power transferred into the slurry increased, so did the ultimate amount of iron removed. One explanation for this could be that it requires more ultrasonic power to separate the smaller diameter coating particles from the sand grain surfaces. Therefore, a series of sonications were carried out on the same sample, at increasing power using the cup horn and stirrer configuration. Each run was of 3 min duration and used the same 100 g of silica sand in 100 ml of 0.3% sodium carbonate solution. The conditions were chosen to ensure that all particles capable of being released at a particular power level had been removed. The slimes generated after each run were collected together with two washings of the sand. The process was then repeated, on the washed sand, for the next higher power input. The separate slimes collected after each sonication were then analysed on a Malvern Instruments Mastersizer-E, to see if any change could be discerned in the particle size distributions (PSDs) resulting from the different power inputs. The data obtained from the Malvern Mastersizer-E was tabulated and the PSD for three levels of intensity plotted on one graph for the purpose of comparison. Results are shown in The effect of sonicating at various concentrations of solids in suspension (pulp density) was investigated in an attempt to determine whether the effect of the energy released on the collapse of the cavitational bubbles was one of surface blasting or whether the energy released simply produced very high-velocity particle-to-particle collisions. If “micro-jet blasting” was the dominant mechanism for surface cleaning, then one would expect relatively little change from sonicating over a fairly wide range of solids concentration. On the other hand, higher solids concentration would favour particle-to-particle collisions and enhance the reduction of iron, if “micro-attritioning” was the major mechanism. Suspensions in water and in 0.1% solutions of sodium carbonate were sonicated varying the pulp density between 12.5% and 50% solids by weight (equivalent to a range of 5.4–28.6% by volume). Results are presented in It can be seen from The results in The main effect of varying alkali concentration in the solution is to increase the rate of iron removal, as shown in In the case of changing sonication power The effect of applying successively increased power to sonicating the same sample of sand, after the removal of the previously released particles, is presented in The silica grains used for this work consisted of the −300+212 μm fraction and were about 100 times larger in diameter than the average particles of the adhering coatings ( This work was carried out in order to throw some light on the predominant mechanism of ultrasonic cleaning. The results in It is interesting to note that, in the case of sonicating with dilute sodium carbonate solution, the ratio of reagent to mineral changed from 1 g/kg at 50% solids to 7 g/kg at 12.5% solids, without making any difference. This indicates that, provided there is a sufficient concentration of reagent in solution, the ratio of reagent to solids in the slurry is not important. On the other hand, increasing the concentration from 0.5 g/l to 1.0 g/l and then to 2 g/l at constant pulp density of 50% solids produced Fe The work on silica sand clearly demonstrates the benefits of sonication, in reducing the iron contamination due to surface coating of the silica grains. The reduction from 0.025% to 0.012% Fe The results obtained in this work are sufficiently encouraging to continue the work at pilot plant level, using commercially available equipment. In a previous paper We wish to acknowledge the help and advice received from the staff of the CSIRO Division of Telecommunications and Industrial Physics and the Department of Chemical Engineering at the University of Newcastle (NSW, Australia). We are also very grateful to Ms. Cindy Kelly, who arranged for the sand analyses to be carried out in the laboratories of ACI Industrial Minerals Division. A.D. Farmer wishes to express his gratitude to the University of Newcastle for the award of a Postgraduate Research Scholarship, which has made this work possible.