The thermal decompositions of both non-activated and mechanically activated alunite ore have been studied by thermogravimetry (TG). The ore was activated mechanically in an attritor for 15min and amorphisation in the structure was studied by X-ray diffraction analysis. It can be verified that alunite decomposes in two steps, which are dehydration and desulphation. It was also established that the mechanical activation affected especially on the temperature range of dehydration reaction. The activation energies of dehydration and desulphation reactions have been calculated from the thermogravimetric data at heating rates of 5, 10, 15 and 20Kmin−1 involving isoconversional methods of Ozawa and Kissenger–Akahira–Sunose (KAS).Alunite is one of the minerals of the jarosite group. It is a potassium alum occurring generally in rhombohedral and hexagonal crystals. Its chemical formula is KAl The structure of alunite contains aluminium sulphate and potassium sulphate, both of them dissolve in water. However, it is not soluble in water, acids and bases unless calcined. Alunite, calcined at temperatures over 500 Alunite ore used in this study was provided from Dostel Aluminum Sulphate Ltd. in Şaphane-Kütahya, Turkey. It was crushed, ground and sieved to −100 Mechanical activation of alunite ore was performed in an attritor (stirring ball mill), which is designed and built in our lab, under following conditions: weight of the sample: 10 X-ray powder diffraction patterns were obtained with a Rigaku Ultima X-ray diffractometer and Cu Kα radiation was used. Thermogravimetric analysis curves were obtained using a Netzsch RT-1500C TGA Instrument in air atmosphere at different heating rates (5, 10, 15 and 20 The X-ray diffraction analysis of non-activated and activated alunite is given in TG and DTG curves of non-activated and mechanically activated alunite ore are given in The TG curve for non-activated alunite ore shows two steps of weight losses. The weight losses are about 8% for dehydration and about 22% as the total weight loss after desulphation. In non-activated alunite dehydration takes place at a certain temperature range. This is an expected property for crystalline alunite. However, activated alunite exhibited dehydration reaction starting from 100 Decomposition of solids is the subject of many kinetic studies. It helps to understand the following decomposition mechanism: A(s) The equations used for At the constant condition of other parameters, the TG curves for dehydration and desulphation of alunite in air atmosphere at various heating rates ( According to the above-mentioned equations, the plots of log The activation energy values of dehydration of non-activated alunite were calculated between 173 and 304 The activation energy values of desulphation were between 220 and 325 Alunite decomposes in two steps: dehydration and desulphation. The dehydration of alunite is important for its further treatments. In non-activated alunite, the dehydration reaction starts after about 500 For the dehydration and desulphation reactions of non-activated and activated alunite, the activation energies calculated by Ozawa and KAS methods are close to each other. In dehydration of alunite, the activation energies decreased to the range of 41–83