We report the preparation of monophasic Zr-substituted magnetite (Zr
                        x
                     Fe3−x
                     O4; 0≤x≤1) nanoparticles by wet chemical route. Such a report is lacking in the literature. Rietveld refinement of the X-ray diffraction (XRD) data suggests continuous decrease in the lattice parameter with increased Zr-substitutions. From TEM analysis, the size of the as synthesized particles was found to be in the range of 5–20nm. The differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) curves for the samples with different amount of substitutions displayed considerable differences in their behaviors. The room temperature specific magnetization at 2T has been found to decrease from 50 (x=0.2) to 41Am2/kg (x=1.0) with increased Zr-substitution. From XRD and magnetic behavior analysis we could suggest that due to occupation of Zr4+ ions at tetrahedral and octahedral voids of Fe3O4, the amount of Fe2+ was more at octahedral site for x≤ 0.4 and at tetrahedral site for x>0.4 respectively. The ferrofluids prepared from these magnetic nanoparticles possessed good heating ability and Specific Absorption Rate (SAR) values suitable for bioapplications.Magnetic materials in general and magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) in particular are well known for their versatile applications which include sensing and therapeutic uses. There are number of reviews and books where the applications of these materials are discussed in detail Although the reports on substituted magnetite as well as by Ti-substituted magnetite i.e. titanomagnetite (tetravalent ion) are well discussed in the literature but detail studies on Zr-substituted magnetite are lacking Thus to study the effect Zr-substitution on the structural and magnetic properties of magnetite, we took up preparation and characterization of Zr-substituted magnetite (Zr X-ray diffraction (XRD) was used for phase identification as well as to study the variation in the lattice parameter with increased zirconium content. Rietveld analysis was done to determine the ionic distribution at interstitial sites. Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) was used for the analysis of particles size and morphology. Mössbauer spectroscopy was employed to investigate the magnetic nature of the as prepared samples at room temperature. The effect of substitution on the magnetic properties like saturation magnetization ( For the synthesis of Zr-substituted magnetite (Zr XRD patterns for all the samples were recorded using a X-ray powder diffractometer (Rigaku) with Cu Mössbauer spectroscopy was used to determine the oxidation states of Fe and their distribution at the two interstitial sites of an inverse spinel structure. Mössbauer spectrometer was operated at ambient temperature at a constant acceleration mode (triangular wave) in transmission geometry. Co MagneTherm (Nanotherics, UK) system was used to study the heating ability of the ferrofluids prepared by these MNPs at different sets of fields and frequencies. The rise in the temperature of the magnetic fluid with time was observed using a copper-constantan thermocouple (T-type, Nanotherics, UK). The temperature vs. time curves were used to determine the specific absorption rate (SAR) value for various fluids. The SAR value could be calculated using the formula given below  The value of It is further observed that the diffraction peaks got shifted toward the higher angle side with the increased substitution of Zr The typical TEM micrographs of the Zr-substituted magnetite for compositions The DSC curves for the as-prepared Zr-substituted magnetite samples with In addition, due to high concentration of Zr-ions, the sample may even have better biocompatibility. Hence, the MNPs with higher Zr-substitution may find more suitability for bioapplications than pure magnetite. As we proceed further, exothermic peak was observed near 380 and 345 Mössbauer spectra of Zr-substituted magnetite samples ( Further, the The magnetization vs. field curves at 300 The observed In the heating ability study of the prepared ferrofluids, the temperature vs. time curves for various samples of the Zr-substituted magnetite at a field of amplitude 25 The SAR values for the Zr-substituted magnetite ferrofluids at two different sets of fields and frequencies are plotted in It has been found that the SAR values for Zr-substituted magnetite ferrofluids was comparable with some of the earlier results We have successfully synthesized nanoparticles of Zr We thank