Six children aged 9–14 years had primary TEN fixation of an isolated femoral diaphyseal fracture. Three of the six patients had major complications, including knee haemarthrosis, loss of position and refracture; two required revision to locked intra-medullary nails without early complication. Two of the six had significant stiffness of the knee requiring manipulation. In the age group 9–14 years, TEN fixation has a significant major complication rate. This needs to be recognised when TEN fixation with other treatment options.Flexible intra-medullary nailing of paediatric femoral shaft fractures has been a routine procedure in Europe for about 20 years with several large series reported. The procedure has justifiably become a popular technique for managing paediatric fractures. With increasing experience the indications for elastic nail fixation have expanded with series reporting its use in patients from the age of 3 to 18 years. Over a period of 2 years [2001–2003], a consecutive series of six children between 9 and 14 years admitted with femoral shaft fractures to Dunedin Hospital were treated by intra-medullary fixation using flexible nails [titanium elastic nail, TEN, Synthes]. In all six cases, two retrograde TENs (4 The patients were followed with clinical and radiological evaluation at 2 and 6 weeks, 3 and 6 months or until bony union. One patient had moved overseas and was not able to be traced. Inpatient medical records, outpatient clinic notes, and radiographs were reviewed for all patients. Details of age, weight, mechanism of injury, fracture type, TEN size implanted, hospital stay, time to union, knee range of motion, pain at the nail insertion site and complications were recorded ( The mean age at injury was 12 years (range: 9–14 years). There were four boys and two girls. All fractures were sustained in a high-energy impact. There was one open fracture [type 1]. The most common pattern was midshaft (four cases) and two were proximal. The average operative time was 70 Three patients had major complications requiring re-operation. Case 4: CH, a 9-year-old girl was knocked down by a car and sustained a transverse fracture at the midshaft of right femur. At 3 months, although the fracture healed well with 5 degrees of varus, she had discomfort at the nail site. She was booked electively for removal of nail. A week before her scheduled surgery, she was admitted acutely with a tense swelling in the right knee which was very painful. At admission her blood report and aspirate did not indicate infection. Radiologically, there was backing-out of the medial nail which has been placed more anteriorly than medial. She underwent immediate removal of the nail and arthroscopic wash out of the knee, with no further sequence. Case 5: JE, a 13-year-old boy involved in a motorbike accident presented with a type I open fracture of his femur. The fracture was midshaft with medial comminution. After initial wound debridement, the fracture was stabilised with two 3.5 Case 6: AH, a 14-year-old boy had significant stiffness and pain around the knee joint 5 months after titanium nail fixation with only 30 degrees of knee flexion. He was fully weight bearing and the fracture appeared to be united radiologically. The nails were removed but two weeks later he refractured following a simple fall on a level ground [ In a multicentre study of early results from the USA, Flynn et al. With the conventional retrograde insertion technique of a medial and lateral wire there is an incidence of nail tip pain, bursitis and skin ulceration which ranges from 1 to 40% ( We found knee stiffness to be a major problem in the postoperative and rehabilitation phase. Ligier et al. Although knee flexion may be regained eventually we believe the incidence of early knee stiffness causes significant problems with rehabilitation. It has been suggested that TEN fixation should be used with caution in the older, heavier patient especially if there is comminution at the fracture site. Non-union or delayed union is uncommon in children's femoral fractures. The delayed union in patient 3 in our series was probably due to varus angulation but this has had no long term sequelae. The refracture in patient 6 after a minor fall also suggests delayed union. Many of the technical complications reported have been ascribed to technical error or the learning curve. With the small numbers that most centres see this is likely to remain a problem. While some of the errors can be minimised by careful attention to detail there remain problems inherent in the technique. We believe that elastic nails are an important and useful addition to pediatric fracture management. They should be used with caution in the older and heavier patient in whom the recently released trochanteric intra-medullary nails may be a better option.