The generation of grinding media wear during wet stirred media milling of organic particles was studied in dependence of product formulation parameters. It was shown that targeted product formulation leads to the reduction of ceramic grinding media wear for a certain product quality. Solids concentration and agglomerate size of product particles were identified as key parameters. Both influence the effective stress intensity of grinding media which has a significant impact on the generation of grinding media wear. Moreover, the reduction of grinding media wear can be attributed to the damping properties of comparatively soft organic particles. Their potential to protect ceramic grinding media from abrasion can be increased by tailoring formulation properties. Therefore, especially the increase of solids concentration was identified as most practical formulation variable which affects also grinding efficiency and production capacity.solids mass concentration solids volume concentration diameter [m] mass specific energy input [kJ kg grinding chamber volume specific energy input [J cm separation distance [m] ionic strength [mol L mass [kg] number of stressed product particles [–] power consumption [W] no load power consumption [W] wear rate [k J stress energy [J] stress intensity [N m time [s] temperature [K] volume [m active volume between two grinding media [m interaction energy [J] stirrer tip speed [m s relative grinding media wear [–] particle size [m] viscosity [Pa s] Boltzmann constant [J K energy transfer coefficient [–] density [kg m attractive effective grinding chamber grinding media grinding product repulsive steric total water Stirred media milling is applied for mechanical production of submicron particles. Especially, the production of fine ground organic particles increased during the last years. Applications can be found in many fields of industry, such as pharma, food, pigment and ink, electronics, agrochemicals or chemicals. Most of these applications require high standards of purity, e.g. the brilliance of printing inks can be affected by impurities or the approval of a pharmaceutical preparation is generally strictly regulated to a limited contamination. Regarding the process of stirred media milling it is not possible to avoid contamination from grinding media wear. There are only a few lab-scale developments based on different mill principles, e.g. planetary ball mills, which use special grinding media made from water or dry ice ( The wear mechanism inside stirred media mills can be classified according the tribological system as three body abrasive wear where a product particle is stressed between two surfaces, i.e. two approaching grinding media ( There were also studies on the generation of grinding media wear resulting from fine grinding of organic particles. Different studies showed that the product contamination from grinding media can be reduced by the optimization of process parameters ( Organic particles do not have abrasive properties, it can be assumed that they provide a potential to protect grinding media from abrasion. A systematic study with varying formulation properties was performed in order to evaluate the potential of grinding media wear reduction by organic product particles. Especially, the variation of solids concentration and targeted particle stabilization were investigated. The polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon Anthraquinone (Sigma Aldrich, Germany) was used as feed material. The crystalline particles had an initial median particle size x Additives were required to ensure colloidal stability of fine ground Anthraquinone in water. Particles were stabilized by an electrosteric barrier against agglomeration. The barrier results from a steric layer which is provided by adsorption of the nonionic polymer Kollidon KVA 64 and an additional electrostatic charge. The electrostatic force can be applied by two different mechanisms: On the one hand the ionic surfactant SDS can be added which adsorbs together with the polymer onto the particle surface ( Experiments were conducted with a 600 mL lab scale stirred media mill (PML 2, Buehler, Switzerland). The mill was equipped with a horizontally operated Centex® disc stirrer. Both, chamber lining and stirrer were made of wear resistant silicon doted silicon carbide. The mill was operated in recirculation mode at a constant volume flow of 30 L h Particle size analysis of ground suspensions was performed in dependence on the product fineness. Particle size distributions in the micron range (>1 µm) were measured by laser diffraction and smaller size distributions in the submicron range (<1 µm) were analyzed by dynamic light scattering. Laser diffraction measurements were carried out with a Helos diffractometer (Sympatec, Germany). Suspensions were diluted with Anthraquinone saturated water according to the detector signal of the measurement device. Submicron particle size distributions were analyzed by using a Nanophox dynamic light scattering system (Sympatec, Germany). Sample preparation was similar, the suspensions were also diluted with Anthraquinone saturated water according to the detector signal. Collisions between grinding media are assumed to represent the main source of wear generation at grinding operations with suspensions containing organic particles. Wear is mainly generated by collisions of the media itself and to some extent by collisions with mill internals. A comparison of the surface areas demonstrates the dimensions which determine the probability of contact events. The grinding media filling of 515 µm beads has a total surface area of 4.19 m Significant information on suspension properties were generated by rheological characterization. The rotational viscometer Bohlin Gemini 2 (Malvern Instruments, UK) was used, measurements were performed with a cylindrical gap cell at 20 °C. A shear rate controlled test was performed. The shear rate was varied in a logarithmic sequence from 10 to 100 s Grinding experiments with targeted particle stabilization were performed in order to control agglomerate sizes, this was realized by pH-adjustment in the presence of KVA 64. The colloidal stability can be described by calculating the total interaction energy, The total interaction energy is derived from the sum of interactions given in Eq.  These theoretical considerations were verified by grinding experiments at different pH with suspensions containing a solids concentration of 0.05 Anthraquinone. It has to be noted that the mill power draws of the different experiments were almost constant, this can be attributed to the flow behavior of the suspensions. Significant differences between stabilized and non-stabilized suspensions can be identified. Suspensions at pH 9 and 11 showed almost newtonian flow behavior. In contrast, the agglomerated suspensions at pH 5 and 7 showed distinct shear thinning characteristics, viscosities at 100 s The main objective of the present study focuses on the investigation of grinding media wear generation. In case of fine grinding organic particles it is assumed that the feed material has potential to protect grinding media from abrasion ( Kwade derived the stress energy of grinding media from the kinetic energy of two approaching beads ( Therewith, the resulting stress intensity can be expressed in proportion to the volume of stressed product particles according to Eq. Based on the scheme given in In addition to the degree of agglomeration, other suspension properties have to be considered. Especially, the viscosity has a strong impact on the kinetic energy of colliding grinding media and the frequency of grinding media collisions. In particular at high suspension viscosities the energy dissipation due to fluid displacement leads to a significant decrease of the stress energy of grinding media. Former investigations of Knieke et al. have shown the existence of a critical viscosity which represents a limiting value for comminution. Their definition is based on the Stokes number of grinding media as a measure for the energy dissipation due to fluid displacement. It is assumed that no further grinding is possible when high suspension viscosities prevent the contact of grinding media surfaces ( The energy dissipation due to fluid displacement inside a given mill can be described by a so–called energy transfer coefficient Finally, the so-called effective stress intensity can be calculated according to Eq. The influence of the effective stress intensity on the generation of grinding media wear is reflected in It has to be recognized that the stress energy of grinding media was kept constant, the variation of effective stress intensities was a result of changing agglomerate sizes, which obviously have an impact on the wear rate. It has to be noted that the stress intensities were calculated based on median values from at-line particle size analysis. Inside the grinding chamber there are much higher dispersion forces affecting the agglomerate sizes. Hence, the measured values enable only a rough estimation of the stress intensity and deviations can be mainly attributed to this approximation. Nevertheless, this proves that agglomerates from organic particles have the capability to reduce wear effects. On the one hand it can be assumed that the effective stress intensity was closer to the optimum one, which results in a reduction of grinding media wear generation ( According to the definition of the effective stress intensity it can be assumed that also the grinding efficiency and the extent of wear are influenced by the variation of the solids concentration. Therefore, grinding experiments with varying solids concentrations of Anthraquinone in the range of 0.05–0.6 were performed in order to evaluate the potential of this formulation principle. According to the material density of Anthraquinone this corresponds to a volumetric concentration range,  In Overall, it can be seen that the increase of solids concentration provides a high potential to increase the energy efficiency of grinding. It can be assumed, that as well the generation of grinding media wear is being affected   Other important measures related to the vairation of the solids concentration are the production capacity and the product contamination. The production capacity can be calculated by rearranging Eq. For many applications the product contamination which is affected by the solids concentration gives a relevant measure to rate the product quality. The wear resulting from ceramic grinding media abrasion during stirred media milling can be lowered by targeted product formulation of suspensions containing organic particles. It was shown that product particles have the ability to protect the grinding media from abrasion. Especially, the increase of solids concentration represents a suitable strategy to reduce grinding media wear and increase productivity. The effect can be mainly ascribed to a change of the effective stress intensity because more particles are captured and stressed between colliding grinding media. More energy is transferred to the comparatively soft product particles, this leads to the reduction of wear. The increase of solids concentration is a suitable formulation principle, as long as the suspension viscosity does not limit the grinding process. Hence, there is an optimum solids concentration corresponding to the minimum of grinding media wear for a given target fineness. Additionally, it was shown that organic particles can be ground in the agglomerated state and dispersed by subsequent stabilizer addition. This strategy was proved to result in a lower relative grinding media wear because stressing of agglomerates leads to lower effective stress intensities. The question arises if the increase of solids concentration and the strategy of targeted stabilization can be combined. Experiments have shown that milling of non-stabilized suspensions at elevated solids concentrations lead to a significant increase in viscosity which increases the risk of blocking the mill or the circulation system. Thus, the applicability of this strategy, i.e. the stabilization of the suspension at the end of the milling process, is limited to low solids concentrations. An increase of the solids concentration without proper stabilization is restricted due to a critical viscosity. Ideally, starting with the optimum solids concentration without stabilizer the viscosity has to be controlled by adding stabilizer during almost the entire milling process. However, since such a strategy is difficult and expensive to realize, it can be concluded from a practical point of view, that the increase of solids concentration to an optimum value with initial stabilization is the most appropriate formulation principle to reduce grinding media wear. In summary, it was shown that changes of the product formulation provide a high potential to reduce ceramic grinding media wear. Most practical relevance is given by the increase of solids concentration which provides a high potential to increase the grinding efficiency. The specific energy input can be significantly reduced by optimizing the solids concentration, this has a strong impact on the production capacity and the resulting product contamination. Finally, the production capacity can be maximized by increasing the solids concentration to a certain value, which corresponds almost to the minimum product contamination. The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest. The