A novel extraction process to recover lithium ions from simulated salt lake brines with high Mg/Li ratio was developed. Tributyl phosphate (TBP), FeCl3 and diethyl succinate were used as extractant, co-extraction agent and diluent, respectively. Effects of extraction conditions containing the volume concentration of TBP, Fe/Li molar ratio and O/A phase ratio on extraction performances were studied. The highest one-stage extraction efficiency of lithium ions and separation factor were about 65% and 350, respectively. In addition, the third phase did not appear over all the volume concentrations of TBP. HCl + MgCl2 and HCl + NaCl were used as washing and stripping agents, respectively. Effects of washing and stripping conditions on washing and stripping performances were investigated too. Mg(OH)2 and MgCO3 were used as regeneration agents to regenerate the organic phase. The extraction efficiency of lithium ions remained at about 53% during reusing the organic phase ten times, demonstrating that the proposed extraction system had good stability and reusability.Lithium is a silver-white metal and has a very high electrochemical potential (3.045 V). Lithium is widely used in many industrial fields, such as glass, ceramics, grease and lithium-ion battery ( Most of the salt lake brines in China have the characteristic of high Mg/Li ratio ( In our previous studies ( It can be seen that FeCl In addition, HCl solution is usually used as typical washing and stripping agent and NaOH solution is commonly used as the regeneration agent. However, HCl solution with high concentration is harmful to both the equipment and the health of human body. Moreover, both the loss of Fe In this work, TBP and FeCl LiCl (purity >99%), NaCl (purity >99%), MgCl The atomic absorption spectrometer (AA-6880, Shimadzu, Japan) was used to determine the concentration of metal ions. The aqueous samples obtained before and after extraction were first diluted by ultrapure water and then measured by using the atomic absorption spectrometer. The concentration of Li All experiments were carried out at ambient temperature and the pH of the brine was not adjusted additionally. The simulated salt lake brine consisted of 0.35 g·L The extraction efficiency ( The washing or stripping efficiency ( The whole process included extraction, washing, stripping and regeneration processes. The flow chart of the whole process is shown in The organic phase for extracting lithium ions from salt lake brine by liquid-liquid extraction is usually composed of extractant, diluent and co-extraction agent. FeCl During the extraction process, the volume ratio of TBP to diethyl succinate greatly influences the extraction efficiency. Effects of volume concentration of TBP on extraction performances are shown in The solvent extraction of Li During the extraction process, the volume ratio of the organic phase to the aqueous phase also has a significant influence on the extraction performance. The volume ratio of these two phases is usually expressed as After extraction process, the organic phase contained a large amount of Li According to the extraction mechanism reported in our previous studies ( In the washing process, increasing the O/A phase ratio is an efficient way to improve washing efficiency and prevent the transfer of Fe In order to further decrease the washing efficiency of Li In order to recover the extracted Li The effect of O/A phase ratio on the stripping efficiencies of Li In order to decrease the concentration of HCl solution, a multi-stage cross-current stripping experiment was carried out. The total Cl Since the binding energy of TBP to H In the regeneration process, 3.6 mol/L MgCl The reusability of the organic phase is a key factor in determining whether the extraction system is stable. Therefore, when Mg(OH) In this work, a new extraction system consisting of TBP as extractant, FeCl The authors declare no conflict of interest. This work was supported by the