Five commercial hardfacing high chromium cast iron alloys were deposited by flux cored arc-welding method. The solid particle erosion studies were carried out using air blast type erosion test rig with 125–150μm cement clinker, 125–150μm blast furnace sinter, 100–150μm silica sand and 125–150μm alumina particles at a velocity of 50ms−1 and at impingement angles of 15–90°. The observed erosion rates were rationalised in terms of relative hardness of erodent particles and ability of erodent particle to cause gross fracture of the carbides. The dependence of erosion rate on impingement angle was found to be quite weak for hardfacing high chromium cast iron alloys. However, significant differences were observed in the ranking of the alloys when eroded with different erodent particles. The presence of large volume fraction of carbides proved to be beneficial to the erosion resistance when the erodent particle were softer than the carbides. With silica sand particles at normal impact and with alumina particles large volume fraction of carbides proved detrimental to the erosion resistance. The operating erosion mechanisms involved small-scale chipping, edge effect, indentation and fracture and fatigue.The strategy of dispersing a ceramic phase into a more ductile matrix to improve the wear resistance has been successfully employed in abrasion, e.g. in WC–Co alloys and high chromium cast irons. High chromium cast irons exhibit 20–25 times more abrasion resistance than mild steels under two body and three body abrasive wear situations, when the abrasive particles are softer than the carbide particles Kosel and Ahmed High chromium ‘white irons’ are widely used in weld deposited form, for protection of engineering components against abrasion and erosion in cement plants, iron and steel making industries and mining industries. The present work was undertaken to evaluate the erosion resistance of weld hardfacing high chromium iron alloys with different erodent particles. Erosion tests were performed on five different grades of high chromium iron weld hardfacing alloys, which were deposited by flux cored arc welding technique on a mild steel base plate, typically 10 The specimens measuring 15×15 The bulk hardness was measured at a load of 30 In the present investigation, erodent particles used were cement clinker, blast furnace sinter, silica sand and alumina. The erodent particles were dry sieved using sieve shaker to obtain the required fractions. The shape and size of the erodent particles was examined under scanning electron microscope. The erosion experiments were performed using air blast type erosion test rig. The specimens for erosion testing were rectangular blocks measuring 20 The erosion experiments were performed using cement clinker, blast furnace sinter, silica sand and alumina particles, at impingement angles of 15, 30, 60 and 90° and at a velocity of 50 Short duration erosion tests were also performed on polished and etched specimens of weld hardfacing high chromium cast iron alloys, for observation of isolated individual impact events. The polished and etched specimens of weld hardfacing alloys were exposed to low doses of erodent particles (typically weighing 0.5–1   The erosion rate vs. impingement angle curve for weld deposited steel, S1, showed ductile signature; peak in erosion occurred at 30° impingement angle whereas hardfacing high chromium cast iron alloys exhibited maximum in erosion rate at impingement angles of 60–90°. In general, erosion rate of hardfacing cast iron alloys showed a weak dependence on impingement angle, the highest and lowest difference was observed with silica and particles at normal impact and cement clinker particles, respectively. With 125–150 With 100–150  The results of the present investigation suggest that The differential hardness of erodents with respect to carbides and matrix could very well explain the observed erosion rates of hardfacing alloys. For an erodent particle to be able to indent a target plastically its hardness should be about 1.2 times greater than that of the target In comparison with cement clinker and blast furnace particles, which have hardness less than that of the carbides, silica sand particles have hardness intermediate between that of primary carbides and the matrix in the high chromium iron hardfacing alloys. The hardness of alumina particles is greater than that of the matrix as well as that of the carbides in high chromium iron weld hardfacing alloys. With alumina particles, primary carbides were no longer effective in protecting the matrix against erodent particle attack since alumina particles were able to plastically indent the carbides. The residual stresses associated with plastic indentation lead to the development of lateral vent cracks approximately parallel to the surface which are largely responsible for material removal The erosion rates of weld hardfacing cast irons were compared with that of weld deposited low alloy steel. The relative erosion resistance of weld hardfacing cast iron alloys was observed to be 10–14 times better as compared to that of alloy S1 with cement clinker particles. With blast furnace sinter particles at normal impact angle, the relative erosion resistance of weld hardfacing cast iron alloys was 2–3 times better as compared to alloy S1, which was less by a factor of three when compared to that with cement clinker particles. With silica sand particles weld hardfacing alloys exhibited erosion resistance which was not more than a factor of two as compared with alloy S1 at 30° impact angle, whereas the erosion rates of hardfacing cast iron alloys were more than two times as compared to that of alloy S1 when eroded with alumina particles. Aptekar and Kosel In the present work the erosion experiments were performed at a impact velocity of 50  The dependence of erosion rate on impingement angle was in general weak for weld hardfacing high chromium cast iron alloys. The peak in erosion rate occurred at impingement angle of 60–90° depending upon the alloy and the erodent particle hardness. The erosion rate of weld hardfacing high chromium cast iron alloys can be rationalised in terms of relative hardness of the erodent particles under given erosion conditions. Significant differences were seen in ranking of weld hardfacing alloys depending upon erodent particle properties and the impingement angle. Large volume fraction of carbides proved beneficial to the erosion resistance with softer erodent particles. With silica sand particles at normal impact and with alumina particles, large volume fraction of carbides were detrimental to the erosion resistance. The material removal mechanisms from the carbides were strongly influenced by the erodent particle hardness and the impingement angle. With softer erodent particles material removal mechanism involved edge chipping whereas with harder erodent particles indentation and gross fracture was predominant erosion mechanism in addition to the edge effect. The authors are grateful to Director, VNIT (formerly VRCE) for providing necessary facilities in carrying out this investigation. The authors are also thankful to M/s Diffusion Engineers Pvt Limited, Nagpur for supplying the samples for present investigation. The authors are grateful to Mr Rajshekar Rao, JNARDDC Nagpur for assistance during SEM work.