The incidence of acetabular fractures in elderly patients is increasing. Poor bone quality and concomitant diseases are the main features of these patients. Fracture patterns are marked by a high degree of variability in terms of patient and fracture characteristics. Preoperative planning with plain radiographs and computed tomography, including 3-dimensional reconstructions, is recommended. Treatment remains challenging because of precarious general health, severe osteopenia, comminution, and associated femoral head damage. Treatment options available include closed management, open reduction with internal fixation, percutaneous fixation in situ, and acute or staged total hip arthroplasty (THA) whether alone or combined with osteosynthesis. In the case of significant destruction of the articular cartilage, primary THA may provide the best solution. Whichever surgical method is chosen, the objective is rapid mobilisation of the patient on a walker or crutches. Late local complications that may occur after nonoperative or operative treatment include posttraumatic arthritis, nonunion, malunion, wound infection, dislocation, intrusive hardware, nerve palsy, and heterotopic bone formation. In this article an overview of the current trends in the management of acetabulum fractures in the elderly is presented. Elderly patients may either have good general health, be real senile or have poor general health. In the first group, non-displaced fractures may be treated conservatively: usually only the anterior wall is affected without anterior column displacement; easily reducible fractures (without very aggressive surgery) can be treated with open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF), in younger patients of this age group a more aggressive approach could be used provided displacement creates either joint instability or non-union risk; non-easily reducible fractures can be included within the former indication or treated with either acute ORIF plus total joint replacement (THR) or delayed THR. Alternatively, elderly patients in good general health can undergo ORIF alone (advantage and disadvantages are discussed in the text). Real senile patients need prompt diagnosis and treatment: acute ORIF plus THR should be the choice. Patients in poor general health also need prompt mobilisation by THR treatment. Deterioration may be so deep that surgery could be unadvisable whatsoever. Whenever the posterior column is displaced, ORIF (with or without THR) is indicated unless general health suggests otherwise. Anterior wall fractures do not need osteosynthesis as instability is not predominant, and can be treated conservatively or with THR; anterior column fracture can be treated with intraacetabular osteosynthesis; posterior column fractures always need osteosynthesis, with or without THR; and the combination of anterior plus posterior column fracture can also be treated with osteosynthesis and THR. The incidence of acetabular fractures in elderly patients is increasing, Prompt diagnosis and accurate treatment is desirable for these injuries in the elderly as unnecessary delays and surgical failures with subsequent salvage surgery can lead to a higher morbidity. Since the general description in the 1970s of central acetabular fractures, It has been thought that anterior column combined with posterior hemitransverse fracture represents the typical acetabular fracture in the elderly. The diverse clinical presentation in the elderly includes polytrauma, minor trauma, and insufficiency fractures, usually the result of a casual fall. Early identification and documentation of any pre-existing co-morbidities are essential for determining the optimal therapeutic protocol. Results of treatment should ideally be evaluated according to diagnosis stratified by age, gender, ASA Treatment of acetabular fractures remains challenging Conservative treatment is the choice whenever the general health situation contraindicates surgery. According to the existing evidence, acetabular fractures involving the weight-bearing dome, if reduced by closed means, can be maintained by heavy lateral and longitudinal traction resulting in acceptable clinico-radiological outcome. Choosing the right surgical approach is a very important issue. Anterior wall fractures can be treated without fixation by compacting the morsellised femoral head onto the articular face of the anterior wall followed by a cemented acetabular cup, resembling a classic technique for hip replacement revision Fractures involving the posterior column can be associated with joint instability, and thus osteosynthesis of the posterior column is crucial. In addition, in case of a subsequent THR it is even more pertinent to consider stabilisation, since an instable posterior column will provoke early acetabular cup failure. Isolated posterior column or associated transverse-posterior wall acetabular fractures can be directly managed by a single Kocher–Langenbeck posterior approach. Trochanteric slide osteotomy can enhance the exposure of nearly the whole acetabulum and the femoral head. Osteotomies heal within 12 weeks, although weaker strength of the abductor muscles, and heterotopic ossification is quite common afterwards. This technique provides a good exposure of the acetabular dome without the risk of developing such complications as malunion, non-union, etc., known to occur with standard oblique osteotomy  Whenever the posterior column is fractured, plating it will usually provide continuity of the acetabular dome, the quadrilateral plate, and ischium, which will facilitate stability for either osteosynthesis or acetabular implantation. The use of locking plates (LP) is becoming widespread in any anatomical location. Recent data for acetabular and pelvic fractures suggest that LP constructs are as strong as the conventional construct of plate plus interfragmentary lag screw for fixing transverse acetabular fractures, therefore LP might improve management of acetabular fractures by eliminating the need for placement of the lag screw. However, recent studies have shown that incorrect surgical technique of LP, in general, is responsible for 40% of complications, Several authors have reported on the treatment of acetabular fractures in the elderly with cerclage wiring and primary total hip arthroplasty. Limited open reduction and percutaneous screw fixation of displaced fractures of the acetabulum has been reported. In some series of ORIF in the general population, 10% of patients require re-intervention with THR. The same results were obtained after percutaneous reduction and fixation. However, survivorship analysis demonstrated a cumulative survival of 65% at 11.9 years of follow up with no conversions to arthroplasty beyond 4.7 years postoperatively. No statistically significant association was found between conversion to arthroplasty and age, gender, closed versus limited open reduction, and simple versus complex fracture pattern. Percutaneous fixation was apparently a viable treatment option for patients aged 60 years or over. Rates of conversion to total hip arthroplasty are comparable to open treatment methods and if conversion is required, soft tissues are preserved for future surgery. Results of these reconverted THR are much worse than those obtained by primary THR. In a study comparing primary THR and THR after failed ORIF it was found that there was a significant difference in the age of the patient population of each group, with a predominance for older patients in the early reconstruction group. Secondly, fewer revisions were performed when a primary THR was carried out (8%), compared to 22% when a former osteosynthesis was performed. The same is true for heterotopic ossification. Apart from what has been said above, in elderly patients ORIF may not be the best option because of osteoporotic bone and the necessary period of bed rest. Primary THR for displaced acetabular fractures was initiated by Westerborn in 1954, Removal of the femoral head allows for excellent exposure of the acetabulum, making possible primary stabilisation of most fractures before THR without the need for extensile or intrapelvic approaches. Surgical techniques have been used successfully to provide primary stability of the acetabular columns by ORIF before using an acetabular cup to replace the articular surface. Multi-holed acetabular shells can be used both as an internal fixation device, by placing screws into the columns enhancing the stability of the repair, It is obvious that treatment by THR can be challenging since primary stability of the acetabular implant can be threatened by the instability of bone fragments. As primary stability for joint replacement is indeed of paramount importance, Primary THA has many advantages. Full weight bearing is achieved rapidly, decubitus complications are avoided, and functional outcome is good with a high rate of union. Nevertheless, despite differences between surgical procedures reported in the literature, ectopic bone formation is common and the overall rate of dislocation reaches 7% considering all reported series. The current choice of many authors for THR is uncemented implants. However in individuals with severe osteoporosis where a typical fracture pattern results in intrapelvic dislocation of the femoral head with a blowout fracture of the anterior column and medial wall, reinforcement rings with cemented acetabular fixation have also been used. Cemented implants make sense in older patients and, of course, only whenever good reconstruction after ORIF as indicated above, and grafting has been achieved ( Since many of these older patients usually have severe comorbidities, general treatment has to be conducted by a very experienced physician, making essential the pre- and postoperative preparation. Average blood loss for percutaneous reduction and fixation of acetabular fractures in patients aged 60 years and over is less than 100 cc; percutaneous reduction and fixation provoke no infection, In order to minimise the needs of blood transfusion, cell saver techniques have been introduced in the treatment of acetabular fractures. Nonetheless, in statistical subanalyses based on fracture pattern, injury severity score, body mass index, days to surgery, and estimated blood loss, no differences have been observed in intraoperative and postoperative transfusion rates and volumes when using cell saver techniques, but as far as cost is concerned, total blood-related charges are higher. Rehabilitation is very important after surgery. After either osteosynthesis or THR, in order to maximise the outcome of these patients, particular attention must be paid to postoperative muscle strengthening protocols. Since significant reduction in level of activity, frequency of participation in sport, and, in general, some loss of life quality is to be expected even in young patients after acetabular fractures, Late local complications that may occur after non-operative treatment include posttraumatic arthritis, nonunion, dislocation, and heterotopic bone formation. Bone defects or non-unions with displacement can be treated with the use of bone grafting or hardware. A cup inserted with multiple screws, a mesh, a suitable ring, or another fixation device can be considered as viable options for these difficult problems. Overall, it should be taken into account that the late outcome of THA after acetabular fracture, including its potential complications, is inferior to that of arthroplasty performed because of degenerative arthritis. Although acute ORIF of an acetabular fracture had previously been hypothesised to be an effective way to improve the anticipated late outcome of THA by eliminating a large fracture gap or preventing a potential nonunion, an initial open reduction may affect the outcome of a subsequent THA by compromising the blood supply of the acetabulum and by initiating the formation of scar tissue, heterotopic bone, and an occult or frank infection. In the general population with multiple injuries early fixation of unstable pelvis and acetabular fractures reduces morbidity and length of stay in the intensive care unit, which may decrease the overall treatment costs. However, in the elderly patients, further study to ascertain the effects of associated systemic injuries and the utility of physiological and laboratory parameters may delineate recommendations for optimal surgical timing in specific patient groups. Methodology is an important parameter for reaching conclusions from literature on fractures of the acetabulum in the elderly. To our knowledge, no stratification of variables has been carried out in papers on this topic. When elderly patients are referred to, ages range from 55 to 93 years. Large series of patients in well-designed prospective studies should include variables such as age, gender, Charlson Even so, definite conclusions might not be easy to reach. Thus one can argue that personal opinions based on high-volume surgery may be of great value. We believe that placing the patient in the lateral position (knee flexed allowing relaxation of the sciatic nerve), facilitates easy access to the posterior wall and column, and also to the anterior wall of the acetabulum ( It is envisaged that in the near future, as acetabular fractures in elderly patients are expected to increase in number, our knowledge on this important clinical subject will also become more evidence-based for each age group, and each fracture pattern. None of the authors have a conflict of interest The authors have followed the principles adopted by the 18th World Medical Assembly, Helsinki, Finland, June 1964, amended by the 29th World Medical Assembly, Tokyo, Japan, October 1975, the 35th World Medical Assembly, Venice, Italy, October 1983, and the 41st World Medical Assembly, Hong Kong, September 1989. The study has been approved by our Hospital ethical committees (Clinical Trials, and Ethics committees). We obtained written informed consent from all patients for diagnostic tests and surgical operations, but also from those patients of whom scans or photos appear in this paper.