A precipitation-hardening copper based alloy (Cu–0.6wt.% Cr) was selected and the ultra-fine grain (UFG) microstructure was obtained by equal channel angular pressing (ECAP). The alloys tensile behaviors and fatigue properties were investigated experimentally, the results indicated that the Cu–Cr alloy processed by ECAP possessed high strength and sufficient ductility and the 12-passes ECAPed sample with UFG under strain controlled fatigue exhibited cyclic softening and lower fatigue limit compared to the unECAPed one. Moreover, the shear bands on the surface of cycled samples were also studied by scanning electron microscopy, the results showed that the oriented distribution of defects along the shear plane in the last ECAP processing was one of the major mechanisms of SBs formation.Equal channel angular pressing (ECAP) has been recognized as a promising method for fabrication of large bulk materials with ultra-fine grain (UFG) sizes through severe plastic deformation The precipitation hardened alloys were found to be most responsive to ECAP in terms of structure refinement, strength enhancement, fatigue life and ductility improvement Cu–Cr alloy is a promising precipitation-hardening material and used widely in the field of trolley wire, electrode and connectors of various microelectronic devices due to its high strength, high electrical, thermal conductivity and excellent fatigue resistance Billets of square 14.5 The samples for testing were shaped by spark erosion to prepare a specimen with the gauge length of 10  The tensile stress–strain curves of the alloy samples prepared by the ECAP with different numbers of passes are shown in Moreover, it can be found an interesting phenomenon about the evolution of elongation-to-failure: in contrast to the case of CG alloy, the elongation-to-failure after one pass of ECAP first decreases from 22% to 11.7% greatly, but it subsequently increases with the increasing number of passes. The elongation-to-failure of the alloy sample after finishing 12 passes of ECAP, as denoted with the curve of No. 5 in The results of LCF are important for better understanding the mechanisms of plastic deformation in general and of fatigue in particular. The empirical relationship between the plastic strain and the fatigue lifetime can be described as called Coffin–Manson relationship, the plastic deformation is expressed as: The cyclic stress response curves, which were determined by monitoring the stress response during total-strain-controlled fatigue, provide useful information pertaining to the mechanical stability of a material. As shown in  As we know, the dense network of dislocations is one of the most important strengthening mechanisms for the UFG materials processed by ECAP Since the starting point of fatigue failure usually occurs at the metal surface, clarifying the mechanism of surface damage formation is important to understand the fatigue characteristics of UFG metals. To investigate the surface damage, the development of shear bands (SBs) on the surface of the cycled UFG Cu–Cr alloy was observed under all strain amplitudes. The density of SBs was higher as strain amplitude increased. As shown in As a matter of fact, residual macrostresses may have a profound effect on fatigue crack. Since fatigue cracks normally initiate at the surface, surface residual stresses are crucial to crack initiation and early stages of crack propagation. Apparently ECAP gives rise to high residual stresses across the samples. However, their magnitude and distribution still need to be studied in the other properties of interest. Ultrafine grained Cu–Cr produced by ECAP was tested for investigating mechanical properties and fatigue behavior, including cyclic softening and fracture surface morphology. The following conclusions can be drawn: The average grain size of Cu–Cr alloy was refined to about 230 The ECAPed samples under strain controlled fatigue exhibit lower fatigue limit because of the lower ductility of the UFG material, compared to the CG Cu. The UFG samples under strain-controlled loading show rapid cyclic softening, which occurs under all applied plastic strain amplitudes in early stage of testing. That cyclic softening of UFG Cu–Cr alloy is associated with some dislocation annihilation and the substructure recovery during cyclic deformation as a result of the to-and-fro motion of the dislocations. The dislocations annihilation become easier and the rate of softening increase when the plastic strain amplitude increases. The shear bands on the surface of cycled samples of UFG Cu–Cr alloy were investigated by scanning electron microscopy. It is shown that shear bands, microcracks and final fracture occur predominantly along the shear plane corresponding to the last ECAP. This work was supported by the