To examine the development law of a coal fracture structure under uniaxial compression, tension, and shearing, a study involving bituminous coal was conducted. A high-resolution three-dimensional (3D) X-ray microanalyzer (microscale) was used to scan the coal after loading using computed tomography (CT). Finally, a threshold segmentation method was implemented to segment the coal matrix, minerals, and fractures in the CT scanning image of the coal. The scanning volumes of the matrix, minerals, and fractures and their actual volume proportions were calculated. The analysis revealed that the coal sample under tensile stress had the least fractures, and the volume proportion of fracture was significantly smaller than those for the coal samples under uniaxial compression and shear stress. Through the 3D reconstruction of coal and its fractures, the spatial distribution of the matrix, minerals, and fractures in the coal body under different loading conditions was visually and stereoscopically presented. Through a quantitative analysis and comparison of the relevant fracture parameters under different loading conditions, it was concluded that the pore proportion was significantly larger than that of fractures (>90%). Classification maps of different coal fractures were obtained, providing a real spatial structure for subsequent numerical simulation. The extension direction, development degree, and connectivity of the main fractures in coal under different load conditions were analyzed from a microscopic viewpoint. Additionally, the length, width, and volume of the veins near the stress loading direction were important factors affecting the coal stress and fracture extension.A coal body is a typical porous medium structure with pores and fractures that differ with regard to size, shape, number, orientation, and distribution At present, the main methods for investigating the pore and fracture structure of a coal body are as follows: a) the mercury intrusion method CT scanning is a non-destructive testing method that uses the penetration ability of X-rays to analyze the interior of an object. Since the 1990s, CT scanning has been widely used to study gas adsorption and migration in coal In recent years, many achievements have been made in 3D coal body reconstruction. Wang et al. Many researchers have investigated the mechanical properties of coal and rock under different loads by using CT scanning technology. Cai et al. At present, the mechanical properties of coal under a uniaxial compression load, Brazilian splitting tension load, or compression-shear load are mainly studied in the laboratory using pressure testing machines and via numerical simulation using FLAC3D Xutuan Coal Mine is a fully concealed Permian minefield, that belongs to Huaibei Mining Area. The main coal seams are 3 The stress-strain curves of bituminous coal samples of different sizes were obtained by performing a uniaxial compression test, Brazilian disc test, and compression-shear test using a compression-testing machine, as shown in When an X-ray passes through an object, it induces complex physical processes, such as photoelectric and Compton effects. Some rays are reflected, scattered, and absorbed by matter, attenuating the ray intensity As indicated by Eq. In this experiment, Xradia 510 Versa, a micron-scale The scanning steps and procedures are as follows: (a) for coal sample preparation, the coal sample after loading is placed into the scanning system; (b) for alignment, the center point of the coal sample is adjusted to correspond to the scanning imaging center; (c) the source and eyepiece are adjusted; (d) the voltage and power are adjusted, and a filter is selected; and (e) the sample is preheated and scanned. The CT scanning parameters for coal samples under different action modes are presented in The results of an industrial analysis of the coal samples are presented in  To avoid the influence of the cone angle of the X-ray scanning on the 3D reconstruction of the coal samples during the later stage, the images at the beginning and end of the scanning were removed when choosing the CT images.  The c for 3D visualization, processing, and analysis of 2D images captured via industrial CT, FIB-SEM, transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and other experimental techniques in geoscience, material science, and other fields. A 3D reconstructed image is obtained via the manual 3D reconstruction of coal samples using the central displacement and ray hardening method from the 2D projected image taken via rotation from −180° to 180°. Then, the target material and spatial distribution of fractures in minerals, macromolecules, and rock samples are obtained without destroying the samples by performing virtual slice visualization and segmentation using the 3D analysis software. In this study, when the image was reconstructed, the minerals in the coal body were consistently expressed in green, the fractures were expressed in red, the coal matrices were expressed in blue, and the white referred to blank areas resulting from the cube of the coal scanning results. Regarding the different thresholds of minerals, fractures, and coal matrices in the different coal samples, for their division into as many components of the same nature into various groupings, the thresholds were appropriately selected and separately segmented. After threshold segmentation of different coal sample components, the real volume of each part of the coal sample can be calculated according to the volume of each part shown in the software. The scanning volumes of the different components in the different coal samples are presented in To calculate the volume fractions of the different components in the different coal samples, the volume fractions of the different parts were expressed by different characters (as shown in The aforementioned characteristics satisfy the following conditions: Here After the threshold segmentation of the coal body, 3D reconstruction was conducted according to the segmentation threshold of the coal body.  To quantitatively characterize the coal fractures under tension compression shear conditions, the parameters of coal fractures under tension compression shear conditions were counted and analyzed ( When a coal sample is damaged under a uniaxial compressive load, three failure modes can be produced (as shown in As shown in The commonly used methods for measuring the tensile strength of coal in the laboratory include the direct tension, Brazilian disc test, and three-point loading bending test methods. In this study, the Brazilian disk test was used to evaluate the coal tensile strength. The shear strength of the coal body includes unconstrained and restrictive shear strength. The restrictive shear strength is mainly determined via a pressure shear test using a direct shear apparatus, a one-sided shear test of cubic specimens, a double-sided shear test under compression at the end of the specimens, and an angular mold compression shear test. In this study, the shear strength of the coal body was determined using an angular mold compression shear test via a restrictive shear strength test. According to the foregoing analysis, regardless of whether coal is under uniaxial compressive, tensile, or shear stress, minerals, particularly long, wide, large-volume veins near the direction of stress loading are important factors affecting the stress and fracture extension in the coal body, thus affecting the overall stress conditions of the coal body. Therefore, in the coal mine field, special attention should be paid to long, wide, and large-volume veins near the direction of stress loading. When such veins occur, the mining direction or angle should be adjusted to avoid accidents. In summary, bituminous coal exhibited tensile failure and fractures mainly extending along the vertical direction under a uniaxial compression load. For this example, the number and volume of fractures in the whole coal sample were the largest, the fractures were relatively well-developed, and the fracture connectivity was good. Additionally, the fracture development was affected by the minerals in the coal, and branch fractures occurred. Under a Brazilian splitting tension load, the fractures mainly extended along the vertical direction, the number and volume of the fractures were the smallest, and the development degree of the fractures was poor. Furthermore, the mineral veins in the direction of the extension of the fractures caused migration. Under shear loading, the fractures mainly extended along the shear direction, the number and volume of the fractures in the coal sample were intermediate, and the degree of development and the connectivity of the fractures were good. Owing to the extension direction of the fractures or veins with a small angle, the fractures deviated from the shear direction at a certain angle. The 3D reconstruction of bituminous coal under tension compression shear conditions was performed, and the law of fracture development was quantitatively characterized. The following conclusions were drawn. Among the samples, the TS coal sample exhibited the smallest amount of fractures, and the volume proportion of the fractures in the TS coal sample was significantly smaller than those for the UC and SS coal samples. The fracture volume decreased in the following order: UC coal sample > SS coal sample > TS coal sample. There was little difference between the effects of shear and uniaxial compression loads on the coal fracture development. The variation law of the CT scanning intensity quantitatively reflected the coal body heterogeneity and anisotropy from a numerical viewpoint. The differences in the mineral contents of the coal samples also reflected the coal body heterogeneity. Through 3D reconstruction of bituminous coal under tension compression shear conditions, the spatial distribution of the matrix, minerals, and fractures in the coal body was intuitively and stereoscopically understood. For 3D reconstruction of bituminous coal fractures under different conditions, it was found that both UC and SS coal samples had some degree of dislocation because of fracture generation. The distribution and structure of the pores and fractures in the coal body under different loading conditions were stereoscopically presented, facilitating quantitative characterization of the fracture development law of the coal body. Through quantitative analysis and comparison of the total volume, average volume, total surface area, average surface area, average of the volume/surface area, Through analysis of the development of the main fractures of bituminous coal under different load conditions, it can be concluded that under a uniaxial compression load, bituminous coal exhibited tensile failure and the fractures mainly extended along the vertical direction. The number and volume of fractures in the coal samples were the largest, the fractures were relatively well-developed, and the fracture connectivity was good. Under the Brazilian splitting tension load, the fractures mainly extended along the vertical direction, the number and volume of the fractures were the smallest, and the fracture development was poor. Under shear stress, the fractures mainly extended along the shear angle direction. The number and volume of fractures in the coal samples were intermediate, and the degrees of fracture development and fracture connectivity were good. Additionally, CT image analysis revealed that the large-volume, long, and wide veins near the direction of the stress loading were important factors affecting the stress of the coal body and the fracture extension.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study was supported by the Thanks Dr. Weining Xie and Advanced Analysis and Computing Center of China University of Mining and Technology.