Clustered nanoassemblies of Mn doped ZnO and co-doped ZnO (Mn, Sn co-doped ZnO; Mn, Sb co-doped ZnO; and Mn, Bi co-doped ZnO) were prepared by refluxing their respective precursors in diethylene glycol medium. The co-doping elements, Sn, Sb and Bi exist in multi oxidation states by forming Zn–O–M (M=Sb, Bi and Sn) bonds in hexagonal wurtzite nanostructure. The analyses of detailed structural characterization performed by XRD, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), show that co-doping ions are successfully incorporated into the ZnO nanostructure and do not appear as precipitates or secondary phases. HRTEM analysis also confirmed the oriented attachment of nanocrystals as well as their defect structures. The formation/activation of higher amount of intrinsic host defects, for instance, oxygen vacancies in co-doped ZnO as compared to Mn doped ZnO sample is evident from Raman spectra. The doped and co-doped samples exhibit ferromagnetic like behavior at room temperature presumably due to the presence of defects. Specifically, it has been observed that the incorporation of dopant and co-dopants into ZnO structure can modulate the local electronic structure due to the formation/activation of defects and hence, cause significant changes in their structural, vibrational, optical and magnetic properties.ZnO, with a bandgap of 3.37 We report here a novel process to prepare highly oriented Mn doped ZnO and co-doped ZnO clustered nanoassemblies based on soft chemical approach. In order to investigate the effect of co-dopants, larger cations such as Sn, Sb or Bi were introduced into Mn doped ZnO and their structural, vibrational, optical and magnetic properties were studied. Furthermore, the understanding of defect structure may provide new insight into the activation of defect mediated properties. Mn doped ZnO clustered nanoassemblies were prepared by refluxing zinc acetate and manganese acetate in diethylene glycol (DEG) medium as discussed elsewhere X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded on a Philips powder diffractometer PW3040/60 with Cu Kα radiation. The crystallite size and lattice strain are estimated from the X-ray line broadening using the Scherrer calculator of X’Pert High Score Plus software. The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis were performed on Omicron, ESCA Probe using Al Kα (   To further understand the influence of Bi, Sb and Sn on electronic structure, XPS analysis of the co-doped samples were carried out.  The Sb 3d   To explore the influence of co-dopants on the vibrational and optical properties, we present studies on the Raman scattering and UV–visible absorption spectra of Mn doped ZnO and co-doped ZnO clustered nanoassemblies. ZnO with a wurtzite structure belongs to the The Raman peaks appeared at ∼320 and ∼432   Highly oriented Mn doped ZnO and co-doped ZnO clustered nanoassemblies were successfully prepared by a novel soft chemical process. The XRD analysis confirmed the formation of single phase wurtzite ZnO structure and their nanocrystalline nature. The co-doping elements exist in multi oxidation states (Sb as Sb The financial support by