Based on decomposition studies of zinnwaldite in Part I, a process for lithium carbonate production by supercritical carbon dioxide (sc-CO2) treatment was developed and optimised to high lithium yields. Sintered and ground zinnwaldite concentrate was subjected to CO2/water treatment at elevated pressure (100bar) and moderate heating (230°C). Mobilisation rates of over 70% were attained. The filtered lithium bicarbonate containing solution was concentrated by electrodialysis up to a lithium content of 8.5g/L. Precipitation of lithium carbonate was achieved by CO2 elimination at 90–95°C. A high selectivity of CO2 treatment for alkali metals, specifically for lithium, enables lithium carbonate product purities of ≥99.0% without additional rinsing.Lithium (Li) is a widely used metal, such as in glass, enamel and ceramic industries, lubricating greases, pharmaceutical products or aluminium production ( Since lithium is irreplaceable in most applications, a steady increase of 8–11%/a is anticipated for the next years ( Currently, lithium is predominantly recovered from South American salt lake brines. Here, lithium production considerably profits from lower manufacturing costs resulting from reduced technological effort compared to lithium ores. The most important ones can be distinguished into lithium rich aluminosilicates such as spodumene (LiAlSi Lithium recovery from ores is the current state of the art ( Lithium extraction from lepidolite is largely similar to that from spodumene. In contrast to the spodumene process, no highly energy consuming thermal treatment step is involved to activate the mineral. But the mineral’s fluoride content requires a defluorination step which is commonly conducted at temperatures of 860 Similar to the lepidolite structure, lithium in zinnwaldite is bound in octahedral layers rather than as an interstitial cation. In addition, the grey-metallic coloured phyllosilicate mineral zinnwaldite may be conceived as an iron-rich lepidolite. These circumstances render lithium extraction from these ores challenging. One zinnwaldite deposit is along the Czech/German border at Cínovec/Zinnwald. Comprising of ∼347,000 t Li It is this context, which prompted Czech scientists to design a lithium extraction process for zinnwaldite (‘gypsum process’). Zinnwaldite concentrate is mixed with gypsum (CaSO In August 2015, Lithium Australia reported on a technology for the recovery of Li For subsequent lithium recovery, mineral phase composition in heat-treated ore is decisive. Previous reports on lepidolite detected an unspecified lithium aluminium silicate (LiAl(SiO CO Particle sizes were analysed by static light scattering measurements conducted with an LS 13320 laser diffraction particle size analyser by Beckman Coulter, Brea, USA. Analyses were conducted using a contrAA 700 continuum source atomic absorption spectroscopy (CS-AAS) by Analytik Jena AG, Jena, Germany and an Optima 4300 DV ICP-OES by PerkinElmer, Inc., Waltham, USA. X-ray fluorescence measurements were done using an energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence (ED-XRF) analyser Spectro Xepos by Ametek, Inc., Berwyn, USA. X-ray diffraction measurements (XRD) of mineral samples were done on a D8 Discover with a VÅNTEC-1 detector by Bruker, Billerica, USA. Mineral samples were crushed using a planetary ball mill PM 100 by Retsch GmbH, Haan, Germany. Calcination of crushed minerals was carried out in a laboratory tube furnace STF 16/50 by Carbolite Gero GmbH & Co. KG, Neuhausen, Germany. CO 15 Reference digestions of raw and calcined minerals were carried out in glass equipment using nitric acid hydrochloride. 5 13.4 Autoclaved digestions were carried out threefold, whereby the average lithium mobilisation rates are listed. The calculated standard deviation is less than 1.5% in every digestion. 5.0 The concentrated LiHCO Compared to the industrially important lithium ores spodumene and lepidolite, zinnwaldite presents a number of challenges that have to be considered when designing a process rendering it economically viable. In contrast to other lithium ores, Li In zinnwaldite, the lithium oxide (Li An approach towards solving these challenges are carbonation processes for the direct formation of Li Chen et al. published a digestion process of β-spodumene by carbonation with soda (Na This method seemed to be quite promising, compared to the state of the art, considering (i) an almost selective leaching of alkali metals, (ii) reduced consumption of chemicals, (iii) no production of non-marketable sulphate salts, (iv) no carbonate precipitation agents required and (v) no lithium losses due to precipitation of aluminium hydroxides (spodumene, lepidolite) or iron and aluminium oxide hydrates (zinnwaldite). However, the suggested Na The initial underlying idea of While lithium mobilisation of untreated zinnwaldite concentrate by The carbonation time was investigated within a range of 0.12–24 The assumption that lithium mobilisation increases with longer carbonation time was confirmed ( In fact, a longer digestion period had a positive effect on the lithium yield. As Consequently, the optimal carbonation time for CO The influence of CO Lithium mobilisation profits from an increased CO In fact, the supercritical CO Further optimisation experiments were done at a CO CO These images show clearly the digesting effect of In fact, the lithium mobilisation increased with a decrease in particle size from a mineral sample of 67 It was shown that a higher surface area has a direct influence on lithium mobilisation. Nevertheless, this assumption is not confirmed by experiments with the finest ground material c (d An explanation for the constant rate of lithium mobilisation in fine material is given through the results of particle size analyses of carbonation residues. The investigated mineral samples b and c with mean particle sizes of ∼4 These observed effects are consistent with experiments for the conversion of wollastonite mineral samples with different particle sizes, since a mean size below ∼40 Grinding is an energy intensive process. Especially in extremely fine material (sample c in this study), energy amounts needed are not justified by increased mobilisation rates. This can be calculated for the used ball mill by the  In fact, higher temperatures did not increase the lithium yield significantly (+2% at 270 Finally, the effect of the liquid to sintered zinnwaldite concentrate ratio was investigated. The results showed an increased lithium mobilisation efficiency up to 75% at the highest liquid to solid ratio of 100 ( For reasons not yet understood, it is evident that lithium yield profits from a high liquid to solid ratio. Since the volume of liquid phase was constant in all experiments (400 As water amounts rise, investment and operational costs of the autoclave and filtration unit magnify proportionally. In addition, as a consequence of lower lithium content in the filtrate, the cost of electrodialytic concentration will also increase. A compromise between the lithium mobilisation and suitable parameters for subsequent electrodialytic concentration is a liquid to solid ratio of 30 (Lithium mobilisation rate 57%). A promising alternative was found in a dual digestion procedure at the same value. Solution of the first, batch-process treatment of zinnwaldite was reused to pretreat the next batch. The overall lithium mobilisation rates of this sequence were 71% at a constant content of approx. 325 Prior to Li This is a common method in the treatment of saline solutions and industrially used for desalination of seawater to obtain table salt (particularly in Japan) ( The filtered LiHCO As shown in Eq. The precipitated Li  A mother liquor recirculation to the carbonation process is possible a number of times, in order to recover the entire lithium content (dotted line, In fact, rubidium recovery may become interesting, since it is a potential substitute for cesium ( Addition of potassium carbonate is the solution to achieve higher rubidium yields. In fact, ≥50% Rb can be recovered, when the carbonation process is conducted in the presence of K Direct carbonation with The decreased lithium content has a negative impact on the subsequent electrodialytic concentration, as well as on the total volume of the autoclave. A compromise is the liquid to solid ratio of 30 (Lithium mobilisation rate 57%, 266 The filtered LiHCO The resulting concentrate was heated to 90 Follow-up activities aim at a detailed economic analysis comparing process economies’ direct carbonation approach and established Li This work was in part supported by the