Nickel metal hydride batteries are extensively used throughout society and represent a large and complex metallic mixture requiring recycling. This paper deals with the recovery and separation of metals from nickel metal hydride battery waste dissolved in 8M hydrochloric acid. Three processes based on leachates from individual electrode materials and a mixed material have been evaluated using mixer–settlers. The solvating extractant used is the trialkylphosphine oxide mixture Cyanex 923. The batteries used in this study contained thirteen metals and the processes separate them in up to four fractions. The main fraction in each process successfully creates a high-concentration nickel stream with low levels of potassium and magnesium (if present in the feed) by extracting the other metals. The purity of the nickel stream after the main process step (4–5 stages) is >99.9%, excluding magnesium and potassium. The extracted metals are separated using a nitrate strip, which allows the rare earth metals and aluminium to be separated from cobalt and manganese.The use of nickel metal hydride (NiMH) batteries is extensive in society today, e.g. in hybrid electric vehicles. The amount of valuable metals used in their construction is significant. This means that effective and robust processes for material recovery are and will be needed for the recycling of NiMH batteries. Several processes using liquid–liquid extraction for the recycling of NiMH batteries have been suggested in literature, e.g. by The solid waste has been divided into three fractions during mechanical separation, creating three individual processes. The three different feed materials with corresponding separation routes are equivalent to two different cases of dismantling of the batteries, the first case involving the cathode and anode active materials being separated and the second case involving shredding of the electrode plates to make a mixed material fraction. A small mixed material fraction is probably unavoidable in the case of individual electrode material separation. The benefit of physically separating the electrode materials is that the composition of the two materials is different and the metal separations are simpler than for a mixed system. The concentration of the hydrochloric acid used for dissolution is crucial with respect to the volume of aqueous phase, which in turn is related to the required organic volume. Minimizing volumes reduces the required flow size in a treatment plant thereby reducing the plant's size and cost. For this process the volume is kept low by means of high concentrations and selective leaching. Using non-oxidizing conditions for dissolution of cathode electrodes or mixed material can prevent the dissolution of nickel metal. For the batteries used in this study this reduces the acid consumption and corresponding flow size for cathode material by 37% and the corresponding amount for the mixed material ( During dissolution almost all of the hydrogen ions are consumed, and the metal concentration at the end of dissolution is equivalent to the acid strength divided by the average oxidation number of the dissolved metals. This means a smaller volume is required for dissolution than in more dilute systems or systems with a higher acidity at the end of the dissolution. In these experiments 8 The approach of using systems with a high metal concentration is particularly appropriate in recycling applications, as a reduced flow size means more efficient processes (reduced energy and chemical usage) combined with a smaller start-up cost related to constructing a plant. In certain cases this additional reduction can mean that a demonstration-size plant can be sufficient to treat a particular waste product requiring recycling, since such wastes can often be low in volume but high in value. The primary purpose in choosing a solvating extractant, Cyanex 923, for group extractions in a process treating dissolved nickel metal hydride battery waste is that this step can simply and robustly purify the nickel content and requires no pH control during extraction. The 10 metals other than nickel, magnesium and potassium are effectively extracted if the acidity is kept low, since high acidity reduces the distribution ratio of lanthanoids and aluminium. This main extraction step purifies the nickel with respect to these other metals and can allow for either direct electrowinning or further purification if the magnesium or potassium requires removal. It should be pointed out that for a sufficiently washed anode material neither magnesium nor potassium is present, and the nickel is pure after the initial separation. The used battery materials were from Panasonic prismatic module 6.5 Three different types of solutions used as water phases were made by dissolving anode material, cathode material and a mixed electrode material. The mixed material was made by shredding whole cells and subsequently removing the whole separators and anode backing material (nickel-plated steel), which remained intact during the shredding. For the organic phases Cyanex 923 (95%, Cytec), tributyl phosphate (97%, Aldrich), 1-decanol (99%, Aldrich) and aliphatic kerosene distilled at 190–250 For the anode and mixed materials an increased percentage of nickel in the aqueous solutions is achieved by refluxing part of the purified nickel stream; thereby increasing the concentration of chloride at the end of extraction, allowing for higher distribution ratios. The reflux was simulated using 4 The experiments were performed using lab-scale mixer–settlers in order to simulate an experimental pilot-plant set-up. The type of mixer–settler is described in a report by Initially slightly less than the stoichiometric equivalent of the necessary amount of protons for dissolution was added to the solid material. The amount of 8 A Thermo iCAP 6500 inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES) was used to determine metal concentrations in the samples. All samples were diluted using 1 The concentrations were represented using the logarithm of the molar concentration in order to give an overview of the concentration trends in the mixer–settlers. A common detection limit was set for the graphical representations at a concentration of 0.1 The stage numbers of the graphs of aqueous and organic concentrations are such that stage 1 is the aqueous inlet stage and consequently the organic outlet stage. Stage 0 is the aqueous feed concentration. In the process based on dissolved cathode material, low-concentration Cyanex 923 extracts zinc and iron, followed by a high-concentration Cyanex 923 step removing aluminium, cobalt, manganese and yttrium. This leaves only nickel and low concentrations of potassium and magnesium in the aqueous phase. The cobalt and manganese can be stripped from the organic phase, either together with yttrium, using a hydrochloric acid strip, or separately, using a nitrate strip. A deviation in the experiment from the extraction-process layout shown in The aqueous phase concentration of the first extraction is shown in The aqueous phase concentration of the main extraction step is shown in The concentration in the organic phase is shown in The organic phase was stripped using 1 The resulting organic phase was stripped with 1 In the process based on dissolved anode material, high-concentration Cyanex 923 extracts cobalt, aluminium, manganese, lanthanum, cerium, neodymium, praseodymium and yttrium (and iron if present), shown in A lower acidity was used than for the cathode process, as the lanthanoid extraction is inhibited by a high acidity. The potassium content was removed from the anode material by washing, so the concentration was very low. Care was also taken to minimize any iron in the process by carefully removing the anode active material from the electrode backing material (iron-rich). The aqueous concentration of the main extraction is shown in The organic phase concentration of the main extraction is shown in For the nitrate strip, shown in As can be seen from the lanthanoid-concentration profile, a large amount is stripped in the fourth stage (first organic contact), but only small amounts are stripped in subsequent steps. This indicates that the flow rates were unsuitable in combination with the nitrate concentration, leading to too low a nitrate concentration for extraction of the trivalent content in stage 4. Under optimum conditions only the cobalt, manganese and nickel will strip. This can be seen in stages 1–3 where the stripping of other metals is very low when comparing the organic phase concentration shown in Since a large part of the rare earth content was stripped in the nitrate strip the hydrochloric acid strip was not performed other than as a limited batch experiment whereby the rare earth content was successfully stripped using hydrochloric acid. With the added knowledge of the first two experiments, some modifications were made to the process layout for the mixed-material flowsheet, shown in In the process based on dissolved mixed-electrode material, similarly to the cathode scheme, the iron and zinc can be extracted in a pre-step followed by a main extraction of cobalt, aluminium, manganese, lanthanum, cerium, neodymium, praseodymium and yttrium. However, for this experiment the zinc and iron are extracted with the main extraction, since the pre-step in the cathode process failed to extract iron, and the process layout is modified accordingly. The purified aqueous phase contains nickel, magnesium and potassium. As for the anode case, the cobalt and manganese can be stripped, either together with the trivalent content, using a low chloride concentration strip, or separately, using a nitrate strip. The aqueous phase concentrations are shown in The trend for the organic phase concentration is that a small amount of magnesium and nickel is extracted, with a lower concentration in the last aqueous step due to significant crowding by the more extractable metals, which decreases the concentration of nickel and magnesium. If the extraction of non-nickel content is optimized by means of the reflux level and the phase ratio, the crowding can likely be increased, thereby further reducing the nickel and magnesium extraction. The trend in the organic phase for the metals with higher distribution ratios is increasing to approximately full extraction. In each stage of the main extraction, the greater extraction in the mixed system than in the anode system is likely related to the higher flow ratio in the mixed-material experiment, thereby decreasing loading, or is because the anode system has not fully achieved steady-state. Since the nickel concentration in the organic phase was significant (though relatively small compared to the aqueous phase concentrations), a three-stage cross-flow scrub step using water was added. The phase volume ratios of the three stages were 25:1, 50:1 and 100:1 (O:A). This removes more than 96% of the nickel content, and more stages can be added to increase the recovery. However, it also reduces the concentration of the other elements. The aqueous scrub is returned to the dissolution step so no material is lost. The efficiency of the process is thereby slightly reduced, but the purity of the cobalt strip phase is increased and a higher degree of nickel can be recovered in the main aqueous nickel stream. Stripping of cobalt and manganese using 0.1 The zinc concentration in the nitrate strip is high in stages 1–4, indicating that the zinc could be stripped using this aqueous phase. However, it does not strip, since the distribution ratio is high in stage 5, likely due to an elevated chloride concentration. This further indicates that a pre-main zinc extraction step is suitable. The majority of any remaining manganese and zinc were scrubbed using a five-stage cross-flow scrub step using the same aqueous flow 0.1 The rare earth metals were subsequently stripped, using 1 The last step of purification of the organic phase to remove iron with pure water required several stages to remove the very low iron content. Improving the pre-main step treatment to remove iron and zinc before the main step would improve the process efficiency. The major difference between the three processes is the difference in composition between the separated metal streams. The nickel stream from the anode-based process can be devoid of potassium and magnesium, whilst the cathode- and mixed-based processes contain both potassium and magnesium. If at the refining stage electrowinning is used this is not a major problem, since magnesium and potassium should not electrodeposit. For the nitrate strip separation the cobalt and manganese stream is similar for all the processes, except that the cathode has low amounts of manganese and the anode has high amounts compared to the amount of cobalt. The advantages of using the separated electrode materials are the initial separation of metals and the increased concentration of the extracted metals, since mixing a larger number of metals dilutes individual concentrations. The advantages of a mixed-material process are the increased ease of handling the feed material and the fact that it could likely be optimized to function without reflux. It is probable that all three processes could be used in a single plant at different times, depending on the available feed material, since the only major difference in the main step will be an optimization of reflux levels, as the same number of stages can be used in each process. Process layouts for three different waste mixtures from nickel metal hydride batteries were tested in mixer–settlers. The initial step, involving four or more stages, extracts the extractable metals and successfully creates an aqueous phase of purified nickel for the three systems. The separations achieved during the strip, removing cobalt and manganese from the trivalent content using a nitrate solution, constitute an option. Adding a scrub step for the organic phase after the main extraction improves the nickel recovery and raises the purity of the subsequent strip streams. Interesting points for future research include investigating solvent losses, chloride and nitrate concentrations in each stage, optimization of strip and scrub steps and improving the pre-main extraction of zinc and iron. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of