A novel process for leaching chromite ore has been proposed. Compared to the traditional alkaline roasting process, the new hydrometallurgical process lowers effectively the reaction temperature and enhances the leaching efficiency through pressure oxidative leaching with pure oxygen (O2) in concentrated sodium hydroxide (NaOH) aqueous solution. The chromium (Cr) leaching efficiency reaches 99% with ore particle size of 40 to 50μm, NaOH-to-ore mass ratio of 4:1, NaOH concentration of 60wt.%, O2 partial pressure of 3.2MPa, and reaction temperature of 250°C. By investigating the dependence of the Cr leaching efficiency on NaOH concentration, O2 partial pressure, and reaction temperature, the macrokinetics can be described by the shrinking core model under control diffusion through the solid product layer with apparent activation energy of 54.6kJ/mol. It was also found that during the leaching process, the alkaline insoluble iron (Fe) and magnesium (Mg) in the chromite ore remain in the residue in the form of magnesium hydroxide (Mg(OH)2) and magnesium ferrite (MgFe2O4) while the divalent Fe is oxidized to trivalent Fe. Furthermore, in the initial stage of the leaching process, silicon (Si) is leached faster than aluminum (Al) and their concentrations in the aqueous solution increase rapidly with reaction time. However, as the leaching proceeds further, the Si concentration in the aqueous solution drops a little and then stays constant.In recent years, global demand for chromium and its compounds has been increasing steadily. Chromium compounds find various applications in both process manufacturing industries and discrete manufacturing industries. However, hexavalent chromium compounds are widely known as toxic and carcinogenic chemicals. Since sodium chromate (Na Conventionally, industrial production of Na Actually, much attention has been focused on hydrometallurgical processing of chromite ore since the 1970s. Both acidic and alkaline leaching processes were reported. However, acidic leaching encounters serious problems in impurity removal since most components in the chromite ore are soluble in acid ( Hundley et al. ( Farrow and Burkin investigated the alkali pressure leaching of Cr In this article, on the basis of the pressure leaching process proposed by Grounded Indian chromite ore was provided by Hubei ZhenHua Chemical Co., China. The ground ore was sieved to a particle size from 40 to 50 Phase analyses of the chromite ore and COPRs were performed with an X-ray diffraction (XRD, APD-10X, Philips, Netherlands) setup equipped with a cobalt (Co) target. The XRD detection of the chromite ore ranged from 20° (2θ) to 80° (2θ), as shown in All reagents used were of analytical grade and provided by Tianjin GuangFu Fine Chemical Research Institute, China. Deionized water, made by a laboratory water purification system (PURELAB Option-Q, ELGA, UK), was used in all experiments. All experiments were carried out in a pure nickel reactor with a volume of 2 All isothermal experiments were conducted at a preset temperature. The temperature was controlled by a programmable temperature controller with a deviation of ± When the reaction period was over, O  The morphology was examined with scanning electron microscopy (SEM, MLA 250, FEI, Australia). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, ESCALab220i-XL, VG, UK) was employed to investigate the phase composition of the COPRs. The Cr leaching efficiency was calculated using the following formula: The NaOH concentration (wt.%) plays an important factor on the leaching efficiency of Cr. All experiments were conducted at 230  In fact, for the oxidative leaching of chromite ore, dissolved O Furthermore, for the alkaline leaching process of chromite ore, a lower liquid-to-solid ratio of the slurry generally leads to deterioration of the Cr leaching efficiency. The following equation reveals that higher NaOH concentration means a lower liquid-to-solid ratio for the same NaOH-to-ore ratio of the slurry: In addition, a striking retardation exists in the curve with NaOH concentration of 50 According to In concentrated NaOH aqueous solution, an acid–base equilibrium exists ( Solubility equilibrium is also present ( The oxidation reaction can be explained by Eq. The Cr leaching efficiency in the temperature range from 200 It is known that higher temperature changes the chemical equilibrium constant and boosts the reaction rate constant. Furthermore, the higher temperature enhances the solubility of the product around the ore particles and is conducive to proceeding the oxidative reaction forward. The XRD pattern shown in According to Eq. Liquid boundary layer diffusion control: If Solid product layer diffusion control: If Surface reaction control: If To investigate the rate-controlling step, the Cr leaching efficiency versus reaction time at 215  From Eq. During the pressure oxidative leaching process of chromite ore, most alkaline soluble elements, such as Al, Si, and Cr, are extracted to the solution. However, the alkaline insoluble elements, mainly Fe and Mg, are chemically inert in the alkaline system and remain mainly in the COPRs. To prevent fluorescence from COPRs, all XRD measurements were carried out in the presence of a Co target instead of a copper (Cu) one. A series of COPRs with different Cr leaching efficiency was examined and compared with the chromite ore. As presented in Chromite ore has a spinel structure of cubic-closed-packed (CCP) form, in which Fe During the leaching process, Fe The COPRs, in which little MgFe The spectral line of Fe(2 As can be seen in Al  A comparison of the leaching behaviors of Cr, Al, and Si at 270 A novel oxidative leaching process of chromite ore with concentrated NaOH aqueous solution and elevated O During the leaching process, the alkaline insoluble elements in the chromite ore, mainly Mg and Fe, remain in the COPRs in the form of Mg(OH) The authors gratefully acknowledge the helpful suggestions and revisions from Professor Zai-Sha Mao. Financial support from the