Magnetite nanoparticles successfully produced from the raffinate of an Iranian industrial copper solvent extraction unit. Removal of iron from leach solution is important for successful operation of hydrometallurgical recovery of copper. It includes reduction of Fe3+ to Fe2+ followed by precipitation of Al3+ as Al(OH)3, oxidation of Fe2+ to Fe3+ (the theoretical ratio for stoichiometric, Fe3+/Fe2+ = 2) and finally synthesize of nano-sized magnetite. Two different Fe2+ oxidation agents namely H2O2 and O2 were used. Using XRD, FTIR, FESEM, and TEM analysis, the phase structure, morphology, and size distribution of magnetic nanoparticles, produced under different conditions, were evaluated and compared. Under optimum conditions spherical magnetic nanoparticles with an average size of about 25 ± 3 nm can be produced. The XRD analysis of produced nanoparticles after purification of raffinate showed the slight formation of aluminum hydroxide, goethite and hematite phases. In addition, the VSM results indicate the highly ferromagnetic behavior for samples at the room temperature with a saturation magnetization of 41.25 emu/g.Iron is an associated metal of the most copper ores and enters into the so-called pregnant leach solution as Fe (II) or Fe (III) or both during the leaching process ( Iron can be removed through selective precipitation forming goethite, jarosite or hematite as an insoluble solids. Also, it can be removed from copper leach solution by membrane technology as well as solvent extraction using a variety of organic extractants [ Most of the existing studies, report the synthesis of magnetic nanoparticles using pure solutions of salts (metal salts such as nitrates or chlorides) as the precursor [ The raffinate of an Iranian copper solvent extraction plant (Sarcheshmeh Copper Complex) was used during this study. The pH, oxidation reduction potential (ORP) and electrical conductivity of the raffinate were measured to be 1.32, 435 mv, and 5.68 S/m, respectively. The analysis of the raffinate composition was performed by an ICP instrument (Varian, 715-ES) ( All the chemicals were purchased from Merck Company and used as received without further purification. Also, all the solutions were prepared in deionized water. The analysis of iron (II) was performed by the photometric method using a spectrophotometer (model Cecil 2000). The concentration of total iron was determined with the flame atomic absorption technique using Varian, AA Spectra 240. Finally, concentration of iron (III) was achieved from the difference between the measured total iron and iron (II) concentrations. XRD measurements were done by a powder X-ray diffractometer (Philips) using Cu Kα radiation. The functional groups of the materials were studied using a Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometer (Bruker, Tensor 27) in the range of 400–4000 cm To synthesis magnetic nanoparticles from raffinates a 3 steps combined process route was developed ( Due to the high concentration of aluminum in the raffinate, one of the major problems during the synthesis of magnetite nanoparticles was the co-precipitation of aluminum. Aluminum precipitates as hydroxide (Al(OH) The most applied method for synthesis of Fe    In all of the above states, the pH of solution was increased to the desired levels of around 11 for the formation of magnetic nanoparticles (reaction 3) by adding the exact amount of NaOH (6 M) [ In order to prevent the simultaneous precipitation of aluminum and iron (III) in the first stage of operation, the Fe To achieve the maximal Al It is well known that the formation of different compounds such as Al(OH) The nanostructure of the prepared samples was clearly revealed from XRD patterns ( The spectroscopic technique of FT-IR is a convenient tool to characterize nanoparticles of magnetite. The spectrum ( The TEM images and distribution histogram of iron oxide nanoparticles prepared under different conditions are shown in The results of the synthesized magnetite using H  The ferromagnetic Fe This study was supported by the