A linear pipe reactor (LPR) system was used to study the flocculation of mineral suspensions with commercial flocculants under a variety of operating conditions. Incorporation of a Lasentec focused beam reflectance measurement (FBRM) probe into the system provided real-time, in situ characterisation of the aggregate dimensions during the flocculation process. At constant flow rate, variation of the distance between the flocculant addition point and detection by the FBRM probe enabled control of the reaction time for flocculation.
                  Once flocculant is mixed with the slurry, the size of the aggregates at a given point downstream in the LPR is determined by the relative rates of the competing processes of aggregate formation and rupture. These processes depend upon, amongst others, upon the mixing conditions, flocculant dosage and solids concentration of the slurry. The mixing intensity present within the LPR is determined by the pipe diameter and the slurry flow rate.
                  Both a calcite slurry and a slimes fraction from a sand-processing operation were studied to assess their flocculation performance under different operating conditions (flow rate, flocculant dosage). Following a short induction period, aggregate size increased rapidly to a peak, with the rate of change indicative of the net aggregation kinetics. Rupture processes then dominated with aggregate size decreasing at a slower rate.
                  The flow rate and hence the shear conditions had a marked effect on the aggregate structure. The effective (net) aggregation rate increased as shear increased, but the ultimate aggregate size decreased reflecting the fragility of large aggregates. For both systems, increasing the flocculant dosage increased the maximum aggregate size, but the effective aggregation rate only increased for the sand slimes, while reaching a constant rate for the calcite system. It is proposed that this reflects the degree to which the particle surface is effectively covered by the adsorbed flocculant.The linear flow or pipe reactor has been used for many years in the field of chemical reaction kinetics   The main drawback to the study of flocculation kinetics has been the lack, until the last few years, of an in situ measurement technique for characterising changes in the size of aggregates. Focused beam reflectance measurement (FBRM) probes, which allow the in situ measurement of chord length distributions over a wide range of solids concentrations, have been available since 1990. However, applications to mineral systems have been limited to date. A number of workers have used FBRM to measure aggregate dimension in beakers or similar containers.   FBRM was used by  A major concern with these previous FBRM studies of flocculation has been the poor control of mixing during the actual flocculation process. Batchwise mixing in stirred vessels produces a wide range of shear rates with particles close to the impeller experiencing very high shear Much greater control of these factors can be achieved from continuous flocculation in a Couette mixing device, in which flocculation takes place within a narrow gap between two, vertically mounted, concentric cylinders where the inner cylinder rotates While a Couette mixing device gives much better control over agitation intensity and mixing time than a baffled beaker, it can only provide information over a relatively narrow range of residence times for flocculation. Consequently, a LPR system incorporating an FBRM probe was assembled to study the kinetics of both the aggregation and degradation processes over a comprehensive range of defined residence times. The objective of this work was to use LPR system to study the effect of process variables (shear rate and flocculant dosage) on flocculation under known turbulence conditions of similar structure to that occurring in full-scale industrial pipes. Two calcium carbonate samples (Omyacarb 5 and Omyacarb 10, Commercial Minerals) were used for the LPR studies. The particle size distributions were measured by laser light scattering (Malvern Mastersizer). Omyacarb 5 had a Feed slurry (15 g l Concentrated slurry pumped from the stirred feed tank was continuously diluted by the addition of water to give the targeted solids concentration for the LPR feed slurry. The density, flow rate and particle “size” distribution of this feed slurry were monitored continuously. Batches of a thickener feed consisting of the slimes fraction from a sand washing plant, were collected in a 4-m Particle size distributions and specific surface areas of different batches, as measured by laser light scattering using a Malvern Mastersizer, were very similar with the average A 30% polyacrylate/polyacrylamide flocculant of molecular weight 10–20 million was used for the calcite studies. The 0.5 wt.% flocculant solution was prepared by accurately weighing powdered flocculant (7.5 g) into a 2-l polyethylene jar, then wetting with ethanol (15 g). Deionised water was then quickly added to give 1.500 l of solution. After mixing by hand for 1 min, the bottle was placed on a roller for 16 h. Ten such simultaneously prepared solutions were then mixed to form a single 0.5 wt.% concentrated flocculant stock solution. This sample was stored in the dark at 4 °C. Flocculant solutions (0.005 wt.%) were prepared daily by dilution of the 0.5 wt.% flocculant solution with tap water (190 ppm Na A 35% polyacrylate/polyacrylamide flocculant of ∼15 million molecular weight was used for the sand slimes studies. Flocculant solutions (0.005 wt.%) were prepared with plant water (173 ppm Na The LPR consisted of a number of stainless steel tubes (ID 22.14 mm×6 m) that could be joined together to provide the required length (reaction time). The slurry feed and flocculant entered at one end with the FBRM probe located at the other, its window projecting into the flow at an angle of 45°. An M500 field unit was used connected to an industrial probe (Lasentec®, Redmond, WA, USA). The measurement end of the stainless steel probe was a 25-mm-diameter cylinder with a 12-mm-diameter flat sapphire window set into its base. A peristaltic pump was used to add the flocculant solution through a 3.91-mm ID stainless steel pipe. Flocculant solution velocities at the entry point varied from 0.06 to 1.1 m s The principle of FBRM has been described by The primary data collected by the FBRM probe is in the form of the number of chords measured within a certain chord range (size channel) per unit time. There are 38 such channels ranging from 0.8 to 1000 μm. A summation of the counts from all the channels gives the “total counts” per unit time. This primary data can then be treated in a number of ways. Aggregate chord length distributions can be obtained. The number of counts per channel can be converted to a percentage of the total, which allows direct correlation between measurements where the total counts vary. The mean unweighted chord length of the sample can be calculated using the following equation: Unweighted mean chord = Where: Additional treatment of the data can be undertaken which applies various length-weightings to the chord distributions. This reduces their sensitivity to fines, but strongly increases the influence of large particles. For example, the mean square-weighted chord length is calculated as follows: Mean square-weighted chord length= In these studies, a constant pipe diameter was used and the linear flow velocity altered by changing the flow rate. All experiments were conducted under turbulent flow conditions (Reynolds number significantly greater than 2000). Linear flow velocities, Reynolds numbers, mean shear rates and Kolmogoroff microscales for the range of flow rates studied are given in The average shear rate increases with increasing flow velocity and hence with flow rate, while the Kolmogoroff microscale (small-scale eddies which dissipate the energy of the system) decreases with increasing flow rate. The effect of the Kolmogoroff microscale on the flocculating system depends on the relative size of the aggregates and these eddies. Typical data obtained from the LPR system consists of an aggregate size parameter (FBRM mean chord length or mean square-weighted chord length) as a function of the reaction time (calculated from the slurry linear flow rate and the distance between flocculant addition point and the FBRM probe tip position). The main features, which can be seen for flocculation of Omyacarb 10 in After a very short “induction” period (<0.5 s), the aggregate size increases rapidly and almost linearly over the initial stages of the reaction. The initial slope is referred to as the effective aggregation rate (this slope may include a contribution from some degree of aggregate rupture, and therefore will be less than the true aggregation rate). The “induction” period includes the period for the flocculant to be mixed with the feed. After achieving a maximum size value, the aggregate rupture became the dominant process. Aggregate size decreased at a slower rate than the initial aggregation rate, and under most conditions did not approach the primary particle size. The size of the aggregates at a given time is controlled by the relative rates of the competing processes of aggregate formation and rupture. These processes will not only depend upon the mixing conditions (flow rate), but will also depend upon the flocculant dosage and the solids concentration. The effect of flow rate and flocculant dosage, as measured by the effective aggregation rate and maximum aggregate size, has been studied with both the calcite and sand slimes slurry systems. Both Omyacarb 10 and the sand slimes showed an increase in the effective aggregation rate with increasing flow rate For both substrates there appears to be a plateauing of the effective aggregation rate with higher flow rates and hence shear rates The maximum mean aggregate size achieved varied significantly for the different flow rates: 118, 56 and 49 μm for Omyacarb 10, and 107, 100 and 65 μm for sand slimes at 10, 20 and 30 l min Flow visualisation experiments (using flocculant/dye solutions added to water at flow velocities covering those used in these studies) showed that the flocculant was efficiently mixed within a 400-mm distance of the addition point It would appear from the mean square-weighted chord length sizes that large aggregates formed with Omyacarb 10 at the lowest flow rate (10 l min While the larger Omyacarb 10 aggregates formed at 10 l min Omyacarb 10 and a finer particle size calcite (Omyacarb 5) were flocculated with a range of flocculant dosages in two series of LPR runs ( For Omyacarb 10 with a flocculant dosage of 20 g t Although the effective aggregation rate was approximately the same at all dosages, the maximum aggregate size and the time to reach that size increased as the dosage increased. For example, at 6 g t Some The maximum mean aggregate size increased approximately linearly with dosage for both calcite systems With longer reaction times (up to 40 s), the rate of decrease in aggregate size was slow compared to the effective aggregation rate For Omyacarb 10 with a flocculant dosage of 6 g t Once the maximum aggregate size was attained the rate of size reduction appeared faster with higher dosages. For Omyacarb 10, aggregate size declined over the period to 40 s by 11%, 14%, 21% and 27% for dosages of 6, 10, 15 and 20 g t  Faster effective aggregation rates were obtained as the dosage increased For the sand slimes, the time (2.6 s) to reach the maximum size was approximately the same for all dosages Two types of aggregation rate behaviour were observed in response to increases in flocculant dosage for calcite and sand slimes (and with other mineral systems we have examined but not reported here). For the sand slimes, the initial aggregation rate increased with dosage, while the time required to achieve the maximum aggregate size remained essentially constant. For calcite, the initial aggregation rate was not greatly affected by higher dosages, and as a consequence the time to reach the maximum size increased as the dosage was raised. It is postulated that the two behaviours are most likely closely related, only differing in the degree to which the particle surface has been effectively covered by the adsorbed polymer. For larger particle sizes, the number of flocculant molecules per particle will be greater than for smaller particles even at equivalent surface coverage. This will lead to an increase in the number of successful aggregate forming collisions. The above observations emphasise the critical role of the residence time in evaluating the likely response to changes in process conditions, and in particular, whether or not the flocculation reaction is still dominated by aggregate growth. For example, calcite flocculation while still in the growth phase may not be significantly affected by flocculant dosage, even though extended reaction times at a higher dosage will invariably lead to larger aggregates. Similarly, at a fixed reaction time during the growth phase the aggregate size will be greater for higher shear conditions, even though milder mixing will favour a larger maximum size. The size of aggregates formed by the addition of a flocculant to a mineral suspension at a given time is controlled by the relative rates of the competing processes of aggregate formation and aggregate rupture. The rate of these processes depends on the turbulence levels, flocculant dosage and solids concentration of the slurry. In the LPR system, different shear rates, generated within the pipe by altering the flow rate, gave effective aggregation rates that increase with increasing shear rate, presumably as a result of increased particle–particle collision rates. Effective aggregation rates obtained under different flow rates tended to plateau with increasing shear rate but gave a close to linear correlation with Kolmogoroff microscale. Larger maximum mean aggregate sizes were achieved under milder shear conditions, reflecting the fragility of the larger aggregates. This may be a result of differences in the aggregate formation process at the different shear rates or to limitations on the size of aggregate that can be produced under each shear condition. After achieving a maximum value, the aggregate size diminished at a slower rate, but under most conditions did not approach the primary particle size. Degradation of calcite aggregates did not produce an increase in fines suggesting the degradation mechanism in this system is aggregate breakage rather than aggregate erosion. The effective aggregation rate for calcite plateaued with increased flocculant dosage. In contrast, the effective aggregation rate for sand slimes increased with higher flocculant dosages. It is proposed that this reflects the degree to which the particle surface has been effectively covered by the adsorbed polymer. Larger aggregates were formed at higher dosages with the size directly related to the calculated adsorption density of the flocculant on the mineral surface. The maximum mean aggregate size increased linearly with dosage for both the calcite and sand slimes systems. Larger aggregates formed with high flocculant dosages degraded more rapidly than the smaller aggregates formed at low flocculant dosages. The subject of this paper arose from the AMIRA P266C “Improving Thickener Technology” project that was supported by the following companies: Alcoa World Alumina, Baker Process, Bateman Process, BHP-Billiton, Centaur Mining & Exploration, Dorr-Oliver, Hydro Aluminium, Iluka Resources, Nabalco, Nalco Chemical, Outokumpu Technologies, Pasminco, Queensland Alumina, Queensland Nickel, Rio Tinto, Western Mining, Worsley Alumina. This support was crucial to the success of this work. This research has also received support from the Australian Government's Cooperative Research Centre (CRC) program, through the AJ Parker CRC for Hydrometallurgy (the Parker Centre). This support is gratefully acknowledged. Clare Talbot, Andrew Owen, and Alex Heath from the Parker Centre made important contributions to the experimental aspects of this work.