This paper discusses a case study application of inferential measurement models for semiautogenous grinding (SAG) mills and is the fourth paper in a series of five papers on inferential measurement of SAG mill parameters. The development of the inferential measurement models of SAG mill discharge and feed streams and mill rock and ball charge levels, detailed earlier in the series, is summarised here. The models are then tested on plant data for validation and analysis. Model characteristics are explored to highlight model sensitivity and relative uncertainty. The results are encouraging while limitations are noted and potential avenues for further research are discussed.This paper describes a case study application of inferential models of the mill inventory and various streams in the primary grinding circuit and is a continuation of earlier work ( A brief circuit description is followed by a summary of the inferential measurement models and their calculation sequence. Section The discussion centres on the primary grinding circuit shown in SAG mill fresh (stockpile) feed [t/h]. SAG mill feed water addition [m SAG mill powerdraw [kW]. SAG mill load cell [t]. Cyclone feed water addition [m Cyclone feedrate [m Cyclone feed density [% solids w/w]. Oversize crusher feedrate [t/h]. Ore is fed to the SAG mill for primary grinding. The mill discharge is screened with the oversized material recycling via a gyratory cone crusher, and the screen undersize being diluted with water and fed to the primary cyclones for classification. Primary cyclone underflow is split between a small recycle stream to the SAG mill feedchute and a ball mill feed stream. The primary grinding circuit products are subjected to further size reduction (ball mill), classification (cyclones) and separation (flash flotation) in the secondary grinding circuit. Further details of the grinding circuit and the other sections of the processing plant may be found elsewhere ( This section recapitulates the inferential measurement models relevant to this paper. Full model details are found elsewhere ( The Inferential measurement models of the SAG mill inventories, feed rate and sizing and mill discharge rate and sizing requires are determined in the following six-step sequence: Oversize crusher feed, primary cyclone feed, SAG mill discharge, including the transfer sizes ( SAG mill rock charge; SAG mill fractional total filling, SAG mill total feed; Oversize crusher product and primary cyclone underflow; and, SAG mill fresh feed, including the feed sizes ( The oversize crusher feed (OSCF) and primary cyclone feed (PCFD) streams are calculated from the oversize crusher feedrate, primary cyclone feed flowrate and density data and assumptions about the size distributions (based on SAG mill grate size and discharge screen aperture size), see Eqs. The oversize crusher feed size distribution (oscf) and the primary cyclone feed size distribution (pcfd) are estimated utilising the SAG mill grate size and discharge screen aperture sizes and the Rosin–Rammler size distribution function, which has been selected for its convenience and since it “has been found to fit many size distributions very well” ( The SAG mill discharge properties (SMDC) and size distribution (smdc), including the transfer sizes ( The SAG mill rock charge properties (SMRC) and size distribution (smrc) are estimated by the reverse-application of the SAG mill grate discharge function on the SAG mill discharge stream estimate, incorporating a size distribution assumption. The mill rock charge mass by size, SMRC Eq. The SAG mill water charge, SMRC SAG mill fractional total filling ( A residual can be constructed for each powerdraw and weight measurement. Both residuals can be reduced to equations in total ( For the powerdraw residual, For the mill weight residual, SAG mill total feed (SMTF) is calculated by mill model inversion. The solids component of the SAG mill total feed (SMTF/smtf) is estimated by the inversion of the Whiten steady state perfectly mixed mill model ( The appearance function ( SAG mill total feed water is determined from the steady state balance for the water: Water in The water entering the mill SMTF Oversize crusher product (OSCP) and primary cyclone underflow (PCUF) are calculated by the direct application of the crusher and cyclone simulation models. The oversize crusher product estimate (OSCP/oscp) is determined by applying the crusher model developed at the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre, ( The primary cyclone underflow estimate (PCUF/pcuf) is determined by applying the Nageswararao model ( SAG mill fresh feed (SMFF) and size distribution (smff), including the feed size indicators ( The estimate of the SAG mill fresh feed eighty percent passing size ( In earlier work, the inferential model results were assessed by comparison to the results of a process simulation model and found to give satisfactory results and thus deemed valid ( The inferential models described above were validated using data collected during the execution of the SAG Mill Control Project ( The MATLAB-Simulink model files were configured to read in the plant data from a master data file, collated from the various data files for this express purpose. The nine days worth of data was read from the master data file spreadsheet and processed by the inferential measurement models. The results were written out to text files, the contents of which were pasted into a master spreadsheet file for collation and graphing. From the significant volume of results generated, specific periods of the results were selected that highlight the performance of the key models. The first set of results is for 8 October 1997. The Grinding Log Sheet recorded that ball charging only occurred during day shift (08:00–16:00 The trends of the ball, rock and total charge estimates ( The second set of results centre around a mill inspection that was conducted on 14 October 1997 as part of the data collection phase of the SAG Control Project ( The prevailing conditions, at the time of the mill inspection, and the inferential charge measurement model results are shown in Although the mill inspection was conducted on a purely-visual basis and is thus subject to a degree of error, measurements errors of 30–50% are not expected. Therefore, the mill charge measurement models contain significant error. Although significant, this level of error is not considered a major concern in this instance for three reasons. Firstly, the estimates arise from the mill powerdraw and weight residuals, Eqs. The third set of results focus on the afternoon shift of 9 October 1997, when the mill control room operator noted that the feed size was increasing. This observation is captured well by the inferential measurement model of the feed size via the As an unmeasured variable, the absolute value of the actual Although the results produced by the inferential measurement models are encouraging overall, two model limitations have been noted, namely: The mill charge estimates do not capture feedsize and density changes. The mill charge and feedsize estimates behave unusually when the oversize crusher goes offline. Also during afternoon shift on 9 October 1997, the mill feed density was increased two percent to stop shell-bolts leaking. This change was made at approximately 19:00 The second limitation was observed when problems were experienced with the oversize crusher. For 3 The oversize crusher outage also affects the mill charge estimates, see The feedsize estimate is at the end of a chain of calculations, Step 6 in the calculation sequence described in the previous Section. The results of the calculations in the chain and assumptions made in them affect the feedsize estimate. All of the preceding steps contain model inaccuracy and errors introduced by simplifying assumptions. Although the primary cyclones and oversize crusher are downstream from the feed stockpile, the nature of the feedsize estimate model means that the primary cyclone and oversize crusher streams (and all other streams in between) influence the feedsize estimate. The model limitation that this unusual behaviour represents could potentially serve a useful purpose. This model feature could potentially be utilised as a fault-detection and diagnostic tool to alert the process operators of the advent of unusual process conditions. Additionally, if the models were part of a controller, normal plant operating status checks would have switched the controller off, thus avoiding any undue control action. This The mill charge and feedsize estimate model results were assessed previously by comparison to the results of a process simulation model and deemed valid on account that the results were satisfactory ( Sensitivity analyses were conducted on the inferential measurement models. Original results were reported in an earlier paper ( The sensitivities of the total, ball and rock charge fraction estimates to a 100 kW change in powerdraw are −4%, 2% and −6% volume, respectively. Taken in isolation, the magnitudes of the sensitivities appear near-credible. However, perhaps half of these figures is more realistic. The large sensitivities suggest the inferential models are being highly sensitive to changes in powerdraw. Reinforcing this finding is that all of the changes take place concurrently. That is, a 100 This degree of sensitivity adds to the case for measurement filtering. The noise inherent in the measuring device plus the measurement noise of the tumbling charge within the mill warrants significant filtering, e.g., a 5-min moving average. The fact that the operating point does not move in large sudden steps attenuates the effect of the sensitivities also. It should also be noted that an increase in powerdraw is likely to be accompanied by an increase in mill weight in the real plant. Therefore, changes in the charge estimates due to powerdraw changes would be tempered by changes in the mill weight. The sensitivities of the charge estimates to changes in mill weight are discussed below. The feedsize ( The sensitivity of the total charge fraction estimate to an increase of 1 These sensitivities to weight changes also appear near-credible. Again, perhaps half of these figures is more realistic. Filtering the mill weight measurement to remove measurement noise and noise due to the tumbling charge is still warranted. A 5-min moving average could be applicable here also. Further research could investigate the appropriate filtering for both the weight and powerdraw signals. The feedsize ( Referring to A 10 t/h increase in Ramping the key model inputs up and down ten percent has highlighted the sensitivity of the feedsize estimate to the calculation sequence. Firstly, estimates of the primary cyclone feed and oversize crusher feed are added together to estimate the SAG mill discharge stream. In Step 2, the discharge stream is passed through the grate classification function to estimate the bottom of the SAG mill rock charge size distribution, the coarser size fractions estimated from extrapolation of a Rosin–Rammler size distribution. The total, ball and rock charge fractions are estimated from the mill powerdraw and weight measurements in Step 3. In Step 4, the rock and ball charge estimates, the breakage parameters are estimated. The SAG mill total feed is estimated using these parameters, the rock charge fraction and size distribution estimates and the SAG mill discharge stream estimate. In Step 5, the oversize crusher product and primary cyclone underflow are estimated utilising the crusher and cyclone feed stream estimates and applying the crusher and cyclone models accordingly. Finally, in Step 6, an estimate of the SAG mill fresh feed is obtained by subtracting estimates of the oversize crusher product and primary cyclone underflow from the SAG mill total feed estimate. Each of these steps contains model inaccuracy and error introduced by simplifying assumptions. Although the primary cyclones are several unit operations removed from the feed stockpile and their behaviour has no bearing on the stockpile feed, the nature of the feedsize estimate model means that the primary cyclone streams (and all other streams between) influence the feedsize estimate. The model excitation also highlighted some unusual behaviour in the feedsize estimate when ramping the mill weight and powerdraw signals up and down. Considering the issues introduced by calculation sequence, several estimates and calculated model parameters were investigated to pin-point the origin of the unusual behaviour. Downstream of the SAG mill discharge, all estimates and parameters were coincident. The SAG mill rock charge size distribution was also constant. The varying SAG mill weight and powerdraw measurents resulted in changes in the total charge ( It was found that varying the mill weight and powerdraw ±10% caused order-of-magnitude changes in the breakage rates, see Previously, in the development and validation phase of the dynamic model of the SAG mill, This behaviour was attributed in part to errors introduced during the model fitting stage of the research, including the utilisation of linear interpolation methods instead of higher order methods. The behaviour was also likely to be characteristic of the breakage rate model itself since researchers at the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre (JKMRC) have experienced similar behaviour (“room for improvement” exists in the “key sub-process” of the “breakage rate relationships”). The JKMRC have also utilised a Kalman filter to estimate parameters to continually tune the model against online data ( Inspection of the breakage rate equations, Eqs. The functional dependence on equipment parameters (mill speed and ball size) and operating conditions (feed size, recycle ratio and ball charge level) gives rise to the name of “variable rates model”. The breakage rate function (r The high sensitivity of SAG mill feedsize estimate to the SAG mill breakage rates is a concern and should be duely noted. The exponential proportionality of the breakage rates to the ball charge fraction ( The dynamics of the SAG mill and typical feedsize changes should be considered when selecting the length of the rolling average. Feedsize changes typically occur over a longer time period, e.g., 15–30 There is evidence of negative, proportional correlation between the ball charge estimate ( A plausible explanation for the bands is that they correspond to different ore hardness levels. This theory could be investigated thoroughly in further research. However, the investigation of the model characteristics here reinforces this argument. The model characteristics and sensitivities were investigated by ramping the model inputs up and down ten percent, one at a time, as described above. Stimulating the powerdraw and weight inputs this way, results in contours for constant weight and powerdraw, respectively, on the total charge versus ball charge plot, as shown in The contours in Comparing the weight contours, Noting now the slopes of the contours. The weight contours, The weight contours were found to be linear as expected. The proportionality constant is between −1.7 and −1.6. This slope is consistent with the slope proposed for striations in For the powerdraw contours, the total charge estimate ( The uncertainty in the total ( The general formula for error propagation ( The residuals are functions of the charge estimates. Hence, the sensitivity of the mill charge estimates to errors in the parameters, Given an implicit model equation Substituting Eq. The left-hand side of Eq. This finding may be applied to the contours in For a low ball charge fraction estimate, A summary of the development of the inferential measurement models of SAG mill discharge and feed streams and mill rock and ball charge levels reiterates the models detailed earlier in this series of papers. The inferential measurement models have been tested on plant data. The mill charge fraction (total, ball and rock) estimates were found to contain a significant level of error. However, considering that model fitting parameters are adjustable and that the models trended sensibly, the models were considered valuable with potential for use in SAG mill charge control. Other model limitations were highlighted when unusual process conditions came into effect. Further research is required to further investigate the model limitations and whether there is potential for fault-detection and diagnosis purposes. Model sensitivity was further investigated by the artificial stimulation of the key model inputs. The powerdraw and mill weight measurements strongly affect the total, ball and rock charge estimates. The oversize crusher feedrate and mill weight measurements strongly affect the feedsize estimate. Moving-average filtering of the mill weight and powerdraw measurements is considered a valid strategy to reduce undue model sensitivity to these measurements. The trending characteristic of the feed size Total and ball charge estimate contours for the mill powerdraw and weight measurements were presented for a number of different operating conditions. The slope of the contours was discussed in terms of relative uncertainties in the total and ball charge estimates. For the weight contour (varying powerdraw) estimates: the total charge estimate ( For the mill powerdraw contour (varying weight) estimates: the total charge estimate ( Since the first paper ( Acknowledgements go to Northparkes Mines for their assistance with and permission to publish circuit information, the Centre for Process Systems Engineering, Imperial college, London, for significant hosting and the University of Sydney for providing Australian Postgraduate Award funding for this research.