Optimizing level intervals is one of the main issues in underground mining operations with steeply-dipping deposits. Specifically, it has a direct effect on the economy, as well as, the technical decisions of a mining project. Any deviation of the level intervals from the optimal values either increases the development costs or cause problems during operational activities. To avoid mining capital losses and facilitate production cycles, level intervals parameters must be optimized. Due to the lack of comprehensive methods that are capable to optimize level intervals, two different optimization models known as Integer Programming and Dynamic Programming are presented. These optimization models need input parameters and these parameters are derived from optimal solutions of the stope boundary problem at each production level. To solve the stope boundary problem we also use integer programming and an approximate dynamic programming. The proposed optimization models are implemented to solve level optimization in a steeply-dipping vein gold deposit. The results obtained from analysis confirm the capability, efficiency and reliability of our proposed optimization models to solve the problems that are raised from practical scales.Prior to using large capacity trucks and shovels in open pit mines, overburden removal was difficult and a capital consuming activity. Therefore, underground mining methods were employed as a more economically and favorable extraction method to mine deep deposits while surface mining methods were limited to extracting outcrops. Undoubtedly, the invention of high capacity trucks and shovels became a basis for switching from underground to open pit mining as overburden removal became economically viable. Consequently, open pit mining became the common and popular method for extracting near-surface deposits for many decades. This fact has changed over time due to (1) depletion of most surface deposits; (2) increases in the truck haulage distances and costs as well as the stripping ratios in open pits; (3) strict environmental regulations in developed and some underdeveloped countries; (4) advancement in underground mining technologies; and (5) high production rate of underground caving methods. As a result, it is highly anticipated that mining companies would return to underground mining in future. Given the aforementioned reasons, there is expected underground mining take a more important role in the mining industry for the coming decades. However, despite the critical role of underground mining in the industry, a large gap is observed between the existing and desired planning tools in this field. In comparison to open pit mine planning ( One of the main factors in designing underground mine plans for steeply-dipping vein deposits is determining the level intervals. Steeply-dipping vein deposits are usually divided into independent levels and ore is extracted from stopes at separated levels. Any deviation of the level intervals from the optimum either increases the development costs or creates technical problems during the extraction process. Short level intervals increases the total number of levels. Consequently, increasing the number of levels means more development, drilling, and support are needed. On the other hand, if the level intervals are increased, some operational problems may be experienced in the production cycle. These problems include limitations imposed on the workers travelling through the raises as well as challenges surrounding the maintenance of raises, water drainage, and ventilation of stopes ( Current studies propose two alternative approaches to solve the level interval optimization problem in steeply-dipping vein deposits. Researchers have been looking at optimization of stope boundaries over the last four decades however; there are few attempts to solve the level interval optimization problem. A two-dimensional (2D) dynamic programming method was developed by The Maximum Value Neighborhood (MVN) algorithm was developed by Ataee-pour ( Although the level interval optimization problem involves a large number of critical factors in underground mine planning, a comprehensive method has not yet been reported for it. The most efficient and practical approach related to this problem was developed by The level interval optimization problem has critical effects on the economical and technical factors of an underground mining project. However, researchers have paid less attention to solve this problem in the last decades. The main goal of this paper is to present an efficient approach for determining the optimal level intervals in steeply-dipping vein deposits. To achieve this goal, the value of each feasible level should be a pre-known parameter before implementing any model or algorithm to solve the problem. So, in this work we consider two phases. In the first phase (phase I), the value of each level is determined by calling and solving an integer linear programming model (ILP The rest of the paper is organized as follows: the next section of this paper presents two alternative methods for optimization of stope boundaries in a given economic block model. Section Mineral deposits in underground mines are extracted from stopes. The simplified shape of a stope in two-dimensional (2D) orebodies is similar to a rectangle. Rectangles are recognized by origin blocks. Among all blocks found inside a rectangle, there exists a unique block with minimum indices on the A view of a rectangle inside a 2D economic block model has been illustrated in    A schematic illustration of an overhand underground mining method has been illustrated in  A new integer linear programming model and a new approximate dynamic programming (ADP) method are proposed in this section to solve the aforementioned problem. The proposed ILP model can guarantee optimal solution for this problem; however, it is a time consuming optimization approach and therefore it is not an efficient method to solve large scale problems. So, a fast and polynomial time dynamic programming algorithm is later developed in this section. This ADP method is an alternative approach for the proposed ILP model and it can produce high quality solutions in a reasonable amount of computational time. A new integer linear programming model is introduced in this section to determine the optimum stope boundaries in a given economic block model. Parameters and decision variables that are used in the model are defined in Most mathematical models in the mine planning optimization field are usually implemented to the conventional economic block model. However, this section of paper focuses on development of a new integer linear programming model, which is applied to a techno-economic block model. This specific model is obtained from the conventional model and hereafter it is referred to as secondary block model ( The set of all blocks in the secondary block model are divided into two main categories: real blocks and virtual blocks. The value of both real and virtual blocks can be calculated by Eq. Suppose that there is a 2D economic block model that is made up of three rows and seven columns ( The proposed ILP model uses some binary decision variables to identify all subsets in Given that at most one subset in any column should be selected in the final solution, the summation of all decision variables in a certain column is always less than or equal to one. Let us explain the minimum stope size constraint in a single row, then this constraint must be modified in order to apply it in 2D problems. Suppose that  In the first, second and fourth senarios; block Constraint 11.d is a modified version for Constraint 10 and it is suitable to apply in 2D stope boundary optimization problems. In Constraint 11.d, their left edges are identified instead of investigating the left corners of stopes. Therefore, by enumerating all blocks that are located in the right-hand side of these edges, the minimum stope size will be considered along the Subject to: Constraint 11.e in the proposed ILP model is used to check the rip pillar width. This constraint has a similar structure to Constraint 11.d. The column To consider the minimum stope size and rib pillar constraints, the values of the decision variable in two neighboring columns are investigated in order to identify the left corners. However to apply these constraints in the first column, it is necessary to add a virtual column in the left-hand side of the secondary block model. Moreover, to use these constraints in the last columns of the given economic block model, the minimum stope size and rib pillar constraints need The solution of ILP Currently, a large number of optimization problems in the engineering fields are solved by dynamic programming methods. In these methods, the complicated main problem is broken into a number of simple sub-problems. After solving all sub-problems and collecting their solutions, the best solution is determined for the main problem from these set of solutions. Dynamic programming method is a well-known optimization technique and to date it has been applied to solve a wide range of engineering problems. In this section, we propose a new dynamic programming algorithm to find stope boundaries in a given 2D economic block model. Although this algorithm generates approximate solutions, it is a fast optimization method and obtained results from several implementations on both hypothetical and real data validate its potential to find high quality solutions with the lowest optimality gap. Considering the size of problem and computational limitations, this proposed algorithm is capable of finding an optimum or near optimum solution with less computational efforts. Dynamic programming methods use the following steps sequentially to find an optimum solution: (1) calculating the cumulative value for each state at each stage and storing the best result obtained up to that point, (2) finding the maximum cumulative value and its corresponding state at the final stage, (3) tracing back the path of states leading to the optimal solution. To consider the minimum stope sizes in this problem, stopes are modeled using specific rectangles. These rectangles should have a minimum size on both the dip and strike directions. At each stage, the ADP algorithm chooses a rectangle with feasible sizes. Therefore, the final solution that is the union of these selected rectangles always remains feasible. Each rectangle has two attributes: (1) its size along the strike direction ( The set of corresponding blocks to the state The value of The cumulative value for each state is calculated using Eqs. Among all previous states, there exists a unique state that maximizes the objective function. This state is denoted by After finding the best previous state, the current cumulative block set is updated by adding all blocks inside the current state to the best previous cumulative block set (Eq. One of the main steps in this algorithm is identifying overlapped area between the current state and previous cumulative block set. Since the value of any block in the objective function is taken into account only once, the overlapping area must be identified and the value of its blocks should be subtracted from the objective function. The set of all blocks inside the overlapped area is denoted by The value of overlapped set is determined by Eq. To calculate To account for the rib pillar constraint, the objective function is penalized using a large negative number if there is a small sized pillar between the current state and the previous cumulative block set. Suppose that In the final step, among all the existing cumulative values at the final stage ( To determine minable blocks, all states related to the The ADP solution for the aforementioned hypothetical problem in Section Suppose that there is a steeply-dipping vein deposit and based on the feasibility studies, the selected method for extracting this deposit is an overhand underground mining method. By excavating drifts along the strike direction of the vein at different elevations, the deposit is divided into independent levels. The operation is concentrated in each level and stopes are placed between these levels. After the blasting process, fragmented materials are removed from stopes to the horizontal haulage drift through an ore pass or chutes. The materials in the drawpoints are hauled to the surface using ramps or the main shaft. In this section, we try to optimize the level intervals in steeply-dipping vein deposits subject to the geo-mechanical, operational and safety factors. As mentioned earlier, this paper is divided into two main phases. The first phase involves calculating the value of the levels and the preparation of basic information for the next phase. In the second phase, given the value of each level, the optimum level intervals are determined using either an ILP model or a dynamic programming algorithm. The general procedure of solving this problem has been illustrated in Suppose that we have two levels at two different elevations. Then, there is some mineralized area between these levels. Due to the geo-mechanical considerations to avoid collapse in the roof and floor of haulage drifts, two pillars should be left at the top and bottom of this mineralized area as crown pillar and sill pillar, respectively. However, a grade block model is created for the remaining mineralized zones. After converting the existing grade block model to an economic block model ( Suppose that Eq. The number of The minimum and maximum level intervals are expressed by The main goal in this paper is to find the optimum level intervals while considering the geo-mechanical and operational factors. To solve this problem a new ILP model and a new dynamic programming approach are proposed. Both optimization methods guarantee the optimal solution however, the proposed dynamic programming algorithm is fast and easy to implement. A new ILP model is proposed to determine the optimum level intervals in a 2D economic block model. After dividing the given deposit into fixed-size blocks and grade estimation, the economic value of blocks are calculated by considering the selling price, recovery as well as the mining and processing costs. Parameters and decision variables that are used in this model are defined in The objective function of this model is looking for the best combination of levels that maximizes the overall profit of mine. The second index of the decision variable defines the level interval between two neighboring levels. These levels are at Neighboring stopes should not have any intersection. Therefore, if two levels contain the overlap area, they do not belong in the final solution, concurrently (Constraint 32.c). Moreover, levels should always be located inside the economic block model (Constraint 32.d). Subject to: The next section introduces a dynamic programming algorithm for this problem. This dynamic programming algorithm is an alternative optimization method for ILP A fast and polynomial time dynamic programming algorithm is introduced in the current section for the optimization of level intervals. The proposed Dynamic programming algorithm is an alternative optimization method for ILP The level interval ( The best previous stage ( The cumulative set for state Given the size of the cumulative sets and using After calculating all cumulative values corresponding to any In the final step, the level intervals and the optimum position for excavation haulage drifts are determined using EQs. (41, 42). It should be noted that, levels are synonymous to haulage drifts. A data set from a gold vein deposit is used to validate the proposed optimization methods (the name and location of this deposit cannot be disclosed for confidentiality reasons). The basic information about the deposit and the parameters of problem are reported in Due to increasing stripping ratio, mining costs, and environmental issues associated with open pit mines, it is anticipated that mine planners will increasingly pay more attention to underground mining methods in the near future. Therefore, designing powerful underground mine planning tools is highly desirable at the moment. One of the main problems in underground mine planning is the optimization of level intervals in steeply-dipping vein deposits. Despite the critical role of level intervals in underground mining, researchers have paid less attention to optimize it in the past decades. This paper proposed a two-phase optimization method to solve the level interval optimization problem. In the first phase, the values of the levels are determined by a new integer linear programming model. The first phase prepares basic information for the next phase. In the second phase, the optimum value of level intervals is determined by a novel integer linear programming model. Two dynamic programming methods are also presented as alternatives to the proposed mathematical models. Implementation of the proposed methods on a real data set validated their potential in producing high quality solutions in a reasonable amount of computational time. Vahid Nikbin: Methodology, validation, writing the first draft. Majid Ataee-Pour: Review, editing, verification. Angelina Anani: Review, editing, verification.