The purpose of this study was to test the feasibility of using bacterial leaching to solubilize copper from a porphyry sulphide ore, a part of the Sarcheshmeh Copper Complex. The bulk ore sample contained 18% pyrite and 0.8% Cu mostly as secondary chalcocite and Cu oxides. Mineral microscopy showed that pyrite grains in this porphyry ore were coated by chalcocite. Conventional flotation could not be used for ore beneficiation because Cu-sulphide could not be selectively separated from pyrite and consequently the flotation concentrate contained too much Fe and less Cu. Hence bioleaching was tested as an alternative process for this ore. The bioleaching was tested with a consortium of mesophilic acidophiles comprising Leptospirillum and Acidithiobacillus spp., originally enriched from the Sarcheshmeh site. Several mineral salt formulations were tested in shake flask bioleaching experiments. These experiments resulted in 89–92% Cu yields with no discernible differences between the different formulations. Sterile controls representing chemical acid leaching resulted in about 60% Cu solubilization. For column bioleaching experiments, ore samples (~40kg each; 75% −12mm) were agglomerated and treated with a schedule of 4days of irrigation and 4days of rest period. The column bioleaching tests yielded Cu recoveries of about 90%. The abiotic control had 50% Cu recovery. Thus the test results were favorable for using the bioleaching approach for this Cu-ore material.Bioheap leaching processes are commercially used especially for the recovery of copper. These processes involve acidophilic microorganisms that grow at pH-values The purpose of this study was to test the bioleaching of a Cu-sulphide ore from Sarcheshmeh Copper Complex with a relatively high pyrite content using a mixed culture of In general, chalcocite as a single mineral can be floated efficiently with ethyl xanthate as a function of its electrode potential and distinctly separately from pyrite flotation. With a mixture of pyrite and chalcocite, as is the case here, the selectivity conferred by the difference in the potentials of the two minerals is decreased ( Both shake flask and column leaching techniques were used to assess the bioleaching of Cu from the ore in this work. Several mineral salt formulations were also evaluated for the bioleaching process in an effort to rank them in relation to the Cu bioleaching yields. A bulk sample of 500 Roll bottle tests performed on the ore sample showed a net acid consumption of about 8 A mixed culture of mesophilic bacteria, including The mineral salt media used in the bioleaching experiments are listed in Five columns (height 200 The purpose of the shake flask experiments was to compare mineral salt formulations for the bioleaching of the − The increasing trend of ORP (ΔORP ~ About 80% of the total Cu in the ore was present as sulphide minerals and the remainder as acid soluble Cu ( The corresponding changes in ORP and pH were similar in all inoculated columns ( Bacterial counts showed a lag of 11   It is debatable whether supplemental mineral salt formulations are needed in commercial operations. Phosphate and nitrogen sources are essential as they may not be available from the dissolution of the ore matrix. Recent bioleaching studies have shown that the alkali earth metals Ca and Mg and the alkali metal K are solubilized from gangue minerals due to acid attack during the bioleaching of sulphide ores ( The Cu-ore sample with high pyrite content was amenable to Cu solubilization via bioleaching. Shake flask studies showed no differences in Cu recovery (89–92%) between different mineral salt formulations used to prepare leach solutions. Cell counts varied but could reflect differences in sessile and planktonic bacterial populations. Similar Cu-recoveries were obtained in the bioleaching columns. The residual Cu in the solids, about 10%, may represent recalcitrant chalcopyrite. Chemical leaching released between 50 and 60% Cu during comparable time courses, whereas the dissolution of Fe from pyrite was considerably more suppressed. The results suggested that agglomeration of the ore is not required for column leaching. Inhibitory substances were not detected in these experiments. This work was supported by the