This paper is part of our study of the frother structure-property relationship using bubble rise velocity as the property. Single bubble rise velocity profiles were determined for surfactants of the polyethylene glycol (PEG) family in a 350-cm column, and the concentration to reach minimum velocity (CMV) measured at 300 cm is determined. The lower the CMV indicates a structure more effective in slowing bubble rise. The CMV is shown to decrease as both alkyl chain length (n, number of carbons) and number of ethylene oxide groups (l) increases. Linear correlations log CMV vs. n and l were observed; and taking literature data for critical coalescence concentration (CCC), a linear log CMV vs. log CCC correlation was found. Mechanisms controlling bubble rise velocity based on structure effects on surface tension gradients and surface viscosity are discussed. A comparison with previous findings on polypropylene glycols is included.Frothers, a class of surface active agents (surfactants), are widely used in mineral flotation. They have three principal functions: to aid formation and preservation of small bubbles; to reduce bubble rise velocity; and to stablize froth ( The use of frothers in mineral flotation practice today is dominated by two nonionic surfactant families, alcohols (general formula: C Polyethylene glycols (also known as polyethylene glycol alkyl ethers, alkyl monoethers of polyoxyethylene glycols ( Several studies have reported structure effects on properties of PEGs. Polyethylene glycols and their ethers have been studied with respect to use in flotation ( Understanding the effect of frother structure on flotation performance is of both fundamental and practical importance. The objective of this study is to establish the structure effect in the PEG family using single bubble rise velocity as the property. Also included are comparisons with literature data on polypropylene glycols (  The water-jacketed (for temperature control) column was 350 cm in height of 20 L capacity. At the base, bubbles of diameter ca. 1.45 mm were formed using a glass capillary of 51 µm internal diameter. (A 1.45 mm bubble is in a size range sensitive to surfactant addition ( Eleven polyethylene glycols (C  To eliminate the effect of distance travelled in order to expose the dependence on structure, the velocity at 300 cm has been selected ( The estimated CMV values are summarized in   As a bubble rises, the initially clean surface when first released is progressively ‘contaminated’ with surfactant, which is revealed by a decrease in velocity that reflects an increase in drag. The increase in drag is commonly attributed to surface tension gradients created as surfactant is swept to and accumulates at the downstream side (rear) of the bubble, gradients which counter the flow of fluid over the bubble surface ( Perhaps the simplest effect to interpret is surface activity. As determined by the magnitude of surface tension decrease, The mechanisms outlined do not readily predict the log-linear relationship demonstrated in The relationship between CMV and CCC shown in In a previous study, we reported the CMV for PPGs ( The PO differs from EO by the presence of the From a practical perspective, making the technical target a frother structure giving low CMV (and by inference from The paper has reported on the effect of structure on concentration to reach minimum velocity at 300 cm (CMV) for polyethylene glycols. The CMV decreased by up to five times for unit increase in either number of alkyl (n) or ethylene oxide groups (l). Linear trends of log CMV against n and l were demonstrated, and against log CCC using literature data. A comparison with structural effect of polypropylene glycols on CMV is included. Mechanisms based on the effect of surface activity, molecular packing, and H-bonding on surface tension gradients and surface viscosity were considered. The work was conducted under the Chair in Mineral Processing funded through tan NSERC (Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada) CRD (Collaborative Research and Development) grant sponsored by Vale, Teck, Xstrata Process Support, Barrick Gold, Shell Canada, Corem, SGS Lakefield Research and Flottec; and through an NSERC-CRD grant sponsored by the AMIRA P9N project.