With a view to develop metal free, low SAPs antiwear additives, the antiwear properties of salicylaldehyde N(4)-phenylthiosemicarbazone and its p-methylphenyl, p-methoxyphenyl and p-chlorophenyl derivatives(1%w/v) and their synergistic/antagonistic behavior with Vanlube 289(1%w/v) additive were tested in base oil using four-ball lubricant tester and ZDDP as a reference additive. Antiwear testing of additives(1%w/v) was done by varying load and time. The performance of antiwear additives has been compared on the basis of tribological parameters. An appreciable synergistic activity is observed between 1% concentrations of the thiosemicarbazones and Vanlube289. The efficiencies of the synergistic formulations are far better than that of ZDDP. The topography and composition of the wear scar were analyzed by AFM and SEM with EDX. The synergistic formulations cause enormous reduction in surface roughness. The EDX analysis of the wear scar in the case of base oil with additive exhibits presence of sulfur and nitrogen.Thiosemicarbazones are biologically versatile compounds. Their antitumor, antimalarial, antiamoebic, antiviral and antibacterial activities are widely accepted Zinc dialkyl dithiophosphates have been frequently used as effective commercial antioxidant and antiwear additives for a number of lubricating motor oils Analytical grade reagents were used in the present investigation. Alloy steel bearing balls of 12.7 The lubricating base oil was neutral paraffin oil having specific gravity 0.82 at 25 Physical properties of Vanlube 289 are given below: Main component borate ester Physical state yellow liquid Color, ASTM D 1500 L 1.5 Density at 15.6 Viscosity at 40 Viscosity at 100 Boron content, % 1.00 The tests were performed at 1475 The wear scar diameter of each of the three horizontal balls was measured in two mutually perpendicular directions, one in the sliding direction ( For each experiment arithmetic mean of the above diameter of each ball (     The coefficient of friction for different antiwear additives is calculated with the help of Eq.  Overall wear rate Wear volumes at different times for each experiment were plotted with time and a linear regression model was fitted on the points including origin to find overall wear rate. The running-in process involves gradual adjustment of two interacting and relatively moving surfaces. Initially, the wear rate is high and then decreases progressively and ultimately a steady state is maintained. Running-in wear rate This was found by fitting a straight line on the initial three points of the curves plotted between wear volume and time. The slope of this line gives running-in wear rate. Steady-state wear rate This was found by fitting a straight line on the mid three points of the curves plotted between wear volume and time. The slope of this line gives steady state wear rate.   Roughness average Root mean square, Peak-valley height, Peak-height, Valley depth, Mean value,  Roughness average Root mean square Peak-valley height, Peak-height, Valley depth, Mean value, The antiwear testing was performed on Seta-Shell four-ball E.P. Lubricant Testing Machine, Stanhope Seta Ltd., London. AFM images were taken on Nanosurf basic Scan 2, Switzerland. SEM with EDX was recorded on FEI Quanta 200F at department of Metallurgical Engineering, I.I.T. (Banaras Hindu University), Varanasi. At first  Salicylaldehyde  R= as  as  as The antiwear behavior of zinc dibutyl dithiophosphate(ZDDP)(1%w/v), salicylaldehyde The concentration of synthesized additives was optimized by varying it from 0.25 to 1.5  Since Vanlube 289  At initial load (294 The above order is in conformity with the polarity of the molecules. When mixtures of Vanlube 289 (1%) and different thiosemicarbazones are tested, there is a tremendous increase in efficiency of the mixtures as antiwear additives showing great amount of synergy. However, it follows the same sequence among different derivatives as shown above. Vanlube 289+different H  A correlation between applied load and friction coefficient at 1% concentration of ZDDP/Vanlube 289/different thiosemicarbazones and mixtures of Vanlube 289 (1%) with the thiosemicarbazones (1%) for 30 The variation of mean wear scar diameter with time duration 15, 30, 60 and 90 From the curves for mixtures of Vanlube 289 (1%) with different derivatives (1%) it is quite evident that increase in MWD is extremely small for different time periods showing their synergistic action resulting into formation of stronger and more adherent tribofilm. The overall order of efficiency follows the same order as discussed above. Variation of mean wear volume with time in absence and presence of 1% ZDDP/Vanlube 289/thiosemicarbazones and mixtures of Vanlube 289 (1%) and thiosemicarbazones (1%) in paraffin oil at 392  Mean wear volumes in absence and presence of different additives at 392 This again is in conformity with the conclusion drawn earlier that H When thiosemicarbazones and Vanlube 289 are present together in a mixture, wear rate is significantly reduced showing synergistic interaction between the two additives and forming a very strong adherent tribofilm. The mixtures with different thiosemicarbazones follow the same trend as given above. The different additives may be arranged according to overall wear rate as given below- Plain paraffin oil>thiosemicarbazones>ZDDP>Vanlube 289>mixtures of thiosemicarbazones and Vanlube 289 (both 1%). Since running-in wear rate refers to the adjustments of newly assembled components under controlled conditions, running-in wear rate is always higher than the steady state wear rate in every case. The running-in wear rate has been found by fitting a straight line on the initial three points of the curves plotted between wear volume and time. The slope of this line gives the running-in wear rate ( The same order for the additives, as discussed above, is observed for running-in and steady state wear rate and can be explained similarly. The surface topography of the wear scar has been studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). SEM micrographs of the wear scar in the presence of 1% additive salicylaldehyde Surface morphology of the wear scar on the steel balls observed after antiwear testing at load 392 Energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis of the worn surface in the presence of the above additive at the same experimental conditions provides elemental distribution and atomic concentrations of the elements. The data are collected in  All the tested thiosemicarbazones act as good antiwear additives and exhibit excellent synergistic behavior with Vanlube 289. Extremely poor antiwear behavior is observed when concentration of both the additives thiosemicarbazones and Vanlube 289, is taken as 0.5%. With increase in concentration of thiosemicarbazones to 1%, the synergistic interaction increases and attains the best value when concentration of Vanlube 289 also is taken as 1%. Among different derivatives the order of efficiency follows the sequence The overall efficiency for different additives lies in the order- Mixtures of Vanlube 289+thiosemicarbazones (both as 1%w/v)>Vanlube 289 (1%w/v)>ZDDP (1%w/v)>thiosemicarbazones (1%w/v)>plain paraffin oil. SEM and AFM support the above order on the basis of smoothening of the surface in presence of the additives. EDX analysis of the wear scar in presence of thiosemicarbazones in paraffin oil shows nitrogen and sulfur indicating chemisorption of the additive resulting into formation of load bearing tribofilm. However, EDX analysis of the wear scar in presence of the mixtures containing Vanlube 289 and thiosemicarbazones in paraffin oil could not explain the strengthening of the tribofilm by the borate esters of Vanlube 289 due to limitations of EDX. The financial assistance from