The behavior of the gangue material in the flotation froth was studied. Experiments were conducted in which hematite was floated in flotation cell and glass particles of approximately the same size were introduced into the froth. A continuous flotation cell of a special design was used, which allowed the collection of the particles which had dropped out of the froth. Glass particles with a range of contact angles (0°, 50°, 66°, and 82°) were used in the experimental program. To examine the effect of the hydrophobicities of the particles on the recovery of gangue mineral, mixtures of hydrophobic and hydrophilic glass in various ratios were used. The results suggest that the hydrophobic particles have a strong effect on the structure of the froth, which in turn influences the drainage of hydrophilic particles in the froth.The flotation process is based on the concept that floatable particles (values) are captured by gas bubbles in the liquid phase and carried up to the froth–pulp interface, while hydrophilic particles are retained in the system. In most cases however, complete separation between gangue and valuable mineral in the pulp zone is not achievable, and some gangue minerals are transported into the froth generally with the entrained liquid. As the froth ages, some of the hydrophilic gangue returns back to the pulp due to drainage of slurry, while the remainder is carried up with the concentrate, resulting in reduced product quality. It has been shown that the drainage of hydrophilic particles (or recovery of gangue in the concentrate) is largely affected by the characteristics of the gangue mineral such as density particle size, and concentration ( In this work, the drainage behavior of gangue mineral in the presence of hydrophobic particles was investigated by adding particles directly into the froth phase. A specially designed flotation cell, which could isolate the froth from the pulp zone, was used, thus allowing the collection of the particles which had dropped out of the froth. Hematite particles were floated in a conventional way while glass spheres were introduced directly into the froth in washwater. Froth-fed particles were of various contact angles ranging from 0° to 82°. In some tests, hydrophilic and hydrophobic glass particles were mixed and tests were conducted with the blended feed. In this way the effect of the hydrophobicity of particles attaching to the bubbles on the drainage of gangue mineral in the froth phase could be observed. All experiments were conducted using hematite ore obtained from the Port Hedland area in Western Australia, and methylated glass spheres ( A flotation cell in which the froth phase is isolated from the pulp zone, was employed. Hematite was floated in the pulp phase using oleic acid and kerosene as collectors while hydrophobic and hydrophilic glass particles suspended in water were directly introduced into the froth phase. Particles that dropped out the froth column (glass particles and hematite) were collected. The washwater was introduced on the top of the froth to minimize entrainment. Details of the experimental procedure may also be found in  As can be seen, the recovery of hydrophilic glass particles decreases sharply as the concentration of oleic acid increases from about 2–3 g/t and then again slightly increases as the oleic acid concentration further increases from 3 to 8 g/t. The high recovery of gangue particles at low oleic acid concentrations may be attributed to the transportation in the entrained water where the upward liquid velocity in the froth is probably high enough to prevent the settling of particles through the froth. The recovery of particles by entrainment will be influenced by the local concentration of gangue in the liquid, the local liquid holdup, and the rise velocity of the liquid relative to the terminal velocity of the particles. The fact that there is a minimum recovery of gangue suggests that at a particular concentration of collector, these factors give rise to a maximum in the net particle drainage rate. The most interesting phenomenon observed here is that as the collector concentration is increased beyond the value corresponding to the minimum, the recovery of gangue increases. The oleic acid does not adsorb on the glass particles, so it would be reasonable to assume that as the concentration increases, the hydrophobicity of the floatable material, the hematite, increases also. The data in Further experiments were carried out by adding mixtures of hydrophobic and hydrophilic glass particles of the same size, suspended in water, into the froth. Hydrophobic glass particles were prepared artificially by silanation. Three contact angles were chosen: 82° (strongly hydrophobic glass), 66° (intermediate hydrophobic glass) and 50° (weakly hydrophobic glass). These tests are particularly important for the observation of recovery of particles in the froth phase where particles are directly introduced into a froth column. At a constant solids concentration in the feed to the froth (20% w/w), tests were carried out with hydrophobic and hydrophilic glass blended in ratios of 1:3, 1:1 and 3:1 for each type of hydrophobic particle. The equivalent percentages of hydrophobic glass in the mixtures were 25%, 50% and 75%, respectively. Additional tests were conducted in which the mass concentration of the hydrophobic particles was the same as in the tests with mixtures. Thus the conditions for these hydrophobic-only tests were identical to those for the hydrophobic–hydrophilic mixtures, except that hydrophilic particles were absent. Any increase in recovery of particles in a mixed system was therefore assumed to be due to an increase in the recovery of hydrophilic particles by entrainment. The assumption is made that the recovery of hydrophobic particles is unaffected by the presence of hydrophilic gangue.  It is evident from In Although the results presented in this paper are obtained from a system where particles are added into the froth, the outcome may also be applicable to conventional froth flotation. The literature suggests that the recovery of entrained solids is closely related to the recovery of feed water reported to the concentrate, the wetter the froth, the higher proportion of gangue in the flotation product. The present study shows that there might be cases where an inverse relationship between the recovery of hydrophilic glass and the water recovery in the concentrate may be established, indicating that the transportation of gangue mineral does not necessarily correlate with the recovered water. This finding raises a serious doubt on the mathematical models developed for the predicting the recovery of gangue mineral in the concentrate ( An interesting result of this study can be seen when the size distributions of the particles that dropped out of the froth column were plotted for various concentrations of the hydrophilic glass particles that were introduced with water into the froth. The concentration of glass spheres was varied from 5% to 25%. Other experimental conditions were the same as given for  The drainage behavior of gangue mineral in a flotation froth has been investigated. The froth was formed by flotation of hematite particles. Separately, a suspension of particles was fed into the froth at pre-determined height. The froth feed contained hydrophilic glass particles or glass particles that had been hydrophobised to give contact angles from 50° to 82°, or mixtures of the two. In order to measure the recovery of hydrophilic particles by entrainment, hydrophobic and hydrophilic particles were mixed in various ratios and experiments were carried out with the mixed samples. It was found that hydrophobic particles significantly affect the drainage rate of hydrophilic particles in the froth. The recovery of hydrophilic particles in the flotation product increased as the hydrophobicity of the floatable particles increased. The water recovery rate decreased with increasing contact angle. Accordingly, it appears that the hydrophobic particles had an effect on the structure of froth, allowing increased drainage rate of water, leading to drier froths, in which the hydrophilic particles become more easily entrapped. Gangue recovery in the concentrate also increased with the concentration of the gangue mineral presented to the froth even in the presence of washwater, presumably as a result of the increase viscosity of the liquid in the froth. One of the authors (SA) gratefully acknowledges financial support from the University of Newcastle, and the Australian Research Council Special Research Centre for Multiphase Processes during the course of this work.