Shot peening is a well-established surface treatment commonly used to improve mechanical properties of material's surfaces. Studies have shown notable enhancement of fatigue strength, wear, scratch and corrosion resistance and fretting properties as a result of an intensive shot peening treatment, the so-called severe shot peening. Nevertheless, this process has some drawbacks including quite high surface roughness and possible embedment of shot residuals at the treated surface, which can have adverse effects depending on the final application. In this paper, electropolishing has been evaluated as a cleaning post-treatment for shot peened surfaces of 316L stainless steel. For this purpose, electropolishing voltage has been varied with the aim of obtaining clean and smoother surfaces without sacrificing the mechanical improvements produced by shot peening. The treated surfaces have been characterized considering surface roughness, morphology, wettability, residual stresses and microhardness evolution after various shot peening treatments combined with electropolishing using different parameter set-ups to identify the most promising combinations.Shot peening is an impact-based surface treatment usually applied for fatigue strength improvement of structural components. During the process, small spherical peening media impact a surface with enough energy to provide surface plastic deformation. The reiterated impacts produce compressive residual stresses and harden the near surface layer of materials, while increasing the surface roughness [ Severe shot peening (SSP) is a particular peening process carried out by modifying the main parameters that control the peening process, namely surface coverage and Almen intensity, in order to obtain higher energy impacts. Almen intensity is defined as the arc height of an standard Almen test strip measured at a coverage of 98% (corresponding to full coverage) by using an Almen gauge, while surface coverage is the ratio of the area covered by plastic indentation to the whole treated surface area [ On a more general note, although surface roughness induced by SSP was found to be significantly important to inhibit bacterial adhesion [ Another challenging issue that could impede successful application of shot peening is some fields for example in biomedical implants is the potential presence of embedded shot fragments on the treated surfaces that makes the treated material prone to aseptic complications, besides introducing potential crack nucleation sites. Some studies have demonstrated that these particles could also be responsible for third-body wear and early implant failure [ In this context, a strict post-treatment control after peening processes is necessary to decontaminate the surface and remove the remaining shot particles and provide a polished surface required in the target applications or to further improve other properties such as wear and corrosion resistance. Thus, suggesting a method that can provide more flexibility to control the surface characteristics induced by shot peening seems quite interesting. Herein we aimed at evaluating the application of the EP process as a post-treatment to shot peened surfaces. Specifically, we studied the effect of EP on 316L stainless steel surfaces, treated by conventional shot peening (CSP) and severe shot peening (SSP). EP is a surface finishing process in which the surface roughness is reduced through a selective electrochemical dissolution. The metal to be treated is immersed in an electrolyte, which must be carefully chosen for each system, anodically polarized and dissolved by applying a specific amount of current for a fixed period of time. The process is traditionally used in diverse applications to provide a clean, smooth and bright appearance. Moreover, EP surfaces could offer additional advantages including easier cleaning and maintenance, increasing corrosion resistance and reducing friction and wear for contact surfaces [ EP has been widely applied for different applications such as optical devices, high vacuum and nuclear applications and automotive or food industry among others [ The combination of shot peening and EP has been previously reported in the literature. As previously mentioned, recent studies demonstrated that the application of EP after shot peening has enhanced the corrosion behaviour of nickel-based alloys [ Here we used EP to decontaminate the surface and to remove the residuals peening particles embedded in SSP treated 316L stainless steel, besides improving surface quality. CSP and not peened materials have been also considered as control series. Likewise, the effect of the electrochemical process on the surface roughness, wettability and mechanical properties of the peened surfaces have been evaluated in order to assess if a tailored surface roughness could be obtained without changing the mechanical benefits produced by the peening processes. Rectangular samples of 30 × 25 × 2 mm Before EP, samples were subjected to CSP and SSP treatments using air blast shot peening machine. ‘A' type Almen test strips were used to obtain Almen intensity. EP experiments were performed on all series of samples applying constant voltage from 2 V to 7 V with an EA-PS 5040-40A power supply, using a two electrode system in a 1500 mL acid electrolyte bath (H Before characterization, the samples were cleaned using acetone and distilled water in an ultrasound bath for 15 min per each step. Then they were dried with warm air. The cleaning procedure is important especially for evaluating brightness and water contact angle, since the surface cleanness can significantly affect the output of these tests. Surface roughness characterization was carried out using a Leica DCM 3D confocal microscope. The average value of standard surface roughness S The surface morphology of the treated samples was observed using a ZEISS Ultra Plus field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM). In addition, surface contamination was analysed using energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS-EDAX). The wetting properties for different shot peened and electropolished surfaces were characterized by water contact angle measurements, using a CAM 200 goniometer system (KSV Instruments) Surface brightness was evaluated by a glossmetter, using a Micro-Tri-Gloss (BYK-Gardner GmbH). Two samples per each condition were evaluated and three random areas were measured on each sample with the incidence angle of 60°. The reported results correspond to the average of the measurements. The distribution of the residual stresses was assessed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis, using AST X-Stress 3000 portable X-ray diffractometer (CrKα radiation (λKα1 = 2.2898 Å), sin Measurements were carried out in depth by removing a very thin layer of material (0.02 mm close to the surface and 0.06 mm at higher depths), measured with a Mitutoyo micrometer precision IDCH0530/0560 after each EP step, where a solution of acetic acid (94%) and perchloric acid (6%) was used. Vickers microhardness measurements were performed on samples for each condition that were cut in cross-section and embedded in a phenollic hot mounting resin. Metallographic preparation was performed using SiC papers up to FEPA 4000 followed by polishing with polycrystalline diamond water based suspension up to 1 μm. The tests were performed using a Fischer HM2000 microhardness tester, equipped with a diamond Vickers indenter and load of 200 gf (HV0.2) during 10s. The measurements were performed along three parallel paths, starting from shot peened surface down to the core material (with a step size of 0.1 mm). Initially, CSP and SSP samples were electropolished at different voltages of 2, 3, 5 and 7 V with the aim of finding a suitable combination between shot peening and EP treatment parameters. In Surface roughness and water contact angle, parameters of utmost importance from the point of view of biomedical application, were characterized for all the above series ( Regarding the wettability measurements ( Taking the trend of roughness and wettability variation into account, application of EP using 5 and 7 V to CSP and SSP series were selected to be further analysed, since these series represented a good combination of low surface roughness and higher wettability. The decrease of surface roughness and water contact angle are consistent with FE-SEM and confocal microscopes observations used for morphological characterization. Before EP, SSP treated surface presents a higher density of impact induced dimples and surface defects compare to the CSP treated surface. After application of EP-5 V, the surface of CSP samples show lower roughness and a few remaining deep defects, in contrast with SSP samples that present higher quantity of dimples, as a result of higher kinetic energy of the process. Application of EP with the highest voltage (7 V), seems to be strong enough to remove defects produced by CSP, but not enough to completely eliminate those induced by SSP treatment; a small quantity of dimples are still visible on the surface. As a consequence of shot impacts, some embedded fragments of the shots were detected at the top surface layer, as it can be observed on the cross-sectional view of a CSP sample shown in Chemical element identification was performed by EDS, as shown in The presence of these residues can have harmful effects on the behaviour of surfaces depending on the target application. Such residuals can produce instability from the point of view of mechanical properties (stress concentrator), and also play a role as initial sites for corrosion. Therefore application of EP seems crucial to decontaminate the surface and remove these shot remains (see The results of brightness evaluation of shot peened samples before and after EP, presented in Distributions of residual stresses and FWHM parameter, obtained by means of X-ray diffractometer for each condition, are respectively shown in During the EP process, a very thin layer of material is removed from the surface, therefore, the top surface of samples exhibit higher compressive stresses. The thickness of the layer affected by compressive residual stresses induced by shot peening is estimated to be around 0.5 mm and 0.9 mm respectively for CSP-5 V and SSP-5 V samples. The higher kinetic energy of the SSP treatment has caused the notable difference between these thicknesses. The FWHM profile, as a cumulative index of hardening and grain refinement, also exhibits the effect of shot peening parameters; the FWHM parameter increased owing to the work hardening induced by shot peening treatments on the near surface layer compared to the NP series. FWHM trend is similar to that of the compressive residual stresses. As the distance from the surface increases, the FHWM parameter decreases until reaching values in the core of material similar to the NP series, similar behaviour comparing with other works [ In depth microhardness profile of all samples is shown in The effects of electropolishing process after different shot peening treatments were evaluated through careful examination of physical and mechanical properties, using different combinations of treatment parameters. On the basis of the obtained results the following conclusions are drawn. Electropolishing was found efficient in considerably decreasing the surface roughness when 5 V and 7 V is applied after shot peening treatments. In conventionally shot peened series, after electropolishing the surface dimples were much less observable, compared to the severely shot peened series with slightly visible shot impact marks. It seems that electropolishing reduce the presence of embedded fragments of residual shots and smooth the surface of shot peened samples. Electropolishing, enhanced surface brightness inducing highly bright appearance for both shot peened series. Evaluation of water contact angle indicated that surface wettability was improved after electropolishing, regardless the electropolishing parameters. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sector.