A number of different uranium minerals are processed in different regions of the world to produce the uranium that is used to generate electricity. The three main types of uranium minerals that are found at the world's largest single uranium bearing ore body at Roxbury Downs, South Australia are uraninite (nominally UO2), coffinite [U(SiO4)1−x(OH)4x], and brannerite [U(Ti, Fe)2O6]. Detailed knowledge of the influence of temperature, [H2SO4] and [Fe]/solution oxidation–reduction potential (ORP) on the dissolution of uraninite are well known, yet little information on the influence of the aforementioned on the dissolution of brannerite has been reported in the literature. In this study the influence of three key parameters on the rate of synthetic brannerite (UTi2O6) dissolution was investigated. The parameters that were investigated included temperature, [H2SO4] and [Fe(III)]. Of these parameters [H2SO4] and temperature were found to have the most significant effect on the rate/overall extent of UTi2O6 dissolution under the test conditions used. Tests conducted on synthetic brannerite residues combined with fresh synthetic brannerite showed that decreases in dissolution rates observed during the dissolution of synthetic brannerite were predominantly not due to decreasing brannerite slurry concentration. The significant decreases in dissolution observed were most likely due to one or more of the following: changes in surface composition/surface passivation, changes in surface morphology and/or changes in particle size.The uranium used to produce the uranium based nuclear fuel used in generating electricity is sourced from a range of uranium minerals. The most widely processed uranium mineral to date has been the uranium oxide species uraninite (nominally UO The mineral brannerite is generally represented using either of the following two chemical formulae; UTi One of the main reasons that brannerite has not been extensively exploited as a source of uranium to date is due to the uranium in this mineral generally not being readily leachable under mild conditions (such as those used to leach uraninite). The dissolution of the non-substituted form of brannerite, UTi Thomas and Zhang have also proposed a reaction sequence for brannerite dissolution (reactions  There have been several studies conducted on the rate and/or extent of dissolution of both natural and synthetic brannerites over a range of conditions using various processes. Ifill et al. determined that natural brannerite (U The majority of studies that have been published in the open literature on the dissolution of synthetic brannerites have been focussed on determination of the stability of this mineral when used as a storage material for radioactive waste (where it is commonly referred to as synroc) ( Although there have been several studies that have reported on the dissolution of brannerite published in the literature there have been no detailed studies conducted on the dissolution of this mineral under conditions similar to those used in uranium mineral processing. There is also very little information on the mechanism of dissolution of this mineral under these conditions. In this study, the rate of dissolution of synthetic brannerite was investigated over a range of conditions including conditions similar to those used in tank based leaching of uranium minerals. The conditions investigated included temperature, [Fe(III)] and [H Uranyl acetate (UO Synthetic brannerite (UTi A 1 An X-ray diffractometer (Bruker D8 Advance) equipped with a CuK A scanning electron microscope operating at 30 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy spectra of several core levels were analysed and their binding energies were aligned with respect to C 1s binding energy of 285 Uranium concentrations were measured using an Agilent HP 7700 ICP-MS. The instrument was calibrated prior to sample analysis using uranium calibration standards. These standards were prepared using a uranium standard solution. An internal standard (terbium) was also added to all calibration and test samples. Prepared synthetic brannerite was characterised prior to use in dissolution studies using three techniques: powder X-ray diffraction, SEM/EDX analysis and XPS analysis. An X-ray diffraction pattern obtained for a sample of prepared synthetic brannerite (which is representative of X-ray diffraction patterns obtained for all batches of brannerite prepared) is presented in SEM/EDX mapping analysis was used to investigate the homogeneity of the prepared brannerite and the degree of uraninite impurity. The results obtained from SEM/EDX mapping analyses are presented in XPS spectra obtained for a sample of the prepared synthetic brannerite are shown in The influence of temperature, [Fe(III)] and [H Four dissolution experiments were conducted to investigate the dissolution of synthetic brannerite under temperature and [H The effect of temperature on the dissolution of synthetic brannerite was investigated over the temperature range 50–95 The brannerite dissolution/uranium leaching from brannerite kinetics obtained from the tests conducted were analysed to investigate the order of the dissolution. The results of this analysis showed that the kinetics of dissolution of uranium from synthetic brannerite were most closely fitted by first order kinetics under the conditions studied ( The effect of [H The brannerite dissolution/uranium leaching from brannerite kinetics for the tests conducted using varying [H The effect of [Fe(III)] on the dissolution of synthetic brannerite was investigated using a higher reaction temperature than that used for the initial tests reported in The effect of [H From the results obtained on the influence of [H Based on the results observed on the influence of [Fe(III)] and [H Comparison of the data obtained on the influence of [Fe(III)] at 15 and 50 The influence of H H H In aqueous H The decreases in rate of synthetic brannerite dissolution that were observed in a number of tests were investigated to determine if this was predominantly due to decreasing brannerite slurry concentration. This involved combining brannerite remaining from tests that had been conducted under the following conditions ([Fe(III)] Surface compositional changes/surface passivation. Surface morphology changes (decrease in surface roughness/surface area). Change in particle size distribution (change in overall surface area). Based on Ifill et al.'s finding discussed earlier, since the resistance of brannerite to leaching is not improved by textural and morphological variations, nor by crystallite size, it was decided to investigate if there were any significant differences between the surfaces of the pre-leached brannerite and fresh brannerite particles. This was done by conducting XPS analyses of the pre-leached brannerite particles ( Based on the results obtained the following conclusions can be made on the dissolution of synthetic brannerite [Fe(III)] (over the range 3–12 [H No significant dissolution occurs at 95 Synthetic brannerite dissolution most closely follows first order kinetics under the following conditions (T Tests conducted on synthetic brannerite residues combined with fresh synthetic brannerite showed that decreases in dissolution rates observed during the dissolution of synthetic brannerite were predominantly not due to decreasing brannerite slurry concentration and were most likely due to one or more of the following: Changes in surface composition/surface passivation. Changes in surface morphology. Changes in particle size. The authors would like to thank the