Nuclear borehole logging is practically the only technique that has the capacity for providing quantitative in-situ coal quality information in real time. The SIROLOG gamma–gamma and neutron–gamma (PGNAA) borehole logging procedures have been providing vital characteristics of the coal seams at Callide coalfields since 1993. Together with an accurate delineation of coal seams, the SIROLOG procedures estimate ash content, density and some ash constituents accurately enough for relatively inexpensive rotary chip holes to be accepted as points of observation in calculations of reserves.The economic value of coal deposits, the mine planning and the production schedules are determined by several factors. These are derived from geological parameters, including, the thicknesses of the coal seams and their depths below the surface. The parameters required would depend on the phase of mining. Generally, however, the parameters sought are those that characterise the properties of the mined coal, particularly those properties that may affect subsequent mineral processing of the coal. Among these properties are: the ash and moisture contents, calorific value, sulphur content and slagging properties of coal. Practically all coal deposits are evaluated by drilling to recover samples. Analysis of the samples taken by core drilling is usually the only means of gaining coal quality information from a borehole. Coring is, however, time consuming and costly, and much attention is now focused on faster and less expensive methods of drilling. Percussion drilling largely fulfils these requirements. However, the recovery of reliable samples from percussion holes and their quantitative assaying is still a laborious and time-consuming activity, fraught with the potential for many serious errors. Borehole logging is now perceived by the coal-mining industry as the approach to coal-deposit evaluation which is fastest in yielding a relevant, although limited, set of geological information. The important benefit that all borehole logging methods bring to this industry is their capacity for contributing key information parameters rapidly and dependably. The flexibility, which this gives users, is not available where the sole information base is the chemical laboratory in which bottlenecks for sampling and analysis frequently occur and thus interfere with the timely delivery of crucial information. Among the many physically different borehole logging techniques, nuclear borehole logging is practically the only one that has the capacity for providing quantitative in-situ coal quality information in real time. Nuclear borehole logging, apart from its capacity for delivering data instantaneously, also has the advantage that the highly penetrating gamma and/or neutron radiation effectively yields much larger sample volumes than either percussion or core drill samples. The two basic approaches to recording and measuring the radiation detected in nuclear applications are Most commercially available logging technology for the coal mining industry is non-spectrometric. Non-spectrometric gamma–gamma and natural–gamma techniques are now being used routinely for the delineation of coal seams and inter-seam sediments. The coal seams are easily identifiable in the gamma–gamma logs because of the difference in density between coal and inter-seam sediments. While this approach is satisfactory for delineation of the coal seam roof, floor and thickness, the amplitude of the recorded anomaly, however, does not always provide a means for the accurate measurement of the ash content in coal seams. This is because there is not always a good correlation between ash and coal density. While coal deposits do exist where there is a high correlation between ash content and density, in most deposits there are significant fluctuations in this relationship due to the non-uniform chemical composition of ash in coal and the variations in other physical properties of the coal, such as rank and porosity. Only spectrometric techniques can provide direct and accurate estimations of ash content, and its elemental constituents, in coal. Spectrometric techniques have the capability of detecting and recording, differentially, different probe–response events, for example, those due to different gamma-ray energies. CSIRO, Exploration and Mining, have conducted research for over 20 years and have developed a family of spectrometric nuclear borehole logging technologies, known as SIROLOG. Spectrometric gamma–gamma logging relies on the fact that variations of ash content would not only cause changes in the value of coal's bulk density (ρ), but also would change the average chemical composition of coal, and therefore the equivalent atomic number ( The gamma–gamma method is a non-specific and indirect method of analysis that relies on artefacts of the geology and, therefore, is not universally applicable. However, the volume of material sampled in gamma–gamma logging is relatively good. The penetration range depends on the source-to-detector distance, source energy and bulk density of the investigated medium. The depth range is commonly considered to be the thickness of the material for which the count rate is 90% of that for infinite thickness material. The 90% depth range is usually between 8 and 15 cm of coal for typical gamma-ray sources ( Due to its high hydrogen content, coal is an excellent matrix for the PGNAA technique PGNAA logging tools are applied in coal mining and exploration not only for the delineation of coal seams and the determination of ash content, but also for the quantitative control of slagging components of ash (such as Fe). The detailed information about slagging parameters of mined coal permits the grade controller to mix coals with a lower Fe content with those of a higher Fe content to achieve the target specification for the product coal. Because neutrons are deeply penetrating, the high-energy gamma radiation, originating from the neutron-capture reactions and recorded by the logging probe, emanates from a large volume of coal. Hence, this technique is not as sensitive to the rugosity and condition of the borehole as the gamma–gamma technique. The PGNAA logging probe has a sampling radius of 0.3–0.4m around the borehole walls. A The callide coal measures basin is located approximately 120 km south-west of Gladstone and 450 km north-northwest of brisbane in eastern central Queensland. The coalfield covers an area of about 18,000 ha and is located within a north-west to south-east trending synclinal basin which is 22.5 km long by 8 km wide. The coal unit is of the late Triassic age and contains alternating sequences of conglomerate, sandstone, siltstone, mudstone, carbonaceous shale, and sub-bituminous, durainous coal of varying hardness and seam thickness. Current coalesced mining seam thicknesses vary from 5 to 21 m, but seam thicknesses down to, and including 0.3 m can be mined. Callide coalfields produces a sub-bituminous, very sub-hydrous, steaming coal with good combustion properties, primarily for domestic power-generation. To most steaming coal mine operators in Australia, ash fusion information is an important indicator to their customers of coal-ash slagging and fouling propensity in thermal power station boilers. Significant relationships exist between ash chemical constituents (e.g. Al, Fe, K, Ca and CO Historically, Callide has experienced sporadic supply problems with respect to its customers. When mining from various sections of its deposits, coal with an unusually high and variable iron oxide in the ash content is encountered. Iron contents above 19% appear to be a precondition, if not probably the causation, of slagging in boilers. A lack of information for mining planning purposes prompted a major investigation into explaining the iron oxide's formation, occurrence and measurement. The work programme was performed by the technical services staff in combination with external academic researchers, most notably from CSIRO, Exploration and Mining. As a result, in 1993, Callide commissioned its own SIROLOG probes and has been using these successfully since then. The information gained enables the updating of the geological quality databases, which in turn allows for more rigorous statistical analyses of the available values (according to the seam considered). Callide coalfields’ total production in 2000 was 7.0 mtpa. By the end of 2001, it rose to 9.4 mtpa and, from 2002 onwards, it will stabilise at 10.5 mtpa annually. Consequently, mining is progressing at a faster rate than ever before and monitoring is critical in controlling the quality of the end product supplied to customers. Coal is currently sold under long-term contracts to CS Energy's Callide Power Station adjacent to the Dunn Creek Mine, Queensland Alumina's refinery in Gladstone and NRG's Gladstone Power Station. At Callide, exploration holes are, at best, around 150 m apart in areas adjacent to the current coal-mining operations. Ash and iron-in-ash values can vary considerably both vertically and horizontally throughout the coal-mining section over this distance. While exploration holes do give a general picture of these variabilities across the wider mine area, closely-spaced (approximately at 50 m intervals) coal quality drilling is undertaken to define the variability at a finer scale, once the coal seam is exposed. The variability in the coal's ash-content and slagging parameters must be understood ahead of mining in order to permit in-pit blending. Stockpiling for later blending is possible but, because of the additional cost involved with double handling, it is preferable to do as much in-pit blending as possible. It has been shown through research and practice at Callide that the prompt neutron-gamma method (neutron-capture) can be employed for the determination of the ash and some of its constituents (e.g. iron) contents in the coal seams of varying Fe-content which are intersected by boreholes Because of the increase in production over the past 3 years and, consequently, the speed at which coal is being uncovered and mined, in-pit coal quality control has become an even more important issue. To avoid contract quality specification excursions, especially of the calorific value (CV) and ash content, and prevent slagging/fouling issues at the various customers’ utilities, quality must be monitored ahead of mining. Typically, this monitoring is done by utilising the mine's existing coal blast hole drilling rig to drill 152 mm diameter percussion (rotary chipped) holes at around 50 m intervals in a staggered pattern ahead of the mining face. This information is used as an adjunct to the existing cored exploration-hole quality data and included in the geological database for coal-quality modelling. To ensure that the SIROLOG probes are calibrated correctly, several cored holes at both exploration hole diameter and in-pit quality hole diameter have been drilled well ahead of the mining area. The information derived from SIROLOG has also allowed the Callide coalfields to develop a better understanding of where problematic zones within the mine area occur. Once the lateral and vertical location and extents of these zones are defined, strategies for mining, including blending with other coals or for segregation of the coal into stockpiles, can be developed.  The primary parameter used in most contractual specifications is the calorific value (specific energy). In general, at the Callide mine, there is a direct relationship between ash content and calorific value of the coal. Consequently, SIROLOG-derived ash estimates also provide additional valuable information without having to outlay the cost of a laboratory analysis. Because of the general relationship between iron-in-ash content and slagging propensity, it is important to track the extent of iron mineralisation zones within the coal. Because of the close correlation between the SIROLOG estimates and the laboratory-analysed ash and Fe, and the tight relationship between ash and calorific value, the need for cored hole drilling and laboratory sample analysis has been significantly reduced. Up to 1993, approximately 30–50% of all exploration holes drilled were cored holes. Following the advent of SIROLOG at the Callide coalfields in 1993, the number of cored holes drilled for coal quality has been reduced to 10% of the total number drilled. Costs of exploration for a cored hole are around $130 per metre. Because of the $25 per metre for a rotary chip and SIROLOG-logged hole, there is a substantial cost benefit. Consequently, this allows the explorationist to either reduce the drilling budget for the same number of holes planned or drill more holes for the same cost budgeted for exploration drilling. A recent project at the Callide coalfields targeted the identification of high-ash resources. Historically, these resources had normally been discarded in the mining process because their low calorific value did not meet mining specifications. However, it was recognised that these resources had a low-Fe content and could be a valuable blend product for high-iron coal as well as for high calorific-value coal. As a consequence, an additional 6 million tonnes of resource has been identified as blend coal that can be utilised to help meet the specification for customer product coal. SIROLOG technology has been used successfully at the Callide coalfields to provide timely and accurate data on coal seam structure and quality. It has supplied a means of identifying problematic ash and iron mineralisation horizons within the coal mining sections to facilitate mining and coal-blending operations. Cost benefits have been manifested in the reduced number of costly cored holes required and, subsequently, the reduced amount of laboratory analyses required for coal-quality modelling.