The use of an industry waste, brown coal fly ash collected from the Latrobe Valley, Victoria, Australia, has been tested for the post-combustion CO2 capture through indirect minersalization in acetic acid leachate. Upon the initial leaching, the majority of calcium and magnesium in fly ash were dissolved into solution, the carbonation potential of which was investigated subsequently through the use of a continuously stirred high-pressure autoclave reactor and the characterization of carbonation precipitates by various facilities. A large CO2 capture capacity of fly ash under mild conditions has been confirmed. The CO2 was fixed in both carbonate precipitates and water-soluble bicarbonate, and the conversion between these two species was achievable at approximately 60°C and a CO2 partial pressure above 3bar. The kinetic analysis confirmed a fast reaction rate for the carbonation of the brown coal ash-derived leachate at a global activation energy of 12.7kJ/mol. It is much lower than that for natural minerals and is also very close to the potassium carbonate/piperazine system. The CO2 capture capacity of this system has also proven to reach maximum 264kg CO2/tonne fly ash which is comparable to the natural minerals tested in the literature. As the fly ash is a valueless waste and requires no comminution prior to use, the technology developed here is highly efficient and energy-saving, the resulting carbonate products of which are invaluable for the use as additive to cement and in the paper and pulp industry.constant in Peng–Robinson equation [–] exponential factor, s constant in Peng–Robinson equation [–] constant in Peng–Robinson equation [–] constant in Peng–Robinson equation [–] activation energy, kJ/mol fugacity, atm rate constant of carbonation, s CO maximum CO pressure, atm ideal gas constant, kJ/mol critical temperature, K relative temperature [–] volume of gas, m initial rate of CO compressibility factor [–] constant in Peng–Robinson equation [–] constant in Peng–Robinson equation eccentric factor Post-combustion CO The on-site CO To date, the parameters governing the leaching behavior of numerous minerals by reaction Victorian brown coal is the single largest source meeting over 85% of the electricity needs in the State of Victoria, Australia. Due to its high moisture content, i.e. up to 75 In the present paper, the performance of a typical Victorian brown coal fly ash for CO The fly ash tested here is a dry ash sample collected directly from an electrostatic precipitator in International Power Hazelwood Pty Ltd., which provides approximately 33% of the electricity needs in Victoria. As indicated in According to the reaction Eqs. Carbonation of fly ash leachate was conducted in a batch-scale continuously stirred high-pressure autoclave (BR-300, Berghof) with a capacity of 300 Considering that the soluble bicarbonate can also be formed during carbonation, the pressure drop of CO  A convergence function was then formed: The parameters of CO Extra experiments were also carried out for the direct carbonation of fly ash as a form of ash–water slurry to compare with the indirect method proposed here. The ash–water slurry has being tested by the existing power plant for a temporary storage of CO For both fresh and used leachate, the concentrations of cations were quantified using ICP-OES. In the meanwhile, a variety of techniques were used to characterize the carbonation precipitates, including X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometry (XRF, Rigaku-2100) for elemental composition, X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku RINT) for crystallized structure identification using a diffractometer with a Cu-Kα radiation at a wavelength of Effect of stirring speed of the autoclave on CO The influence of carbonation temperature was investigated secondly under a typical condition of 10 The XRD spectra for the precipitates are illustrated in The bubbling of gaseous CO Following the discussions on The co-precipitation of two carbonates favors particle agglomeration and their filtration. As demonstrated in For a given reaction period of 60 The XRD spectra in The initial CO  The pseudo-second-order kinetic model was further used to model the CO The fminsearch function in MATLAB was used for the fitting of experimental results via the error minimization algorithm. An excellent agreement between fitting and experimental observation for a relative variance The obtained rate constant at different temperatures can be expressed through Arrhenius law ( After being collected from electrostatic precipitator, the Victorian brown coal fly ash is mixed with water and pumped as slurry into ash storage dam. The ash–water slurry is being used directly for the storage of CO Intensive investigation on the propensity of a brown coal fly ash-driven acid-soluble alkaline earth metals on CO The co-existence of calcium and magnesium irons in aqueous solution captured the CO The magnesium carbonate preferentially co-precipitated with calcium carbonate together into micron-scale aggregates, the size of which varies noticeably with carbonation temperature. A global activation energy of 12.7 The authors are grateful to the