The main difference between the new Column Flotoextraction (CFE) method and the conventional SX and SPRAY methods is the substitution of organic phase bubble dispersion, instead of its drop dispersion into the aqueous phase. This substitution is intended to increase the contact area of phases and to enhance the buoyancy force of the organic phase. The main aims of this study are the introduction of the CFE method and the comparison of its performance and selectivity with SX and SPRAY methods. The results indicated ∼10% and ∼20% increase of cobalt (Co) extraction from dilute (100mg Co/l) synthetic solution in A/O
                     =40 and ∼1% and ∼6% increase of Co extraction from concentrated (1000mg Co/l) synthetic solution in A/O
                     =30 for the CFE method compared to SX and SPRAY methods, respectively, due to improved contact surface of the phases. In the same extraction time (1min), the increase of Co extraction from dilute and concentrated solutions in the CFE method compared to the SX method were ∼16% and ∼4%, which demonstrate improved kinetics of the extraction process in CFE method. Improvement of separation factors in the CFE method relative to SX and SPRAY methods warrants the better performance of this innovative method.Solvent extraction (SX) or liquid–liquid extraction is one of the most important hydrometallurgical methods for selective removal, purification and concentration of valuable ions from aqueous solutions using organic solvents. Successful performance of this method in mineral processing requires clear and concentrated pregnant solutions from ore leaching ( Despite these limitations, two points are important to note. Firstly, continuous depletion of mineral deposits coupled with low grades of the minerals increase the operating costs in the production of concentrated pregnant solutions for extraction contactors. Secondly, the current environmental concern in the world is the increasing volume of dilute solutions containing valuable ions and heavy metals with the development of various industries such as mining, and the high costs for the removal of their environmental problems. Improved performance of extraction equipment for dilute solutions not only expands the usable reserves, but may also enable the use of wastewaters as new sources of feed solution to the SX process. This technological development is valuable for effective recovery of valuable ions from dilute solutions or elimination of environmental problems of toxic and heavy metals in wastewaters. Research efforts conducted to achieve this important aim have led to the invention of various extraction technologies such as Predispersed Solvent Extraction (PDSE) ( Consistent with these technological developments, the new Dissolved Nitrogen Predispersed Solvent Extraction (DNPDSE) method was developed. The mixing operation of the two phases in this method was based on organic phase bubble dispersion, instead of its drop dispersion into the aqueous phase. This substitution was aimed at increasing the contact area of the two phases (to improve recovery of metal ions from dilute solutions) and to enhance the buoyancy force of the organic phase (to improve separation of the two phases). In this method, solvent-coated nitrogen bubbles smaller than 100 In this study, major and minor aims have been pursued. The main aim of this research is introducing the new method of CFE and comparing its performance and selectivity with SX and SPRAY methods. The term SX method in this paper refers to conventional bulk mixing to the organic and aqueous phases. In order to eliminate the effect of unknown causes and chemical compounds in the solutions and real wastewaters on the extraction results, synthetic aqueous solutions have been used. To select the major and associated elements in these solutions, environmental problems of mines in Iran were addressed. The environmental study of zinc (Zn) production plants showed that the solid residues of leaching, neutralization, hot purification, cold purification and electrowinning processes in these plants contain valuable metals such as Zn, cobalt (Co), and manganese (Mn). These residues have been accumulated and stored in tailings dams due to lack of appropriate extraction technologies, and have caused environmental problems over time. Taking into account the high economic value of these metals and the mentioned reasons, the need to devise methods for extracting metals from these residues with maximum efficiency, based on modern methods with minimum environmental impacts is of the utmost importance. The secondary aim of this study is to investigate the potential of the new CFE method in extraction of valuable elements from these residues by examining synthetic solutions containing similar elements. Due to the high economic value (even in low concentration), Co has been selected as the major element, with Zn and Mn as associated elements in the synthetic solution. Reagent-grade CoSO According to In the CFE method, 11.4 To convert the organic phase into bubbles in the CFE contactor, the best conditions should be provided for its foaming. For this purpose, the first step is to select the appropriate surfactant and determine its optimum concentration to get the highest quantity of foam from the organic phase ( The Baykerman method ( In this method, the phases of aqueous (with an appropriate pH) and organic in the volume ( The contactor with the schematic diagram shown in The schematic diagram of the CFE contactor is shown in Downcomer is a vertical pipe blocked in the upper part except for two inlets: one for air (a tube with a diameter of 5 Successful performance of the CFE method in generating solvent-coated bubbles requires providing a high foaming capacity for the organic phase. The results of SX experiments at As it was necessary for the additives to have no negative effects on extraction rates ( The results show no effect of silicone oil on the Co extraction and stripping in the SX method, and the observed extraction variations are due to the systematic errors which occurred during the experiments such as human and analyzing instruments errors. To investigate the effect of surfactant on the performance of SPRAY and CFE methods, the dilute aqueous solution was used due to the impossibility of applying low In the absence of silicone oil, the Co extraction in the CFE method is lower than the SPRAY method due to the presence of large drops and organic phase accumulations in the CFE method relative to smaller drops with a more uniform distribution in the SPRAY method. With the addition of silicone oil up to the optimum amount and providing the highest foaming capacity for the organic phase, the efficiency of the CFE method was significantly increased due to conversion of the organic phase drops into bubbles. Under these conditions, the efficiency of the SPRAY method was gradually increased probably due to the production of smaller and more uniform drops and improved contact surface. Increasing the amount of silicone oil to twice the optimum amount gradually decreased the extraction efficiency of both methods. Decreased extraction in the CFE method is due to the emergence of anti-foaming effects of this surfactant and reduced conversion process of drops into bubbles ( As mentioned earlier, it is expected that mixing of the aqueous phase with bubble dispersion of the organic phase in the CFE method, instead of its drop dispersion in SX and SPRAY methods, has led to an increase in the contact area between the phases and improved the extraction process. To prove this claim, similar extraction experiments were conducted using the three methods based on changes in the two basic parameters of pH and Diagrams of Co extraction from dilute and concentrated solutions at different In this research, the bubbles of 100–600 A quantitative comparison of results showed that the degrees of Co extraction from the dilute solution at The results of SX experiments at 1 Diagrams of Co extraction from dilute and concentrated solutions at various pHs and the same According to Extraction pHs of Co (3.2–4.4) are higher than Mn (2.2–3.4) and Zn (0.8–2.4). If the extraction process is conducted at pH values where Co D2EHPA pH-extraction isotherms for dilute solutions of Co (containing 1920 Considering the range of suitable extraction pHs for Zn (0.8–2.4), Mn (2.2–3.4) and Co (3.2–4.4), the extraction process was first performed at pH In this research, the degrees of Co extraction in three methods may be not true equilibrium values. Therefore, differences of these methods in distribution coefficients, separation factors and enrichment factors are apparent. Distribution coefficients of the elements were determined according to Separation factors of Zn/Co at extraction pH According to A quantitative comparison of the elements extraction percentages in  Column Flotoextraction (CFE) is an innovative method to simplify and improve performance of the DNPDSE method. Applying the centrifugal pump and spargers similar to the downcomer of the Jameson cell in the CFE contactor instead of the system under pressure in the DNPDSE contactor has eliminated the major defects of the DNPDSE method. Successful performance of this method requires providing high foaming capacity for the organic phase. 11.4 The authors wish to thank Tarbiat Modares University for providing the possibility of conducting this research.