Purpose: The purpose of this study was to compare intraoperative stress radiography and ankle arthroscopy in the evaluation of distal tibiofibular syndesmosis disruption in acute ankle fracture. Type of Study: Prospective study. Methods: We treated 53 Weber type B or C ankle fractures without radiographic evidence of frank syndesmosis diastasis. Intraoperative stress radiography and ankle arthroscopy were performed. Syndesmotic screws were inserted in those patients with syndesmosis diastasis. Screws were removed 12 weeks later and second-look ankle arthroscopy was performed at the same time. Results: Sixteen cases (30.2%) had positive intraoperative stress radiographs; 35 cases (66.0%) had positive arthroscopic findings of syndesmosis diastasis, including various combinations of coronal, sagittal, and rotational planes of instability. During second-look arthroscopy, 31 of 34 patients with syndesmotic screws showed healing of the syndesmotic ligaments and the syndesmosis became stable. Conclusions: Ankle arthroscopy excels intraoperative stress radiography in detecting syndesmosis disruption. It also provides assessment of different planes of instability and assists anatomic reduction of the syndesmosis. Intraoperative radiography still does play an important role in assessing fracture reduction and proper restoration of fibular length and longitudinal orientation of the syndesmosis. Level of Evidence: Level 2.Acute ankle fracture is a very common sports injury. The traditional belief was that type B and C (Dennis Weber Classification) ankle fractures were highly associated with syndesmosis diastasis, especially type C fracture. We have treated 53 Weber type B or C ankle fractures without radiographic evidence of frank syndesmosis diastasis from June 2002 to December 2003. The mean age of the patients was 35.4 years (range, 16 to 88 years). Standard anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the injured ankles were taken after admission. Short leg slab and ice therapy were applied to the injured leg. Informed consent for open reduction and internal fixation of the fractures and ankle arthroscopy were obtained from all patients in the study. We performed open reduction and internal fixation of the distal fibular fracture by 3.5-mm AO Dynamic compression plate through the standard lateral approach. For medial malleolar fractures, we inserted two 4-mm cannulated screws for fracture fixation. After fixation, we assessed the degree of syndesmosis instability by using 2 methods. (1) With intraoperative antero-posterior stress radiography, by using a bone hook applied to distal fibula and providing lateral force to distal fibula in the coronal plane, the degree of syndesmosis diastasis can be assessed by using an image intensifier. Lateral movement of fibula or widening of the mortise on intraoperative radiographs was considered to be a positive finding ( In our series, 2 patients with circumferential comminution at the fracture site needed intraoperative radiography to ensure proper restoration of fibular length and longitudinal orientation of the syndesmosis ( All patients with positive intraoperative stress film had positive coronal plane instability shown in ankle arthroscopy. Among them, only 2 patients had pure coronal plane instability, 10 patients had associated sagittal plane instability, and 4 patients had instability in all 3 planes ( Of the 35 patients with arthroscopically detected syndesmosis diastasis, a syndesmotic screw was inserted in 34 patients. The patient without the screw put on was an 88-year-old woman. For those 34 patients with a syndesmotic screw, second-look ankle arthroscopy after removal of the syndesmotic screw showed that 31 patients (91.2%) had regained stability of the syndesmosis and that the syndesmotic ligaments had healed. Three patients had residual sagittal plane syndesmosis instability. Syndesmosis disruption in acute ankle fracture is common. It varies from 35% to 60%. Burns et al. Clinical diagnosis of syndesmosis disruption was known to be insensitive and nonspecific in acute ankle fractures because many patients could not localize the tender spot at the syndesmosis. Radiographic diagnosis of tibiofibular syndesmosis diastasis was considered to be reliable in the past. Harper and Keller In our study, there were 16 cases with evidence of syndesmosis widening on intraoperative stress radiographs that was not shown in the standard preoperative anteroposterior and lateral views. However, ankle arthroscopy appears to be even better in detecting and analyzing syndesmosis diastasis. During ankle arthroscopy, easy passage of the arthroscope or arthroscopic instrument into the lateral ankle gutter is a hint to the presence of syndesmosis diastasis. In those 16 cases with positive intraoperative stress radiographs, the associated sagittal plane and rotational plane instability cannot be detected by intraoperative plain radiography. We suggest that, because it is difficult to obtain a good lateral view intraoperatively and there is no definition of the anatomic location of the syndesmosis in the lateral view, the integrity of the syndesmosis in the sagittal plane cannot be assessed radiographically. In addition to the fact that ankle arthroscopy is more sensitive than intraoperative stress radiography in detecting syndesmosis diastasis, we believe that it is also a useful tool to analyze the pattern of syndesmosis diastasis. Thus we can have proper reduction of the syndesmosis in all 3 planes in order to obtain anatomic reduction of the syndesmosis, which can also be confirmed by ankle arthroscopy. The patterns of syndesmosis diastasis cannot be fully explained by arthroscopic findings of patterns of syndesmotic ligament injury. It may be attributable to some syndesmosis stabilizer that cannot be assessed by arthroscopic means, e.g., tibiofibular interosseous membrane. However, there are some interesting observations. Those patients with complete syndesmosis disruption (all 3 syndesmotic ligaments being disrupted) were likely to have combined coronal and sagittal plane instability. However, if the posterior syndesmotic ligament was anatomically or functionally intact, it was likely resulting in rotational plane instability because the posterior ligament acts as a fulcrum for external rotation of the distal fibula. For those cases with a complete tear of the anterior and interosseous syndesmotic ligaments—the intact posterior interosseous ligament substance with fracture at its tibial insertion—a different combination of planes of syndesmosis instability can occur. It may be due to the variable stability of the fracture. For those stable fractures, e.g., after fixation of a sizable posterior malleolar fragment, the posterior syndesmotic ligament is functionally intact and most probably only rotational instability can be detected. For those highly unstable, small fragments, the posterior ligament is functionally ruptured at its tibial insertion, and combined coronal and sagittal syndesmosis instability results. Sometimes, sagittal plane instability resulted without coronal plane instability. We propose that it may be due to the intact posterior periosteum sleeve of the fracture, which resisted lateral displacement of distal fibula but allowed posterior displacement of lateral malleolus. To assess for any longitudinal instability of the syndesmosis To have a better analysis of syndesmosis diastasis, we propose a new classification as shown in Ankle fracture is frequently accompanied by distal tibiofibular syndesmosis diastasis. In terms of the diagnosis of syndesmosis diastasis, ankle arthroscopy is the more sensitive method when compared with intraoperative stress radiography. Moreover, ankle arthroscopy can aid analysis of different patterns of syndesmosis diastasis and guide anatomic reduction of the syndesmosis. Intraoperative radiography still has an important role in detecting longitudinal instability of the syndesmosis and guiding the proper insertion of the syndesmotic screw. Stabilization of the syndesmosis by means of a syndesmotic screw is an effective way to allow healing of the syndesmotic ligament and the syndesmosis to regain stability.