This work investigates the adsorption conditions of Copper (Cu) and Zinc (Zn) ions from sulfate media by a commercial sorbent, Lewatit TP-207 (L-207). Batch studies are carried out and the key processing parameters (sorbent quantity, contact time, temperature and acidity etc.) were studied. The adsorption isotherms of the metals were obtained and compared for different isotherm models. Furthermore, the adsorption equilibrium data were best fitted to the Langmuir isotherm model. The reaction was found spontaneous and endothermic with thermodynamic values. The best adsorption capacities were 68.5 and 73.0mg/g for Cu and Zn, respectively. Moreover, industrial wastewater solution experiments were carried out. The L-207 can be used for adsorption of Cu and Zn ions in industrial effluents and real samples.Copper (Cu) and zinc (Zn) are some of the most important base elements in the world. They are widely used in many industrial applications such as chemistry, metallurgy, agriculture, paint, rubber industries, etc. Nowadays, several appropriate methods are available including cementation In this work, L-207 was used as a sorbent for adsorption Cu and Zn from the sulfate matrix, which is the major constituent of some fertilizers, food, agriculture, mining industry, etc. The effects of experimental conditions such as sorbent quantity, contact time, temperature and acidity on L-207 of the Cu and Zn studied were investigated and optimized for the most effective adsorption. In addition, the adsorption isotherms and adsorption thermodynamics of Cu and Zn were obtained and compared with different isotherm models. L-207 is a weak acidic, macro porous cation exchange sorbent with chelating iminodiacetate groups for the selective adsorption of heavy metal ions from weak acidic to weak basic solutions. It was obtained from the Laxness Company, Germany. The physico-chemical properties and short specification of this sorbent are presented in The Cu and Zn were prepared from CuSO A PerkinElmer Atomic Absorption Spectrometer Analyst 800 was used for determination of all metal ions. The Thermo Scientific, Niton XL3t XRF Analyzer and the Nuve ST 402 temperature controlled shaker were used in experimental procedures. The experiments were carried out in a batch system. The shaking rate was adjusted to 100 The adsorption percentage and the adsorption capacity of the metal ion were calculated below: The XRF spectra were used in order to characterize the various changes in L-207. XRF images of the sorbent before and after Cu and Zn adsorption are shown in The sorbent dosage of the L-207 on the adsorption of Cu and Zn ions was investigated. The quantity of L-207 was varied, ranging from 20 to 120 The effect of contact time on Cu and Zn adsorption capacity was varied in the range 15–240 As shown in the figure, increasing the contact time and sorbent quantity, the amount of adsorbed Cu and Zn increases due to the increase in the number of sorption sites. On the other hand, the sorption capacity considered as the amount of metal ions sorbed per gram of sorbent decreased as the sorbent concentration increased. However, the amount adsorbed per unit mass ( The effect of temperature on metal adsorption capacity was studied between 25 and 45 The results indicated that the adsorption capacity increased with temperature increases. The increase in adsorption with temperature may be attributed to an increase in the number of active surface sites available for adsorption on the adsorbent. The adsorption capacity reached equilibrium at all temperatures after 180 As can be seen from The effect of solution pH on Cu and Zn ions adsorption was studied. As presented in Some well-established isotherms were used to comprehend the adsorption of Cu and Zn onto the L-207. The isotherms were investigated at temperatures of 298, 308, and 318 The linear Freundlich isotherm gives the relationship between log The plots of log As shown in The Freundlich constants, In order to identify the adsorption isotherm and determine the maximum adsorption capacities, the Langmuir equation was used The monolayer capacity for adsorption ( A comparison of the correlation coefficients, The adsorption capacity of the L-207 was compared with some previously used sorbents and is given in The thermodynamic parameters Δ At equilibrium, Δ The Van’t Hoff equations: The Δ The values of Δ In order to evaluate the adsorption efficiency of L-207, the wastewater (i.e., copper sulfate and zinc sulfate) was obtained after the precipitation step of salts (i.e., CuSO This study addressed the important parameters of Cu and Zn from sulfate media with the aim of identifying optimum adsorption conditions. Many adsorption studies are available in the literature, which however focus on synthetic solutions; little attention has been paid so far to real industrial wastewater on adsorption. We attempted to shed light on the essential role of Cu and Zn in this adsorption process. Furthermore, industrial wastewater solution experiments were carried out. By comparing the coefficient of determination using the linear method, it was found that the Langmuir isotherms had higher coefficients of determination than that of the Freundlich isotherm. The maximum adsorption capacities, The adsorption process conditions at which copper sulfate pentahydrate and zinc sulfate heptahydrate manufacturing wastewater is generated can be used to enhance the efficiency of the adsorption process to achieve higher Cu and Zn recovery and minimize chemical and energy usage for carrying out the adsorption stage into current wastewater treatment setup. The adsorption method for Cu and Zn is advantageous compared to the other methods (e.g., precipitation, cementation, etc.) because Cu and Zn can be easily recovered from the solution. The results showed that an L-207 could be applied for the recovery of Cu and Zn in secondary sources, such as in any leaching solutions (e.g., electronic wastes, spent plating solutions, etc.). Consequently, this L-207 is a promising candidate for recovering other transition metal ions in aqueous solutions. In conclusion, L-207 has a comparatively good adsorption capacity, easy application and efficient adsorption ability towards Cu and Zn in acidic systems.