This paper collects experimental data and mathematical modelling of Nd(III), Tb(III) and Dy(III) solvent extraction with an ionic liquid prepared from Aliquat 336 (Methyl-tri(octyl/decyl)ammonium chloride) and Oleic Acid (AliOle). Extraction experiments were carried out to evaluate the effect of chloride anion in aqueous phase, AliOle and REE concentrations over the extraction extension. Mathematical models computed with Matlab software were derived from the mass balances and chemical equilibria involved in the extraction system of Neodymium(III), Terbium(III) and Dysprosium(III) individually. The optimized equilibria parameters proposed fit accurately the experimental data and allowed us to predict the extraction extension of each metal from an aqueous mixture.The use of Rare Earth Elements (REEs) is continuously growing since they are essential for the development of a wide variety of new technologies such as the manufacture of hybrid cars, wind turbines, mobile phones and televisions, disc drives, and defence technologies ( The rare earth elements share many chemical and physical properties, however they are subdivided according to their atomic weight into light rare earths (LREEs), which include the elements between La and Sm, plus Sc, and heavy rare earths (HREEs), which include the elements between Eu and Y. New techniques are being developed to obtain the REEs from the recycling of end-of-life products. This process is known as urban mining, which refers to the exploitation of anthropogenic stocks ( Investigations into the recovery of REEs from aqueous solutions using ionic liquids have been carried out over time ( The present manuscript describes a study on the solvent extraction of Neodymium, Terbium and Dysprosium, which are essential metals in green energy applications and in turn, some of the most critical REEs according to the US Energy Department reviews ( This paper develops a mathematical model of single Nd(III), Tb(III) and Dy(III) solvent extraction. Matlab R2016a software was used to solve the equilibria equations and mass balances involved to determine the equilibria constants. Several equilibria equations were tested to find out the most suitable model. The proposed extraction model has proven to fit perfectly single metal extraction data and to faithfully predict the simultaneous extraction of neodymium, terbium and dysprosium mixed in the aqueous phase. The validity of the approached equilibria constants was confirmed by comparing the plotted experimental and calculated data. Similar extraction models can be applied in the future to predict the extraction extension of other REEs with AliOle and establish this information as a background for the metals transport in an SLM system. It could be also helpful to predict the potential separation factor between two rare earth elements at different experimental conditions. Neodymium(III), terbium(III) and dysprosium(III) chloride solutions were prepared dissolving 99.9% purity Nd As an organic phase, the synthetized IL AliOle, prepared by reacting equimolar amounts of Methyl-tri(octyl/decyl)ammonium Chloride (Aliquat 336) and Oleic Acid following the procedure established in previous studies was used ( Metal extraction experiments were carried out in separatory funnels in which equal volumes of aqueous and organic phases (10 The organic phase was kept for stripping experiments. Hydrochloric acid 1 Extraction experiments were performed using AliOle dissolved in kerosene from 0.005 to 0.1 The effect of the AliOle concentration, the chloride concentration on the aqueous phase and the competitive extraction of the metals were studied. The mathematical model proposed was developed taking into account the equilibria equations involved in the REE extraction process with AliOle. Model equations of solvent extraction of Nd(III), Tb(III) and Dy(III) individually incorporate the equilibria and the mass balance equations. Different equilibria (speciation and extraction) were considered regarding the speciation of the metals in chloride medium in order to figure out the most suitable extraction model. The extraction mechanism of Nd(III) was superficially investigated in a previous research ( The equilibria expressions of the complex formation constants expressed as a function of the activities of the species (a where γ The ionic strength of the metals was calculated from the equation: where c The Davies equation was used to calculate the activity coefficients of the species in the aqueous phase when I According to the speciation described, several extraction mechanisms of REEs from chloride medium were considered. A distinction was made between extraction of REEs by ionic exchange ( With the corresponding equilibria equations written as follows: The bar above the species denotes that they are in the organic phase. In the equilibria equations, the activity coefficients (γ) of the organic and the aqueous neutral species are considered equal to 1. The mass balances are based on the stoichiometry of the equilibria equations. Taking into account the equal volumes of the aqueous and the organic phases, the total concentration of the reagents involved in the reaction can be calculated as the sum of the species present in the system. Generalized mass balances for the equilibria of single extraction reactions (R.4–R.13) can be written as follows: REEs mass balance Chloride mass balance AliOle mass balance where the subscript t means the total concentration of the specie, which in turn is the initial concentration, org represents the concentration of the species in the organic phase, The models that better fitted the extraction extension of each REE individually as well as the optimized extraction and formation constants calculated in each case were used to forecast the behaviour of the multicomponent extraction process. In this regard, the mass balances of chloride (Eq. Nd(III) mass balance Tb(III) mass balance Dy(III) mass balance Chloride mass balance AliOle mass balance For the competitive extraction prediction Eq. The calculations of the modelling of REEs extraction were performed using the mathematical software Matlab R2016a. The formation (Eqs. According to the flowchart in The calculated extraction percentage is a key parameter of the model resolution since the optimization of the stability and equilibria constants depends on the sum of the square of the differences between the calculated and the experimental percentages of extraction. Finally, the function F(x), defined as: The optimization led to the determination of the stability and equilibria constants, whose values allow the experimental extraction extension of the metals to be reproduced with the minimum error. The simulation models created were applied to the extraction of Nd(III), Tb(III) and Dy(III) individually. The stability factors from the literature ( The error, calculated as the sum of the absolute value of the differences between the calculated and the experimental extraction percentages of the metals for each point studied (Eq. The results show that the best-fitted model to the experimental data for Nd(III) Tb(III) and Dy(III) is the one corresponding to the This finding is in agreement with the results obtained in previous studies regarding the extraction of Nd(III) in chloride media using AliOle ( As can be seen, the selected model is able to reproduce the experimental extraction yield of Nd(III), Tb(III) and Dy(III) using the optimized equilibrium parameters listed in The optimized stability and equilibrium constants calculated on this model were tested on an extraction system of neodymium, terbium and dysprosium contained as a mixture in the aqueous phase in order to determine if the model established for single extraction of the metals was also useful to reproduce their competitive extraction. The effect of the AliOle and chloride concentrations in aqueous phase over the simultaneous extraction of Nd(III), Tb(III) and Dy(III) was studied. As shown, the equilibrium parameters calculated for the extraction of each metal separately allowed us to recreate feasibly the simultaneous extraction of Nd(III), Tb(III) and Dy(III) in the aqueous phase. The proposed model, which involves solvating extraction of the metals by 1:2 stoichiometry, has proven to be a very handy tool to predict the extraction extension of REEs with AliOle in chloride media. This could also be very useful either to set the parameters on a new experimental study about any other REEs solvent extraction with AliOle, or to model their transport through SLM. It also could be successfully exploited for extraction prediction of REEs from end of life products (urban mining), requiring only minor adjustments of the equilibria equations and mass balances. This paper reports on the extraction of neodymium, terbium and dysprosium from chloride media with AliOle IL (Methyl-tri(octyl/decyl)ammonium oleate) prepared at the laboratory. The effect of the AliOle, the chloride anion and the REEs concentrations over the extraction yield was studied. Several mathematical models were computed with Matlab software. The models were derived from the chemical equilibria and the mass balances involved in the extraction system of single Nd(III), Tb(III) and Dy(III). The stability and equilibrium parameters of all the proposed models were determined using the fmincon function. The model that better fitted the experimental data was found to be in agreement with preliminary studies. The calculated formation constants of the aqueous Nd–Cl, Tb–Cl and Dy–Cl complexes formed in the aqueous phase were: K This work provides the basis for the study of the recovery of REEs from chloride media using AliOle as extractant and appears to be very promising for the recycling of these metals from urban mining by solvent extraction and by SLM. This work was funded by the