Cheap titania precursors including titania dust, metatitanic acid (solid) and titanium-rich slag were tested as the feeding materials in the FFC Cambridge process (laboratory scale). Porous pellets (∼20mm in diameter, 2.0–3.0mm in thickness) of the precursor were successfully reduced to titanium metal or alloy by constant voltage electrolysis (2.9–3.1V) in molten calcium chloride (∼900°C). The reduction was independent of the initial crystal structure of the precursor. More importantly, some metallic impurities in the titanium-rich slag, such as aluminium and manganese, were found to be partly or completely removed after electrolysis. The current efficiency decreased with electrolysis time, typically from 40% in the first 5h to 20% in 12h for the 2mm thick TiO2 pellets. The energy consumption of electrolysis was about 33kWh/kg Ti when the oxygen level in the produced metal was reduced to below 3000ppm. Analyses of the electrolysis data and of the phases and compositions in partially reduced oxide pellets suggested strong dependence of the electro-reduction on mass (ion) transfer in the pellet after metallisation of the pellet's surface. An earlier proposed “double-melt electrolysis” was compared with the electrolysis data, focusing on the origin and influence of background current.Commercial application of titanium is, to a great degree, restricted by the costly extraction method, e.g. the Kroll process, although titanium is the fourth richest element among all structural metals in the earth's crust and has many desirable engineering and functional properties. In 2000, Chen et al. reported a new process in which solid titania was directly electrochemically reduced to metallic titanium in molten CaCl The cost of an industrial process can be from many origins, and a comprehensive cost analysis of the FFC Cambridge process goes beyond the scope of this paper. However, two of these cost-related factors deserve good scientific considerations: materials and energy. The commercial titanium sponge is usually priced on the market at about $ 8 Except for a brief mention This paper reports our investigation on using three titania precursors, all collected from the industry in western China where over 0.9 billion tonnes of titanium mineral are stored, as the feeding material to produce titanium metal or alloy via the FFC Cambridge process (laboratory scale). The results reveal that titanium metal or alloy can be directly extracted from different TiO Metatitanic acid was collected from the vacuum dehydration stage of the sulfate process in the Titania Plant of Panzhihua Iron and Steel Group Corporation. The titania dust, a non-classified by-product from anatase production, was collected from the floor near the rotary kiln in the same plant. The as-received metatitanic acid and titania dust were labelled by the supplier to contain only Ti, H and O, and the particle size was of sub-micrometers. The titanium-rich slag, provided by Zunyi titanium plant, was manufactured by reaction between ilmenite and coal in a closed electric arc furnace. The composition of the slag was analysed by EDX and the results are given in The titania precursor powder was manually pressed into small pellets (20 The sintered pellet was wrapped tightly with molybdenum mesh and wires. This assembly was used as the cathode in constant voltage electrolysis with a graphite rod anode (20 The photo of a sintered titania dust pellet and the SEM image of its interior are shown in As confirmed by SEM ( The possibility of direct electrolysis of the titanium-rich slag was also investigated. Titanium-rich slag is the raw material for production of titania pigment and titanium sponge, and contains typically 60–90 While this unprecedented finding is scientifically interesting and commercially important, it warrants some comments. Electrochemical reduction on a solid or liquid cathode of mixed elements in molten CaCl Typical current-time curves recorded during constant voltage electrolysis of the three precursors are presented in The electrolysis usually lasted for ∼12 It is worth noting that the current efficiency depended on a number of factors such as pellet thickness and porosity, and oxide particle size. Under similar conditions, thicker and denser pellets led to lower efficiency. Nevertheless, the efficiency values quoted above are much higher than that (∼6%) recently reported by Liu et al. Further, and more importantly, the CaO level in the molten salt should also be controlled to satisfy the transport of oxygen ion from the cathode to the anode. It was reported that the CaO level in a freshly prepared CaCl It may be argued that an “optimal CaO level” in the melt is needed to balance the need for current flow and for avoiding electronic conductivity via the cathodic generated Ca (0) and Ca (I) species. For information, based on the total amounts of titania (1.5–2.0 We would like to emphasise again here that careful dehydration of the as-received CaCl In fact, the influence of the background current on the electrolysis efficiency has long been recognised and some measures were proposed It can be seen in Observations of the perovskite and Magnelli phases in electro-reduction of TiO The point of the above discussion is to highlight the complexity of the electro-reduction of TiO In this laboratory, the background current was found to be much higher in a repeatedly used molten CaCl Based on the above analyses and discussion, we propose to apply the second bath after the pellet was properly metallised on the surface, instead of waiting until full metallisation of the pellet. This change from the original proposal Porous pellets made from three titania precursors, namely titania dust, metatitanic acid and titanium-rich slag, were successfully electrochemically reduced to metallic titanium in molten CaCl This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 20125308 and 20573081). Panzhihua Iron and Steel Group Corporation and Zunyi Titanium Plant are gratefully acknowledged for provision of the titania precursors.