High performance nanocomposites were prepared by incorporating 0–12vol.% nano-sized (39nm) Al2O3 particles into PEEK matrix using compression molding. The microhardness and dynamic mechanical properties of the nanocomposites increase with increasing Al2O3 content. The wear resistance of the nanocomposites evaluated at a sliding speed of 1.0m/s and nominal pressure from 0.5MPa to 1.25MPa under dry sliding conditions was improved more than threefold at 0.8vol.% Al2O3 content. However, the wear resistance of the nanocomposites containing above 1.67vol.% Al2O3 was deteriorated, despite their higher hardness and stiffness as compared to that of nanocomposites containing lower Al2O3 content. The surface roughness of the wear track formed over the countersurface increases with increasing Al2O3 content. The coefficient of friction of nanocomposites was higher than that of pure PEEK. SEM and optical microscopy have shown that wear of pure PEEK occurs by the mechanism of adhesion mainly, whereas of nanocomposites by microploughing and abrasion. Energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS) shows that Fe and alloying elements of countersurface transfer to the wear debris at higher Al2O3 content.High performance semi-crystalline poly(ether–ether–ketone), hitherto referred to as PEEK, has been widely used in many applications due to its excellent thermal, mechanical, chemical and electrical properties. It is an attractive material for journal bearings and piston rings under various loading conditions as it is comparatively fatigue resistance and exhibits a low creep rate up to about 250 Though, the incorporating of particles into polymers improved hardness and storage modulus (stiffness), which in turn result in improved wear resistance. However, the hardness and stiffness are not only the factors controlling the wear behavior, but also the nature and stability of the transfer film and its adhesion to the countersurface affects the wear properties Recently, we have demonstrated the improvement in thermal, dynamic mechanical, and wear properties of PEEK by incorporating micron size Al A commercial PEEK (grade 5300PF) donated by Gharda Chemicals Ltd., Panoli, Gujarat, India under the trade name GATONE™ PEEK was used as matrix in the present study. The nano-sized Al PEEK nanocomposites incorporating 0–12 Theoretical density of the nanocomposites was calculated by rule of mixture using the density of Al Microhardness test (Model: DVK-2S, Matsuzawa Seiki Co. Ltd., Tokyo) with a Vickers diamond pyramidal indenter was used to determine the microhardness of nanocomposites under a constant load of 100 The dynamic mechanical tests were carried out in the three-point bending mode using a Perkin-Elmer DMA 7e dynamic mechanical analyzer from 30 Wear rate and coefficient of friction were conducted on a pin-on-disk wear tester at a sliding speed of 1.0 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Philips XL-30) was used to examine the worn surface of the composite pins and wear debris. SEM was also used to examine the morphology of PEEK powder, Al  The microhardness of PEEK/Al Dynamic mechanical properties are highly sensitive to the structure of materials. Therefore, they were studied from 30    The SEM micrographs of the worn surfaces of the pure PEEK and its nanocomposites are shown in   Based on the above investigations, the following conclusions can be drawn: The experimental density of the nanocomposites is slightly higher than that of theoretical density below 12 The microhardness and stiffness of the nanocomposites increases with increasing Al Wear resistance of PEEK is 10-fold better than that of mild steel. It increases more than 3-fold and 30-fold as compared to pure PEEK and mild steel, respectively at 0.82 Wear resistant of nanocomposites containing 1.67 We thank Dr. P.D. Trivedi, Polymer Division, Gharda Chemicals, India for providing PEEK powder for this research work. We are grateful to Dr. T.L. Prakash, Executive Director of C-MET for his interest in this work. We also thank Mrs. V. Girmarkar/Dr. T. Seth for performing SEM analysis.