The study focuses on the analysis of the information flow among the ISI subject categories and aims at finding an appropriate field structure of the Web of Science using the subject clustering algorithm developed in previous studies. The clustering journals and ISI subject categories provide two subject classification schemes through different perspectives and levels. The two clustering results have been compared and their accordance and divergence have been analyzed. Several indicators have been used to compare the communication characteristics among different ISI subject categories. The neighbour map of each category clearly reflects the affinities between the “core” category and its satellites around.A series of previous studies focused on the analyses of journal clustering based on a complete journal–journal cross-citation matrix ( Along with the development of computerised scientometrics, mapping of science plays an important role in the construction and analysis of science structure. For instance, a variety of techniques for analyzing journal–journal citation relationships have been reported in the literature ( The data have been collected from the As already mentioned at the outset, citation links are determined on the basis of paper-by-paper assignment, which provides us several advantages compared to other approaches ( The clustering method adopted in this study is the The value of the modularity lies in the range [−1,1]. It is positive if the number of edges within groups exceeds the number expected on the basis of chance. Basically, MAM is implemented by simplifying Eqs. In MAM, firstly each node of the network is assigned to a single community. The two nodes When a local modularity maximum value is reached during the optimization, it will correspond to a cluster number from the formed communities. Since generally there are several local modularity maximum values available during the optimization stage, these various cluster numbers under such modularity values can be regarded as different clustering levels (resolutions). Therefore, we can find the most approximate number of clusters from these different clustering levels because the global modularity maximum value could be found among local modularity maximum values. Thus Before the clustering process, a distance matrix was built according to the cross-citation similarities between categories. Salton's cosine measure was used for the normalisation of similarities ( Similarity between categories based on cross-citations (SCC): The number of subject assignment in the Web of Science (SCIE, SSCI, AHCI) is 14,608 for 9487 journals during 2002–2006, namely, roughly 1.54 categories per journal. The average number of journals for each category is 59.4. Among the 9487 journals under study, roughly 60% journals have single assignment for categories in ISI subject classification, and others have multiple assignments. The most assignments are, respectively, from When we aggregate the journal–journal cross-citations to the category–category cross-citations, the self-citations of the journals having multiple assignments will automatically generate large amounts of citations over different categories. Taken into account the big share of multiple assigned journals, as well as the big share of journal self-citations, this aggregation will definitely impact or even distort the real network among categories. In order to avoid the latent distortion, we decided to exclude all the journal self-citation data before we got the aggregated category–category citation matrix. In other words, our category-to-category cross-citation matrix is aggregated from citations only among different journals. In order to measure in how far references/citations are spread among other journals,  As a contrast, we present the top 10 categories with highest entropies after the exclusion of arts and humanities (see Opposing the entropy which measures the distribution of links within the communication network, the index of self-link mainly represents the degree of isolation (see Eq. The symmetrical cross-citation matrix of ISI science and social sciences categories is densely populated: more than 90% of the cells (45,094 of 222 The categories shown in Using the same method, we could get the ego-centred neighbour maps for all the ISI subject categories. For those nodes with less or even no strong links, we may set some lower thresholds to present their communication neighbourhood. For reasons of research affinity, here we would give an example of the category information science and library science (see The ISI category of multidisciplinary sciences, which includes journals such as According to the  The division between different clusters is basically clear and recognisable, which reflects the affinities and divergence among the 221 subject categories. There are a few obscure classifications in this structure, for instance, some agricultural categories are classified in cluster #1 (biology, environmental science and geography), where we admit that there is close relationship among agriculture and biology, environmental science and geography; some engineering categories are spread over several clusters, but it is mainly due to the application characteristics of the engineering science.  The two classification schemes, respectively, based on subject categories and journals are basically coincident, only with the exception that there are one life and medical science cluster and two separate clusters related to agriculture, biology and environmental in the category cross-citation clustering, while in the journal hybrid clustering system, the life and medical science cluster splits up into two clusters, and the two clusters related to agriculture, biology and environmental integrate into one. The divergence between the two structures may due to firstly the differences of the clustering similarities and algorithms, and secondly, to the fact that the journal classification is automatically generated from the clustering program based on the journal cross-citation and text similarities, but the category clustering is based on the journal assignments to ISI subject categories, which are on the basis of a number of criteria including the journal's title, its citation patterns, etc. The differences between the two classification schemes may also reveal some possible improvement for the journal assignments to the ISI categories. The cross-citation network structure among different clusters of ISI categories is visualised by The There are indeed structural differences between the elaborate clustering of more than 8000 journals and the clustering of the ISI subject categories. The former clustering results are generated automatically based on the journal-to-journal similarities, and are then labelled using the best TF-IDF terms from all documents under study in these individual journals; while in the clustering based on ISI subject categories, we first assign all the individual journals into different categories according to the ISI assignment and then aggregate all the journal-to-journal citation data to category-to-category citation data. The clustering is thus analyzed at the category level, and the labelling for each cluster is based on the names of ISI categories included. Therefore, the two clustering results provide two subject classification schemes through different perspectives and levels. The two classifications are structurally comparable but differences indeed exist. The divergence between the two structures may be due to the interferences from the multiple journal assignment to ISI subject categories, and on the other hand, may also reflect some possible improvement of the journal assignment scheme in ISI. The above-mentioned main idiosyncrasy of the ISI category classification is that it may assign one single journal to different categories in view of the subject matter of the documents they publish. If category The research was supported by