We describe the synthesis, characterisation and surface-modification of magnetic nanoparticles and a poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) microgel, followed by the assembly and characterisation of magnetic nanoparticles on the microgel. To facilitate this deposition, the surface of the microgel is first modified via the layer-by-layer assembly of polyelectrolytes. One advantage of this concept is that it allows an independent optimization and fine tuning of the magnetic and thermoresponsive properties of individual components (nanoparticles and microgels) before assembling them so that the hybrid core–shell structure retains all the individual properties. The decisive parameter when exploiting the thermoresponsive and magnetic properties in such hybrid core–shell structures is the amount of heat transfer from the magnetic core onto the thermosensitive (loaded) microgel (for the subsequent heat-triggered release of drugs). Inductive heat study reveals that the heat generated by the magnetic nanoparticles is sufficient to cause the collapse of the microgel above its volume phase transition temperature. Successful confinement of positively and negatively charged magnetic nanoparticles between polyelectrolyte layers is achieved using the layer-by-layer deposition onto the microgel. Dynamic light scattering measurements show (i) the presence of each layer successfully deposited, (ii) the preservation of thermoresponsivity in the coated microgel, and (iii) that the magnetic nanoparticles do not get detached during the phase transition of the microgel. Electrophoresis measurements confirm charge reversal at every stage of layering of polycations, polyanions and magnetic nanoparticles. This unique combination of thermoresponsivity and magnetism opens up novel perspectives towards remotely controlled drug carriers.Much effort has been devoted to the synthesis of organic/inorganic nanocomposites One of the numerous applications of MNP in medicine is cancer treatment To realise such a core–shell structure, one can employ the layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly devised by Decher et al. in the early 1990s In this work, we report the LbL assembly of PEM as well as MNP as a shell on a thermoresponsive PNiPAM core (see Ferrous chloride tetrahydrate (FeCl MNP were prepared according to a co-precipitation technique Briefly the same procedure was followed with 0.81 g FeCl The synthesis of PNiPAM microgel The surface modification of the PNiPAM was carried out using the LbL technique to deposit PEM Positively charged MNP were added to PSS-terminated surface-modified microgel, MG/PDADMAC/PSS while negatively charged (PSS-MNP) were added to PDADMAC-terminated surface-modified microgel, MG/PDADMAC X-ray diffraction (XRD) of the MNP was performed on a Philips X'pert Diffractometer, PW 3040/60 system using  TEM picture in The surface modification of MNP with PSS was confirmed by electrophoretic measurements ( Further evidence of the presence of the polyelectrolyte bound to the MNP is provided by FTIR spectra as shown for MNP and (PSS-MNP) in The modification by PSS can be quantified by TGA as shown from the TGA curves of MNP and (PSS-MNP) in   MNP were assembled on thermoresponsive PNiPAM microgel (MG)  From The time-dependent temperature curve for MG/PDADMAC/(PSS-MNP)/PDADMAC microgel under a 200 kHz and 3.8 kA m  We demonstrate the feasibility of independently tuning the magnetic and thermoresponsive properties of individual components, namely of magnetic nanoparticles and PNiPAM microgel, respectively, before assembling them into hybrid core–shell structures with dual-stimuli properties. We describe the synthesis and characterisation of the PNiPAM microgel, and of both positively and negatively charged magnetic nanoparticles. The layer-by-layer technique proves to be very versatile firstly in the surface modification of the PNiPAM microgel using polyelectrolytes (polyelectrolytes on microgel), secondly in the deposition of magnetic nanoparticles (nanoparticles on polyelectrolytes), and thirdly in confining these magnetic nanoparticles with another layer on polyelectrolyte (polyelectrolytes on nanoparticles). Dynamic light scattering studies show that at every stage of polyelectrolyte layering, the resulting core–shell structure retains its thermoresponsivity, and more importantly, that upon deposition of magnetic nanoparticles, the resulting hybrid core–shell structure retains both thermoresponsive and magnetic properties and the nanoparticles do not get detached after the phase transition. Electrophoretic measurements show charge reversal after each layer is deposited which is a clear indication of successful deposition. Inductive heat study reveals that the heat generated by the magnetic nanoparticles is high enough to cause the collapse of the microgel above its volume phase transition temperature. These hybrid core–shell microgels possess a unique combination of thermoresponsivity and magnetism with high specific absorption rate which could open up novel prospects for remotely controlled drug carriers. A.K.G. would like to thank the Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdienst (DAAD) for a scholarship. Prof. H. Lueken is thanked for ZFC and FC measurements and Dr. M. Hodenius is thanked for induction heating measurements. Support by the Fonds der Chemischen Industrie (Germany) and the Department of Science and Technology (Government of India) are gratefully acknowledged.