A gold ore containing 20 Step 1 The given data indicates: A M  Recovery, Step 3 The distribution of gold in the streams is best illustrated in the following table: The units of assay can be any mass based concentration unit as long as the same unit is used throughout, e.g. ppm, g/t or mass%. A copper-zinc ore was fed to an integrated mineral processing system at the rate of 250 Determine the mass flows in the two concentrate streams and the recovery of metal in each product stream. Step 1 To determine the masses of copper and zinc concentrate streams,  Recovery of copper = and Recovery of zinc = A spreadsheet such as Cells D6, D7 are the unknown concentrate masses Cell D8 is the feed minus the concentrate masses Recoveries in cells I6:J8 are calculated in the same manner as in An integrated circuit consisted of a crusher, grinding mill and a classifier. The circuit produced 4800 Step 1 Determine the liquid/solid ratios in each stream.  Classifier feed stream = Classifier underflow (oversize) stream = Classifier overflow (undersize) stream = Step 2  Circulating ratio = Circulating load = 100 + C A rod mill was integrated with a hydrocyclone and produced a grind at the rate of 250 Step 1 Let us choose arbitrarily the following three sizes: −4 +2.0 Step 2 Calculate the circulation ratio for each screen interval chosen. Thus For size −4.0+2.0  For size −210+105 Average C The circulation load is then =100 + 411 = 511% The objective of all mineral processing operations is to concentrate the minerals of interest and reject the unwanted material associated with the ores. The process is often complex as seen in the previous chapters since minerals exist both physically and chemically combined with each other. Ideal clean separation of the mineral from the unwanted fraction, known as On repeated treatment, some of the middlings finds their way to the concentrates and some report to the tailings. Thus both the concentrate and the tailings are diluted resulting in a loss of grade of the concentrate. To what extent this loss of grade can be accepted would depend on the economics of the process. The scheme of operation usually followed is represented by Each stream has therefore to be assessed to determine the mass and the concentration of the mineral of interest. This chapter deals with the method of assessing the distribution of minerals in the concentrate, middlings and tailings streams and their recovery. The first step in analyzing the constituents of each stream is to obtain representative samples of the streams. The methods of sampling, the sample size and the errors involved Initial qualitative assessment of the raw material that forms the feed stream to a separating process is done by identifying the minerals present under an optical microscope. To get a better idea, X-Ray diffraction (XRD) and X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) analysers are employed. These provide quantitative analysis of elements in the rock sample. The nature of interlocking of minerals in rocks and grains is normally assessed by examining polished sections of the rock particles under an optical and/or electron microscopes which can be operated at large magnifications (from 5,000 to more than 10,000 For estimating quantitatively the presence of elements in continuous operating stream, wet analytical chemical methods are most reliable. However, this is a slow process. To speed up the determinations and to get an equally reliable result Atomic Adsorption Spectrophotometers or Inductively Coupled Plasma atomic emission spectrometers are used where a solution containing the metal ion of interested is aspirated in a flame (AAS) or a plasma (ICP) in which the metal ion is converted into a free atom vapour. A monochromatic light beam is directed through the flame and the amount of radiation of a specific energy level is detected. This electron energy level is specific for an element which helps to identify it. A calibration curve with known amounts of the element and flame intensity helps in quantifying the presence of each element. In operating plants where analytical results are required with least delay, attempts have been made to analyse the composition in situ while the process is in progress. Both dry and wet methods have been attempted with varying degrees of success. For example, in the iron ore industry, the iron (Fe) content of the ore is examined as it travels on the conveyor belt. The Fe-content is determined by using a In wet streams, as in grinding circuits, continuous quantitative analysis of more than one element in a stream is obtained by the use of On-Stream or In-Stream analysers. Here a radioactive source is used to irradiate elements present in a stream (or slurry). Several elements can be detected and quantified simultaneously. For details, any text book on instrumental analysis can be consulted. In some operations the feed stream is from a single supply of ore from one mine when sampling and assaying is relatively easy, but in most cases ores from several sources form the feed to a process. In such circumstances either each source is separately sampled and blended at pre-arranged proportion (according to grade and availability) or a composite sample is analysed. It is a general experience that in industry a sampling error of ± 2% is acceptable. We need to be clear about the definition of terms used in assessing the different streams in a process. The weight of an object is the effect of gravity acting on the mass of the object and is equal to the mass In a mineral processing operation, the throughputs and capacities of units are expressed as tonnes/h or tonnes/day. These tonnages invariably refer to the dry tonnes passing through a process even if the process is treating a slurry of solid and water. This is principally due to the fact that it is the solid that contains the valuable mineral and hence the mass of this component is of the most concern. A slurry is a suspension of solids in a liquid. It is also referred to as It can also be expressed on a volumetric basis (mass = volume Thus a 30% solids slurry by mass means 30 The concentration may also be expressed as per cent solids in the slurry, that is, if %S is the percent solids by mass in the slurry and ρ  and The percent solids in a slurry will most often be quoted as mass % rather than volume % since mass is the property of main concern. Percent solids in some plants is also referred to as The specific gravity of common solids, at different solid-water ratios are given in Grade refers to the concentration of a mineral in a stream and is expressed as a percentage. It is determined by chemical assaying and may be expressed as: For a number of ores, such as base metal ores, grade is quoted in terms of the contained metal rather than the mineral. Recovery describes the amount of mineral or metal of interest that is present in the concentrate in relation to that present in the feed stream. This is usually expressed as a percentage and written as: Thus if we take 100 The concept of distribution can be seen from the following illustration. In the above example only 80% of the mineral present has been accounted for in the concentrate, the rest of the mineral must be in the tailings, neglecting the existence of a middling product. Since the mass of the concentrate is 20 Thus 80% of nickel has been recovered into the concentrate and 19.2% lost in the tailings.  Material balance estimations is one of the most useful and powerful methods of assessing unit and integrated operations. It is used to calculate recoveries and distributions of valuable components at the end of the monthly accounting period or for estimating quantities in streams (mass or assay) that can’t be easily measured. The results from a mass balance is strongly influenced by the accuracy of stream sampling and assaying. Where difficulties arise in the balancing of a circuit the it is usually one or both of these factors that should be suspect. Streams that are difficult to sample (e.g. cyclone underflow) or difficult to assay (e.g. low value streams such as tailing streams) need special attention. Mass balancing described here in only basic as the complexity in balancing increases with more complex circuits and recycle streams and with less information from sampled streams. The modem spreadsheet programmes are idea for these calculations and specialised mass balancing programs such as JKMetAccount, JKSimMet, Limn and USBC are available for complex calculations. The basic principle involved is the conservation of mass. For a process at equilibrium or  The units are in mass or mass rates, either of the total material or of the constituent of interest, that is: Water can be one of the constituents used in a mass balance for a wet process. In a size separation unit such as a screen or classifier the mass in specific size fractions can be used as For a material balance to provide meaningful data, several samples need to be taken and the variance of errors to be established. Errors originate not only in the procedure of sampling but also in the method of measuring. Napier-Munn et al [ Error = 1% for > Error = [0.1+actual %] Where the mass balance of multi-component system is concerned, the error of each component is more difficult to establish. For an acceptable representative stream, the sum of the squares of errors in each size fraction should be minimum. This would give the best fit of mass split. Consider the two product process in  In an operation where the interest is to recover a mineral in a single concentrate, the set up is usually called a two product system, producing one concentrate and one tailing stream. To calculate the recovery of the metal or mineral, the material balance method is applied. The resulting formula is known as the To derive the formula let us assume that in an operation, samples are taken simultaneously from feed, concentrate and tailing streams and that the weighted average corrected analysis of each stream is: Feed stream Feed mass = M mineral assay in the feed = A Concentrate stream Concentrate mass = M mineral assay in the concentrate = A Tailings stream Tailings mass = M and mineral assay in the tails = A For a two product process, the material balance will be: Input mass of feed = Output mass of concentrate + Output mass of tailings. Similarly for the component metal:   By definition, and from  When a process produces three output streams such as an additional middling or second concentrate stream, then the mineral or metal distribution can be calculated using the same principle as that of the two product formula. Such situations frequently occur in metallurgical plants. The recovery formula is generally known as the To illustrate the method, the presence of only two metals, (A and B) is considered here for a metallurgical circuit involving crushing, grinding, classification and flotation. In each unit process, the feed is considered as the concentrate from the previous process. Let us assume that the masses and concentrations of the minerals (metals) in the three streams are as given in Considering the overall material and metal balances of the system the following equations apply:  The application of the method is best understood by  A lead-zinc ore was treated at the rate of 100  Step 1 Using the two product formula: Mass of Pb Concentrate = and         = Mass of Zn concentrate = or A judgement will need to be made as to the reliability of the analytical techniques and/or the sampling procedures before deciding on the accuracy of the calculated values. Step 2 The distribution of the metals is calculated in a similar manner to The premise in the methods of assessing the streams so far has been that the circuits were open, that is, maximum product was obtained at reasonable rates in the concentrate. In actual practice it is found that all concentrate do not satisfy the required specifications of size and concentration. Hence the concentrate has to be treated to separate the unwanted fraction. The out of specification fraction is submitted for further separation by passing on to downstream processes or by adding it to the original feed. In the latter case, a continuous circulating load is set up in the system as illustrated in When a classifier returns the coarse fraction of its feed material to the mill, then the total load to the mill is increased and is the sum of the new feed stream plus the coarse returns. Thus in a closed circuit system the circulating load C  The circulating load C Bond [ In both cases the same general formula applies. By a balance of the mass in size interval i, the circulating ratio in the classifier circuit shown in  For the circuit in To determine the circulation ratio C Then applying Bond’s concept, the circulation load would be: When more than one circulating load is operating in an integrated circuit, the mass balances have to be established for each circuit.  A practical but rapid and approximate method to determine the circulating load in a grinding mill and classifying circuit is suggested by Barber-Greene[ Then the circulation ratio is given by: Other screen sizes could be chosen for the calculation as shown in A calcite sample is ground in a mill in close circuit with a hydrocyclone. Samples were taken from the feed, overflow and underflow streams and their solid to water ratios determined as 2.5, 7 and 0.3 respectively. Calculate the circulating load of the circuit.  Mill discharge stream to classifier = SG Product overflow from classifier = SG Product underflow from classifier = SG Establish a mass balance and derive an expression for the circulating load. A copper sulphide ore was crushed and milled in close circuit with a classifier. The overflow from the classifier fed a rougher cleaner flotation circuit at the rate of 500 Mass flowrates of the cleaner concentrate and rougher tailings, Grade of copper in the rougher tailings. The screen analysis of feed, product and tailings from a classifier were: The classifier was fed with ground silica at the rate of 50 Mass (tonnes) of dry ore per day in classifier underflow, Mass (tonnes) of dry ore per day from classifier overflow.