In the present work, a study of adsorption of copper(II) ions onto calcium alginate beads has been carried out. In spite of many works reported in the literature on this subject (here reviewed), this work was mainly aimed at developing a methodological approach to study adsorption and biosorption of heavy metals considering a mathematical modelling including pH. Generally, in the adsorption isotherms, this parameter must be maintained constant to use the usual equilibrium models, such as Langmuir, Frendlich and Redlich–Peterson equations.
                  pH-edge tests are been proposed and carried out to study the equilibrium and several empirical and semiempirical models are proposed to describe and to fit all the experimental data, including pH as independent variable. pH and equilibrium concentration can be considered at the same time in the mathematical modelling of biosorption equilibrium. A statistical and physical discrimination among rival models has also been performed to select the best model.
                  The results show that pH-edge tests can be used to describe the equilibrium data and that the proposed models are able to fit the experimental results using a mathematical model with just three adjustable parameters. The behaviour of calcium alginate with respect to copper biosorption is characterised over a wide range of pH conditions and this approach can be extended to other biosorbent materials using other heavy metals.Conventional methods to remove heavy metals from wastewaters, such as chemical precipitation, electrowinning, membrane separations, evaporation and resin ion exchange, may be technologically inapplicable or very expensive from an economic point of view. For these reasons, many efforts have been addressed (mainly in the last 10 years) on the developing of new technologies in which technological, environmental and economic constraints are taken into consideration. Biosorption may be a suitable wastewater technology to remove heavy metals as demonstrated by several researchers because it is possible the use cheap adsorption materials that can be competitive with the conventional technologies Although equilibrium and kinetic studies are the main goals of these works, one of the aspects considered in these studies is the immobilisation of suitable microorganisms able to adsorb heavy metals on their cell membranes Among these, different biopolymers have been used, such as calcium alginate. This is an exopolymer extracted mainly from brown seaweeds and various bacteria (e.g. In the following, a review of the most recent works carried out on calcium alginate used as heavy metal biosorbent or immobilising system for biosorbing microorganisms is reported.    Desorption tests carried out by 10 mM HCl were established to be possible with 97% of heavy metal recovery in three biosorption–desorption cycles with negligible reduction in terms of biosorption capacity. The same authors Other researchers  Strontium biosorption by root tissue powders of   A comparison among the biosorption properties of sugar beet pectin (SBP), Ca–alginate and citrus pectin has been carried out by The abilities of different species of seaweeds and their derivatives to remove several heavy metals have been studied by   Beside equilibrium and kinetic studies, other researchers have addressed the heavy metal spatial distribution inside the calcium alginate beads after adsorption tests.  Although the literature on biosorption of heavy metals by alginate is wide, little attention has been addressed to investigate the modelling behaviour of sorption properties of Ca–alginate with respect to pH over a wide range of experimental conditions, with the exception of recent works described by The behaviour of Ca–alginate with respect to heavy metal adsorption, also related to the pH conditions, is of fundamental importance both in studies in which this biopolymer is used as immobilising agent of microorganism (to discriminate the heavy metal up-take of the immobilised biomass with respect to alginate) and in studies in which alginate is used directly as an adsorbing material. In the present work, the pH effect on sorption equilibrium experimental data is modelled through empirical and semiempirical models in order to characterise the Ca–alginate adsorption properties with respect to copper ions. In general, these models can be useful to fit equilibrium experimental data, overcoming the use of the simple Langmuir or Frendlich equations that require constant pH equilibrium data in parameters estimation. These equilibrium data have been produced at constant pH, varying the initial copper concentration (standard tests—STD) and, for several initial copper concentrations, changing pH by base or acid addition (pH-edge tests). A simple statistical discrimination among rival models is also discussed. Calcium alginate beads were prepared by dropping a 3% (w/v) sodium alginate aqueous solution by a peristaltic pump into 5% (w/v) CaCl A number of beads (300) were collected, the total volume measured by adding them to a cylinder with a known volume of distilled water, and the particle diameter experimentally estimated (the procedure was repeated three times). The particle diameter was of 3.0±0.3 mm (confidence limits of 95%). The mean weight of this known volume of beads was evaluated removing only the excess of water on filter paper after their collection by filtration. From these data, 1 mL of beads has wet weight of 1.03 g. Successively, these were introduced in an oven at 50° for 24 h. The dry weight was 0.066 g/mL of beads. A selected volume of beads (5 mL) was suspended in 100 mL of acid solution maintained at pH 2 by 1 M HCl. Then this suspension was potentiometrically titrated adding step by step 0.1 M NaOH. After each addition, an equilibration time of 3 h was considered before reading the pH values. These tests are aimed at the study of the active groups of alginate beads responsible for sorption as reported elsewhere Weight loss of the used beads, during each acid, basic or sorption treatments, was evaluated in all tests. The beads weight has been estimated before ( Adsorption tests were realised with two experimental procedures. Sorption test at constant pH (noted in the following as standard method—STD) and pH-edge tests. In both cases, a selected amount of alginate beads (a volume of beads ranging from 5 to 10 mL) was placed in a shaken flask with a known volume of distilled water. A selected volume of a copper solution (prepared by dissolving CuCl Copper concentration in the liquid phase was determined by atomic absorption spectrophotometer (Varian Spectra, 2000). All samples were diluted with HNO Preliminary adsorption tests were carried out in order to roughly characterise the calcium alginate beads. The results of the titration of protonated beads are shown in In any case, the titration results are in agreement with those obtained by other researchers One aspect that very often is not considered in the study of biosorption of heavy metals using alginate beads is their chemical stability, with the exception of the work carried out by Finally, preliminary kinetic tests permitted us to establish that the equilibrium can be reached after 4 h of contacting time in the investigated experimental conditions (see Equilibrium adsorption tests were carried out by two experimental procedures: standard tests (STD) and pH-edge tests. Several pH-edge tests were carried out under different experimental conditions, changing the initial copper concentration and using two different calcium alginate amounts (5 and 10 mL, both in 100 mL of solution). Test 1 represents the group of pH-edge runs with 5 mL of alginate, Test 2 represents replication of the first test and Test 3 represents the group of pH-edge runs carried out by 10 mL of beads per 100 mL of solution. A typical experimental result is shown in Before analysis of these data with several empirical and semiempirical equilibrium models, a check was carried out to evaluate if the equilibrium results obtained with the pH-edge procedure are similar to those obtained in adsorption standard conditions (named STD). With this aim, from the pH-edge tests we have selected some experimental points with pH values very close to 4.0 and an independent series of tests, obtained in standard conditions, was carried out selecting the equilibrium pH at 4.0. In this last experiment, a complete and usual adsorption isotherm was obtained. From the analysis of The data reported in The cluster analysis was carried out as reported in other studies not related to this subject Grouping these data, a standard application of the Langmuir model was possible, and the relative adjustable parameters were estimated by regression analysis The (1) As expected, (2) The (3) The behaviour of Considering these results, a further phase of mathematical modelling was performed using the experimental data reported in The empirical and semiempirical models used to fit the obtained equilibrium data are as follows. The empirical model reported in Model 1 was empirically developed by the analysis of Obviously, an empirical model is able to simulate the biosorption properties as a pH function, but it does not give any information about the mechanisms operating in the system. This approach may be useful in further physical modelling studies to evaluate data points not experimentally obtained (data interpolation). The first step in the pH-effect physical modelling assumed a noncompetitive mechanism of interaction for heavy metal and hydrogen ions in solution. This kind of model, firstly developed for enzymatic reactions The experimental data ( the parameter standard deviation as parameter error, the model residual variances ( The performances of the selected models are also compared by using an Considering the results reported in  In this paper, the experimental results of copper adsorption onto calcium alginate obtained in different operating conditions of pH were represented by using several simple models. The first and second models are empirically formulated on the base of the specific experimental behaviour observed. The third model is a simple mechanistic model giving good results consistent with both previous biomass characterisation and chemical properties of the active functional group The classical empirical approach to adsorption data modeling consists of using simple mathematical equations, such as the Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms, that can be applied only for representing data collected at constant pH. The originality of the empirical model and the experimental approach (pH-edge tests) here proposed lies in the introduction of an empirical equation into the classical Langmuir isotherm permitting representation of the effect of different equilibrium pH on the adsorption capacities. The authors would like to thank the collaboration of Drs. Molinari Enrica and Montanella Davide for their valuable support during the experimental test work. This research was financed by the University of Genoa (Fondi di Ateneo, 2001).