The selective chlorination process of pre-reduced limonitic nickel laterite using hydrogen chloride was investigated in this work. In HCl–O2–H2O–N2 atmosphere, the effects of variations in temperature, the partial pressures of hydrogen chloride, oxygen and water vapor, and total gas flow rate were all studied. It was found that the chlorination of nickel and cobalt could be described by two stages; and it was controlled by gas diffusion through product layer. Four apparent activation energies, including 20.43kJ/mol and 12.89kJ/mol for the first and second stage of nickel chlorination, 14.95kJ/mol and 13.02kJ/mol for the first and second stage of cobalt chlorination respectively, were obtained in the temperature range of 420–460°C. And the apparent reaction order of hydrogen chloride was also obtained. During the selective chlorination, the oxidation of pre-reduced ore could take place with the selected conditions; chlorinated iron was mostly rejected as hematite and thus nickel and cobalt were selectively chlorinated by hydrogen chloride.Limonitic nickel laterite is an important nickel reserve, which is rich in iron in the form of goethite and has low contents of magnesium, aluminum, silicon, and other elements. Goethite is the main nickel-bearing mineral in the laterite ( In our previous work, a new reductive roasting – selective chlorination – water leaching process for limonitic nickel laterite has been presented ( And the selective chlorination has been investigated at the temperature range of 300–500 Accordingly, the kinetics of selective chlorination of pre-reduced limonitic nickel laterite using hydrogen chloride was studied in this work. To satisfy the selective chlorination, it was conducted in HCl–O A limonitic laterite ore from the Philippines was analyzed by flame atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS) and X-ray fluorescence (XRF) which gave the results shown in The selective chlorination tests were performed on a horizontal tubular furnace as shown in During the selective chlorination, 99.95%(v/v) hydrogen chloride, 99.95%(v/v) nitrogen and 99.95%(v/v) oxygen were supplied by bombs and were passed through anhydrous CaCl The chlorination fractions of iron, nickel and cobalt in chlorinated ore were analyzed by a water leaching method. The chlorinated ore was leached by distilled water with solid/liquid ratio of 1/50 at 80 Experiments to investigate chlorination temperature effect were carried out in the temperature range of 420–500 As partial pressure of hydrogen chloride increased from 0.20 to 0.60, shown in In the selective chlorination process, oxygen plays an important role. It promotes the chlorination of iron alloys and the oxydrolysis of ferrous chloride for chlorinated iron rejection. On the other hand, it leads to secondary reactions, i.e. the oxidation of pre-reduced ore, as described by Eqs. As shown in  The selective chlorination of pre-reduced limonitic nickel laterite is a gas–solid reaction system as described by Eqs. During the selective chlorination, as described above, two stages of kinetic process were obviously observed for the chlorination of nickel and cobalt. And it could be contributed to two reasons: (a) the chlorination rate of metals (Eq. In this work, the well-known shrinking-particle model was chosen to represent the change during the chlorination of nickel and cobalt in pre-reduced ore. From the results above, the rate process of chlorination of nickel and cobalt may be controlled by gas diffusion through product layer (hematite, magnetite and chlorides). Thus the corresponding kinetic equation ( A plot of model fitting for metal chlorination versus time based on Furthermore, a plot of model fitting for metal chlorination versus time based on  In this work, the selective chlorination of pre-reduced limonitic nickel laterite was investigated in HCl–O The financial support from the