In the processing of sulphide ores, there is generally a concentration step such as flotation, before smelting. One of the problems arising in the smelter is the presence of ‘MgO’ and one of the major challenges in the flotation step is to reduce the amount of ‘MgO’ recovered to the concentrate and thus reporting to the smelter. The reporting of ‘MgO’ in concentrates is a pseudo-representation of the range of actual magnesium-bearing minerals which are present in the ore and concentrator products. However, since the total amount of ‘MgO’ present in a concentrate is what drives the smelting problem, regardless of which mineral source, the ‘MgO’ content is the measurement of interest.
                  One of the major sources of MgO is pyroxene, and particularly orthopyroxene. The common occurrence of talc, which also bears MgO, in association with orthopyroxene, warrants additional focus on this mineral. This paper reviews the occurrences of pyroxene and talc in sulphide ore bodies, focussing on the Merensky ore in South Africa and the Sudbury ores in Canada. The various mechanisms by which it reports to the concentrate and methods of reducing these mechanisms, are discussed.
                  Four mechanisms have been identified and each of these has a different treatment route – that are quite wide ranging in effort and cost This paper shows the importance of identifying the mechanisms involved so that the correct treatment can be used. The incorrect treatment can prove costly but in many cases ineffective – a principle of project management that is wider than this paper alone. It also shows the valuable contribution that quantitative mineralogy/process mineralogy makes to process diagnosis and optimisation.In the processing of sulphide ores, there is generally a concentration step such as flotation, before smelting. One of the problems arising in the smelter is the presence of ‘MgO’. Elevated MgO grades of nickel concentrates cause furnace operational problems in downstream processing. This is because of increased liquidus temperature and slag viscosity, requiring the furnace to operate at higher temperatures, also shortening campaign life of the furnace ( Orthopyroxene has been selected as the focus of this paper in the context of two orebodies where its recovery has been reported as problematic, Orthopyroxene is a magnesium-rich ferro-magnesian inosilicate containing approximately 27–35% MgO ( The geochemical definition of orthopyroxene is shown in Both the Bushveld and Sudbury Igneous Complexes are relatively ancient deposits, dated at 2.06 and 1.85 Ga respectively. It is therefore not unexpected to find the alteration of the anhydrous primary orthopyroxene into hydrous alteration product minerals such as talc (Mg The Bushveld Igneous Complex is an extensive geological system, comprising various limbs in the Northwest and Limpopo Provinces of South Africa and with some evidence of its extension under surficial cover into Botswana. The main economic interest of the Bushveld Complex lies within the so-called Critical Zone, one of a series of discrete layered zones within the complex. The Critical Zone is host to the Merensky Reef and the UG2 Chromitite, both carrying Platinum-Group Elements (PGE) in a complex array of discrete PGM and sulphide solid solution species of PGE. The Merensky Reef is also exploited for its Ni and Cu, hosted by the sulphides pentlandite and chalcopyrite. Both the Merensky Reef and UG2 essentially comprise the same major minerals although showing distinct variations in texture and relative abundance of the minerals. The base of the Merensky Reef comprises a pegmatoidal feldspathic pyroxenite sandwiched between two thin chromitite layers. Overlying the second of these chromitite layers, the pyroxentite grades upward into a norite (orthopyroxene and plagioclase rich rock) and anorthosite (plagioclase rich rock). The pegmatoidal feldspathic pyroxenite layer is typically heterogeneous varying in thickness from mine to mine (up to 5 Orthopyroxene in Merensky ore accounts for between 50 and 60% of the overall bulk assemblage. Variable but significant recovery of this silicate mineral to flotation concentrate occurs in the Merensky flotation process ( The Sudbury Structure, a unique geological feature located within the Canadian Shield of northern Ontario, Canada, is host to nickel–copper deposits that have been mined since 1886 ( The Structure consists of the Sudbury Igneous Complex (SIC), the surrounding brecciated footwall rocks as well as the Whitewater Group of rocks which infill the interior of the Basin. Ore deposits are hosted in breccias at the base of the SIC, in a discontinuous layer known as Sublayer Norite, and in the breccias and gneissic rocks of the underlying footwall. The Sublayer Norite is synonymous with another term known as Dark Norite Breccia (DNBX). While the term Sublayer Norite is most well known, the term DNBX has been used historically within Xstrata Nickel, formerly Falconbridge Limited. These ores are generally lower grade and more mafic than the ores hosted by the footwall rocks. Sulphide mineralogy is dominated by pyrrhotite, pentlandite and chalcopyrite that occur as blebs, stringers, breccia or matrix sulphides and as massive sulphide. Gangue mineralogy is largely dependent on the host rock. The Sublayer or DNBX, with its noritic matrix, is dominated by plagioclase, actinolite, and pyroxene, whereas the underlying footwall breccias and gneisses have a larger component of quartz, orthoclase and plagioclase. All ore hosting units contain some amount of augite, a clinopyroxene, but only the Sublayer or DNBX contains both clinopyroxene and orthopyroxene. Total pyroxene content in Sublayer or DNBX ores varies between 10 and 20%. Orthopyroxene content accounts for roughly one half of the total pyroxene content, representing 5% to 13% of the bulk modal assemblage. In both Sudbury and Merensky ores, valuable sulfide minerals are concentrated by flotation. The first step in this process involves comminution and size reduction of the ore to an appropriate size. If the ore is fine, there are associated problems of separability due to unselective recovery by entrainment. If the grind size is too coarse, and there are composite particles which can result in either recovery or grade losses. Speciality reagents are then added to achieve suitable selectivity, both to enhance the floatability of the valuable minerals and to reduce the floatability of the unwanted gangue minerals. There are reagent and mineral interactions and there can be inadvertent activation of the gangue minerals resulting in their reporting to the concentrate. Four mechanisms have been identified for orthopyroxene reporting to flotation concentrates. Each of these has a different treatment route that is quite wide ranging in effort and cost. These are listed and then discussed in more detail in turn.     Recovery of ultra fine silicate gangue by entrainment remains a contributing process to the overall recovery of gangue to final concentrate. The reduction of gangue recovery to concentrate by froth washing in mechanical cells was reported by Composite particles are found in final concentrate. The size range of these varies but the key feature is that part of the composite particle which consists of a positively-floating mineral, be it naturally floating (such as talc), positively floating under collection by, for example, xanthate, and positively floating under collection as a result of activation mechanisms. This case is identified by presence of composites in the concentrate using mineralogy, or paymetal grade of concentrate on a size-by-size basis. This type of problem is addressed by additional milling, which can be expensive, however successful and economic if well-focussed. In the case of Raglan operations, Québec, this amounted to regrinding of the cleaner tailing in the cleaner circuit before scavenger flotation ( Inadvertent activation can occur due to the addition of reagents, particularly copper sulphate and also can be due to the dissolution of the metal ions from the sulphide minerals. When soluble copper species enter this flotation system however, reactions develop which transform the inert pyroxene into a floatable mineral. A study was performed using TOF-SIMS and XPS to investigate copper activation, and the effect of such activation on sulphide collector adsorption ( The use of copper sulphate activator in the flotation of base metal sulphides is widely practised for sphalerite and iron sulphides. The reaction was investigated by Perry in the context of fine particle flotation ( From the above equilibria, the role of pH in the state of equilibrium is seen. Clearly acidic pH favours the production of Cu The free availability of Cu  In acid pH regimes with 3 In higher pH regimes with 8 When copper sulphate was used ahead of collector dosage, the recovery of all three minerals improved at the higher pH values, in particular pentlandite. For the cementation reaction described in Eq. In other sulphide work,  This work concluded that the metal monohydroxide species is generally more surface active. It also explained why the charge reverses, i.e., because the interaction is chemical and not entirely electrostatic. The free energy release for the chemical interaction is higher than for the electrostatic mechanism. The metal monohydroxide continues to interact with the mineral surface, resulting in a surface species M  Comparative microflotation tests using hand-selected specimens of talc, chromite, feldspar, orthopyroxene and quartz, and supported by zeta-potential measurements, showed that in that alkaline pH range, the addition of copper sulphate at a concentration of 10 The reactions between copper sulphate and xanthate proposed by When orthopyroxene (Opx) enters the flotation system, further difficulties develop. In cases where Opx is present in significant quantities in the ore treated by a concentrator, problems can develop by way of a reactive and interactive system that causes the Opx to float and to interfere with sulphide flotation. There are two main types of response. The first type of effect includes the destabilisation of the first rougher flotation froth, reducing pentlandite recovery to that product. It was shown that the choice of frother type may either enhance selectivity against Opx, or enhance Opx flotation by adsorption of frother on that Opx. Dowfroth 250, a polyglycol ether frother, was shown to be present on magnesium-enriched sites of the Opx surface in flotation concentrate. Substitution of this frother by MIBC, an alcohol, reduced this interference considerably. This work also showed that the addition of CMC to the flotation system restored much of the desired metallurgical performance by depressing the Opx from flotation ( The second type of effect is an activation mechanism brought about by metal ions in he process water, be they from the addition of copper sulphate as an activator for sulphides, or the release of nickel from pentlandite as a result of chemisorption of xanthate ( A detailed study to improve the selectivity of separation of pentlandite from pyroxene using zeta-potential and TOF-SIMS measurements of flotation test products from defined conditions was reported by  It was shown by There are two aspects to talc flotation in these systems. One is talc rimming of other silicate particles such as orthopyroxene. This has been discussed in the section on composite particle effects. The other is the behaviour of liberated talc. Talcaceous minerals are naturally floatable and enhance froth stability. This increases entrainment of non-floatable gangue minerals. Talc has two types of surface due to its phylosilicate, or thin sheet-like, structure. One surface is an uncharged plane, the other a charged edge. The plane is hydrophobic and causes talc to have natural flotation properties. The traditional approach to depressing magnesium-bearing gangue minerals is to add either carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) or a guar gum to the flotation system. This depresses the flotation properties of the magnesium-bearing minerals and modifies the froth. As a result, kinetics and selectivity are enhanced. The proposed mechanism for this depression is by adsorption on the mildly hydrophobic surface of the silicate and creating a hydrophilic surface. This prevents particle-bubble attachment and therefore depresses flotation ( Comparative adsorption studies of CMC, guar and starch depressants on talc were reported by Comparative adsorption studies of dextrin and guar gum onto talc were also carried out by Polyacrylamides have been investigated as talc depressants by The effect of molecular weight of CMCs and guars on talc adsorption was studied by The effect of charge, molecular weight and the presence of cations Ca Earlier,  In Sudbury, orthopyroxene dilution into the Strathcona nickel concentrate became problematic in 2005–2006. Mineralogical work, including QemSCAN and ToF SIMS, was undertaken. Results show liberated orthopyroxene in both ultrafine and fine-mid size fractions in the nickel concentrate. This indicated that both entrainment and flotation were occurring. ToF-SIMS analysis did not detect the presence of either Cu or Ni ions on the surface of the orthopyroxene. While talc rims on orthopyroxene grains have been identified on occasion, the majority of orthopyroxene appears unaltered. This work leaves open the possibility that orthopyroxene in the Sudbury Sublayer or DNBX ores may have natural flotation properties. The use of CMC in this flotation system, together with a flowsheet change, significantly reduced the recovery of orthopyroxene to the nickel concentrate. The results of this work will be separately reported (Di This review has attempted to elucidate and summarise the occurrences, flotation and depression of orthopyroxene in ultramafic deposits. At this stage, the following conclusions may be drawn: For the two igneous geological systems reviewed, orthopyroxene occurs in quantities sufficient to be considered as significant to the mineral processes treating these ores and its presence has been shown to be problematic. There are two major effects on the base metal sulphide flotation performance arising from acquired flotation properties of orthopyroxene. These are: Dilution of the flotation concentrate, reducing the paymetal grade and increasing the magnesium grade, Reduction in paymetal recovery to that concentrate. Four mechanisms have been identified and each of these has a different treatment route – these routes are quite wide ranging in effort and cost, vis     A secondary interference with sulphide flotation was noted, in which frother type, was shown to have a significant effect on flotation performance. Further work should be done to evaluate whether there are other mechanisms for pyroxene to report to the concentrate and to understand the differences between clinopyroxene and orthopyroxene as well as to test the treatment methods. The authors would like to thank the management of Xstrata for permission to publish this review. The Centre for Minerals Research – University of Cape Town; Professor Jim Finch – McGill University; Mr. Phil Thwaites, Manager of Process Control, Falconbridge, and Mr Jim Schmitt – Akzo Nobel, contributed significantly to this review and to the Falconbridge Milling School, Sudbury, in May 2006, entitled