A simplified heat and mass transfer model in cellulose medium was developed to predict the air outlet temperature and humidity after evaporative cooling. The model was used to simulate the operation of pre-cooled Natural Draft Dry Cooling Towers (NDDCTs) by a validated MATLAB code. The effects of supplied water flow rate to the media, ambient temperature and humidity on the performance of pre-cooled NDDCTs were investigated. It was found that the effect of the selected water flow rates on tower performance is negligible. Both ambient temperature and humidity affect the tower performance.area, m effective reduced flow area, m heat and mass transfer area, m specific heat, J/(kg K) diameter, m temperature correction factor friction factor inside the tube gravitational acceleration, m/s height, m heat transfer coefficient, W/(m effective heat transfer coefficient, W/(m enthalpy of saturated water vapour at wet-bulb temperature of the inlet air, J/kg loss coefficient medium thickness, m characteristic length, le = mass flow rate, kg/s pressure drop, Pa heat transfer rate, W heat rejection rate, W water flow rate, m air relative humidity, % temperature, K temperature difference, K velocity, m/s overall thermal resistance, K/W volume of medium, m medium width, m humidity ratio, kg densimetric Froude number defined in text Nusselt number, Nusselt number of water, characteristic heat transfer parameter, m Prandtl number, Reynolds number, Reynolds number of water, characteristic flow parameter, m thermal diffusivity, m cooling efficiency, % correction factor the mean flow incidence angle, ° thermal conductivity, W/(m K) dynamic viscosity, kg/(m s) kinetic viscosity, m specific surface area of medium, m density, kg/m ratio of minimum to free stream flow area contraction ratio dimensionless mean temperature difference dimensionless temperature changes of water and air the conditions at ground level the conditions at the average height of tower inlet; inlet or before pre-cooling the conditions at the entrance of heat exchanger; outlet or after pre-cooling the conditions at the exit of heat exchanger the conditions at the outlet of the tower air or based on air side; air dry bulb inlet contraction separation and redirection of flow at the lower edge of tower shell contraction at heat exchanger expansion at heat exchanger downstream evaporation; tube fin total effective front of heat exchanger form and friction at heat exchanger heat exchanger supports heat exchanger logarithmic mean latent heat of vaporization evaluated at 0 °C cellulose medium medium front sensible kinetic energy at the outlet of tower tower supports saturated water vapour water or based on water side wet bulb hot water inlet and outlet A Natural Draft Dry Cooling Tower (NDDCT) creates the air flow through the heat exchanger bundles by means of buoyancy effects due to the difference in air density between the inside and outside of the tower Past research has focussed on hybrid cooling with mechanical draft cooling towers. An earlier paper The objectives of this paper are threefold: (1) to develop a model to predict air outlet temperature and humidity after evaporative cooling and the water evaporation rate; (2) to determine the effects of water flow rate through the medium and ambient conditions on the pre-cooled NDDCT performance; (3) to investigate the water evaporation of the wetted-medium evaporative pre-cooling systems. A simplified heat and mass transfer model in wetted media was developed to predict the air outlet temperature and humidity after evaporative cooling. The model was used to simulate the effects of pre-cooling systems on the NDDCT performance. The trade-off between cooling performance and pressure drop was included. The MATLAB code of NDDCT without pre-cooling system was compared with the case study reported by Kroger A hyperbolic, natural-draft, dry-cooling tower pre-cooled with wetted medium packing is shown in In this configuration, the entire cylindrical shell inlet area of the tower was covered with one layer of 100 mm thick cellulose media. To cover the entire tower inlet area of 3091 m Water was distributed over the top of the media by distributor and dripped down by gravity and capillarity to wet the media uniformly. Excess water was collected at the bottom of the media and recirculated by pump. Air passed through cellulose media to form a cross-flow heat and mass exchange process. The water deposited on the media evaporated by extracting its evaporation heat from the air stream and thus cooled the air. The pre-cooled air then flowed through the heat exchanger bundles to cool the tube-side fluid coming from thermal power plant. The tower considered in this study has a height of 120 m, a representative height for NDDCTs used in thermal power plants. The details of the tower and heat exchanger are summarised in The design conditions of the proposed tower without pre-cooling are given in Wetted-medium evaporative cooling is presently applied in many fields and shows good cooling performance. Applications include evaporative coolers and cooling ventilation systems It is widely acknowledged that medium is the most important element in wetted-medium cooling systems In Section Heat and mass transfer coefficients and the pressure drop are the main characteristics of cellulose medium for the purpose of the present application. The heat and mass transfer processes in the wetted-medium evaporative cooling system and a control volume are demonstrated in Theoretically, evaporative cooling is adiabatic cooling, the air dry-bulb temperature is decreased because it gives up sensible heat, and the water vapour becomes part of the air and carries the latent heat with it Considering the equations in  The properties in Eq. The pressure drop introduced by wetted medium is also of critical importance in NDDCT applications. It is critical because the pressure drop will affect air flow passing through the tower. In this study, the pressure drop was represented by the experimental correlation developed by A. Franco The medium geometry is represented by the non-dimensional length, le/ The cooling efficiency is generally considered as the key factor in determining the performance of direct evaporative cooling systems. It represents how close the exiting air gets to the state of saturation  Thermal Analysis In this section, the heat transfer in the heat exchanger of the proposed NDDCT is analysed. The heat exchanger geometry is already described in In  Pressure Drop Analysis In this section, the pressure drop of the pre-cooled NDDCT is analysed. The main equations and correlations are listed in In The values of air mass flow rate, heat transfer coefficient and pressure drop of cellulose media, heat rejection rate and water evaporation rate can be found when the energy and draft equations are satisfied. A MATLAB code was developed to find these values by an iterative process. The fixed variables during iteration were tower specifications and heat exchanger specifications, hot water flow rate, hot water inlet temperature, medium type and thickness. The iteration variables were air temperature exit the heat exchanger and cooling efficiency. The iteration procedure is summarised as follows. Step 1, a preliminary air mass flow rate Step 2, calculating a new air mass flow rate Step 3, calculation of wetted-medium evaporative cooling used the new air mass flow rate Step 4, Step 1 and Step 2 were repeated using the new temperature Step 5, it was then to make sure that the assumed cooling efficiency in Step 3 was consistent with that calculated in Step 4, and to check the consistency of pressure drop in Step 3 and Step 4. This was finished by a period of iteration of Step 4 with an increase in the initial cooling efficiency by an iteration variable in each iteration. After that, a closer air mass flow rate Step 6, the energy equations were balanced by a period of iteration. If the air mass flow rate Finally, a value of air mass flow rate could be found that would satisfy both the energy and draft equations. Meanwhile, it was ensured that the assumed cooling efficiency in Step 3 was consistent with that calculated in Step 4, and the pressure drop in Step 3 approached well to that in Step 4.  The wetted medium used in the simulation was 100 mm thick cellulose medium. The ambient temperature of 20 °C was the design point of the proposed tower. All the results reported herein were from the numerical simulation described above. The wetted medium performance was coupled with the tower performance. The predicted performance of wetted media when placed in the form of a cylindrical shell around the tower inlet is reported in this section. The supplied water flow rates to the media in A. Franco's For the studied cellulose medium, within the studied air velocity range, The pressure drop also increases with the air velocity increased as shown in The pre-cooled NDDCT performance is reported in this section. The air mass flow rate and the heat rejection rate of NDDCTs are compared in The changes in air mass flow rate of the towers with, and without pre-cooling at relative humidity of 20% and 60% are depicted in As can be seen from In terms of heat rejection, although pre-cooling decreases the inlet air temperature of the heat exchanger and thus improves heat rejection through Eq. Comparing The evaporation rates at water flow rates of 0.128 and 0.171 l/s per m  The results presented above are based on ambient humidity of 20% and 60%. For real climatic conditions, the humidity may exceed this value, and the heat rejection rates will be lower than that in The main conclusions are: The effect of supplied water flow rates on tower performance is negligible as long as the flow rates can fully wet the medium. Both the ambient temperature and humidity affect the tower performance. The water evaporation rate of pre-cooling is less than that of wet cooling tower. NDDCTs benefit from wetted-medium pre-cooling when ambient air is hot and dry, but the improvement declines quickly at increasing humidity. Care must be taken in designing pre-cooling of NDDCTs. Wetted-medium pre-cooling is an important consideration for future EGS geothermal and concentrated solar thermal plants in Australia and the rest of the world, most of which are expected to be constructed in inland regions and dry climates. This research was performed as part of the Australian Solar Thermal Research Initiative (ASTRI), a project supported by