Bismuth telluride is considered as an efficient and super-active electrocatalyst in the sector of electrochemical application. Herein, we prepared binary nanosheets (Bi2Te3) through simple solvothermal and hydrothermal method. Furthermore, to enhance the electrocatalytic activity, graphitic carbon nitrides nanosheets (g-C3N4) were used to prepare the composition of Bi2Te3/g-C3N4 binary nanosheets (BNs) with help of hydrothermal energy. Moreover, Bi2Te3/g-C3N4 hybrid was characterized by various techniques (XRD, XPS, SEM, TEM, EDS and EIS analysis). The electrochemical performance of Bi2Te3/g-C3N4 BNs modified GCEs were analyzed by electrochemical technique (DPV, EIS and CV methods). As modified the Bi2Te3/g-C3N4 BNs modified electrode exhibits excellent electrochemical activity towards food toxic ractopamine (RAC) with high-sensitive and nano-molar detection limit (LOD). Besides, the practical ability was analyzed to detect the RAC in meat samples using Bi2Te3/g-C3N4 BNs modified GCE.Ractopamine is a feed additive chemical and principally contaminated into meat based foods and ecosystems through food processing [ Recently, material science and electro-catalyst developers have been focusing a bimetal tellurides (M Graphitic carbon nitrides (g-C Bi In a typical procedure, 5.5 mM melamine and 16.5 mM glucose powders were added into a 100 mL Teflon-lined autoclave (hydrothermal process), which was then filled with deionized water up to 60% of total volume. The mixture was stirred for 30 min with 30 mg Bi Glassy carbon electrode (GCE) was washed then used Bi The XRD patterns of the g-C X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurement analyzed to study the surface chemical composition and its oxidation state. The composition of Bi Further, the surface morphology of the as-prepared g-C To further demonstrate the electron, transfer behavior of GCE (a), g-C As an efficient technique of recording the interfacial properties of the various electrodes, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was used. The coating amount of Bi The electrochemical behavior of RAC at the GCE modified with Bi To further verify the electrocatalytic activity of RAC at Bi The effect of different scan rates on Bi To clarify the electrochemical parameters of Bi Selectivity of the Bi Storage stability of Bi To evaluating the electrochemical ability Bi In summary, synthesized a super-active electrocatalyst of Bi  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at