Recovery of minor actinides from spent molten salt is one of the important issues. Decontamination of spent molten salt waste is also the problem to be solved for establishment of pyrochemical reprocessing. The decontamination method of spent molten salt waste with recovery of minor actinides has been proposed. Our proposed process is based on the hydrometallurgical process. This process consists of the following processes. First, the spent molten salt waste is dissolved in aqueous solution. Next, the minor actinides are recovered by chromatographic techniques using the pyridine resin in the methanolic hydrochloric acid solution. In the last process, the spent molten salt waste is decontaminated by the cation-exchange chromatography. In the present paper, the adsorption behavior of minor actinides, rare earth elements, alkaline earth elements, and alkali metal elements on pyridine resin is reported. The demonstration experiment of the recovery of the minor actinides from simulant spent molten salt waste is also reported.Nuclear energy is one of the most important energy systems. The innovative nuclear system such as FBR is desired for the sustainable energy demand. Various types of reprocessing systems have been proposed in order to fulfill the requirement for the novel nuclear cycle with innovative nuclear system. The pyrochemical reprocessing is one of the promising methods ( The resin used in the present experiment was highly porous tertiary pyridine type resin embedded in silica beads. The average diameter of silica beads is 60 The adsorption behavior of alkali metal ions, alkaline earth ions, and rare earth ions on pyridine resin and their separation behaviors in the methanolic hydrochloric acid solution were investigated in order to obtain the basic data for radioactive salt waste treatment by carrying out the chromatography. A 1 The adsorption behavior and separation phenomenon of minor actinides in methanolic hydrochloric acid solution were also investigated by using the minor actinide sample solution with fission products. This sample was prepared by removal uranium and plutonium from the irradiated MOX fuel by using the ion exchange. The typical chromatogram of alkali metal, alkaline earth, and rare earth ions using methanolic hydrochloric acid solution is shown in The results of the adsorption experiments using lithium chloride aqueous solution were described in the followings. The adsorption of rare earth was observed under the condition of more than 5 This chromatogram using minor actinide solution is shown in We propose the method of the recovery of minor actinides from salt waste and decontamination of salt waste from the obtained results of adsorption experiment and the knowledge in existence. The proposed decontamination system of salt waste with minor actinide recovery is shown in The demonstration of recovery of minor actinides by second process was also carried out by using the simulant molten salt waste solution. The simulant molten salt waste was made by mixture of lithium and potassium chlorides and the fission products with minor actinides sample which was removed uranium and plutonium from irradiated MOX fuel by ion exchange. The simulant molten salt waste solution was prepared by dissolution of simulant molten salt waste with deionized water, and adjusted to 5 The adsorption behavior of alkali metal, alkaline earth, rare earth elements, and minor actinides on pyridine resin and their separation phenomena were investigated. Based on these results, the decontamination method of spent molten salt waste with recovery of minor actinides was proposed. This process consists of separation processes using pyridine resin and cation exchange. The feasibility of the recovery of minor actinides and the removal of rare earth elements from the spent molten salt waste by chromatography using pyridine resin was confirmed by the demonstration experiment using simulant molten salt waste. It was declared that the spent molten salt waste can be decontaminated by the cation-exchange chromatography. Present study includes the result of “Research and development on removal and recovery of minor-actinides from spent molten salt waste of pyrochemical reprocessing” entrusted to “Tokyo Institute of Technology” by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan (MEXT).