Copper retention due to chemical and physical interaction with reactive gangue has been studied during sulphuric acid leaching of atacamite, chrysocolla and malachite, using a synthetic rock (57% quartz, 42% reactive gangue and 1% ore). Smectite- and mordenite-rich gangues represent the highest copper retention whereas the lowest is found for kaolinites and illite. During leaching, smectites show the largest change (increase) in volume; no volume change occurred for kaolinites, zeolite and illite. Kaolinite-rich gangue forms barriers due to de-lamination demonstrated by acid accumulation at the top of the columns.
                  The X-ray diffraction patterns of smectite, illite and kaolinite in the residues demonstrate the diminution or complete loss of basal crystal faces accompanied by the neo-formation of alunogen, meta-alunogen, coquimbite and goldichite. These new phases contribute to a temporary reduction of permeability. For all the synthetic rocks assayed, the copper retention is directly proportional to cation exchange capacity (CEC) of the starting materials, and corroborated by the CEC of Cu of the residues determined without water elution prior to analysis.
                  This test used represents a predictive tool to evaluate the potential Cu retention and gangues with elevated CEC.Oxidised copper ores, consisting mainly of silicates (chrysocolla, a mineraloid with cited formula (Cu,Al) The extraction of copper from low grade oxide ores is considered to be an economical operation if the efficiency of the extractive operations borders 95%. This process is continuously being developed to improve the removal of copper from a wide variety of ores; in many cases the ore is a microscopically inseparable mixture of reactive gangue minerals such as smectites (M It is therefore considered important to establish an analytical predictive link between the metallurgical whole ore/rock approach and single phase mineralogical studies, as this will permit one to observe and understand mineralogical changes in residues and copper retention by potentially reactive gangue phases under acid conditions in a short-term experimental setup. This experimental study intends to semi-quantify the interaction between atacamite, malachite and chrysocolla with potentially reactive gangue using a non-traditional chemical and mineralogical characterization in a short and severe acid leaching test. These ore minerals, atacamite, chrysocolla and malachite, were selected for their importance for Chilean copper deposits and availability of pure materials. The criteria for selection of the gangue were the reactivity due to charge deficiencies per formula unit, expandability, the cation adsorption and exchange capacities (CEC), the possibility of physical barrier formation, relevance for Chilean exotic copper-ore deposits, and on an experimental level, purity, homogeneity and availability of the materials. The short-term leach tests were carried out with a strong solution of sulphuric acid (265 g/L) at ambient temperature (18 to 21 °C) in small columns ( The mixtures were compressed to the consistency of a semi-consolidated sediment at 40 ton/cm The mixtures (40 g of ore and gangue) were placed in columns (4.4 cm diameter, 6.5 cm height) and the leaching process was carried out with 50 mL H Cation exchange capacities (CEC) of the starting materials and residues were carried out by ammonium acetate (Ca, Mg, Na and K) and di-ethylene-triamino pentaacetic acid (Cu and Zn) exchanges and analyzed by AAS (Hitachi Z-8100). Total and soluble copper were determined by AAS following attacks by HNO During the leaching experiments smectite-rich gangue increased up to 75% in volume with formation of air–then acid–filled cavities due to the rapid sealing effect of overlying smectite in the column. No volume change occurred for illite and mordenite (Ca,Na Mineralogical changes in the residues were most notorious for the smectite group gangues. Nontronite ((M Total copper in the head and residue of the mineralized series shows similar efficiency of the leaching process for the three mineral species interacting with all the gangues studied ( The preferential copper retention in most of the smectite gangues could be due to: (1) adsorption of Cu on montmorillonite and nontronite surface sites and in the remaining cation exchange positions, (2) retention of Cu as suspended gel or in water within the residues. This second option could be favored if abundant cations are made available by the silicate gangue, as happened in three of the smectite species. The more acid stable SWY montmorillonite retains comparatively less copper, but at the same time maintains its crystal structure, suggesting as for the acid resistant mordenite, Cu retention in charge compensation positions. These phenomena repeat for all three ores studied, irrespective of the total Cu of 0.5% for atacamite and malachite and 0.25% for chrysocolla ( There is a good correlation between the total exchange capacity of the residues (considering remnant cation proportion) ( Therefore this study shows that the parameter of cation exchange capacity, when applied as a straightforward interchange procedure without water elution of the residue to wash out remaining solution or gels, does not permit one to pinpoint the location of the retained copper; however, it reflects well the overall capability of a gangue to retain copper in the residue, the principal concern in mineral processing. A single step exchange is easy to implement in many mining laboratories on site. Applications of CEC to natural mineralized ore can be a very efficient predictive tool for potential copper retention. The highest copper retention is found for smectites and mordenite gangue; the lowest is observed for kaolinite, illite and quartz. The use of CEC without prior elution of the residue with water provides a measure for the overall Cu retention which may either be due to cation exchange capacity, surface adsorption or, in the case of an expandable phase, retention of solution or gel in the residue. Together with the XRD analysis focused on the possible presence of clay mineral phases, the CEC represents a powerful predictive tool for Cu retention by clay mineral and zeolite phases. Both methods are easy to implement on a production site. As a complement to traditional mineralogical characterization, the combination of CEC and XRD analyses incorporates a robust knowledge of gangue–solution interaction during leaching and the potential loss of copper and its retention in minerals with elevated CEC. This research was made possible by the FONDECYT Grant 1010823 “The interaction of oxide zone copper minerals and gangue during leaching: a geometallurgical and experimental perspective”. Staff at the GEA Institute is thanked for their help with the analytical work. The helpful comments and suggestions of two anonymous reviewers are very much appreciated.