Background
                  The purpose of this study was to investigate clinical and radiologic outcomes of clavicle hook plate fixation for distal-third clavicle fracture (Neer type II) and to compare the clinical and radiologic outcomes and complications between Neer type IIA and type IIB.
               
                  Methods
                  We retrospectively reviewed 35 patients who underwent open reduction and internal fixation with AO hook locking compression plate (LCP) for distal clavicle fracture, including 13 patients with Neer type IIA and 22 patients with type IIB. Visual analog scale pain score, shoulder scores (subjective shoulder value, University of California–Los Angeles shoulder score, American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons score), and active range of motion were evaluated to determine clinical outcome. Coracoclavicular distance was measured, and that of the injured side at last follow-up was compared with that of the uninjured side to evaluate radiologic outcomes.
               
                  Results
                  AO hook LCP fixation for distal-third clavicle fracture (Neer type II) produced satisfactory radiologic outcomes, including high union rates (100%) and coracoclavicular distance maintenance, as well as satisfactory clinical outcomes, including visual analog scale score for pain, shoulder scores (subjective shoulder value, University of California–Los Angeles shoulder score, American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons score), and active range of motion. There were no significant differences between Neer type IIA and type IIB. With regard to complications, 22.9% of patients experienced shoulder stiffness and 17.1% had subacromial erosion; however, there were no significant differences between the 2 groups.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The AO hook LCP is a suitable choice for Neer type IIA and type IIB distal-third clavicle fracture fixation.Distal-third clavicle fractures account for approximately 10% to 15% of all clavicle fractures Various surgical techniques have been introduced, such as K-wire fixation, The purpose of this study was to investigate the clinical and radiologic outcomes of using AO hook LCP fixation for unstable distal-third clavicle fracture and to compare the outcomes and complications between Neer type IIA and type IIB fractures. We hypothesized that clinical outcomes would not differ between patients with type IIA (group A) and type IIB (group B) fractures but that group B would exhibit higher nonunion rates and increased CCDs than patients in group A. This is a retrospective study of patients seen from March 2009 to May 2014 for Neer type II distal clavicle fracture fixation using the AO hook LCP. During this period, 43 patients underwent open reduction and internal fixation with the AO hook LCP for Neer type II distal clavicle fracture. The inclusion criteria were acute fracture within 2 weeks of injury and availability for follow-up at 2 years after surgery. Exclusion criteria were previous surgical history on the affected shoulder and concomitant fracture around the affected shoulder. We retrospectively reviewed the medical records, including radiologic imaging, of 35 patients (13 in group A and 22 in group B) who met these criteria. For functional assessments, we used a visual analog scale (VAS) pain score, the subjective shoulder value (SSV), the American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (ASES) score, the University of California–Los Angeles (UCLA) shoulder score, and active range of motion (ROM). ROM was defined as forward flexion in the scapular plane and external rotation with the elbow at the side. Internal rotation was determined by measuring the highest spinal segment the patient could reach with the thumb pointed upward. To facilitate statistical analyses, the spinal segment level was converted to continuous numbers: T1 to T12 levels were represented by 1 through 12; L1 to L5 level were represented by 13 through 17; and the sacrum was represented by 18. For radiologic evaluation, both clavicle anteroposterior views were taken regularly after surgery (at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, 12 weeks, 6 months, and 1 year and annually thereafter). Bone union was defined as bridging callus across the fracture site or invisible fracture line. The CCD, defined as the perpendicular distance from the top of the coracoid process to the lower border of the clavicle, was measured by 2 independent examiners. The individual value was measured, and then the individual mean value was calculated. We compared the CCD of the injured side with that of the uninjured side to evaluate reduction status and to confirm control of superior migration of the proximal fragment by AO hook LCP. All patients underwent open reduction and internal fixation in the 20° beach chair position under general anesthesia by a single surgeon. A 9- to 10-cm incision was made on the distal clavicle and acromion. The facture fragments were identified after dissection, and a hook plate was placed under the acromion and on the fracture site extending medially. We checked the status of reduction, depth of the hook, and contour of the plate on the distal clavicle under fluoroscopic guidance. Adjustments of the plate contour with appropriate hook depth were made until optimal reduction and contour of the plate were achieved. Then, locking screw fixation of both medial and lateral fragments was performed. Even though an additional coracoclavicular ligament repair was not performed, the deltotrapezius fascial repair for reinforcement was done securely over the plate. Regardless of Neer type, the affected arm was kept in a sling for 6 weeks after surgery. Pendulum exercise, self-assisted circumduction exercise, and gradual passive ROM began on the first day after surgery, as tolerable. At 6 weeks postoperatively, active ROM exercise began. After 3 months, the implant was removed if bone union was obtained; if not, implant removal was delayed until union was observed. If the patient experienced shoulder stiffness at the time of implant removal, brisement under general anesthesia and subsequent arthroscopic capsular release were performed concomitantly. Statistical analyses were performed using the SPSS software program (version 21.0; IBM, Armonk, NY, USA). The Mann-Whitney test was used to compare numerical data, such as VAS pain scores, ASES scores, UCLA shoulder scores, and the mean increase in CCD, between the 2 groups. A Wilcoxon signed rank test was used to compare preoperative and postoperative CCD values within each group. Fisher exact test was used to compare categorical data. Statistical significance was set at We identified a total of 35 patients, including 24 men and 11 women. The mean age of the patients at the time of operation was 40.7 ± 12.3 years overall (range, 22-62 years). The right arm was affected in 20 patients and the left arm was affected in 15 patients, with 8 right arms and 5 left arms in group A and 12 right arms and 10 left arms in group B. The mean time to surgery was 4.4 ± 2.4 days (range, 1-10 days). A total of 45.7% of patients had comminuted fractures, including 30.8% in group A and 54.5% in group B. All patients underwent plate removal surgery, and the mean time to removal of the hook plate was 4.4 ± 1.2 months (range, 3-8 months). There were no significant differences in patient demographic data ( At the 2-year follow-up, the mean VAS pain score was 1.4 ± 0.9 (range, 0-3). The mean SSV was 84.4 ± 9.1 (range, 60-100). The mean UCLA score was 32.6 ± 2.2 (range, 26-35). The mean ASES score was 83.5 ± 7.9 (range, 66.7-100). There were no significant differences in VAS pain scores and shoulder scores (SSV, UCLA, and ASES) between group A and group B. The mean active forward flexion was 157° ± 4° (range, 150°-165°). The mean active external rotation was 49° ± 3° (range, 44°-54°). The mean active internal rotation was 10 ± 1 (range, 9-12). There were no significant differences in active ROM between the 2 groups ( Bone union was obtained in all patients. The mean preoperative CCD was 19.9 ± 3.6 mm (range, 13.2-28.8 mm), and the mean postoperative CCD at last follow-up was 11.3 ± 1.0 mm (range, 9.5-13.0 mm). Although there was a significant difference in preoperative CCD values between the 2 groups, there was no significant difference in mean postoperative CCD at last follow-up. The mean increase in CCD at final follow-up was 7.6% ± 2.2% (range, 3.1%-13.9%) compared with a preoperative measurement from the uninjured side; there was no significant difference between the 2 groups ( Postoperative stiffness occurred in 22.9% of all patients (n = 8), including 15.4% of group A (n = 2) and 27.3% of group B (n = 6), although all patients were taught how to perform pendulum exercise and self-assisted circumduction exercise on the first day after surgery. For patients experiencing stiffness, we performed concomitant arthroscopic capsular release during the hardware removal operation. We educated and encouraged patients to perform passive ROM exercises including pendulum exercise on the first day after surgery to prevent shoulder stiffness. Despite these efforts, some patients were not compliant and experienced stiffness. We attempted physiotherapy for these patients; however, there was still no improvement. Therefore, we conducted brisement and arthroscopic capsular release under general anesthesia during the hardware removal operation. After arthroscopic capsular release, all patients recovered full ROM. In addition, 17.1% of patients (n = 6) had subacromial erosion, including 30.8% in group A (n = 4) and 9.1% in group B (n = 2) ( The purpose of this study was to evaluate the clinical outcomes of displaced distal-third clavicle fractures treated with open reduction and internal fixation by a clavicle hook plate and to compare the outcomes according to Neer subtype classification (Neer type IIA and type IIB). Contrary to our initial hypothesis, there were no significant differences in nonunion rate or CCD change between patients with Neer type IIA and type IIB injuries. On the other hand, our results show satisfactory clinical and radiologic outcomes in both groups with no significant differences between the 2 groups. Shin et al In our study, we could not perform anatomic reduction and firm fixation for the distal portion of fracture in all cases, but we tried to maintain the level and alignment between the distal and proximal fragments using the AO hook LCP. Our results show that the mean increase in CCD was 7.6% compared with a preoperative measurement from the uninjured side. The extent of CCD increase in this study is comparable to that of studies using other techniques, such as anatomic clavicle LCP or suture anchors for distal clavicle fixation. There were a few complications related to use of the hook plate in distal-third clavicle fractures. Lin et al demonstrated subacromial impingement syndrome and rotator cuff lesions by musculoskeletal sonography Our study had some limitations. First, the study was retrospective and did not have a control group to compare AO hook LCP with other fixation methods. Second, the sample size was small, which may have resulted in a type II error caused by low statistical power. With a larger sample size, our conclusions might be more convincing. AO hook LCP fixation for distal-third clavicle fracture (Neer type II) exhibited satisfactory clinical and radiologic outcomes, including high union rates and satisfactory maintenance of CCD, without any significant differences between patients with Neer type IIA and type IIB injuries. There were also no significant differences between the 2 groups with regard to complications after surgery. The AO hook LCP is a suitable choice for Neer type II distal-third clavicle fracture fixation, regardless of subtype. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article. The authors would like to thank Dong-Su Jang, MFA (Medical Illustrator, Medical Research Support Section, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea), for his help with the illustrations.