In many fields of research and technology, nanodisperse formulations are applied. Especially in pharmaceutical applications, it is necessary to facilitate the processing of small educt batches for formulation screening of new active pharmaceutical ingredient in high quality. In this study, the design of microsystems for high-pressure homogenization is systematically studied and variations of design parameters are evaluated. The designs primarily produced in silicon are successfully transferred to stainless steel to facilitate higher pressure drops over the homogenizing structure at elevated temperature required for solid lipid nanoparticle (SLN) processing. Different groups of geometric principles are applied and can be ranked by droplet breakup efficiency: straight channel<z-channel<orifice∼y-channel. Changes within a geometric principle alter the droplet breakup efficiency as well. Conclusively, nanoemulsion (NE) and SLN can be produced in the customized microchannels presented. Especially multiple orifice systems and y-channels with rounded inlet structures prove most efficient.Nanodisperse formulations of either liquid or solid particles have widely been investigated and applied in various fields of science and technology. In the industrial context, emulsions are, e.g. applied as coolants in metal processing Especially for life-science and pharmaceutical applications nanoemulsions and solid nanoparticles (especially solid lipid nanoparticles, SLN) are promising vehicles for drug delivery. Nanoemulsions and nanoparticles can facilitate the application of hardly soluble drugs, enhance their bioavailability and permeation through biological barriers, enable drug targeting, sustain drug release, and protect drugs against degradation With respect to these requirements, a number of different processing methods for nanosized particles were developed and characterized. Firstly a differentiation between bottom-up and top-down processes can be made. Bottom-up processes mainly comprise different precipitation methods, which appear less suitable for the production of emulsions and solid lipid particles. Conclusively, top-down processes prevail and can, secondly, be subdivided into dispersion processes by rotor–stator-machines, ultrasonic devices, membrane emulsification and high-pressure homogenization The use of customized microsystems provides several advantages such as a high surface-to-volume ratio, a defined residence time distribution, and a relatively defined input of stresses to the product stream (by customizing microchannel design). Additionally, the application of small educt batches and a good product recovery, due to small dead volumes, are facilitated. This is of special interest for applications in early pharmaceutical development, as just small amounts of active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) are available for formulation screening. In this case, the use of microsystems can reduce costs, but additionally decreases process times and the hazardous potentials. In this study, the feasibility and limitations of nanoemulsion and SLN production in customized microchannels of different materials are investigated. Furthermore, the effect of different design principles and structural changes within these on the droplet breakup efficiency is elucidated in detail. The microsystems are designed and developed as a modular approach. This will implement the stage for particle size reduction (evaluated in the present study) into an integrated overall microsystem for SLN production. Different modules will be set before or after this stage such as microsystems for the dispersion of solid APIs in the lipid phase, the initial combination of aqueous and lipid phase by droplet formation, and the defined cooling and crystallization of previously liquid particles. This approach fosters the evolution towards continuous production and poses the challenge to achieve acceptable product quality by just one passage. Consequently, these high-pressure emulsification microsystems are optimized regarding their breakup efficiency. Softisan® The microsystem generally consists of a structured bottom plate with customized microchannels for dispersion on its top side as well as outlet and inlet structures on its bottom side ( All microsystems display outer measures of 30 Silicon wafers were structured by a double sided, deep reactive ion dry etching process as described by Lesche and Büttgenbach To achieve a higher stability against elevated process pressures and temperatures required for SLN production, stainless steel was used as microsystem substrate. The structuring of polished stainless steel sheets was actualized by a micro electrical discharge machining process, described in detail by Richter et al. The inlet and outlet geometries differ for silicon and stainless steel ( If a general channel width smaller than 1  For high-pressure homogenization experiments in microsystems, a customized homogenization plant ( Silicon microsystems were only utilized for nanoemulsions (⩽300 The coarse pre-emulsion of 5% (w/w) MCT in a solution of 3% MHS in double-distilled water was yielded by applying a rotor–stator high shear mixer (Ultra-Turrax®) equipped with S25 N-18G dispersion tool (both: Ika, Staufen, Germany) at 8.6 The pre-emulsion was processed at ambient conditions in the homogenization setups described above. Silicon microsystems were investigated at 50–300 For the lipid matrix (LM), 30% PL and 70% HF were weighed into a sealed container and melted at 90 To guarantee a constant temperature of 70 Mean particle size (MPS) and particle size distribution (PSD) were determined by laser light diffraction and polarization intensity differential scattering (LD/PIDS) by LS Comparing different top-down homogenization methods (e.g. rotor–stator-machines, ultrasonic disruption, membrane emulsification), the specific energy input, i.e. the energy related to the stressed emulsion volume, was introduced as a directly comparable measure for disruption efficiency The volume flow rate To elucidate the applicability of a commonly used equation to describe comminution processes In order to demonstrate the significance of differences, first of all an In first line, an emulsion formulation was used to assess differences in dispersion efficiency, investigating the influence of variations in process parameters. A variety of silicon microsystems applying different geometric principles was investigated ( Besides emulsion formulation, process parameters crucially affect the homogenization result in the production process of nanoemulsions. In this study, process parameters such as geometric principles, minor structural changes of these, micro channel depth, and process pressure were systematically varied. Four geometric principles of microchannel design were applied: (a) straight channels, (b) z-channels with flow redirections, (c) orifice channels with a distinct constriction over a short length of the microchannel, and (d) y-channels, in which the product flow is split up and redirected to converge frontally ( Taking the properties of silicon into account, homogenization experiments were carried out with process pressures up to 300 For the characterization of flows, parameters such as volume flow rate, Reynolds number, and maximum mean velocity (both at the smallest cross-sectional area) are taken into account. These may foster the interpretation of particle reduction patterns in accordance to different flow characteristics. In the first section, results for microsystems with a channel depth of 31 With regard to an integrated overall microsystem, just one passage through the homogenization structure was conducted in emulsion experiments. The resulting mean particle sizes (MPS) for all microsystems with a depth of 31 Although the overall energy input is, in consequence to Eq. The particle sizes for z-channels (Z1, Z2, Z3) are significantly smaller than those for straight channels ( Orifice and y-channels display particle sizes significantly smaller than for all straight and z-channels (pressures >50 For orifice channels ( In addition to single orifices, cascading quadruple orifices (O4 and O5) were investigated. These two microsystems differ only in flow direction. In O4, the product flow first passes a 30 Nevertheless, it is important that the orifice interacting with the product flow first is the smallest and, consequently, yields the highest pressure drop. Consequently, the counter pressure to the first orifice is not too high either. The small first orifice of O4 (30 For y-channels ( With respect to the curve progression for all microsystems ( To elucidate differences between the four geometric principles in different channel depths, the final particle sizes (for one passage at 300 Regarding the flow parameters at 300 With rising depth of the microchannel, the final particle sizes at 300 For straight channels, S2 with 100 The particle sizes of Z1, Z2, and Z3 show comparable values for >150 All orifice channels, except O4, show comparable particle sizes for >100 Within the group of y-channels ( A potential to further decrease the particle size can be deduced from the fact that no plateau in particle size is achieved up to 300 In addition to the comparison of final particle sizes at 300 The determined kinetic constants Comparing the results of kinetic constant calculation for 31 and 48 Conclusively, the interpretation of kinetic constants of the emulsification process may help to interpret the particle size data, but cannot provide a complete understanding of the most efficient MS geometry. It must be taken into account that this principle is just applicable if the minimum particle size determined by the formulation is not achieved. Furthermore, this simple model cannot differentiate between particle sizes resulting from insufficient disruption performance or coalescence downstream the homogenizing structure. Hence, the correctness of interpretations based on kinetic constants should be validated in future studies by both, computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations and micro particle image velocimetry (μ-PIV). Future experiments with differently fast adsorbing emulsifiers may help to differentiate between bad disruption performance and coalescence phenomena. In this case, slowly adsorbing macromolecular molecules such as hydrophobically modified starch An essential limitation of the production of nanodisperse formulations by homogenization in silicon microsystems is the applicable pressure range. Due to the fragile nature of silicon and glass, these microsystems were only used up to 300 As for silicone microsystems, resulting particle sizes decrease with increasing process pressure for all microsystems and geometric principles display differences in droplet breakup efficiency ( The mean particle sizes decrease until 1500 As expected, the application of a z-channel leads to smaller droplet sizes at a given pressure as compared to the straight channel. For the z-channel the final D The orifice channel is more effective than the z-channel by trend, yielding smaller particle sizes up to 750 The y-channel remains the most efficient in droplet breakup, displaying significantly smaller mean particle sizes for the whole pressure range (except for the orifice channel at 1500 As final particle sizes at 1500 The production of SLN by melt homogenization necessitates the lipid phase to be in the liquid state, in fact, processed as an emulsion. In case of the present formulation of hard fat and phospholipid as lipid matrix, this is assured by keeping the formulation and all parts of the homogenization setup temperature-controlled at 70 As expected from the fact that SLN are processed as emulsions, the results are basically comparable to those for emulsions. Furthermore, By applying higher pressures, low particle sizes are achieved with good reproducibility. The pressure level sufficient to decrease the particle sizes under a critical value differs for geometric principles. Taking the particle size distribution as a function of process pressure into account, a clear differentiation between different geometries can easily be made ( In the studies presented, the feasibility of nanoemulsion production in customized microsystems is proved. The particle sizes decrease with rising energy input due to elevated pressures for all microsystems was investigated. A clear differentiation between the efficiencies of geometric principles was demonstrated. Straight channels are least efficient, z-channels are slightly more efficient, and orifice and y-channels are most efficient in droplet breakup. Regarding the efficiency, the concentration of energy input by pressure loss on a small volume appears to correlate best with droplet breakup efficiency. For deeper microchannels, the differences between geometric variations are decreased. In general, an increased channel depth leads to smaller particle sizes except for orifice channels. In this case, the particle sizes rise. Especially multiple orifices prove to be an interesting concept for efficient droplet breakup apparently independent on changes in channel depth. This may account for stable flow regimes even under changing process parameters. SLN production is only possible by changing the microsystem substrate to stainless steel, which resists higher pressures and temperatures than silicon–glass microsystems. Generally, findings in steel microsystems compare well to those in silicon. For SLN, the application of lower pressures yields very broad particle size distributions and badly reproducible results due to uncontrolled agglomeration of large particles after production. If higher pressures are applied and, consequently, particle sizes fall below a critical value, particle populations with narrow distributions and a high reproducibility result. On the whole, no clear correlation of resulting particle sizes to common flow parameters like flow rate, Reynolds number, and maximum mean velocity at the smallest cross-sectional diameter was found. Fitting particle size decrease to a simple emulsification model fosters the interpretation of differences. However, these interpretations require validation by CFD simulations and μ-PIV. Overall, the crucial parameter seems to be the focusing of the pressure drop on a possibly small volume of channel lumen. This is realized best with short orifices of small diameters or a y-channel with short supply channels to the convergence zone. Interestingly, a multiple orifice design displays as a promising, highly effective alternative assumingly due to the reduction of coalescence in turbulent flow downstream the homogenization structure. Thus, a further optimization of orifice and y-channels is aimed at, elucidating the influence of multiple orifices, counter pressure, cavitation, and turbulent chambers on emulsification efficiency. The present study was performed in the context of the Research Group 856 “Mikrosysteme für partikuläre Life-Science-Produkte” (mikroPART). The authors would like to kindly thank the German Research Foundation (DFG) for funding this research group. Furthermore, the authors would like to thank BASF, Condea and Phospholipid for the kind support with materials. One of the authors (S.B.) gratefully acknowledges the financial support of the Volkswagen Foundation.