Covariance functions are essential in geostatistics, where they are often used for spatial continuity analysis. Although several methods focus on the automatic modeling of these functions, they require the acquisition of sample pairs. This procedure requires the user to change the parameter settings, which is a tedious and subjective task. In this paper, we propose a methodology to generate a covariance table with minimum user influence, or even with a fully automatic workflow. The covariance table is obtained through a three-step workflow: estimating values to fill up a regular grid from the dataset, auto convolute via a fast Fourier transform algorithm and then back transform to the spatial domain while ensuring conditional negative definiteness approximation. The estimated model represents the turning point when compared with previous methods that have proposed covariance table usage. The estimated model that we used for the fully automatic workflow was built using an ensemble estimation method based on k-fold cross validation. The results of presenting close automatic covariance model from the exhaustive model are satisfactory. This paper also addresses important implementation details, providing a less subjective methodology to working with covariance tables. A three dimensional case study illustrates the practical application for geostatistical simulation using three datasets to check the loss of quality in the model reproduction because less data is used.Given that covariance models are essential for characterizing spatial continuity, calculating and fitting those models is a critical step in most kriging and simulation geostatistical approaches ( By applying Fourier transformation in  From the sparse sample data that are available, it is not possible to directly perform fast Fourier transform FFT algorithm. Advances in this matter were accomplished in The CT is obtained through a three-steps workflow. The first step is to build a base model to extract the covariance (BMEC) by estimating values from the dataset to fill up a regular grid. The second step is to auto-convolute the BMEC via FFT to obtain the spectral density table. The third step is to back transform the spectral density table into the CT in the spatial domain.   It is important to first explain what a base model to extract covariance means in the context of this study. Spatial continuity, or the lack of it, is an intrinsic characteristic of any spatial phenomena covered by geostatistics. Therefore, a model that carries a similar spatial continuity feature could be enough to be a base model to extract covariance in a table form. Although this work focuses on estimating a BMEC using a single variable, it is possible to use an exhaustive secondary correlated data or even a training image to obtain a CT. Although how much similarity between a model and its BMEC is needed to obtain a good CT is questionable, the important matter is to understand that even a very simple estimated model may carry a similar spatial continuity feature compared to the CT that we are looking for.  The ensemble methods combine a given learning algorithm and its ability to recognize patterns in data with one or more base estimators in order to improve robustness over a single estimator. For example, when artificial neural networks (ANNs) are used as spatial interpolators they are also known as “neural kriging” (NK), due to the similarities between both techniques ( Accordingly, the ensemble estimation can be based on random path and sequential simulation, and each iteration will create a different model. In sequential Gaussian simulation (SGS) ( The algorithm is based on the following concepts. In k-fold cross-validation, the dataset is randomly split into k mutually exclusive subsets (the folds) of approximately equal size. A base estimator, or an induction algorithm, builds an estimation from a given dataset. The base estimator is then trained and tested k times. The cross-validation estimate of accuracy is the overall number of correct estimations divided by the number of nodes in the dataset. The cross-validation estimate is a random number that depends on the division into folds. A base estimator is stable for a given dataset and a set of perturbations if it induces estimators that make the approximately same predictions when it is given the perturbed datasets ( From these ideas, we propose the following algorithm to build a viable BMEC. We use a base estimator In this paper, base estimators are given by Eq. Function If our objective is to build a BMEC, then we need a base estimator that is based exclusively on sample positions and conditioning data. Therefore, we chose This is an empirical technique, so the quality of the results are extremely tied to the quality of the samples and base estimators. Although ensemble estimation is computationally expensive, it is an important technique to incorporate validation errors and improve the quality of results created by generic base estimators, such as IDW, KNN or any other estimation technique. Therefore, we can build an evolutionary workflow where, in each generation, a more robust model is generated using covariance models from the previous step. Now that all of the fundamental techniques and concepts have been presented, it is possible to describe the proposed technique and algorithm. The first step is to build a regular grid and fill it with the estimated values to have a BMEC acceptable to perform FFT. The algorithm needs a regular BMEC with no missing nodes to generate the CT. This first step represents the fundamental proposal of this article. Instead of interpolating the missing covariance values from the dataset, as described by Yao in This methodology could lead to a fully automatic workflow. However, there are trade-offs because human interaction with a spatial continuity model is useful. This provides an opportunity for interpretation, uncertainty analysis, and drives analog use and data collection. The presented methodology uses a simple estimator (e.g. NN) as a BMEC to generate a CT that does not take into account any prior knowledge regarding the deposit. The geomodeler may have a geological knowledge that has to be weighted when building a CT if desired. The steps to add this type of information to the CT follow: (1) build a CT from BMEC and a CT inputting anisotropy, nugget effect and range (as shows in The weighted function should be dependent from the distance For the case study, a three-dimensional case was chosen generated from an unconditional realization created through SGS. This realization is referred to as the exhaustive model and it follows a Gaussian probability distribution. The realization honors the input covariance structures, as shown in  The BMEC was generated through the ensemble estimator with a 20-folds cross validation.  The results show that our proposed methodology produces a reasonable outcome for the three datasets proposed in the case study. In addition, the loss of quality in the covariance model reproduction was almost unaffected by the gradually suppressed information. The BMEC is a work in progress but it opens a different approach to build a robust CT and obtain new BMEC forms. ANNs are also a strong candidate to build a BMEC. The use of ANNs could automatically lead to recognition of more complex spatial trends, which is especially valuable when taking into account the number of studies reporting good predictive properties from machine-learning techniques ( Our technique based on extracting a CT from a BMEC was found to obtain good results, both in the statistical validation of the method and in the speed of obtaining a spatial continuity analysis, replacing the traditional variogram modeling phase. This CT is obtained through a three step workflow: interpolating the dataset to fill up all of the grid nodes in a regular grid, auto convoluting via FFT algorithm and then back transforming to the spatial domain. The BMEC represents a solution to a complex problem compared with the previous methods that proposed the use of CT. Although we have proposed a fast, automatic spatial continuity method to compute covariances, it does not suppress previous modeling phases, such as choosing stationary domains. In addition, the ensemble estimation presented in Section This research was supported by the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq) and Petrobras SA. 