Proximal row carpectomy is usually performed as a motion sparing procedure for degenerative conditions of the adult wrist. A 13-year-old right handed male was a pedestrian involved in a road traffic accident in which his hyperextended right hand was struck by an oncoming vehicle. He sustained an isolated closed injury to the right wrist and carpus. The wrist was clinically deformed, with a palpable radial pulse, capillary refill less than 2 On the second day after injury the external fixator was removed and a longitudinal dorsal approach to the wrist was performed. The scaphoid was found to be in seven pieces proximal to the waist, all detached from soft tissue with a complete tear in the scapholunate interosseus ligament. The lunate was found to have substantial dorsal and palmar fragmentation but also a large area of central bone loss. A displaced coronal, dorsal shearing fracture of the articular surface of the distal radius was also noted. Attempts were made to reconstruct the scaphoid and lunate but due to the amount of bone loss, it was not possible. Primary bone grafting of the areas of bone loss in both scaphoid and lunate was considered, but rejected in view of the significant involvement of articular surface. A primary proximal row carpectomy was performed. Due to an operative tourniquet time of 120 Following the removal of the cast, finger and forearm rotation physiotherapy was commenced, progressing on to wrist flexion and extension exercises at 5 weeks after surgery. A thermoplastic wrist gauntlet was worn in between physiotherapy treatments until 6 weeks after surgery. At two months after surgery, the patient had regained 70% of normal pronation and supination along with 15 degrees of wrist extension. No active wrist flexion was possible. The active range of movement increased to full wrist extension and 10 degrees of flexion with no symptoms of pain at four months after surgery. At 1 year after surgery, the patient remained satisfied with the results of his surgery. He has maintained full extension, 10 degrees of flexion, is pain free and is able to participate in normal activities of cycling, football and fitness training ( Four years after injury, his skeletal growth had ceased and the tips of the lag screws were irritating the tendon of flexor pollicis longus ( Proximal row carpectomy was first described by Stamm in 1944 Proximal row carpectomy has been shown to give satisfactory pain relief and maintenance of a functional wrist motion and grip strength when treating degenerative conditions. Although usually performed for degenerative and post traumatic conditions of the wrist, proximal row carpectomy has been previously described as a primary procedure with good early results. In this case, severe comminution of both the scaphoid and lunate along with bone loss and a complete tear in the scapholunate interosseus ligament precluded successful reconstruction. Although described in adults, Four years after injury, the patient has no functional limitations and remains pain free. We conclude that, whilst such a destructive procedure would rarely be the primary procedure of choice in the skeletally immature, good functional results can be obtained when reconstruction is precluded by the severity of the injury pattern.