Grade Engineering® comprises a range of techniques aiming to reject low grade uneconomic material (preconcentration) as early as possible within the mining value chain. It has been identified as an effective and feasible operating strategy whereby mining unit metal productivity can be significantly increased. Two Grade Engineering (G.E) levers have been assessed in a copper porphyry deposit: preferential grade by size response, and differential blasting for grade. Those are exploited through a modified blasting fragmentation coupled with screening based process on run-of-mine material to recover upgraded undersize fractions. Application of G.E inevitably alters comminution circuit typical feed particle size distributions, and consequently impact semi-autogenous (SAG) milling performance. A factorial design approach has been employed to assess the extent of this effect. A wide range of different operating scenarios, representing the possible G.E strategies and dynamic processing rock attributes, were simultaneously assessed using the Integrated Extraction Simulator (IES), a new cloud-based process simulator. This enabled the development of a G.E throughput improvement model as function of blasting fragmentation, impact hardness (Axb) and grindability (BMWi), which can be employed to conduct more detailed process modelling as well as resource optimisation.
                  Improvements up to 14% in throughput due to changes in mill feed particle size distributions were observed under the conditions examined. The impact of this effect upon the proportion of material that is amenable to G.E is also discussed.Grade Engineering (G.E) refers to a range of integrated strategies aiming to improve feed grades by removing low grade uneconomic material prior to energy intensive and inefficient grinding ( Preferential grade by size refers to a “natural” based rock property whereby a significant metal proportion preferentially deports into specific size fractions after breakage ( In order to understand variability and the extent of this geological-processing response, an extensive and careful sampling program, at drill core scale, is required. Either intact drill core or coarse assay rejects of bench height composites can be employed. Historical experience has indicated that scale up factors need to be applied to transform drilling preferential grade by size responses (typically determined with a material having a particle top size of ∼3 The second G.E strategy involves the application of differential blasting for grade to exploit spatial grade heterogeneity. This relates the presence of spatial high grade and low grade discrete clusters within a certain production volume originally assigned to a single destination based on its average grade. Currently there is no statistical evidence that reflects a relationship between the preferential, “natural” grade by size response (  The application of these two G.E strategies will inevitably alter the comminution circuit feed particle size distribution (PSD) due to modified blasting fragmentation and additional screening process. Results from the G.E characterisation program enable the population of G.E attributes (see The G.E strategy focuses on “Metal Exchange” ( The G.E circuit configuration seeks to produce a defined undersize mass pull, i.e. proportion of material under defined size fraction (see “upgraded undersize”, It is noteworthy that the proportion of the ore body treated as direct mill feed and the proportion amenable to G.E, with the resultant proportion of undersize fine G.E material (at the same time defined by the blasting fragmentation and screen aperture selected in G.E circuit) determines the particle size distribution fed to comminution and therefore its metallurgical impacts. The installation of autogenous and semi-autogenous milling (SAG) for comminution circuits has undoubtedly lead to several economic advantages in mine site mineral processing over the years. However, SAG milling also has some disadvantages, including; performance sensitivity to mill feed input variations, such as; rock competency, and mill feed particle sizing distribution. SAG mill feed contains particle fractions of ore which serve as the grinding media. Larger ore particle fractions break the smaller particles, and in the process also breakdown into smaller particles, before exiting the mill as a product. Steel balls are charged to the SAG mill to replicate the breakage action of larger ore particles, and also help break the more competent rock lumps, in order to maintain mill throughput. The Mine to Mill (M2M) strategy is a clear example of manipulating the relationship between plant throughput and feed particle size distribution ( The installation of precrushing (secondary crushing) stages applied to the whole or partial SAG feed stream to improve comminution throughput has also been extensively discussed in the literature ( The G.E approach offers similarities in producing a mill feed stream with a fine particle size distribution compared with the secondary crushing strategies previously outlined. The application of G.E to amenable ores offer further economic advantage by improving mill grades through coarse separation preconcentration Combination of these two optimisation strategies could lead to significant improvements in energy efficiency, and thus unit metal productivity. The Integrated Extraction Simulator (IES) has been employed to assess G.E’s impact on comminution circuit performance (associated with Cu-porphyry deposit under assessment) due to changes in mill feed particle size distribution. IES is a new cloud-based simulator that is able to integrate blasting, comminution and flotation in one single simulation package ( Pebble crusher: Andersen/Whiten model ( SAG mill: variable rates model ( Trommel: Single component efficiency curve ( Ball mill: perfect mixing model ( Hydrocyclone: Efficiency curve Nageswararao model ( The circuit under assessment, is shown in Three different blasting profiles (coarse, medium and fine particle size distribution); used in feed to both the gyratory crusher and G.E circuit. Five G.E mass pulls (proportion of upgraded fine material from 20 to 60%, in 10% intervals), producing six different particle size distribution profiles per ROM blasting and therefore eighteen mill feed fragmentation profiles (fifteen related with GE strategy and three corresponding to the base case, fine blasting fragmentation depicted as example Four different impact hardness values (Axb The proportion of G.E circuit product supplied to mill feed was fixed in a 1/3 ratio of direct mill feed, which was determined as economically optimal by intensive characterisation assessment (Section Results across the multiple processing scenarios tested indicated that the change in SAG mill energy was strongly influenced primarily by changes in mill feed PSD. Nevertheless, ball mill energy consumption did not appear to be significantly changed (this is mainly controlled by the mill ball load, As an example, the anticipated SAG feed tonnage increase for a 20% G.E undersize mall pull, at medium blasting fragmentation and a mill feed Axb of 25, is depicted in Throughput improvement changes (as percentage), modified G.E mill feed particle size distribution (measured through size fraction 20% passing, F20) and changes in flotation feed P80 relative to base case (as percentage) are depicted in Simulation results indicate that throughput improvement is strongly related with mill feed F20, and to lesser extent ore competence (Axb). By adding a G.E circuit streams to the primary crusher product there is a significant increase in the fine particle content below the F80 in the SAG mill feed ( The SAG mill throughput improvement, obtained from G.E impacted mill feed, also suggests that the proportion of critical size is not significantly altered, and that the major change results from the fraction lower than 20 An algorithm was developed to automatically analyse the significant amount of data obtained from IES mass simulation to identify mill throughput improvement. From clear and strong relationships evident in  Both fitted parameters, This model allows prediction of throughput simulation performance with a ∼±0.6% with a ∼95% of confidence ( First order economic analysis was conducted to understand the interaction between Grade Engineering and increased throughput. The minimum economic (or breakeven) cut-off grade defines the minimum grade that is economic to treat at a processing destination given a set of parameters, as Eq. Eq. Grade Engineering® (G.E) involves a range of operating techniques that seek to increase mill feed grades by removing as early as possible low grade uneconomic material prior intensive and inefficient grinding. The G.E assessment example discussed in this paper involved a Cu-porphyry deposit in which two size based G.E coarse separation techniques were characterised and economically assessed, preferential grade by size deportment and differential blasting for grade. The first refers to the natural propensity of certain rocks to concentrate metal in finer particles. While differential blasting for grade exploits intrinsic grade variability, where changes in blasting fragmentation aim to induce the deportment of metal into the finer particle fractions. The G.E exploitation strategy involves the installation of screen and crusher equipment, which alters both the mill feed “typical” particle size distribution and mill feed grade. A factorial design approach was employed to assess the magnitude of this effect across multiple operating scenarios using the Integrated Extraction Simulator (IES). Three G.E blasting fragmentation profiles, six under size mass pulls (proportion of fine material upgraded within G.E circuit) coupled with a range of comminution ore properties (four Axb, and four BMWi) representing the characteristics of the ore body; comprised the G.E operating conditions tested. It was observed that variations in feed particle size distribution significantly impacts the SAG mill gross energy whereas ball mill grinding capacity was not greatly affected. The application of G.E increases the proportion of fine feed material under the SAG mill grate size, (∼20 A G.E comminution throughput improvement model has been developed that takes into account SAG mill feed F20, defined as a function of blasting fragmentation, the proportion of G.E/direct mill feed, and mass pull, coupled with impact hardness (Axb), by using the mass simulation IES capabilities. This model can be used in further G.E coarse separation circuit value based optimisation analysis (i.e. strategic mine planning and scheduling). The impact of throughput improvements upon the G.E strategy has been discussed. This could decrease the economic cut-off grade for ore and therefore potentially increases the material amenable to G.E. It is noteworthy that cut-off grades are function of costs, revenue and mine operating mode. Therefore, the cut-off grade estimation is not a mere function of throughput. The increase in comminution feed grade due to Grade Engineering could also lead to a further increase in global metal recovery and therefore cut-off grade. Furthermore, deleterious elements, such as clay and arsenic can certainly have a baneful impact on mining revenue. This analysis coupled with grade-tonnage information is required to determine the magnitude of the additional value resulted as the combination of both, increase in feed grades and throughput strategies. During the simulations, the operating mill parameters (i.e. critical velocity, ball load) were kept constant. Therefore there is an opportunity to determine more customised comminution “recipes” to optimum process the different rock type operating scenarios. Nevertheless, in this analysis the inherent modelling limitations need to be considered ( The authors which to thank Dr Michael Scott, CRC ORE Project Evaluation Specialist for his contribution regarding the impact of throughput boost to Grade Engineering strategy from a grade cut-off perspective. Dr Frank Shi Principal Research Fellow, Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre for the valuable discussions regarding SAG milling performance. The IES team is also gratefully acknowledged for its simulation and modelling support.