Strength reliability, one of the critical factors restricting wider use of brittle materials in various structural applications, is commonly characterized by Weibull strength distribution function. In the present work, the detailed statistical analysis of the strength data is carried out using a larger class of probability models including Weibull, normal, log-normal, gamma and generalized exponential distributions. Our analysis is validated using the strength data, measured with a number of structural ceramic materials and a glass material. An important implication of the present study is that the gamma or log-normal distribution function, in contrast to Weibull distribution, may describe more appropriately, in certain cases, the experimentally measured strength data.Brittle materials, like ceramics have many useful properties like high hardness, stiffness and elastic modulus, wear resistance, high strength retention at elevated temperatures, corrosion resistance associated with chemical inertness, etc. In many of the engineering applications requiring load bearing capability i.e. structural applications, it has been realized over the years that an optimum combination of high toughness with high hardness and strength reliability is required The above mentioned limitations have triggered extensive research activities in the ceramic community to explore several toughening mechanisms In a recent paper, Lu et al. In the present work, we analyze the strength data, obtained in our previous work on monolithic ZrO The variability in strength of ceramics is primarily due to the extreme sensitivity of the presence of cracks of different sizes. It can be noted that the Yield strength and the fracture/failure strength of polycrystalline metals is deterministic and is volume independent, when the characteristic microstructural feature (grain size) remained the same for the tested metallic samples. However, the fracture strength of a brittle material is, in particular, determined by the critical crack length according to the Griffith’s theory For a given ceramic material the distribution of crack size, shape, and orientation differs from sample to sample. It is experimentally reported that the strength of ceramics varies unpredictably even if identical specimens are tested under identical loading conditions As part of the present study, the analysis of four strength datasets is performed. The first two datasets i.e. dataset 1 and dataset 2 are the results of previous experimental work. In particular, dataset 1 refers to the strength data obtained with hot pressed ZrO The flexural strength of both ZrO Among the four selected datasets, the other two datasets are taken from literature. While dataset 3 is obtained using sintered Si In this section we briefly describe different competing probabilistic models considered here and mention the estimation procedures of the unknown parameters from a given sample dataset The density function of the two-parameter Weibull distribution for Here Since The two-parameter gamma distribution for Here also The density function of the two-parameter log-normal distribution with scale parameter The maximum likelihood estimators of the unknown parameters can be obtained by maximizing the log-likelihood function of the observed data Interestingly, unlike Weibull or gamma distributions, the maximum likelihood estimators of The two-parameter generalized exponential distribution has the density function Here Therefore, In this section we describe different available methods for choosing the best fitted model to a given dataset. For notational simplicity it is assumed that we have only two different classes, but the method can be easily understood for arbitrary number of classes also. Suppose there are two families, say, Cox In terms of Among competing models, it is natural to choose a particular model for a given sample, which has the distribution function The distance between two distribution functions can be defined in several ways, but the most popular distance function between two distribution functions, say To implement this procedure, a candidate from each parametric family that has the smallest Kolmogorov distance should be found and then the different best fitted distributions should be compared. Unfortunately, the first step of this procedure is difficult both from a theoretical and computational point of view. Practically, from each parametric family the best member is chosen by maximum likelihood estimators rather than minimizing Kolmogorov distance. Then the family is chosen that provides the best fit to the empirical distribution in the sense of Kolmogorov distance. This is most probably the oldest method which is being used for goodness of fit or for model discrimination. The basic idea of the minimum chi-square criterion is very simple. First divide the sample in Similarly, the chi-square distance between Now between the two families For datasets 1, 2, 3 and 4, we have fitted different distributions and the estimated parameter values, chi-square values, Kolmogorov distances and the log-likelihood values are reported in From The picture is quite different for dataset 2 (see Another point that can be mentioned is that the fitted Weibull and normal distributions are closer to each other when compared to the fitted gamma, log-normal and generalized exponential distributions. Therefore, we can make two classes, one with Weibull and normal distributions and the other with gamma, log-normal and generalized exponential distributions. Suppose we take one representative distribution from each group, say Weibull and log-normal. Then based on the result For dataset 1, it can be noted that shape parameter of the Weibull distribution is very high. It shows the symmetric nature of the data whereas dataset 2 is more skewed. Therefore, it is clear that if the strength data are distributed symmetrically around its mean, then Weibull distribution may provide a good fit. However, if it is not, then there may be several good competitors. In our opinion, normal distribution should not be used in fitting strength data, because it may take negative values with high probability. In view of the presented statistical analysis as well as that of Lu et al. As a concluding note, the uncritical use of Weibull distribution must be avoided and therefore, the use of Weibull modulus as a strength reliability parameter can only be made after detailed analysis of strength data, as presented in this paper. Similar to the strength data, the grain size parameters, like mean grain size, grain size distribution width are equally important factors in determining critical material properties. In one of our earlier studies In the present work, we have considered several statistical distribution functions with an aim to critically analyze the strength data of brittle materials, like ceramics. Other than Weibull and normal, several two-parameter distributions, like Gamma, log-normal and generalized exponential distributions were used. The experimentally measured strength data obtained with hot pressed dense ceramics, like monolithic ZrO The implication of our study is important and that is the strength property of brittle ceramics should be characterized using various statistical criteria and different distribution functions, as adopted in the present work. The authors would like to thank Mr. Damodar Tiwari for his constructive suggestions to prepare this manuscript.