   Dempsey, Paul; Dreisinger, David Bruce, GREAT BRITAIN A process for the extraction of copper from a copper sulphide containing concentrate such as chalcopyrite; involves dispersing the finely divided copper sulphide containing concentrate in an aqueous sulphuric acid solution to form a slurry; providing an effective amount of a suitable surfactant such as lignosol or quebracho; reacting with agitation the slurry and surfactant with free oxygen-bearing gas in a pressure vessel at an elevated temperature to extract the copper values from the concentrate to produce the final leach solution containing dissolved copper values and a solid residue; and separating the final leach solution containing the dissolved copper values from the solid residue.   Chorzempa, Robert, USA assigned to Metals Investment Trust Limited An electrolytic cell comprises a plurality of cathodes interspersed among a plurality of anodes. The plurality of cathodes and plurality of anodes form a plurality of electrodes spaced and suspended in parallel fashion in an electrolyte solution. The electrolytic cell further comprises a plurality of scrapers. Each scraper of the plurality of scrapers is placed between each of the plurality of electrodes in parallel fashion and the scraper moves a minimal distance relative to the plurality of electrodes.   Dartnell, Nicholas J.; Rider, Christopher B., GREAT BRITAIN assigned to Eastman Kodak Company The invention relates to a method for controlling the recovery of a metal, such as silver, from a solution flowing through an electrolytic cell. A constant current is applied between the anode and cathode of the cell and the rate of change of the voltage monitored, the information obtained from the monitored change of voltage being used to control the rate of recovery of the metal.   Schaefer, Dieter; Grehl, Matthias; Meyer, Horst, GERMANY assigned to W.C. Heraeus GmbH and Company KG A method for dissolving base metals and noble metals from ores having base metals and noble metals, which comprises adding the ore to a solution of a non-acid oxidizing agent, then adding an aqueous solution of an acid forming halide and then adjusting the H+ concentration of the combined solutions to a minimum H+ concentration of 1 mol/l.   Virtanen, Henri; Pouru, Hannu, FINLAND assigned to Outokumpu, Oyj The present invention concerns a method for the prevention of anode passivation in the electrolytic refining of copper, when periodic reversal current technology is used in electrolysis. The method is particularly suitable for the electrolytic refining of copper at high current densities. Irregular periodic reversal current technology is used in the present method, whereby current reversal is adjusted on the basis of an increase in electrolysis cell voltage.   Lin, Jiunn-Ren; Fan, Chang; Chang, I-Long; Shiu, Jer-Yuan, TAIWAN assigned to Industrial Technology Research Institute A process of recovering metals from waste lithium ion batteries, wherein the waste batteries are calcined and sieved to generate an ash containing metals and metal oxides. The invented process includes subjecting the ash to a dissolution etching treatment, and a filtration treatment, and separately using a membrane electrolysis method to separate out metal copper and cobalt, wherein the acid generated on the cathode side in the electrolysis process can be recovered through a diffusion dialysis treatment. After electrolysis, the solution rich in lithium ion, after precipitating the metal impurities by adjusting the pH value, can be added with a carbonate ion to form a lithium carbonate.   Byszewski, Carolyn H., USA A process is disclosed for removing heat stable amine salts using an electrodialysis process. The process of the present invention can be used to reduce the level of heat stable salts in a lean solvent stream in an acid gas removal process. A base is added to the electrodialysis unit in order to permit the recovery of the heat stable amine salts as salts corresponding to the base added. The purified amine solution can be used again to remove acid gases from a gas stream.   Geisler, Robert A., CANADA assigned to Centaur Mining Exploration Ltd. Aqueous solutions containing lead, zinc and manganese are treated to recover these metals by sequential solvent extraction steps. Solvent extractants are selected to extract preferentially lead, then zinc and then manganese in that order. Any interfering metals are removed (as by ion exchange) before extraction. The loaded extractant phases are stripped with selected acids and lead; zinc and manganese each recovered from the strip solutions. Optionally, calcium can be recovered when present. A preferred type of extractant (for lead especially) is substituted monothiophosphinic acids. A closed loop system is described which is advantageous with leachate from sulphide and carbonate ores.   Myerson, Allan S.; Robinson, Peter, CANADA An industrial waste stream recycling method for recovery of high purity zinc oxide products and other chemical and metal values from industrial waste streams containing zinc compounds by leaching the waste stream with a solution of 30% or greater by weight ammonium chloride, resulting in a first product solution and undissolved materials; adding zinc metal to the first product solution, whereby zinc-displaceable metal ions contained in the first product solution are displaced by the zinc metal and precipitate out of the first product solution as metals, leaving a second product solution; and diluting the second product solution with water, resulting in the precipitation of zinc oxide.   Kocherginsky, Nikolai; Grishchenko, Andrew, RUSSIA assigned to National University of Singapore The present invention is directed to an improved process for the recovery of metal ions from metal-containing aqueous solutions using a supported liquid membrane (SLM) whereby the pH of the metal-containing solution is preferably adjusted to between 5.5 and 8 and ammonia or other weak base is present in the metal-containing solution in a concentration sufficient to form a complex between the weak base and metal ions present in the solution. The present invention permits enhanced recovery of metal in the solution without any need to adjust the pH of the solution during the SLM process.   Suarez, Jose Castellanos; Alvarez Villanueva, German A.; Fuxa, Ana Maria De La Cruz; Gonzalez, Pilar Martin; Urtafe, Isabel Lobaina; Laurencio, Oscar Perez; Rodiguez, Milagros Escalona, CUBA assigned to Centro de Investigaciones Para la Industria Minero-Metalurgcia (CIPIMM) The present is a hydrometallurgical procedure for nickel and cobalt recovery, which involves leaching with ammonia–ammonium carbonate solution of the nickel and cobalt bearing mineral material, using a tubular reactors aid mineral material is previously submitted to processes such as selective reduction, cooling, new ammonia leaching, liquid/solid separation and/or nickel and/or cobalt extraction by solvent or ion-exchange resin, allowing the recovery of all the extractable nickel and up to the 130% cobalt extraction reported by the standard ammonia–ammonium leaching.