Commercial purity copper and four commercial copper alloys were studied to determine their color stability during prolonged hand contact and their corrosion resistance in synthetic sweat containing 0.8% sodium chloride and 3% acetic acid.
                  The hand baton test showed that alloys C752 and C706 with high nickel content remained shiny after two years of exposure to hand contact whereas C110 and alloys C260 and C510 became dark and dull. Glancing Angle X-ray Diffraction showed the presence of cuprous oxide Cu2O on the copper alloys with a thickness between 50 and 230nm, as determined by chronopotentiometry. The dark appearance of C110, C260 and C510 after hand contact was the consequence of the reflection of light from a rough and porous surface, as verified by Scanning Electron Microscopy. The nickel in the copper alloys kept the alloys shiny with good color stability by keeping a smoother surface.
                  Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy showed that copper C110 and brass C260 had the best corrosion resistance, followed by C510 and alloys C706 and C752 had the lowest corrosion resistance, all tested in synthetic sweat. The nickel containing alloys corroded approximately 40times faster than the C110 in the synthetic sweat. This suggests that the color stable surface of the Cu–Ni samples on the hand baton was the result of higher corrosion rates in hand sweat rather than better corrosion resistance. SEM studies of the samples after immersion, however, revealed very different surfaces and microstructures compared to the hand baton test. The laboratory test protocol could be improved by incorporating cyclic tests (wet and dry) and adding a rubbing component to better mimic actual hand contact.Copper and over three hundred copper rich alloys have been registered as antibacterial by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The Copper Development Association has shown that a >90% decrease in viable bacteria can be achieved by using copper surfaces in place of plastic and stainless steel surfaces in hospital rooms Metallic corrosion caused by human hand contact has been studied by many researchers. Burton et al. described the problem of “rusters” in industry as the individuals whose hands tarnished the metals that they touched Jensen et al. compared the corrosive action of palm hand sweat with “rusters” on two different steels and showed that corrosion rates increased with increased sweat rates and he reported that the copper in steel was beneficial in reducing the corrosion of steel in presence of sweat Colin et al. focused on the composition of the corrosion layers on copper alloys 31Cu–66Ni–2Fe, 62Cu–23Ni–12Zn–2.5Sn and 83Cu–2Ni–10Zn–5Sn (wt%), in synthetic sweat medium by using FTMS (Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometer) and LAMMA (Laser Microprobe Mass Analyser) Milosev et al. studied the corrosion of 62Cu–18Ni–20Zn (wt%) and other copper alloys in synthetic sweat (the same composition as used above by Colin et al.) and in Ringer physiological solution (8600 The published literature describing synthetic sweat formulations is diverse and includes many different compounds. Some examples include the International Standard Organization (ISO105-E04-2008E) The goal of this current investigation was to first understand the color stability of copper and four commercial copper alloys during long-term exposure to hand contact, and second to develop an accelerated electrochemical test to mimic hand contact. Different techniques (Scanning Electron Microscopy, Glancing Angle X-ray Diffraction, Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy and Chronopotentiometry) were used in this study to understand what caused the discoloring of the copper alloys. We found that none of the current synthetic sweat solutions could mimic the results from long-term exposure to human hands. Herein we describe our own analysis of hand sweat and the development of a new synthetic hand sweat test solution. Commercial purity copper and four representative commercial copper alloys were selected for hand contact tests and laboratory tests. A “hand baton” was designed and built to determine the color stability of the commercial copper alloys in contact with human palm sweat. The test samples were copper alloys machined into flat disks with a 25 Electrochemical corrosion tests were performed using 0.9% NaCl and EN1811 solution (0.5% NaCl, 0.1% lactic acid and 0.1% urea with a pH adjusted to 6.5 using ammonia) at ambient temperature but the corrosion rates (not shown here) did not correspond to the hand-baton results. For this reason, and because of the large differences in the literature regarding the composition of sweat, a survey was performed to determine the composition of palm sweat in order to design a synthetic palm sweat for use in the laboratory. For this test, twenty-one people of different ages, gender and ethnicity, held an absorbent material in their palm for thirty minutes. The absorbent material was next immersed in 25 Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) was conducted using the Hitachi S-3200 Glancing Angle X-ray Diffraction (GAXRD) patterns were obtained using X’PERT-PRO diffractometer at the New Mexico Bureau of Geology & Mineral Resources. The XRD diffractometer had a thin film attachment, unfiltered Cu Kα radiation, a glancing incidence angle of 0.2° and a step size about 0.02°. Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) was performed to compare the corrosion resistance of copper alloys in the synthetic sweat during approximately one month of immersion. A copper wire was attached to each sample using conductive silver paint. The copper alloys were then embedded with epoxy binder and the edges of samples were sealed with grease before immersion to avoid leaks and premature corrosion. After drying, they were placed in Erlenmeyer flasks containing 250 Chronopotentiometry technique was used to measure the thickness of the oxide film for the different alloys after hand contact test. The chronopotentiometry was conducted using the same Parstat 2263 potentiostat running PowerSuite software. The copper alloys samples were immersed in a 0.2 For samples preparation, rings for each alloy were removed from the hand baton and they were partially electrically isolated by using an epoxy binder as shown in A hand baton was constructed to see the consequences of palm sweat contact on the color-stability of alloys. Test coupons were removed from the baton after two years of hand exposure and were placed in an ultrasonic bath with methanol for six minutes to remove the organic debris on the surface. The SEM examination of surfaces ( The In order to determine the thickness of the oxides on the alloys, samples from the hand baton were reduced in 0.2 Based on the time required for the reduction of the oxide, it is possible to determine the thickness of oxide with Eq. (1). The time was the midpoint of the steepest part of the reduction curve. The investigation has shown two different behaviors for the selected copper alloys in terms of color stability after two years of hand-contact as summarized in The appearance of an object is a consequence of interaction between light and the surface. In the case of a rough surface, such as alloys C110, C260 and C510, with many irregularities, the incident rays strike different regions which are inclined at different angles to each other. Consequently, the outgoing rays are reflected at many different angles and the image is disrupted. Reflection from such a rough surface is called diffuse reflection and the surface appears matte and dull. When light strikes a smooth surface, all the reflected rays are in line with each other and the surface appears shiny ( We first tested the copper alloys using electrochemistry in the published synthetic sweat solutions, but we found very little difference between the alloys in these solutions. Therefore we set out to determine the composition of hand sweat.  The large scatter of the acetate and chloride shows that different people have different compositions of hand sweat, agreeing with the previous literatures’ description of ‘rusters’. A high concentration was chosen for the synthetic palm sweat test solution because this would represent the more corrosive segment of the population. Since the palm sweat was found to be acidic (pHydrion solution turns orange on contact with hands), acetic acid was chosen as the source for the acetate. Based on the data in In this following section, samples were immersed in Erlenmeyer flasks containing 250    At the end of the immersion test, the samples were cleaned with DI water, dried with compressed air and examined with a scanning electron microscope. The investigation of copper alloys in contact with hand and in aerated synthetic sweat showed very different behavior in terms of color stability and surfaces. The protocol of the laboratory tests could be improved to mimic the rubbing action. In the case of a doorknob, the contact of the knob with hand is cyclic and there is an abrasive component of skin damp with sweat. However, despite the limitations of the EIS laboratory tests, the fact is seen that the copper nickel alloys corroded 40 Commercial purity copper and four commercial copper alloys were studied via natural hand contact and via electrochemical laboratory tests to determine their color stability during prolonged hand contact and corrosion resistance in synthetic palm sweat containing aerated 0.8% NaCl and 3% acetic acid. The hand baton test, which represents a natural condition such as doorknob contact with hands, showed that C752 and C706 with high nickel content remained shiny after two years of exposure to hand contact. The alloys which performed the worst in terms of color stability are commercial copper C110, brass C260 and the bronze C510. GAXRD showed the presence of cuprous oxide Cu EIS tests performed on copper alloys, showed with a good reproducibility that after approximately one month of immersion in aerated synthetic sweat that copper C110 has the highest impedance and the best corrosion resistance, followed closely by brass C260. The bronze C510 has the third place and cupronickel C706 and nickel-zinc C752 have the lowest impedance and the poorest barrier properties with impedance 40 The investigation of copper alloys in contact with hands and immersed in aerated synthetic sweat showed very different behavior in terms of color stability and surface roughness. The protocol could be improved by using wet-dry cyclic tests instead of a full immersion tests and also an abrasive contribution to mimic the synergistic effects of wear. The authors thank James Michel and the Copper Development Association for funding this research, Bonnie Frey and Dustin Baca for conducting the IC measurements at the New Mexico Bureau of Geology & Mineral Resources, and Ethan Buchner for helping with electrochemical tests. The authors also thank the many participants in the palm sweat survey.