The effects of mechanical processing by ball milling on powder mixtures consisting of immiscible elements were studied. Equiatomic Ag–Cu and Co–Cu mixtures were subjected to mechanical treatment at different values of milling intensity. The kinetics of structural evolution were characterized by means of X-ray diffraction analyses taking advantage of the Rietveld method. The evolution processes followed sigmoidal trends, the rate of evolution being proportional to the milling intensity and thereby connected with the impact energy. A threshold impact energy was determined below which no structural evolution is observed.The mechanical treatment of elemental mixtures by ball milling (BM) often results in the formation of metastable phases In the case of amorphizing miscible systems, the alloying process was proposed to take place via a diffusion mechanism analogous to the one observed in thermally-activated solid state amorphization reactions (SSAR) This fact poses interesting questions concerning the relationship between mechanical processing conditions and eventually induced microstructural modifications. The first question addresses the connection between impact energy and structural deformation. Is the impact energy required to be higher than a certain threshold value for microstructural deformation to occur in immiscible systems? We studied in the past the case of miscible systems and found no energy threshold. Amorphous phases and solid solutions were formed even at very small impact energies In the following, the experimental methodologies employed are briefly described. The methodology employed to characterize the regime of mechanical treatment has been fully described in previous works and will not be discussed here in detail Experiments were carried out on Ag, Co and Cu powders with a nominal purity level on the order of 99.99%. Handling procedures were performed inside a glove box under Ar atmosphere, with nitrogen, oxygen and humidity content below 1–5 Powder mixtures at Ag Milling trials were carried out by employing a modified commercial Spex Mixer/Mill mod. 8000, equipped with a variable speed motor controlled by a frequency converter The processes of structural modification were followed by means of usual wide-angle X-ray diffraction (XRD) methods. The analyses were performed on powders milled for different time periods. The XRD patterns were collected with a Rigaku system equipped with Cu Kα radiation over the 2 As expected on the basis of previous results The case of the Ag–Cu system is the more complex one and is illustrated by the XRD patterns reported in The fitting of peak profiles provides the values of apparent lattice constants for the three fcc phases. The evolution of lattice constants as a function of the milling time is shown in The structural evolution of Co The Rietveld analysis was employed to quantitatively describe the kinetics of structural evolution The different sets of experimental data have been best-fitted by kinetic curves, also shown in In the case of miscible systems, the rate constant In order to clarify the physical meaning of the Note that while no energy threshold is observed in the case of amorphizing systems, a low energy limit must be overcome to trigger a self-propagating combustion-like reaction in the case of exothermic systems The existence of mechanochemical activation energies has important implications on the relationship among milling parameters, structural evolution rates and total work done on the powders. We have shown in previous works that the transformation curves pertaining to trials carried out at different intensities arrange according to separate trends when plotted as a function of the milling time, while the same data superpose when plotted as a function of energy dose Data collected in the present paper further confirm and extend these findings. The distinct trends of structural evolution plotted in As expected on the basis of previous work on miscible systems Financial support has been provided by MIUR and by the University of Sassari.