In the present study, solution combustion technique has been explored to synthesize Sodium β-alumina (SBA; NaAl11O17) powder and thin films. Three fuels namely urea, glycine and citric acid have been used to seek the feasibility of synthesizing crystalline SBA powder at low temperature. Also, the effect of nature of fuels used as well as calcination treatment on phase evolution and morphology of the as-combusted powder was investigated. Thermal analysis and X-ray diffraction studies suggest the formation of crystalline SBA powder at temperature as low as 259°C, using urea in the combustion reaction whereas other fuels resulted in amorphous SBA phase and this variation in phase was found due to difference in exothermicity of the fuel used. Thermodynamic and spectroscopic analyses showed that the exothermicity of fuel depends on various factors like (i) standard heat of formation of fuel and (ii) the complexation offered by fuel to metal cations. Furthermore, sodium β-alumina thin film capacitor (metal-insulator-metal) was also fabricated using urea via spray combustion synthesis. The sodium β-alumina thin film showed a high dielectric value (εr) of ~21.Stoichiometric Sodium-β-Alumina (SBA; NaAl Various methods have been adopted to synthesize SBA powders like conventional solid state reaction Hence in quest of low temperature synthesis of SBA, solution combustion is a viable technique which compensate externally supplied heat by generating sufficient heat energy in situ Several attempts have been made to synthesize SBA powders using solution combustion route. For instance, Mali et al. have synthesized SBA by calcining the combusted powder at 1400 Hence, in the present study, solution combustion technique has been adopted to synthesize SBA powders as well as its thin film at low temperature. Three different fuels i.e. Urea, Glycine and Citric acid were used to investigate how these fuels alter the combustion reaction and to seek the feasibility of synthesizing SBA powder at low temperature. Subsequently, SCS was adopted to fabricate SBA thin films and its dielectric property was evaluated. Aluminum nitrate nonahydrate (Al(NO Urea as fuel (F Glycine as fuel (F Citric acid as fuel (F Solution of aluminum nitrate and sodium nitrate is prepared by dissolving stoichiometric amount of these two salts in 10 The precursor employed for powder synthesis is further adopted for spray combustion to fabricate thin film. Prior to spray coating, the solvent cleaned indium tin oxide (ITO, Luminescence technology corps, 50 × 50 × 1.1 To understand the thermal behavior of the dried gels (obtained by subjecting the solutions in hot air oven at 80 Thermal analysis is one of the appropriate way to understand the combustion pathways in the system, especially combustion parameters like combustion temperature (T But in F The multistep weight loss in F To aid the further interpretation of the combustion processes of F The amount of heat released during combustion reaction or the heat of the reaction can be calculated theoretically from the equation mentioned below From the above equations, it is evident that, the heat evolved during combustion reaction ( However, there is significant difference in Complexation of metal cations with fuel primarily depends upon the type of ligand groups present in the fuel. For instance, urea has only amine group at both ends, while glycine has amine group as well as carboxylic group at two ends to form complex with metal cations ( Furthermore, combustion temperature (T Hence, from the above thermal analysis it can be summarized that, fuel plays an important role in combustion synthesis, as selection of fuel helps in tuning the exothermicity as well the combustion temperature of the reaction. The XRD spectra of powders produced from F The XRD pattern of powder produced from F The XRD pattern of powder produced from F Mullite like alumina (m-Al Moreover, an interesting phenomenon can be observed in XRD patterns of powders produced from F The crystallite size of the various powders (as-combusted and calcined at different temperatures) is calculated using Debye Scherer formula (Eqs. To study the morphology of the produced powders, they were subjected to SEM analysis as shown in Plate like hexagonal particles could be observed in the powder (produced from F The SEM micrograph of powder (as-combusted) produced from F Similarly, powder (as-combusted) produced from F The TEM micrographs of powder produced from F As inferred from the powder studies, among the three fuels used (i.e. urea, glycine, citric acid) crystalline SBA was obtained only from F To have a better understanding of the elemental composition in the SBA film, GIAXRD was supplemented by XPS analysis. Further, to investigate the different chemical states of oxygen atom in the films, O1s spectra was deconvoluted into three principal peaks centered at 530.6 The concentration of each oxygen binding states (M-O-M, M-OH and M-OR) in SBA film can be calculated by taking ratio of each peak area to the total O1s peak area. As observed in Na1s and Al2p representative spectra of SBA thin film are shown in The schematic as well as the fabricated device is shown in Capacitance voltage measurement were also performed at 1 Sodium β-alumina (SBA; NaA This work is supported by Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 