In the second part of this study, the Population Balance Model developed for the enzymatic hydrolysis of cellulose polymer chains is extended to particulate cellulose substrates. In this case, the particle fragmentation process is complex. This phenomenon is induced by the hydrodynamic shear stress when the particle cohesion is lower than the hydrodynamic force. The particle cohesion depends on the mechanical properties of the substrate particles which are affected by the Endoglucanase (EG) activity that hydrolyses accessible glycosidic bonds all along the reaction. These two effects are taken into account in the model. The Exoglucanase (CBH) activity is assimilated to an erosion process as for soluble substrates. The β-glucosidase activity as well as the inhibition effect are also considered in the global population balance-based model. The numerical resolution of the Population Balance Equation (PBE) is based on the Direct Quadrature Method of Moments (DQMOM) coupled with the Maximum Entropy (ME) reconstruction technique. Numerical results in different cases show coherent prediction of the Particle Size Distribution (PSD) evolution during the hydrolysis reaction as well as the kinetics of simple sugars release. The modelling procedure is supported by experimental data which reveal the importance of the particles cohesion and its evolution during the hydrolysis reaction.Constant appearing in the cohesion force Parameter of the breakage frequency First time derivative of the weights of the quadrature nodes First time derivative of the product of the weighted abscissas Cellobiose molar concentration Glucose molar concentration Weighted abscissas Impeller diameter Hydrodynamic force Particle cohesion force Shear rate Moments order Inhibition constant of the CBH Inhibition constant of the EG Parameter of the Michaelis-Menten type kinetic Inhibition constant of the Particle size Abscissas of the quadrature nodes  Number based particle size distribution Volume based particle size distribution Number of quadrature nodes Impeller power number Impeller speed Dissipated power Source term of the PBE accounting for the pure breakage process Source term of the PBE accounting for the erosion process Time Particle volume Tank volume Volume of the elementary particle for the erosion process Parameter of the Michaelis-Menten type kinetic Weights of the quadrature nodes Exponent Daughter distribution function for the breakage process Daughter distribution function for the erosion process Dirac delta function centered on Average turbulent energy dissipation rate Cefficient of the breakage frequency Particle breakage frequency Erosion frequency for CBH activity Intrinsic erosion frequency for CBH activity Chains breakage frequency for EG activity Intrinsic chains breakage frequency for EG activity Particle size Mean of the PSD Kinematic viscosity Dynamic viscosity Volumic mass of the fluid Volumic mass of the substrate particles Standard deviation Coefficient of particle's fatigue Cellobiohydrolase Carbon-Binding Module Catalytic Domain Chain Length Distribution Direct Quadrature Method of Moments Endoglucanase Filter Paper Unit High Performance Liquid Chromatography Maximum Entropy Population Balance Equation Product-Difference algorithm Potentail of hydrogen Particle Size Distribution Substrate reactivity The production of bio-ethanol and chemicals from lignocellulose-based materials has attracted extensive research over the last few decades. This growing interest on renewable energy sources and green chemistry is motivated by the environmental and socio-economic issues as well as the depletion of fossil fuels ( The fractionation of the biomass into its elementary constituents by means of hydrolytic enzymes is known as the most challenging step of the substrate transformation process, it directly controls the conversion rate/yield thus, significant efforts have been devoted to (i) the improvement of the substrate pretreatments through a better understanding of the physico-chemical properties of the biomass in order to enhance its digestibility, (ii) the understanding of the enzymes hydrolysis elementary mechanisms for improving the hydrolytic potential of the cocktails and (iii) the elucidation and quantification of the factors affecting the enzymes performance and the substrate reactivity during the hydrolysis reaction. These three contributions are necessary before one can develop reliable models for process design at industrial scale. A typical enzymatic hydrolysis reaction kinetic shows an initial rapid rate followed by a progressive slowdown leading to a partial substrate conversion even for long-time reaction and/or high enzymes loading ( The enzymatic hydrolysis of particulate substrates is a heterogeneous multi-step reaction. The enzymes are first adsorbed onto the substrate surface by their Carbohydrate-Binding Module (CBM) before acting with the Catalytic Domain (CD) and hydrolyse the glycosidic bonds ( In the first part of this study, a population balance approach has been developed for the modelling of the enzymatic degradation of cellulose polymer chains. The three main cellulolytic activities have been taken into account. The EG activity is assimilated to a random scission of the polymer chains while the CBH activity is modelled as an erosion process leading to the release of a specific product: cellobiose. The This second part is devoted to the specific case of particulate substrates. The general theoretical framework remains unchanged. The Population Balance Model (PBM) is extended to complex systems by rethinking how the different enzymatic activities are acting and degrading the substrate at the particulate scale. In particular, one has to consider now that an enzymatic attack does not imply the particle breakage but rather affects its cohesion. The particle fragmentation is due to the hydrodynamic shear stress. After introducing the theoretical framework, numerical results are discussed in different cases and experimental data are given in order to support the model assumptions. The population balance modelling is a common approach when dealing with particulate/dispersed systems undergoing space and/or phase transformation. In our case, cellulose particles are progressively transformed into simple sugars (cellobiose and glucose) by the cooperative action of the cellulases. In the first part of this study, a Population Balance Model is formulated and solved numerically in the case of pure soluble cellulose substrates. This second part focuses on insoluble/particulate substrates. Considering the particle volume Assuming that the particle volume is proportional to its size, To solve Eq. The The moments provide the main properties of the PSD. The zeroth order moment, By applying the moment transformation to Eq. We propose that the evolution of the PSD during the enzymatic hydrolysis of a particulate substrate is governed by both the cooperative action of the enzymes and the mechanical stress acting on the particle due to the fluid motion. The EG activity breaks up the glycosidic bonds of surface chains affecting by the way the cohesion of the particles and their mechanical properties. The combination of this activity and the hydrodynamic shear stress leads ultimately to the particles fragmentation. Thus, unlike the case of soluble substrate where the EG attacks produce new chains systematically, in the case of particulate substrate, the fragmentation process is complex and both the EG activity and the shear stress have to be taken into account. The CBH activity attacks the free chain-ends and produces cellobiose molecules. This activity can be seen as a surface erosion process. Starting from these considerations, the PSD evolution during the enzymatic hydrolysis process is modelled using the following PBE: We discuss below the choice of the daughter distribution functions and the breakage frequencies in this specific case of particulate substrate. In the case of heterogeneous reactions, as discussed before, the fragmentation mechanism of the substrate particles is complex. The EG activity acts at a microscopic scale by cutting glycosidic bonds without leading necessarily to the breakage of the attacked particles. The structural features of the substrate particles and the hydrodynamic shear stress are to be taken into account when dealing with the PSD evolution during the hydrolysis reaction. With a mono-component substrate such as cellulose, one can consider that all the particles have the same structural characteristics (e.g. degree of crystallinity, porosity). Thus, breakage may occur at any position on the particle surface. In other words, after the binary breakage of a particle, all sizes are equally probable. This can be formulated by a uniform daughter distribution function as in Eq. The source term The CBH activity, even for insoluble substrates, can be considered as an erosion process leading to a specific product which is a cellobiose molecule. In this case, an initial particle of volume Thus, The moment transformation of Eqs. Once the daughter distribution functions are properly defined for the two processes considering particulate substrates, the most challenging part is the formulation of the breakage frequencies For the CBH activity, whatever the nature of the substrate, a specific product is released after an effective attack. Thus, Substrate particle breakup phenomenon occurs when the hydrodynamic force The shear rate can be expressed as ( Thus, the hydrodynamic force The particle cohesion force The expression The particles breakage frequency The expression of the breakage frequency in Eq. As in the case of soluble substrates, one has to take into account the inhibition effect since the cellulases are highly sensitive to the accumulation of simple sugars in the system ( Michaelis–Menten type kinetic model is adopted for the modelling of the Eq. The numerical resolution of the system Microcrystalline celluloses (Avicel PH-102 and Avicel PH-105) were kindly provided by FMC BioPolymer (USA). These are pure insoluble cellulose substrates with mean sizes of 90 and 20 The hydrolysis of the substrates was carried out in 50 The yield of the enzymatic conversion of Avicel PH-102 and Avicel PH-105 into simple sugars (cellobiose and glucose) was calculated as ( The PSDs evolution during the enzymatic hydrolysis reactions were determined through laser diffraction analyses using a Mastersizer 2000 Hydro, Malvern Instruments Ltd. This The mechanical resistance of the initial substrate particles was explored using an ultrasonic bath (Ultrasonic Cleaning Unit Elmasonic S 60 (H), Elma Schmidbauer GmbH, Germany) having an operating frequency of 37 Quantitative detection of simple sugars was achieved using High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) on an Ultimate 3000 Dionex separation system equipped with a BioRad Aminex HPX 87H affinity column and a refractive index detector (Thermo Scientific). The separation of product species was performed in For numerical illustration of the potential of the PB-based model, we assume that the initial PSD follows a normal law (Eq. Numerically, the parameters of the initial distribution are fixed as The CBH activity is assimilated to a surfacic erosion process leading to the detachment of elementary particles. Thus, the erosion frequency is set proportional to We give in the two first figures the results obtained considering the erosion process only. For the particle fragmentation process, the breakage frequency is set proportional to the particle size The aim of this study is not the accurate estimation of the cohesion force and its evolution within the process time. For this, specific protocoles as those used in comminution processes to determine the density distribution of fracture energies ( Unlike the hydrodynamic force which is constant within the process time, the cohesion force decreases progressively since the substrate particles are attacked by the enzymes. We give an illustration of the fragmentation process in The evolutions of the first four reduced moments given in The reconstruction of the PSDs from the moments using the ME technique in this case is illustrated in In enzymatic hydrolysis reactions, the enzyme activities are combined with the hydrodynamic shear stress effect for an efficient transformation of the complex biomass matrix into fermentable sugars. The combination of the pure fragmentation and the erosion processes in a global model is an essential step for the modelling of this reaction. In this case, the frequency of the erosion process is kept proportional to the particle surface ( The time evolution of the moments of the initial PSD ( Since the conservative variable in the case of particulate substrates is the particle volume, we give in The conversion of the substrate into simple sugars ( In this section, we give some experimental results obtained using particulate cellulose (Avicel PH-102 and Avicel PH-105) submitted to enzymatic hydrolysis under the conditions commonly used in the literature. The experiments described below aim to support our modelling approach such as the importance of the substrate structure and the evolution of the physical properties of the substrates during the hydrolysis reaction. The population balance framework developed in this contribution is based on these considerations which is not the case for Michaelis–Menten based kinetic models widely used in the literature. The two different substrates used in this study (Avicel PH-102 and Avicel PH-105) have different initial PSDs. Solutions from these substrates are prepared with the same loading (1%  This simple test shows the importance of the cohesion force of the substrate particles when dealing with particulate systems. Thus, even though the two substrates are pure cellulose with comparative crystallinity index, their mechanical resistance is substantially different. This means that their behaviour during the enzymatic hydrolysis reaction will be also completely different since the cohesion of the substrate particles will be distinctly affected by the hydrodynamic shear stress and the enzyme activities. This will be confirmed in the next section. The enzymatic hydrolysis reactions have been conducted for 24 As expected, the PSD of Avicel PH-102 shows a spectacular evolution. After 24 In the case of Avicel PH-105, the evolution of the PSD is not significant compared to that of Avicel PH-102. Indeed, the mean size of the substrate particles decreases from The results of the enzymatic hydrolysis reactions corroborate those discussed in the previous section where the sonication effect was explored. The physical properties of the two substrates used in these experiments are significantly different. These results support our modelling approach in which a cohesion force has been proposed in order to describe the evolution of a particulate system submitted to the hydrodynamic shear stress and enzymatic attacks. This allows the tracking of the PSD evolution as well as the kinetic of the simple sugars release all along the hydrolysis reaction which is not the case with the classical modelling approaches. Indeed, as discussed before, when using Michaelis–Menten based kinetic models, the variable is the substrate concentration. Thus, the evolution of the substrate properties cannot be predicted and the only output is the conversion rate. Furthermore, if we examine the conversion kinetics of the two substrates ( In this study, the case of particulate substrates is explored. The population balance approach developed initially for the soluble substrates has been extended to insoluble substrates since these systems are ubiquitous when dealing with enzymatic hydrolysis reactions. The transition to the particulate substrates brings additional challenges since the particle fragmentation process is dissociated from the intrinsic cellulolytic activities which was not the case when dealing with soluble substrates especially in the case of EG activity. In fact, the action of the EG activity on a cellulose chain induces automatically the breakup of this chain and the formation of two smaller ones. In the case of an insoluble cellulose particle, the action of the EG activity leads to the breakage of an accessible glycosidic bond without the fragmentation of the particle. This activity affects the structural features of the substrate particles mainly their cohesion force. Thus, the fragmentation process has been modelled by taking into account the dynamic evolution of this cohesion force and the hydrodynamic shear stress. The CBH activity is still considered as an erosion process since it leads to a specific product even for particulate substrates. The novelty here is the formulation of the daughter distribution function which has been rethought since the length scales are extremely distinct between the cellobiose molecules and the substrate particles. The The numerical tests in different cases show a consistent results for both the fragmentation and the erosion processes. The Population Balance Model predicts the evolution of the substrate initial PSD and the conversion rate. The experimental results obtained by the sonication test confirm the importance of the mechanical properties of the cellulose particles. The two different substrates tested present distinct behaviours against this assay. Avicel PH-102 is extremely sensitive to the ultrasounds which induce a severe fragmentation process while Avicel PH-105 is minimally affected. The enzymatic hydrolysis reactions conducted with identical conditions show the same results. The Particle Size Distribution of Avicel PH-102 evolves along the reaction which is poorly the case of that of Avicel PH-105 but the conversion rates are similar. These experimental tests support the modelling approach and point to the importance of the coupling between the PSD evolution and the conversion rate for a judicious interpretation of the hydrolysis reaction results. The dynamic character of the cohesion force of the substrate particles which can be characterised by the notion of the The authors would like to thank