The influence of electric field strength on the microwave treatment of ore is elucidated. The ore consisted of a microwave-absorbing mineral in a low-absorbing matrix, and the influence of electric field strength was assessed by numerical simulation. Simulations were undertaken using finite difference modelling techniques for a theoretical 15×30 mm sample of calcite host rock containing 10 vol.%, 1-mm2 particles of pyrite. The simulations modelled the microwave heating, thermal conduction, expansion, thermally induced fracturing and strain softening and, finally, uniaxial compressive strength to predict the effect of microwave heating on the strength of the ore material. Standard correlations were then used to develop specific comminution energy verses t
                     10 relationships for the treated and nontreated samples. It is shown that microwave power density is vital to the fracturing of the rock, and it is suggested that by utilising high power densities, the microwave fracturing of rock to reduce grinding energy requirements may be economically viable.The mechanical size reduction of solids is an energy-intensive and highly inefficient process. It has been shown that in the US, 1.5% of all electricity generated is used in size reduction and that based on the energy required to create new surfaces, grinding is less than 1% efficient Increased mill capacity and reduced wear, Better control of mill product size and improved liberation (recovery), A reduction in slimes production, Alteration of the physicochemical properties of ground products. Interest in the application of microwave radiation to minerals started in the mid-1980s when Most minerals are brittle materials with a complex three-dimensional structure. The precise nature of grain boundaries between two mineral phases in rock is not well understood, but it is suggested to be an area of disorder between two ordered species. If this were the case, then it would be sensible to assume that grain boundaries are an area of weakness. However, products of comminution suggest that grain boundaries are areas of strength (transgranular fracture being common in mineral processing operations) and can adversely influence liberation of one species from another. If microwave energy can induce microcracking around grain boundaries, then reductions in required comminution energy and enhanced liberation of valuable mineral would occur. The majority of testwork carried out so far concerning microwave treatment of minerals have utilised standard multimode cavities, similar to that found in a conventional kitchen microwave oven. The multimode cavity, whilst mechanically simple, suffers from poor efficiencies and low electric field strengths, vital to high power adsorption. Whilst the influence of microwave radiation from this type of cavity has been shown to have a significant influence on ores and minerals, the inefficiencies of the application method have led to conclusions that at present, commercial microwave treatment of minerals (despite the numerous process benefits) is not viable. Single-mode cavities comprise of a metallic enclosure into which a microwave signal of the correct electromagnetic field polarisation will undergo multiple reflections. The superposition of the reflected and incident waves gives rise to a standing wave pattern that is very well defined in space. The precise knowledge of electromagnetic field configurations enables the dielectric material to be placed in the position of maximum electric field strength, allowing maximum heating rates to be achieved at all times. In the early evolution of microwave heating, such cavities saw little use. This was mainly because they lacked the versatility offered by multimode cavities. However, the development of electronic automatic tuning systems now means that they are finding favour in industrial situations. They offer extremely rapid heating rates and the ability to heat materials that appear transparent to microwaves in ordinary multimode cavities. Numerical modelling was undertaken using the geomechanical 2-D finite difference modelling software application, FLAC V3.3 The finite difference modelling comprised of the five main stages given below and are more fully described later: Microwave heating of the two different mineral phases Transient heat conduction during heating process between minerals Determination of peak thermally induced stresses and strains Modelling of thermal damage associated with material failure and strain softening Simulation of uniaxial compressive strength tests to evaluate the reduction of unconfined compressive strength due to microwave heating. The amount of thermal energy deposited into a material due to microwave heating (power absorption density) is dependent on the internal electric field strength, the frequency of the microwave radiation and the dielectric properties of the material. The power absorption density per unit volume of the mineral can be approximated by Because the microwave absorption factor for calcite is substantially lower than that for pyrite, no microwave heating of the calcite matrix was assumed during the modelling with selective heating of the pyrite particles only. The early work of The dielectric loss factor, For an initial series of models, the power densities at various temperatures was obtained for the heating of pyrite within a 2.6-kW, 2.45-GHz multimode microwave cavity. The calculated power density varied between 3×10 The transient conduction of the microwave thermal energy during heating was modelled using an explicit finite difference method written as an algorithm using FLAC's compiler language known as FISH. The basic concept in the thermal conduction modelling was that a thermal energy flux may occur between a zone and its four immediately adjacent zones. The direction, i.e. into or out of the zone, and the magnitude of the thermal energy flux was dependent on the temperature gradient that existed between the zones and the conductivity of the zone. The boundary conditions were such that no thermal energy was lost from the material, i.e. the material was assumed to be fully insulated. The basic law that was used to determine the thermal energy flow between the zones was Fourier's law Thus, the change in stored energy per time increment, Δ Expressing this in an explicit finite difference form for a square zone The relationship between thermal energy in joules and temperature in degrees kelvin for a given time increment, Δ Thus, at the end of each time increment, the new temperatures of each zone due to thermal conduction and microwave heating are determined using The microwave heating and thermal conduction for a specified heating time, ht, was simulated by recursively iterating The time increment, Δ The thermal conductivity and specific heat properties of calcite and pyrite vary with temperature At the end of the heating interval, the thermally induced strains within a zone, assuming perfect restrainment by the surrounding zones and isotropic expansion, is given by The thermal expansion coefficient for pyrite and calcite has also been found to be temperature dependent The calculated thermally induced stress within a zone can then be determined using Hoek's law for isotropic elastic behaviour To obtain a state of static mechanical equilibrium throughout the domain of the material, a redistribution of the thermally induced stresses and strains was necessary. To obtain the equilibrium distribution, the model was stepped in FLAC's default calculation mode for static mechanical analysis. This default mode performs an explicit time-marching finite difference calculation utilising Newton's law of motion to relate nodal strain rates, velocities and forces When static equilibrium was obtained, modelling of brittle fracture and subsequent post failure strain softening, which is characteristic of the stress–strain relationship of a crystalline limestone Upon failure, the ore was assumed to behave as a brittle linear strain softening medium undergoing plastic deformation with a final residual strength being obtained after 1% strain again characteristic of a strong crystalline limestone The effect of thermal heating on the unconfined compressive strength and fracture development within the modelled ore was predicted by the simulation of the uniaxial compressive strength test on the thermally damaged models The simulation was undertaken as a plane strain analysis with the material being considered as continuous in the out of plane direction. The simulation was undertaken by applying a constant velocity to the grid points positioned at the top and base of the model domain whilst the left and right boundaries were unstrained. This is analogous to a displacement-controlled uniaxial compressive strength test. To monitor the load–deformation relationship within the samples during testing, history files were generated from the average stress conditions at the top and bottom boundaries. The models were run until approximately 0.2% axial strain of the sample whereupon the models predicted failure strength and some strain softening details of the samples was obtained. To determine the effect of microwave heating on the strength of the calcite and pyrite ore, numerical modelling was undertaken for an unheated sample and for samples with microwave heating times of 1, 5, 15 and 30 s. It was assumed that the samples were treated in a multimode microwave cavity with a power density that varied from 3×10 The modelled temperature distributions for each of the four time intervals is shown in Due to the length of time required to heat the pyrite particles within the 2.6-kW microwave cavity, conduction of the deposited thermal energy from the pyrite into the surrounding calcite host was predicted to occur. After 30 s of microwave heating time, the calcite host had been heated to greater than 600 K. This conduction can be seen to reduce the temperature gradient generated within the ore sample and thus reduce the thermally generated stresses within the sample. The effect of the microwave treatment on the unconfined compressive strength of the ore sample has been illustrated in Also of interest was the pattern of the simulated shear planes developed within the modelled samples after the unconfined compressive tests. These patterns have been shown in To assess the effect of increasing the microwave power density on the temperature distribution, unconfined compressive strength and shear plane development within the ore samples, a microwave power density of 1×10 The modelled temperature distributions within the ore samples for each of the four time intervals are shown in The effect of the microwave heating on the unconfined compressive strength of the ore samples is illustrated in The pattern of shear planes developed within the ore samples after the simulated uniaxial compression test for the 0.05, 0.25, 0.5 and 1 s heating intervals are shown in The influence of microwave power density on a theoretical ore has been demonstrated. The numerical simulation has shown very clearly that if the preferential dielectric material can be made to absorb the majority of the applied energy, significant reductions in compressive strength can be achieved. To further illustrate this in the context of comminution, the extremely well-known relationships developed by The results of this analysis are shown in Point load index is of particular interest to the mineral processing engineer because it allows rapid prediction of the relationships between ECS (specific comminution energy, kW h/t) and It has previously been shown that point load index is intimately related to Mode 1 fracture toughness Mode 1 fracture toughness has also been shown to have highly significant correlation with the breakage parameters It was shown that This clearly shows the influence of power density on the comminution of ores. The purpose of this paper has been to illustrate the influence of power density (or electric field strength) on the comminution of minerals. It is appreciated that the texture used for the modelling stage is not exactly like a ‘real’ ore. However, the ore has behaved in a similar manner to real ores previously tested This numerical modelling programme has shown power density to have a significant effect on stress formation in microwaved ore samples. The next stage of the work will be to validate the predictions against ‘real’ ore samples. Ores of different texture will be studied, so quantification of the underlying relationships between grain size, chemical and physical properties and distribution can be developed. However, the numerical modelling has been shown to be a useful comparative tool that allows quick qualification of microwave heating variables. Microwave power density has been shown to have a significant influence on the thermo-mechanical failure of an ore. It has been shown that by increasing the power density, significantly greater stresses are created for much lower energy inputs. This has significant ramifications for the development of microwave-assisted comminution flowsheets. It is concluded that the use of high power density cavities may make the microwave treatment of minerals economic especially when coupled with the additional benefits of thermally assisted comminution.