Accurate methane gas adsorption capacity estimation is key for the coalbed methane (CBM) reservoir gas-in-place assessment. As in situ, the reservoir pressure and temperature vary from one location to another. The temperature induced gas sorption capacity evaluation is important for the CBM and mining industry. In this study, grand canonical Monte Carlo (GCMC) simulation was used to investigate temperature effect on methane adsorption capacity and adsorbed methane density for different sized pores. Methane adsorption experiments were performed to show realistic temperature effect on methane adsorption capacity and the experimental data were used directly to validate the numerical model. The pore structure of coal was characterized by high-pressure mercury injection, low-pressure N2 gas adsorption, low-pressure CO2 gas adsorption. The simulation results revealed that, first, temperature influence on methane adsorption was more obvious in smaller pores than that in larger pores. Based on the characteristics of the temperature influence on methane adsorption, pores can be divided into three categories: 0.7–0.9 nm pores, 1.0–1.3 nm pores and pores larger than 1.4 nm. In the 0.7–0.9 nm group, methane adsorption capacity decreased by approximately 19% at 3 MPa from 20 °C to 100 °C. In contrast, in the 1.0–1.3 nm pores and pores larger than 1.4 nm, methane adsorption capacity decreased by approximately 32% and 45%. Second, in 0.7 nm and 1.0 nm pores, methane adsorption capacity decreased linearly with an increase in temperature. In 4.0 nm pores methane adsorption capacity exhibited a negative exponential decrease with increasing temperature at low pressure (<3 MPa). Third, when the pore size was the same, the temperature effect was more obvious at a lower pressure than that at a higher pressure. The experimental results indicated that methane adsorption capacity in the coal sample decreased linearly with temperature increasing, and temperature effect on reducing methane adsorption capacity was greater at low pressure. These experimental results were consistent with the simulation results. Based on simulation and experimental data, it was obvious that temperature-induced gas adsorption capacity variation was both pore size dependent and pressure dependent.As an unconventional gas, coalbed methane (CBM) is an important source of energy in the United States, China, Australia and other countries ( Coal is a porous and heterogeneous medium. A wide range of pores in coal was involved in the coal matrix from micropores (<2 nm) to macropores (>50 nm) ( Previous numerical studies have primarily focused on gas sorption behaviors for a single size at different temperatures and the results demonstrate that the increase of temperature would reduce the methane adsorption amount in coal or active carbon ( For numerical simulation and experimental methods, each has its own advantages and disadvantages. Numerical simulations can offer detailed information about methane adsorption capacity, adsorbed methane density, and many others. Experimental measurements can intuitively show final and real methane sorption capacity on coal and it will be an essential dataset for the simulation model validation. By combining numerical simulation and experimental measurements, we can get the detailed and realistic methane adsorption behavior in coal. In this study, we try to characterize temperature effect on methane adsorption capacity for various pore sizes within coal matrix. GCMC methods were used to simulate the temperature effect on methane adsorption capacity quantification and methane density distribution in slit pores for different sized pores. Finally, the pore size distributions of selected coal samples were characterized and followed by the methane adsorption capacity measurements at different temperatures. These experimental results were used to validate the numerical simulation results and comprehensively analyze temperature effect on methane adsorption in coal. A core sample, labeled as CS-1-1, was obtained at depth of 3452 m from northern part of Erdos Basin China. This coal sample is Permo-Carboniferous Taiyuan Formation. Coal petrographycial analysis was conducted and the vitrinite reflectance (     Slit pore model was adopted in our simulation work to simulate methane adsorption behavior under different temperature conditions. The justification of the slit pore model is that the coal is rich in nanoscale slit-like pores. The scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used to probe the coal sample and the results shown in The grand canonical Monte Carlo (GCMC) method was employed to simulate the gas sorption behaviors and this method has been tested to be a valid tool for this type of simulation studies ( It is essential and capable to define the total gas quantity, excess adsorption amount, bulk phase gas amount and absolute adsorption in the simulation. Total gas quantity is the sum of all gas molecules within the pore system, including both the adsorbed frees gas molecules. Bulk phase gas is defined as the gas in the pore void space, and thus no adsorbed gas is involved within bulk gas. Excess adsorption, termed as Gibbs adsorption, equals to the total gas amount minus the bulk gas. Within the coal pore system, excess adsorption (Gibbs adsorption) is the amount in excess of what would be present if pores are completely filled with the bulk phase gas with absence of sorption quantity ( The intermolecular forces between gas molecule and pore wall result in the formulation of adsorbed gas layer. In other word, the generation of adsorbed gas layers is due to intermolecular potential energy between the pore wall and gas molecules (  Methane adsorption features in various sized pores are known to be different ( From  Based on the comparisons of the methane adsorption capacities for 0.7 nm, 1.0 nm and 4.0 nm pores, it was noted that the decreased quantity of methane adsorption with temperature increase for 0.7 nm pore system is much smaller than those of 1.0 nm and 4.0 nm pore systems at the same gas pressure. We calculated methane density distributions in different sized pores at different temperatures through GCMC simulations as shown in In 1.0 nm pores (  As temperature effect on methane adsorption in different sized pores is different, it is crucial to characterize pore structures of the coal samples when we analyze ultimate influence of temperature of methane adsorption on coal. For gas isotherm measurements, methane adsorption capacities were tested at 50 °C, 60 °C, 70 °C and 80 °C and the results are shown in In order to show temperature effect on methane adsorption capacity on coal under different pressures, the adsorption amounts for each pressure at different temperatures were plotted in The experimental results illustrate that methane adsorption amount decreases linearly with temperature increase for all pressures. This phenomenon agrees with the methane behavior in small pores (pore size < 1.5 nm). According to the simulation results, methane adsorption amount decreases linearly with increasing temperature, both at low and high pressures within small pore systems. Additionally, in the coal sample CS-1-1, pores smaller than 1.0 nm account for more than half of the total pore surface area ( It is widely accepted that pores in coal have strong heterogeneity ( Based on the simulation results and experimental data, the following conclusions can be made: For 0.7 nm and 1.0 nm slit pore systems, methane adsorption capacities linearly decrease with an increase of temperature for all pressures. For 4.0 nm silt pores, excess adsorption capacity exhibits a negative exponential decay with temperature increase at low pressures (<3 MPa). The temperature effect on methane adsorption capacity is stronger within large pores than small pores. According to the features of the temperature effect on methane adsorption in pores of different sizes, pores can be divided into three categories: 0.7–0.9 nm pores, 1.0–1.3 nm pores and pores larger than 1.4 nm. For 0.7–0.9 nm pores, methane adsorption amount decreases by approximately 19% at 3 MPa from 20 °C to 100 °C, and that in 1.0–1.3 nm pores and pores larger than 1.4 nm decrease by approximately 32% and 45%, respectively. HPMI, LP-N The temperature-induced gas adsorption capacity variation is both pore size dependent and pressure dependent. The authors sincerely thank the financial support of the