We describe a highly selective incision combined with percutaneous manipulation for reduction and internal fixation of talar neck fractures. We retrospectively investigated the clinical data from 29 cases of talar neck fractures treated from January 2009 to June 2013. Fifteen patients (study group) were treated using a 1- to 2-cm limited incision placed on the anteromedial or anterolateral side of the talus, followed by percutaneous reduction and fixation. Another 14 patients (control group) underwent open reduction and internal fixation through a conventional anteromedial or anterolateral approach. All cases were fixed with Herbert screws or cannulated titanium screws. All the patients were followed up for a minimum of 18 (median 24) months. All the fractures displayed bony union at or before the final follow-up visit. The mean American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society ankle scale score in the study group was 75.3 ± 17.7, 9 patients (60%) had good or excellent results, and 3 (20%) developed talar avascular necrosis. The mean ankle scale score in the control group was 78.9 ± 15.2, 9 patients (64.3%) had good to excellent results, and 6 (42.9%) developed avascular necrosis. No statistically significant differences were found in the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society score, the number of good to excellent outcomes, or the incidence of complications between the incision groups. A highly selective incision combined with percutaneous reduction and internal fixation can be used to treat fractures of the neck of the talus satisfactorily.The talus is an important tarsal bone in the human body. For anatomic purposes, it can be divided into a head, body, neck, lateral process, and posterior process. The shape of the talus consists of 6 articular surfaces and is wider in the front than at the back, providing greater stability in dorsiflexion. About 70% of its surface is covered by articular cartilage without muscle attachment. In addition, the talus lacks independent nutritional vessels and its blood supply is primarily through the thickened ligaments and joint capsules distributed in the talus. Talar fractures are relatively uncommon, accounting for only 0.6% of all fractures Fractures of the talar neck account for about 48% of all talar fractures Post-traumatic arthritis and avascular necrosis of the talus can occur as sequelae to certain talar neck fractures owing to its unique anatomic structure and blood supply and have been the subject of wide-ranging research. Previously, the talar blood supply was considered poor; however, subsequent studies have shown that multiple blood vessels form a rich vascular network around the talus A major complication of talar fractures is avascular necrosis of the talus. A high-energy injury with damage to the blood supply and dislocation are the major reasons for avascular necrosis. The incidence of necrosis after talar neck fractures is 14% for Hawkins type I fractures, 20% to 50% for type II, 80% to 100% for type III, and ≤100% for type IV fractures Some researchers have applied closed reduction and percutaneous internal fixation for nondisplaced fractures, which effectively reduces the damage to the soft tissue and the disturbance to the blood supply The present study was designed as a retrospective investigation of the data from 15 consecutive patients treated for talar neck fracture at our department from November 2011 to December 2013 (study group). In addition, 14 patients with talar neck fractures who had undergone conventional open reduction and internal fixation from January 2009 to August 2011 were enrolled as the control group. All the patients were collected by the senior authors (J.T., Q.W.). The study group included 12 male and 3 female patients, and their mean age at diagnosis was 40.0 years. The control group included 8 males and 6 females, with a mean age of 41.6 years. The primary cause of injury included 16 cases (55.2%) of a fall from a height, 9 (31.0%) of traffic accidents, and 4 (13.8%) crush injuries. According to the Hawkins classification, in the study group, 1 case (6.7%) was type I, 8 (53.3%) were type II, and 6 (40%) were type III. In the control group, 2 cases (14.3%) were type I, 6 (42.9%) were type II, and 6 (42.9%) were type III. Of the 29 cases, 3 (20%) in the study group were Gustilo type I or type II open fractures, and 2 (14.3%) in the control group were Gustilo type I or type II open fractures. Hawkins Type IV fractures will often present as Gustilo type III open injuries with a dislocated talus. The incidence of talar necrosis with this type of fracture has been 100% All trauma patients were comprehensively evaluated in the emergency room. Those patients with obvious talar dislocations or gross displacement underwent manual reduction under anesthesia, and a plaster slab or external fixation was applied to provide temporary stability. Nine patients underwent fixation with a single-arm external fixator, and the Schanz pins were placed in the proximal part of the tibia and the calcaneus. (6 [40%] in the study group and 3 [21.4%] in the control group). External fixation was performed to prevent the fragments from compressing the skin and forming tension blisters and to help ease the stretching of the surrounding vascular network. Conventional preoperative 3-dimensional (3D) computed tomography (CT) scans were analyzed to classify the fractures and clarify the positions of the major fragments and comminution. The timing of surgery was determined according to the nature and time of the injury. For every patient, surgery was performed as quickly as possible. For open bone fractures, the patient underwent emergency surgery within 2 to 8 hours after the injury, and an attempt was made to immediately reduce and stabilize the fracture. For patients with poor soft tissue conditions, open reduction and internal fixation was performed within 7 to 10 days after injury. A preoperative plan was formulated in accordance with the findings from the CT and radiographic images. All the surgical procedures were performed by 5 experienced surgeons (K.W., Z.Z., J.T., J.H., and J.L.) in our department. In the study group, we placed 1- to 2-cm incisions at the anteromedial and/or anterolateral shaded areas ( The outcome assessments were performed by 2 of us (J.T., Z.Z.). Standard lateral and anteroposterior radiographic films were performed to assess bony union during the fellow-up period. In the case of questionable union, a 3D CT scan was used to confirm fracture healing. The American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) ankle hindfoot scale was used to evaluate the outcomes of the patients The clinical data of the 2 groups are listed in As an illustrative case, we describe a 34-year-old male who had experienced a Hawkins type II talar neck fracture and Sneppen type II talar body fracture after a car accident ( Talar fractures are relatively uncommon fractures in the emergency room. However, with the rapid development of transportation and construction, high-energy injuries frequently occur and the incidence of talar fractures has been increasing as a result. Owing to the unique structure and articular cartilage distribution on the surface of the talus, the blood supply can only enter from a limited area. After high-energy injuries to the talus, the syndesmosis and joint capsules can be damaged, thereby destroying the blood supply to the talus. In certain cases, even if the blood vessels have not been lacerated or injured, the blood supply can be blocked by contusions or swelling of local soft tissue and compression caused by dislocated bone fractures. Although Hawkins type I fractures can be observed on the initial radiographs, dislocation of the subtalar joint or the tibiotalar joint can occur from the initial impact of the injury. During surgical intervention, dissecting the soft tissue for anatomic reduction of the talus can potentially aggravate the avascular state of the talus and lead to nonunion or bone collapse. At present, a consensus has been reached that for displaced talar fractures, surgical reduction and stable internal fixation should be performed as soon as possible Three surgical approaches are commonly applied in talar operations: anteromedial, anterolateral, posterolateral approaches. In recent years, however, some investigators have reported that percutaneous reduction and fixation is a good treatment modality in the treatment of talar neck fractures A medial malleolar osteotomy is occasionally necessary to expose the medial wall or the top of the talar body. Osteotomies were required for 3 Hawkins type III cases (20%) in the present study. In addition, 2 cases with concomitant medial malleolar fractures had results similar to that for the medial malleolar osteotomy case. None of the 3 patients (20%) requiring medial malleolar osteotomy developed nonunion or talar necrosis after surgery. This might have resulted from preservation of the deltoid branch. It has traditionally been considered that open reduction and internal fixation should be performed as soon as possible to protect the residual blood supply Normal lag screws and Kirschner wires have been commonly used for internal fixation of talar neck fractures. In recent years, the application of talar steel plates has gradually gained popularity Cannulated screws can be placed over the wires in a position determined from preoperative planning and intraoperative assessment, thus facilitating a minimally invasive operation. Cannulated screws are made of titanium, which is biologically more compatible and has a Young's modulus of elasticity similar to that of bone. Cannulated screws allow magnetic resonance imaging, which can assist in the early detection of avascular necrosis. In the present study, Herbert screws with better compression effects were inserted in 4 cases. The advantages of Herbert screws include that 2-way compression can be produced through the thread differences of the head and tail and that the buried design does not disturb the articular surface, which is particularly applicable for intra-articular fractures. Ly and Fallat All 29 patients in our study achieved bony union, 10 (34.5%) of whom had developed varied degrees of traumatic arthritis by the last follow-up examination. This was related to the damage to the cartilage of the articular surface at injury. However, despite the clinical diagnosis of arthritis, the AOFAS scale scores at the final follow-up examination were mostly good and fair, and only 2 patients (14.3%) in the control group required additional treatment. The effects of surgical reduction and the collapse of the talar body by avascular necrosis could also have been related to the development of traumatic arthritis. It has been reported that the incidence of traumatic arthritis varies from 40% to 95% The limitations of our study were the small sample size and its retrospective design. Because talar fractures are rare, only 29 cases could be included in our study. Of the 29 patients, only 15 consecutive patients were collected as study samples. The other 14 patients were selected as historical controls. This might threaten the validity of our conclusions. Also, every group included different Hawkins type fractures. This could inevitably result in individual heterogeneity and sample selection bias. Although we knew that open fractures, fracture type, and comorbidities have the potential to affect the fixation type and final results, our experience in treating talar fracture using a highly selective incision will be helpful in developing treatment strategies in the future. Also, these limitations could be solved by the performance of larger sample studies or cohort studies. In conclusion, talar neck fractures, although not extremely common, pose a large challenge for all surgeons treating this injury type. In the present study, we performed highly selective incisions at the anteromedial and anterolateral areas, combined with percutaneous manipulation and reduction. Theoretically, we reduced the disturbance to the residual blood supply to the talus, enhanced fracture healing, and might have lowered the incidence of avascular necrosis. Although the present study still had many limitations, such as the small sample size and short follow-up period, we propose the following recommendations on the basis of our results: Early surgery, if possible, and the performance of preoperative conventional 3D CT scans Anatomic reduction and stable percutaneous internal fixation Also, surgeons should have clear knowledge of the features and distribution of the blood supply to the talus and should choose the appropriate entry points accordingly. In addition, minimally invasive treatment with efforts to protect the blood supply should be chosen. Also, early functional exercises should be recommended to patients in the painless state. Finally, the non-weightbearing period should be extended as long as possible. First and foremost, I would like to show my deepest gratitude to Professor Q.W., a respectable, responsible, and resourceful scholar, who provided me with valuable guidance in the writing of this paper. Second, I would like to thank Dr. T.J.; without his enlightening instruction, impressive kindness, and patience, I could not have completed my work. I also thank Drs. Z.Z., J.H., and J.L., who participated in most of the operations and prepared the present report. Finally, I thank Mr. Yilin Chou, who was responsible for all the artwork in the present study.