Processes for production of superfine white alumina trihydroxide (ATH) powders from actual plant Bayer liquor have been developed for use in non-metallurgical applications. The specialty grade hydroxides suitable for non-metallurgical application should conform to certain qualities such as fineness, purity, brightness, etc. The effect of a number of parameters such as precipitation temperature, amount of seed, seed surface area, precipitation time, soda content of pregnant liquor, modifier/additives, etc. on the precipitation of ATH were studied to achieve the required fineness. At higher temperatures, a purer product (with respect to soda) is obtained and particle size is increased, whereas at lower temperatures particle size is reduced and the soda quantity in the product is increased. The effect of seed surface area and seed quantity are found to have marked effects on the productivity and particle size of precipitated ATH. Higher seed specific surface area and higher seed quantity favoured productivity and finer particle size. Increased soda content in the pregnant liquor also enhanced productivity and finer size particles. The single most important parameter that influenced the precipitation process with respect to productivity, particle size and purity is the effect of a modifier, namely aluminium sulfate. ATH productivity is doubled when a modifier is added and the particle size is also reduced to ∼1 μm. An improvement in yield and finer size is also observed when organic additives are used.The Hall–Heroult and Bayer discoveries developed more than 100 years ago are the only main technologies available worldwide for production of aluminium even today. Aluminium hydroxide from the Bayer process utilised to obtain metal grade alumina forms the largest market, and the market for aluminium hydroxide for non-metallurgical purposes is second. Aluminium hydroxides produced from the Bayer process are generally yellowish in colour and coarser in size. These Bayer varieties of aluminium hydroxide, commonly called aluminium trihydrate (ATH), are mainly used as chemical feed stock apart from its use in aluminium manufacture. But many non-metallurgical applications of ATH require finer size particle and higher purity. These products are generally prepared by grinding the Bayer precipitates followed by size classification Non-metallurgical ATH/oxides have a wide range of application as abrasives, adhesives, cement, glass, ceramics, refractories, catalysts, fire retardant products, cosmetics, toothpaste, antacids, paints, pigments, printing ink, etc. The specialty grade hydroxides/oxides mentioned above require sophisticated special operations suitable to the particular application. The major considerations are soda content, particle size and brightness. Their applications vis-a-vis particle size requirements are mentioned elsewhere The precipitation reactor includes a 1 L capacity polycarbonate vessel having a lid. The lid had provision for accommodating a stirrer and a thermometer. The stirrer was made up of a perspex rod and a propeller type impeller. Agitation of the liquor was performed with a Remi laboratory model stirrer having variable speed controller. For maintaining precipitation temperature, a constant temperature bath of Siskin–Julabo make was used. Actual plant Bayer liquor received from M/s National Aluminum, India was filtered to remove precipitated iron hydroxide and stored for further studies. The clear liquor was analyzed for alumina and soda content. The required amount (400 mL) of Bayer liquor was poured into the precipitation reactor and the reactor was kept in a constant temperature bath at the desired temperature with agitation (150 min Analysis of Al ATH seed supplied by M/s NALCO, India was 103 μm in size and it was then wet ground to various sizes. To avoid iron contamination, grinding was performed in a ceramic ball mill with ceramic balls. Alumina hydrate of finer size (non-metallurgical grade) was prepared by controlled precipitation from Bayer liquor by seeding and adding size refining agent, namely hydrated aluminium sulfate. Seed size and its amount, temperature, Al The effect of temperature on precipitation process was studied at an Al The effect of amount of seed on the precipitation process was studied in the range of 5–20 g/L of seed using the same seed (S2) and A/C ratio as above. The precipitation temperature was kept at 50°C The effect of duration of the precipitation period on yield and particle size was studied in the presence and absence of hydrated aluminium sulfate. The time period studied in this case was up to 24 h. Precipitation conditions used in this case are, seed concentration—10 g/L, seed size—12.5 μm, temperature—50°C and aluminium sulfate concentration—10 g/L (wherever used). Continuous increase in yield was observed with precipitation time even after 24 h when a modifier was not used, but in the case where a modifier was used, ATH yield reached almost a steady value within 12 h of precipitation It has been already observed that a modifier (aluminium sulfate) significantly influences the amount of precipitation, particle size of precipitated ATH and also precipitation time The effect of caustic concentration in liquor was studied at Al The effect of alumina/caustic ratio on yield and size was studied with three different ratios while keeping caustic concentration the same In the present study various sizes of non-metallurgical grade ATH particles were produced, by utilizing the above parameters under controlled conditions, in the range of ∼0.5–5.0 μm size. The precipitated ATH was characterised chemically and by XRD, SEM, TEM etc. for its purity and crystal phase morphology. The dried products were examined for the crystal phase using XRD technique. The result shows typical gibbsitic type of aluminium hydroxide The process developed in the laboratory is essentially the controlled precipitation of ATH from Bayer liquor using seed crystals. A modifier (hydrated aluminium sulfate) was used to achieve the required particle size, increased precipitation rate etc. It has been observed that temperature played a vital role in the precipitation process. At higher temperature, a purer product was obtained but productivity and ATH particle size were poorer. The higher the seed specific surface area, the higher the productivity and lower the product particle size. Likewise, a higher amount of seed enhanced the productivity. Reduction in product size was also observed with increased amount of seed. The study on effect of precipitation time on ATH productivity showed increased productivity with time. In the case where a modifier was used, maximum productivity was obtained within 8–10 h, beyond which productivity remained almost steady. In the case where no modifier was used, lowered productivity was obtained but a continuous increase in productivity was obtained beyond 24 h. The single most important parameter influencing the precipitation process with respect to productivity and particle size was the effect of a modifier. Addition of small quantities of organic additives helped in obtaining increased productivity and finer particles. Authors are thankful to the Director, Regional Research Laboratory, Bhubaneswar for his constant encouragement and to allow publication. Thanks are also due to M/s NALCO, India for supplying the Bayer liquor. The authors are also thankful to RSIC, Bose Institute, Calcutta for TEM studies.