The use of EPS-producing heterotrophic and chemolithotrophic bacteria in bioflotation processes have been investigated for the last two decades. These studies have mostly been confined to laboratory microflotation tests using pure cultures. In this study the use of EPS, extracted from bioleaching consortia, to float chalcopyrite was evaluated and key process parameters such as pH, flotation time and the concentration of collector, bacterial cells and EPS were optimised. Analyses of the EPS extracted from various bioleach systems indicated that the EPS consisted mainly of carbohydrates, proteins and uronic acids. Microflotation tests using free EPS yielded a chalcopyrite recovery of 77% when chalcopyrite was floated alone and 70% during the separation of a mixture of pure chalcopyrite and pure pyrite compared to 32% when using SIBX only. The results obtained suggested that the flotation of chalcopyrite could be significantly increased in the presence of EPS extracted from bioleaching populations.The growing world demand for raw minerals has led to the increased exploitation of low grade-sulphide ores, necessitating processing of ores with complex mineralogy, particularly for base metals. This in combination with the more rigorous specifications for production of concentrates, stricter environmental legislation and a necessity to achieve lower operating costs has led to numerous investigations aimed at finding better processing techniques and more effective flotation reagents. Conventional flotation methods use highly selective inorganic modifiers such as cyanides, sulphides and ferro-cyanides, and their use has raised concern with regard to environmental issues ( The use of microorganisms in mineral beneficiation has been elucidated with recent developments in biotechnology. Bioflotation is one such developing technology for processing ores. During bioflotation, microorganisms and associated extracellular metabolic products are used to selectively separate gangue ores ( Numerous laboratory studies have demonstrated that it is possible to use microbial species as flotation reagents in selective separation. The selective flotation or depression of sulphides and oxides has been studied with a variety of microbes (e.g. Of particular interest are bioleaching bacteria, acidophilic metal sulphide oxidizing species, which are already used in commercial biohydrometallurgical processes. These bacteria selectively attach to sulphide surfaces forming a biofilm or an EPS layer. Compared to conventional inorganic reagents, bacteria are non-toxic and environmentally benign, potentially providing an alternative to conventional flotation methods. Studies showed that the use of xanthate in the flotation of pyrite could be greatly reduced by prior application of The aim of this study was to investigate the application of mixed bioleaching consortia and their EPS as bioflotation reagents. The main objectives were (i) optimisation of operating parameters such as pH, flotation time, collector, EPS and bacterial cell concentration and (ii) evaluation of the efficiency of bioleaching bacteria and the EPS produced as bioflotation agents. Pure mineral samples of chalcopyrite (CuFeS Bioleach pulp samples used during cell isolation and EPS extraction were obtained from several continuously operated bioleaching systems. These reactors were maintained on various sulphide concentrates. The operating conditions and composition of the microbial consortia are summarised in The samples were allowed to stand for an hour to allow the solids to settle. The solid free liquor was centrifuged (6000 The supernatant obtained during the isolation of bacterial cells with the bound EPS was used for the extraction of only the free EPS found in the bioleach pulp. Cold ethanol (2.2 The biochemical composition of the free EPS only was determined using the following described methods. The Bradford assay was used to determine the protein content, using bovine serum albumin as standard ( During the process optimisation tests all experiments were carried out using a modified Hallimond tube ( Industrial grade sodium isobutyl xanthate (SIBX) was used as a collector for chalcopyrite flotation. The effect of various SIBX concentrations, ranging from 0.5 A series of tests were conducted on pure chalcopyrite to determine the optimal cell concentration to be used during microflotation tests. The final cell concentrations evaluated ranged from 1 During the optimisation of the free EPS concentration required for optimal flotation of chalcopyrite, dried EPS was re-dissolved in dH A series of microflotation tests were conducted using 1 To determine the effect of pH on chalcopyrite recovery, a series of tests were conducted using bacterial cells (1 All microflotation tests were carried out using a modified Hallimond tube as described for the previous tests. The optimised process parameters determined in Section During process optimisation free EPS and cells containing bound EPS were extracted from a continuously operated pyrite reactor (45 The free EPS obtained after ethanol precipitation was biochemically characterised and found to consist of carbohydrates (79%), proteins (19%), uronic acids (0.68%) and humic acids (0.23%). Of the total dry mass obtained during ethanol precipitation, 70% of the mass obtained could be accounted for by the mentioned constituents. The unaccounted constituents (30%) could be attributed to lipids, DNA and even metal ions, such as Fe which are known to be present in EPS. The results in  The results indicated that by increasing the EPS concentration from 1.7 Previous studies utilised pH 4 during microflotation tests using bacteria ( Optimisation of the collector, bacterial cell and EPS concentrations as well as the flotation time did not result in the high chalcopyrite flotation recoveries as obtained in the literature ( The results indicated ( In Section Biochemical characterisation of the EPS indicated that in all cases over 70% of the dry weight obtained could be attributed to EPS with a ∼30% of the mass unaccounted for. The unknown constituents might be attributed to lipids, DNA and even metal ions which are known to be present in EPS. The EPS was found to consist mainly of carbohydrates and smaller amounts of protein with trace levels of humic and uronic acids (  The carbohydrate:protein ratio (C:N) of the EPS varied significantly between the chalcopyrite and the pyrite and sphalerite systems. The free EPS extracted from pyrite and sphalerite systems showed C:N ratios of 6.6 (35 The results obtained were contrary to published literature that indicated the EPS from bioleaching bacteria ( The results indicated that bacterial cells containing bound EPS was not efficient at chalcopyrite flotation with chalcopyrite recoveries of between 32% and 43% obtained (   Uronic acids are considered to be replicate units of acidic polysaccharides or mucopolysaccharides and is a constituent in biofilms and in bacterial aggregation ( As the results for the flotation of chalcopyrite using free EPS extracted from the 70 Many of the bioflotation studies concerning bioleaching bacteria and their EPS as potential flotation bioreagents used pure cultures. However, during this study the effect of mixed microbial cultures and free EPS extracted from bioleaching systems, operating at temperatures varying between 35 and 70