Background
                  This study assessed the clinical and radiological outcomes of different non-surgical interventions, surgical versus non-surgical interventions, and different surgical interventions used in the management of proximal fifth metatarsal fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  A systematic review of published and unpublished literature was undertaken.
               
                  Results
                  Six studies, assessing 330 patients and 333 fractures of the proximal fifth metatarsal were reviewed. Four studies assessed outcomes following tuberosity fractures, whilst 2 studies recruited patients following proximal diaphyseal or Jones fractures. The findings suggested that bandage is superior to below knee cast immobilisation for patient-reported functional and pain scores, with no difference in fracture union or re-fracture, and a shorter duration to return to work. There was no significant difference in complication rates or functional outcomes for patients managed in a plaster slipper compared to a bandage post-injury. When comparing surgical and non-surgical management, intramedullary screw fixation results in a shorter time to fracture union, reduced complication rates and earlier return to pre-injury activities compared to non-surgical cast immobilisation. However, the evidence-base is limited in it size and presented with a number of methodological limitations.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Further well-conducted randomised controlled trials are required to determine the optimal management strategy for the different types of proximal fifth metatarsal fractures.Fractures of the fifth metatarsal are one of the most common fractures of the foot The main classification used to describe the different types of proximal fifth metatarsal fractures is based on the specific anatomical location of the fracture, and its likely cause The avulsion fracture is considered the most common type Proximal diaphyseal fractures are located at the metaphyseal–diaphyseal junction and can extend to the articular surface The third common type of fifth metatarsal fracture is the proximal diaphyseal stress fracture. This occurs distal to the other two fractures Fractures of the proximal fifth metatarsal can be treated in a variety of ways. These have been broadly categorised as conservative (non-surgical) or operative (surgical) interventions. Conservative treatments have been recommended in cases where the fracture ends are sufficiently close together to not require further reduction. Such methods include casts, orthoses, boots and compression dressings. These provide the metatarsal with some support, helping to maintain the anatomical position and reduce the incidence of fracture displacement. Surgery has been advocated for those fractures that involve a proportion (over 30%) of the metatarsocuboid articular surface The management of these injuries is controversial The purpose of this study was to evaluate the current evidence-base to assess the clinical and radiological outcomes of interventions (surgical and non-surgical) used for treating proximal fifth metatarsal fractures in adults. All randomised (RCT) and non-randomised (nRCT) comparative studies assessing the management of proximal fifth metatarsal fractures were included. Studies evaluating the management of concomitant tarsometatarsal dislocations, tarsometatarsal fracture-dislocations, or with metatarsal fractures not involving the fifth metatarsal were excluded. We also excluded studies evaluating the management of fractures to the neck or head of the fifth metatarsal. Studies of patients under the age of 16 were excluded, however trials containing both adults and children were eligible provided the proportion of children was clearly small (<5%), or separate data for adults could be obtained. In cases where papers presented the results of fifth metatarsal fracture but also reported the results of the management of fractures of other bones in the foot, such as fourth metatarsal fractures, these studies were included provided that the proportion of other fractures was clearly small (<5%), or separate data for people with isolated fifth metatarsal fractures was obtainable. The following electronic databases were searched from their inception to June 2010 using a preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (PRISMA) compliant search strategy Conference proceedings from the British Orthopaedic Association, British Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society, British Orthopaedic Foot Surgery Society, British Trauma Society, and European Federation of National Associations of Orthopaedics and Traumatology (EFORT) were also searched. The bibliographies of relevant review articles and all full text papers obtained for review were made. Each included study's corresponding author was also contacted to identify another important paper which may have been omitted from the original search. Using a pro-forma stating the study eligibility criteria, two authors (TS, CH) independently reviewed all titles and abstracts identified by the search strategy, to obtain an agreed list of eligible studies. Two authors (CH, TS) independently extracted all key trial and participant data from the included studies using a pre-defined data extraction form. This was then synthesised into a data extraction table to present all key trial data and participant information from the included articles. Corresponding trial authors were contacted in an attempt to obtain additional information omitted from their trial reports. Primary outcome measures: patient-rated foot and ankle function scores: e.g. American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Score (AOFAS) Secondary outcome measures included: symptomatic non-union and refracture, return to normal activities/sporting pursuits, persistent foot pain, persistent swelling, complications including infection, complex regional pain syndrome type 1, osteoarthritis, anatomical restoration (including malunion), time to radiological union. Two authors (CH, TS) independently assessed the methodological quality of the literature using the Cochrane Collaboration's ‘Risk of Bias’ tool which incorporates an assessment of randomisation (sequence generation and allocation concealment), blinding (participants, personnel and outcome assessors), completeness of outcome data, selection of outcomes reported and other sources of bias, such as selection bias and performance bias. Any disagreements on study eligibility, data extraction or methodological appraisal were resolved by discussion. Before conducting a meta-analysis, the methodological heterogeneity of the studies was visually assessed using the extraction table. When studies appeared homogeneous in respect to their population, interventions and outcome measurements, then a meta-analysis was conducted. When this was not met, a narrative review of the evidence was presented. Statistical heterogeneity was assessed by visual inspection of the forest plot and by using the A total of 264 studies were identified from the search strategy. On review of the titles and abstracts, 12 studies appeared pertinent to the research question. On further scrutiny of the full text manuscripts, 7 studies satisfied the eligibility criteria. One study was excluded since it appeared to replicate a later paper reported by the same authors The literature reviewed presented with substantial methodological limitations when reviewed with the Cochrane's Risk of Bias assessment. The findings of this exercise are presented in The 6 studies reviewed assessed three interventional topics. All studies were RCTs, with the exception of Josefsson et al. Three studies assessed the use of casts versus bandaging treatments for patients following avulsion (tuberosity) fractures The cast management was described as a low-weight below knee weight-bearing cast by Zenios et al. Four outcomes were assessed by meta-analysis. As Due to the variety of different outcome measures used between the studies, there was insufficient data to perform a meta-analysis for the other outcome measures collected. Accordingly, the remaining analysis performed was narrative in nature. Wiener et al. Wiener et al. The incidence of re-fracture was assessed in 1 study Weiner et al. One study assessed pain during the first 12 weeks post-injury Zenios et al. One study assessed the clinical outcomes of using a plaster cast, compared to a tubular elasticated bandage for patients with a tuberosity fracture of the proximal fifth metatarsal The plaster slipper management and the elasticated bandage subjects were both instructed to wear their intervention for 6 weeks, and were provided with a support shoe and crutches to weight-bear as tolerated. All subjects were provided with standard oral analgesia, and no physiotherapy was provided for these subjects. Gray et al. They also concluded that whilst 2 patients in each group demonstrated non-union at 12 weeks, only 1 patient, in the tubular bandage group reported pain and poor functional outcome. No cases of re-fracture were noted in either intervention group. Two studies comparing a surgical to non-surgical interventions following proximal diaphyseal fractures, or Jones fracture, to the fifth metatarsal Surgical intervention in both studies consisted of intramedullary screw fixation followed by cast immobilisation and a minimum of 2 weeks none weight-bearing. Non-surgical intervention was cast immobilisation, non-weight bearing for a mean 11.0 weeks in Mologne et al.’s It was possible to perform a meta-analysis of the frequency of delayed union, and re-fracture using the 2 studies which have assessed this topic Josefsson et al. This higher incidence of non-union was also seen in Mologne et al.’s Time to clinical unions was 14.5 weeks in the non-surgical group (range 8–22 weeks, SD 4.7) and 6.9 weeks in the surgical group (range 4–11 weeks, SD 2.3) in Mologne et al. Finally, Mologne et al. This study assessed 3 different management strategies for the treatment of proximal fifth metatarsal fractures. There is some evidence to suggest that the use of a bandage is superior to cast immobilisation in relation to patient-reported functional and pain scores, with no difference in respect to fracture union or refracture, and a shorter duration to return to work. There was no significant difference in respect to complication rates or functional outcomes for patients managed in a plaster slipper compared to those managed in a bandage post-injury. However, when comparing surgical and non-surgical management, intramedullary screw fixation results in a shorter time to fracture union, reduced complication rates and earlier return to pre-injury activities compared to non-surgical cast immobilisation. Whilst acknowledging these recommendations, the current evidence-base presented with a number of substantial methodological weaknesses. These most notably included the recruitment of small and underpowered sample sizes in all but two studies The purpose of this study was to compare the effects of different non-surgical interventions versus different surgical interventions. No comparative studies were identified comparing the outcomes of 2 separate surgical procedures. Whilst the evidence-base has suggested that a variety of different interventions are used, it therefore remains unclear as to which intervention is the most superior in respect to clinical and radiological outcomes, in the management of patients following fracture of the fifth metatarsal. This is therefore an area for future research, to determine the efficacy of these differing surgical interventions. Previous authors have suggested that surgical treatment is indicated when the fracture is displaced by more than 2 The literature has also made recommendations on the specific issues related to optimal outcomes in surgical interventions. For example, it has been suggested that bone grafting should be performed when there is considerable intramedullary sclerosis The prognosis of proximal fractures of the fifth metatarsal made be largely related to the location of fracture. Previous case series and cohort studies have suggested that avulsion fractures predominantly heal well, whilst proximal diaphyseal fractures heal poorly, have a higher incidence of delayed or non-union and can be difficult to manage successfully No studies have assessed the cost-effectiveness of the different interventions. Whilst cast treatment itself is more expensive, more time consuming, and requires technical staff and clinical sessions for cast change, these issues do not arise with the use of elasticated tubular bandage The studies reviewed included the limited use of patient-reported outcomes. A previous meta-analysis compared all foot and ankle rating scales Minimally displaced metatarsal fractures are most commonly immobilised in below knee casts None declared. None. None. The library staff at the Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital's Sir Thomas Browne Library will assist in the gathering of papers required for this study. We thank the No funding was obtained to support this study, and no writing assistance was sought.