Multiple-point statistics are used in geostatistical simulation to improve forecasting of responses that are highly dependent on the reproduction of complex features of the phenomenon. Often, complex features cannot be captured by conventional two-point simulation methods, based on the variogram. Inference of multiple-point statistics requires a training image that depicts the geological features of the geological setting being modelled. The proportions of facies in the training image may not match the target statistics of the final model. This is a problem because taking multiple point statistics from a training image also takes the univariate proportions, that is, the multiple point statistics contain all lower order statistics. There is a need to scale multiple-point statistics to different target univariate proportions. In other cases, locally varying facies proportions must be honored, but a single training image is available. The multiple-point statistics from the training image are scaled to the appropriate target univariate proportions of facies. An iterative scaling approach based on the expression for scaling multiple-point statistics in a purely random case is proposed. The implementation is illustrated through an example where it is shown that the proposed method lies between two extreme cases for a Boolean simulation, namely, the change in size of the objects and the change in their number of occurrences. A second example is presented to illustrate the potential use of this scaling procedure for nonstationary multiple-point geostatistical simulation.Multiple-point statistics can be used for improved geostatistical modelling of variables distributed in space. The relationships between several points at a time are estimated from training data and imposed during the simulation process in order to achieve a numerical model that correctly represents the spatial features that conventional simulation cannot capture.  The training information requires abundant data located over a regular grid of points, in order to have enough replicates of each particular multiple-point event. This is often solved by utilizing a training image ( Multiple-point geostatistical simulation can be performed using any of the available methods. The single normal equation simulation proposed by There is an implicit assumption of stationarity required to export the multiple-point statistics from a training image to the simulated model. A stationarity assumption stricter than the usual second order stationarity is required, since the use of configurations of several points also locks all lower order statistics. For instance, if four-point configurations are matched during the multiple-point simulation process, then all three-point and two-point statistics whose configuration is included in the four-point configuration originally used are implicitly matched ( This paper addresses the issue of scaling multiple-point statistics, which may be required in two distinct cases: (1) a training image with different proportions than the data, and (2) locally varying proportions. First, consistency problems may arise when the training image does not have the same one-point distribution as that inferred from the available site-specific observations. Some kind of correction is required to ensure unbiased proportions in the output realization. These problems occur frequently, since training images are not readily available with the exact same proportions of facies that are being modelled. Direct use of the multiple-point statistics extracted from the training image will distort the histogram of the simulated realizations generating a bias in the proportions. A basic requirement for the simulated model to be accepted as a plausible representation of the true phenomenon is that it honors a given histogram. Scaling of multiple-point statistics is then required to allow the use of the training image in a consistent manner with the data and preserving its character, hence generating acceptable numerical models. Another relevant use of a scaling procedure for multiple-point statistics is to impose non-stationary features, but preserving the character provided by the training image. One could devise the use of a single training image to model a field with locally varying proportions of the facies. Scaling multiple-point statistics to a given set of univariate proportions of the facies could be done by generating a new image with an object-based model, if the conceptual model can be reasonably represented by a Boolean algorithm. Alternatively, dilution/erosion methods could be used to modify the original training image to adjust the proportions to the target ones ( We present a methodology for scaling multiple-point statistics to generate consistent results from simulation methods that account for this information and to consider non-stationary features during the modeling process. The methodology is general and could be adapted to be used with continuous variables, as long as the data are coded as indicators by defining classes through a set of thresholds. The problem is presented in the case of a categorical variable, which is where simulation accounting for multiple-point statistics has seen a faster development. Consider a training image that depicts the spatial arrangement of The multiple-point statistics to be considered are defined by a spatial arrangement of nodes and by the combination of facies values in these nodes. If we consider the case where an Each one of the possible combinations is identified with an index that completely defines the facies values within the The frequency of each multiple-point event in the training image is denoted: Knowing the facies values of the Now, the simulated model must honor a set of statistics inferred from a set of samples. For instance, the available data may show that the global declustered proportions of the facies in the domain are: The goal of this paper is to propose a methodology to calculate the corrected frequencies of multiple-point events that will honor the target proportions, preserving the “character” of the training image, that is, keeping the features that make it distinct. These corrected frequencies are denoted: It should be mentioned that dimensionality becomes quickly a problem when dealing with a large number of categories and a pattern with many points. The indexing proposed above does not preclude the use of the scaling approach proposed. The methodology could be applied in a different context, for instance, when using the search tree considered by To understand the concept of scaling multiple-point statistics, the following example illustrates possible outcomes from an increase in the proportion of a facies in a binary case and where the scaled models preserve the character of the original training image. A field of 1000 by 1000 pixels is populated with 10 by 10 pixels squares, where the centers of the squares are randomly located in the field, that is they are generated through a Poisson process ( Dimensionality is always a problem when dealing with multiple-point statistics since the combinatorial becomes very large as the number of points in the multiple-point configuration The proposed approach is based on how multiple-point statistics change when the facies codes of the points in the pattern are randomly distributed. In this case, the frequency with which a multiple-point event occurs can be calculated as the product of the probabilities of occurrence (proportions) of each facies values in its nodes. Since the facies values are considered uncorrelated, it is straightforward to scale the frequency of occurrence of multiple-point statistics. The frequency of a multiple-point configuration can be calculated by Since Scaling the random case is quite simple; multiplying the original frequency by a series product of the desired frequency over the old frequency results in a simple equation: The scaled multiple-point frequencies honor the target univariate proportions: Following up on the previous example, we can see that a change in the global proportions of the facies will change the probability of occurrence of the multiple-point event depicted in It can be checked that the expression provided for scaling multiple-point statistics in the random case provides the same result calculated above: This expression is valid only in the case of a multiple-point statistics from an uncorrelated variable (pure nugget effect). As soon as the variable is spatially correlated, multiple-point proportions cannot be directly calculated. An iterative approach is proposed next to calculate the multiple-point frequencies that honor the target proportions, from the initial multiple-point frequencies inferred from the training image. The formula above overcorrects the multiple-point frequencies. Convergence can be achieved by iterating using the following modified expression: Multiple-point frequencies for all indexes First, to illustrate the use of the scaling approach, the small example presented in The reference image (map on the left hand side of  A second example has been designed to illustrate the use of the scaling procedure proposed. A binary two-dimensional training image has been created with black horizontal stripes two-units thick in a white background. The training image is shown in Multiple-point statistics have been inferred from the training image and unconditional realizations have been computed for different proportions of black (stripes) and white (background) facies. A simulated annealing program to match the multiple-point statistics was prepared. Different pattern sizes imply control over different scales of the phenomenon. For example,  The scaling procedure was used to scale up the proportion of the black facies. The initial proportions (25% black, 75% white) were changed and the multiple-point statistics were scaled. These were then used to simulate realizations with the intent of generating realizations that kept the essential features of the training image, but honoring the facies proportions imposed to the new models. It can be seen from the realizations displayed above that, depending on the pattern size, two situations can arise: the stripes may become wider if the pattern is small enough not to capture its entire width, or the stripes may become more abundant if the pattern is big enough to capture the relationships between the width of the black facies objects and the background, as is the case when 3 by 3 or 4 by 4 patterns are used. Scaling multiple-point statistics can improve the current use of multiple-point geostatistical simulation techniques by allowing locally varying proportions of facies to be reproduced still honoring the relationships captured by multiple-point statistics. Another important use of a multiple-point scaling technique is the use of a representative training image that does not exactly match the target simulation proportions. An iterative approach to scale multiple-point statistics was developed based on the way that multiple-point statistics change for a purely random field. This approach can be shown to provide reasonable values of the statistics that lie in between two extreme cases that are easy to show in the case of objects: an increase in the number of objects or an increase in the size of the objects. The scaling procedure has the potential of being incorporated in a nonstationary simulation algorithm that honors the features provided by a training image, through the local updating of multiple-point statistics. The authors would like to acknowledge the Chair in Ore Reserve Evaluation at the University of Chile sponsored by Codelco Chile and the industry sponsors of the Center for Computational Geostatistics at the University of Alberta for supporting this research. The comments by two anonymous reviewers helped improve the original manuscript and are acknowledged by the authors.