The occurrence of metavolcanic rocks within the Paleozoic basement of the Alpi Apuane metamorphic complex has been known since long time. Among them, some massive porphyritic tourmaline-bearing rocks cropping out in the southern sector of the Alpi Apuane present some distinctive and peculiar features, differing from the better known middle Ordovician metarhyolites of the “Porfiroidi e scisti porfirici” Fm. The porphyritic tourmaline-bearing rocks belong to the recently proposed Fornovolasco Metarhyolite Fm. They are granular to porphyritic, with phenocrysts of quartz (often with magmatic embayment), pseudomorphosed feldspars, and mica (both biotite and muscovite), in a groundmass formed by quartz, white mica, albite, and K-feldspar. Tourmaline (schorl-dravite in composition) is an abundant accessory mineral, in some cases forming cm-sized spots. The studied rocks plot into the rhyolite field of the Total Alkali vs Silica classification diagram. They show a peraluminous nature, having an Alumina Saturation Index ranging from 1.3 and 3.2. Their trace-element signature is that typical of highly evolved orogenic magmas. Laser ablation-ICP-MS U—Pb datings on zircon suggest a Permian crystallization age (weighted average ages of the four samples ranging from 292 and 271 Ma), thus relating these rocks to a post-Variscan magmatism. This new dating represents the very first evidence of a Permian magmatism in the pre-Triassic basement of the Northern Apennines. The potential relationships between Permian felsic magmatism and the ore genesis in the Alpi Apuane metamorphic complex are also discussed.The Paleozoic basement of the Northern Apennines (central-northern Italy) has been described from few small outcrops, with the only exception being represented by the Alpi Apuane where large outcrops (ca. 60 km Several difficulties in the interpretation of this record in the Northern Apennine basement have been encountered by previous authors, mainly owing to the small and scattered outcrops, the rarity of fossiliferous layers in metasedimentary units, and the Alpine metamorphic overprint, usually obliterating or masking the older structures. Moreover, very few geochronological data are available to date. Indeed, the present knowledge of the basement stratigraphy derives mainly from geological, petrographical, and geochemical data, coupled with a correlation with the better known and well-dated Paleozoic sequences of central Sardinia, allowing some tentative stratigraphic reconstructions (e.g., The stratigraphic succession of the Alpi Apuane suffers the same lack of geochronological data common to the other outcrops of Northern Apennines. In addition to the biostratigraphical dating of Within the frame of an ongoing study of the mineralogy, geochemistry, and structural setting of such ore deposits from the southern Alpi Apuane, a close spatial relationship between the pyrite ± baryte ± iron oxide ± (Pb-Zn-Ag) ore deposits ( The Northern Apennines are an orogenic belt formed during the Oligocene-Miocene collision between the Corsica-Sardinia microplate and the Adria plate. As a consequence of this collision, stacked slices of the former Adria plate continental margin (Tuscan and external foreland tectonic units) lie below the ocean-derived, ophiolite-bearing, Ligurian units. The Tuscan units locally preserve the Paleozoic basement overlain by Mesozoic and Cenozoic cover sequences ( In the Alpi Apuane area, a large tectonic window exposes the lowermost units of the inner side of the Northern Apennines, represented by the Apuane and Massa units ( The studied area ( The occurrence of metavolcanic rocks within the Paleozoic basement of Alpi Apuane has been known since the end of the 19th Century, even if the first comprehensive petrographical study was performed by The “ The age of these rocks has long been debated. Indeed, different authors proposed ages ranging from Permian (e.g., Locally, the “ The lenticular bodies of porphyritic tourmaline-rich rocks occurring within the Paleozoic phyllites in the southern Alpi Apuane have attracted the attention of several geologists during the second half of the 19th Century and the first decades of the 20th Century, mainly owing to their massive nature, contrasting with the surrounding strongly foliated schists. The first petrographic description was given by The samples studied in this work represent all the major known occurrences of the rocks belonging to the Fornovolasco Metarhyolite Fm in the Alpi Apuane ( The petrographic features of the rock samples were investigated by optical microscopy integrated by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) observations. A SEM Philips XL 30 operating at 20 kV accelerating voltage and 5 μm beam diameter coupled with an energy-dispersive X-ray fluorescence spectrometer EDAX PV 9900 at the Pisa University's Dipartimento di Scienze della Terra was used. Electron-microprobe analyses were performed to fully characterize their mineralogy. Chemical data have been collected using an automated JEOL 8200 Super Probe at the Milano University's Dipartimento di Scienze della Terra “Ardito Desio”. Operating conditions were 15 kV accelerating voltage, beam current of 5 nA, and 3 μm beam size, using wavelength dispersive spectrometry (WDS). A φ(ρZ) routine was used for matrix correction ( Chemical analyses of whole rocks were performed at ACTLABS (Ancaster, Ontario, Canada). Major and trace elements were determined by ICP-OES and ICP-MS, respectively, following lithium metaborate/tetraborate fusion and dissolution with diluted HNO Geochronological data were obtained by zircon U—Pb analyses on four samples (FVb13, FVc1, POL1, and SAS1). After crushing and sieving, zircon crystals were concentrated from the 90–250 μm grain size interval using standard separation techniques. About 100 zircon crystals for each sample were embedded in epoxy resin, ground to expose approximately mid-section of crystals, and finally polished with 0.25 μm alumina paste. Crystals for geochronological analyses were selected using SEM-cathodoluminescence (SEM-CL) taking into account the occurrence of inclusions, cores and/or rims and compositional zoning. Laser Ablation-Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) U—Pb analyses were performed at the Perugia University's Dipartimento di Fisica e Geologia using an iCAPQ Thermo Fisher Scientific, quadrupole-based, ICP-MS coupled to a G2 Teledyne Photon Machine ArF (193 nm) LA system. Uranium-Pb zircon analyses were calibrated with the international reference material zircon 91500 using a spot size of 25 μm and the Plešovice zircon had been used as quality control ( The rocks belonging to the Fornovolasco Metarhyolite Fm ( The largest outcrops of this formation occur in the Fornovolasco tectonic window, whereas small and scattered outcrops are present in the Stazzemese area and in the Sant'Anna tectonic window ( The bodies of these porphyritic rocks are usually flattened on the main field composite foliation. In the Fornovolasco area, this foliation records Alpine D1 and D2 events as well as pre-Alpine deformation (Variscan in age), as widely reported elsewhere in the Paleozoic basement of Alpi Apuane (e.g., The Fornovolasco metarhyolite is characterized by a porphyritic texture ( Quartz is usually represented by anhedral to subhedral grains, up to 5 mm in size, sometimes showing rounded embayment structures ( Feldspars occur both as albite (containing <0.01 K atoms per formula unit) and K-feldspar (Or Phyllosilicates are represented by biotite, chlorite, and white mica ( White mica usually occurs as subhedral crystals showing a decussate texture; it can also form fine-grained individuals, closely associated with quartz and minor feldspar. On the basis of its chemistry, it can be classified as muscovite ( Tourmaline is widespread in almost all the studied samples, even if its modal abundance is highly variable. Tourmaline occurs as euhedral to anhedral grains, scattered within the groundmass, or as rounded spots, formed by the intimate intergrowth of tourmaline, quartz, and minor albite. In some cases, radiated aggregates of prismatic to acicular tourmaline crystals have been observed ( This optical zoning is related to a chemical zoning, patchy or oscillatory, revealed through SEM observations. Electron microprobe analyses on tourmaline from the Fornovolasco Metarhyolite were performed on samples FVb7 (showing the best-preserved magmatic textures, with biotite relicts and tourmaline spots) and FVb9, with tourmaline crystals scattered in the groundmass or forming radial fibrous aggregates. Results are reported as Supplementary Material SM1, whereas selected chemical analyses of tourmaline crystals, representative of the observed chemical variations discussed below, are given in Octahedral The role of Ti in tourmaline is not completely constrained yet. According to The Accessory minerals are represented by apatite, epidote, monazite-(Ce) (in some cases included in apatite), rutile (usually after biotite), titanite, and zircon. Minor amounts of sulfides (pyrite, arsenopyrite, and traces of galena and tetrahedrite) have been observed in some samples. The studied rocks plot into the rhyolite field of the Total Alkali vs Silica classification diagram ( With respect to the felsic metavolcanic rocks (metarhyolite and metadacite; The LA-ICP-MS U—Pb analyses were performed on the four selected samples, representative of the main outcrops of the Fornovolasco Metarhyolite Fm in southern Alpi Apuane. Selected zircon crystals are generally euhedral and range in length between 100 and 300 μm. Most of them have an elongated prismatic habit, with a width-to-length ratio > 2 (~ 81%), even if equant crystals occur (~ 19%). Some crystals contain fluid inclusions or mineral grains. The SEM-CL images (       Previous authors debated the nature of the porphyritic tourmaline-rich rocks of the southern Alpi Apuane, assigning them different origins (e.g., The Alpine tectono-metamorphic overprint partially obliterated the original petrographic features of these rocks. In addition, the widespread tourmalinization and the local occurrence of pyrite veins ( Notwithstanding such alteration and deformation processes, the structural as well as the petrographic data support a subvolcanic setting for the Fornovolasco metarhyolite. For instance, the study of the field relationships between some metarhyolite bodies and the foliation of the surrounding schists ( As stated above, the U—Pb concordant ages extend over a time interval of about 50 Ma, from late Carboniferous to middle Permian. Such a spread is common to the four studied samples, although every one displays a different age distribution within this interval ( An alternative interpretation of the time spread shown by the data ( Further studies are needed to propose a clear picture of the Permian magmatism recorded in the Alpi Apuane metamorphic complex. As a matter of fact, the Fornovolasco metarhyolite represents the record of a magmatic event following the Variscan orogeny and gives new hints on the Permian evolution of the basement of the Adria plate. The occurrence of a late- to post-Variscan magmatism in the Northern Apennines was hypothesized by several authors through the identification of metavolcanoclastic Permian formations in some of the small and scattered outcrops of Paleozoic rocks occurring in Tuscany ( The age of the Variscan and post-Variscan metamorphism in the basement of the Northern Apennines was dated by several authors. The thermal events recorded in the Paleozoic basement could be related to the thinning of the lithosphere and the emplacement of magmatic bodies following the Variscan orogeny, e.g., gabbro-derived granulites from the External Liguride Units having Sm/Nd ages of ~ 290 Ma obtained on clinopyroxene, plagioclase, and whole rock ( As pointed above, the Fornovolasco metarhyolite is spatially associated with the main ore deposits from the southern Alpi Apuane ( The occurrence of tourmalinite in the Paleozoic basement of the southern Alpi Apuane has been known since a long time and was used by miners as an empirical prospecting tool (e.g., The discovery of a Permian magmatism in this area allows refining this minerogenetic model. Indeed, tourmalinization seems to be related to the occurrence of the metarhyolite bodies, in agreement with the usual association of tourmaline + quartz hydrothermal veins and metasomatic bodies with shallow crustal level tourmaline-bearing felsic rocks (e.g., A pre-Ladinian tourmalinization event was suggested by Petrographic observations and chemical data show the complex zoning of tourmaline from the metarhyolite bodies. Color zoning seems to be mainly related to the Ti content, in agreement with previous authors, with dark brown areas characterized by the higher contents of this element (e.g., The close similarity between the chemistry of tourmaline from metarhyolite bodies and tourmalinite is also marked by the occurrence of It is well-known that no specific compositional field can be established in the diagrams of Consequently, a more detailed study of the chemical and isotopic composition of tourmaline seems to be mandatory. The data reported in this work document that the Fornovolasco metarhyolite is the first occurrence of Permian felsic magmatic rocks within the basement of Northern Apennines, where only metavolcanoclastic rocks were known in Permo-Triassic metasediments. This finding fits with the previous knowledge in other sectors of the West-Mediterranean southern Europe, such as Eastern and Southern Alps, Ligurian Alps; Corsica, Sardinia, and Calabria (e.g., This research received support by Ministero dell'Istruzione, dell'Università e della Ricerca through the project SIR 2014 “THALMIGEN – Thallium: Mineralogy, Geochemistry, and Environmental Hazards” (Grant No. RBSI14A1CV), granted to CB. MP wish to acknowledge the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at