 Perth based, Australian Centre for Geomechanics (ACG) was pleased to present the International Seminar on Paste and Thickened Tailings (P&TT) in Melbourne, 14–16 May 2003. Over 150 local and international personnel attended the event that was held at the Sheraton Towers Southgate. Economic and environmental considerations and ‘visual’ preoccupations have seen industry prioritise mine residue disposal. The last few years have witnessed a growing interest in environmentally superior alternatives to conventional tailings storage and facilities. Paste and thickened tailings provides an opportunity to reduce the potential risk of an unplanned release by reducing the volume of water reporting to the tailings storages and indeed to eliminate conventional water retention in tailings storage facilities. Organised by the ACG, in collaboration with Particulate Fluids Processing Centre (PFPC) of The University of Melbourne, this highly topical and relevant event was an overwhelming success. The seminar was designed to equip attendees with a comprehensive understanding and knowledge of paste and thickened tailings and provide a forum to question the ‘experts’. Feedback indicated that the event succeeded in both the scope and depth of sessions, expositions presented, and in the dialogues, discussions and interest generated during the luncheons and dinner. The seminar was truly an international affair, with delegates from South Africa, Canada, USA, Chile, The Netherlands, Botswana, UK, and Germany. As Melbourne turned on its Autumn charm, the 155 industry practitioners, consultants, researchers and suppliers were offered an introduction from Lead Organiser, Richard Jewell, ACG Senior Consultant, followed by a global overview of environmental policy implementation presented by Professor Bob Watts, Chief Scientist & Vice President––Technology, BHP Billition. The first day then focussed on the environmental advantages that the evolution of paste and thickened tailings has generated. Gary Bentel (WMC Resources) and Don Glenister (Alcoa Alumina) presented detailed overviews of environmental technology in practice at their respective operations. Paste technology has the potential to generate enormous benefits and reduced risks in the key areas of mine safety, environmental and production costs. A sound understanding of the composition, transportation and deposition of mine tailings is crucial for each operation’s unique disposal and storage facility. Mark Coghill from Rio Tinto Technical Services opened day two of the seminar with a keynote address outlining the dominant concern in the industry regarding water saving and the challenges industry faces to implement thickener technology. Coghill says that many university and government organisations expect the mining industry to continue funding their research requirements without really understanding its needs, time frame or the deliverables. “This failure has delayed the implementation of technology and can lead to reductions in future research funding.” Day two continued with further examination of case studies from Pajingo Joint Venture, Albian Sands (Alberta) and BHP Cannington. The topical issues of the development of equipment and chemical additives and state-of-the-art back fill technology were explored. A total of some 14 highly relevant case studies highlighting various aspects of P&TT technology were presented during the seminar. The presentations on the final day included an evaluation of the real costs and benefits of paste technology. Briony Ruse (PFPC) encouraged the delegates to discuss the challenges industry faced when determining the costs of a disposal facility. Ruse says that tailings disposal methods such as dry tailings disposal methods, are not being widely adopted due to the perceived high cost of implementation. “Full Cost Accounting methods present industry with the means to financially manage tailings disposal. The use of these accounting techniques would preclude the need for environmental bonds and would increase the confidence of stakeholders that all costs associated with tailings were properly anticipated and accounted for.” The seminar concluded with Richard Jewell and David Boger (PFPC) overseeing dynamic debate and discussion from the attendees. Those attending then departed to the four corners of the world having gained a shared knowledge and further insight into the tailings interests of their industry and research peers. The seminar succeeded in increasing the awareness of paste technology by introducing many attendees to the strengths and limitations of this relatively new technology. The ACG was enabled to host this event with the generous support of its sponsors, namely, Alcan International Ltd., GL&V Australia and Australian Mining Consultants. The global demand for information about the management of tailings facilities and continued success of the International Paste and Thickened Tailings Seminar has resulted in planning of Paste 2004, to be held again in South Africa in April 2004. To order copies of the Paste 2003 seminar proceedings (including CD ROM) and for further details about Paste 2004, please contact Josephine Ruddle–– Josephine Ruddle  PDMIW’03 was held at the Falmouth Beach Resort Hotel, in Falmouth. This was another successful conference organized by Minerals Engineering International (MEI) in one of the most remote but beautiful areas of mainland Britain. It was the first conference dealing with environmental issues and attracted around 50 delegates from 16 countries. Over 70 papers were submitted and 41 of high quality were selected for presentation. MEI has a very close association with Elsevier Science in the production of The papers presented were organized in five technical sessions, namely tailings disposal, coal wastes, effluent treatment, acid mine drainage and processing of wastes. The tailings disposal session included the papers by P. Newman, M. Hodgson and E. Rosselot on “The disposal of tailings and minewater sludge using Geotextile dewatering techniques”, A. Cadden, P. Newman, R. Verburg and M. Fordham on “New developments in surface paste disposal of mine wastes”, M. Dillon and R. White on “Tailings storage at Lisheen Mine, Ireland”, A.W.L. Dudeney, I.I. Tarasova and P. Tyrologou on “Co-utilisation of mineral and biological wastes in mine site restoration”, and M. Benzaazoua, S. Ouellet, M. Fall, B. Bussière and T. Belem on “Contribution to understanding the mechanism of cemented paste backfill hardening”. The coal waste session included the papers by B. Radloff, M. Kirsten and R. Anderson on “Wallerawang Colliery coal tailings briquetting project”, P. Bankowski, L. Zou and R. Hodges on “Using inorganic polymer to reduce leach rates of metals from brown coal fly ash”, A. Molina and C. Poole on “A comparative study using two methods to produce zeolites from fly ash” and M. Zilberchmidt, M. Shpirt, K. Komnitsas and I. Paspaliaris on “Thermal processing of sulfur containing coal wastes”. The effluent treatment session included the papers by K. Komnitsas, G. Bartzas and I. Paspaliaris on “Efficiency of limestone and red mud barriers: laboratory column studies”, A. Esau, J.W. Coetzee and F.W. Petersen on “The removal of heavy metals from metallurgical waste using biosorption”, R.A. Kleiv, K.L. Sandvik and M. Thornhill on “Adsorptive removal of copper using mechanically activated olivine”, A.N. Ajah et al. on “Molybdenum removal and recovery from wastewater produced by a styrene monomer plant”, M. Iqbal and R.G.J. Edyvean on “Production of fungal biomass immobilized loofa sponge (FBILS)-disc biosorbent for the removal of heavy metal ions from aqueous solution” and C.J. Hallett, R.H. Coulton, J. Dolan and C. Marsden on “The Wheal Jane minewater treatment plant––performance to date”. The acid mine drainage session included the papers by S. Santos, R. Machado, M.J.N. Correia and J.R. Carvalho on “Treatment of acid mining waters”, M. Benzaazoua, P. Marion, I. Picquet and B. Bussiere on “The use of pastefill as a solidification and stabilization process for the control of acid mine drainage”, M. Thornhill, R.A. Kleiv, K.L. Sandvik, B. Jerkeng, and E.R. Iversen on “Development of a modelling tool for the prediction of pollution transport from subaqueous sulphide tailings deposits” and K. Komnitsas, D. Kolitsa and I. Paspaliaris on “Efficiency of reactive materials for decontamination of acid leachates”. Finally, the processing of wastes session included the papers by S. Brochot, M.V. Durance, J. Villeneuve and M. Mugabi on “Modelling of the bioleaching of sulphide ores: application for the simulation of the bioleaching/gravity section of the Kasese Cobalt Company Ltd reprocessing plant”, N. Fraunholcz on “Separation of waste plastics by froth flotation––a review”, H. El-Shall and P. Zhang on “Process for dewatering and utilization of mining wastes”, C.J. Mitchell, D.J. Harrison, H. Robinson and N. Ghazireh on “Minerals from waste-recent BGS and Tarmac experience in finding uses for mine and quarry waste”, S. Kelebek, S. Yoruk and B. Davis on “Characterization of basic oxygen furnace dust and zinc removal by acid leaching”, E. Sonmez, H. Ozdag, S. Koca and H. Ipek on “Beneficiation of colemanite concentrates from fine wastes”, and D. Read, B. Rabey, F.P. Glasser and A. Street on “Implementation of a strategy for managing radioactive scale in the china clay industry”. Before the presentation of the selected papers, short presentations of twelve poster papers was organized. It has to be underlined that the poster session was very interesting and initiated many lively discussions throughout the conference. The interaction and socializing of the delegates in a relaxed atmosphere was vital and contributed to the success of the conference. Discussions in the conference room, during coffee breaks and lunches and exchange of information on a number of scientific issues provided an initial informal peer-review of the papers and according to my personal view initiated future research efforts. As a common practice for all MEI conferences, no proceedings were issued. Instead, all participants received the draft papers in a CD-ROM. The authors who presented the papers have been asked to submit the full papers within a month after the conference. All papers will be then double refereed, revised if necessary and, if accepted, published early next year in a special issue of Last but not least the assistance provided by the conference secretariat throughout the conference is greatly acknowledged. Barry Wills’ guided coastal path walk and the Gala Dinner were some of the things that delegates will remember. Kostas Komnitsas