Biomass could be used as substrate for ethanol production. Normally, two main ways are required for the conversion of biomass to ethanol: (a) pretreatment and hydrolysis of cellulose in the biomass to generate reducing sugars; and (b) utilization of the reducing sugars for bioethanol production. The main challenges of the current technologies for ethanol production from biomass are the low yield and high cost of the pretreatment and hydrolysis of the cellulose. In this article, the overall processes for bioethanol production from biomass have been reviewed, especially the pretreatment and hydrolysis of cellulose.Biomass, which is defined as an organic matter derived from living or recently living organisms, is a promising energy source. Currently, as the world’s largest source of renewable energy, biomass makes up more than 10% of global energy supply. Biomass is all biologically produced matter based on carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen which can be converted to energy products via biological or thermochemical processes, generating a variety of end-products including biogas, bio-oil, or syngas. These products can be used as fuels, for electricity generation and transportation, as well as sources of heat. In addition to dedicated lignocellulosic biomass feedstocks such as wood and energy crops, alternative feedstocks, such as municipal solid waste (MSW), food waste, manure, and algae, represent resources for bioenergy production ( Energy consumption has gradually increased in the last decades with the population of the world grown. Crude oil is the major resource to meet the energy demands ( In this article, the characteristics and structure of lignocellulosic biomass as well as the overall processes of lignocellulosic biomass conversion to ethanol (especially the pretreatment and hydrolysis of cellulose) have been reviewed. Lignocellulosic biomass includes various agricultural residues, such as deciduous and coniferous woods, MSWs, waste from pulp and paper industry, and energy crops. The major components of these materials are cellulose (35%–50%), hemicellulose (20%–35%), and lignin (10%–25%). The remaining fraction of lignocellulosic biomass includes proteins, oils, and ash ( The structure of the lignocellulosic biomass is complex, with recalcitrant and heterogeneous characteristics, and native holocellulose is resistant to enzymatic hydrolysis. In the current model of lignocellulose structure, cellulose fibers are embedded in a lignin–polysaccharide matrix. At present, United States, Brazil, and China are the largest ethanol producers in the world. It is reported that the United States produced 39.5 Lignocellulosic biomass mainly consists of three components: cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin. The basic steps for bioethanol production from lignocellulosic biomass are shown in In order to remove lignin and hemicellulose, decrease cellulose crystallinity, and enhance the porosity of the lignocellulosic biomass, pretreatment should be carried out. The ideal pretreatment process should meet the following requirements: (a) improve the formation of sugars or the ability to subsequently form sugars by enzymatic hydrolysis; (b) minimal degradation of carbohydrate; (c) avoid the formation of byproducts that are inhibitory to microorganisms used in the subsequent fermentation step; (d) be cost-effective; and (e) minimal wastes. Numerous pretreatment strategies have been developed, such as physical pretreatment, chemical pretreatment, physicochemical pretreatment, and biological pretreatment ( Biomass could be comminuted by a combined process of chipping, grinding, and milling to decrease cellulose crystallinity. The physical size of biomass is usually 10–30 Pyrolysis is also considered to be an effective way for biomass pretreatment. Cellulose could rapidly decompose to generate gaseous products and residual char. However, the decomposition becomes much slower with lower temperature. The performance of the process could be increased with mild acid hydrolysis and the presence of oxygen. Utilization of sulfuric acid for hydrolysis of cellulose has been known for a long time. The sulfuric acid could disrupt the hydrogen bonding between cellulose chains and convert it to an amorphous state, which is extremely susceptible to hydrolysis. The produced hydrolysate is separated from the residue biomass by pressing. The key unit operation is the acid and sugar separation. The sugars are separated from the acid in a moving-bed chromatography column with a cross-linked polystyrene cation exchange resin. Then, the sugar solution is neutralized and the acid from the ion-exchange column is reconcentrated in a triple-effect evaporator and recycled. Lignin is burned to produce thermal energy for the operation of the plant. The use of alkaline is one of the early attempts for biomass pretreatment. In the alkaline pretreatment, a large amount of the hemicellulose and lignin are solubilized, while most of the cellulose remains intact. The cellulose stored in the residual solid could be further hydrolyzed by enzymes with high hydrolysis rate and theoretical yield. The high cost of alkaline is the inhibitory for industrial application. In the steam explosion pretreatment process, biomass is exposed to superheated steam in a reactor. The high pressure steam penetrates the biomass and initiates an autohydrolysis reaction. The organic acids, which are generated initially from the acetyl groups in the biomass, catalyze hydrolysis of most of the hemicellulose fraction to soluble sugars. Upon hydrolysis by cellulases, the biomass treated by the steam explosion process yields much higher fermentable sugars than the untreated material. Reaction time, temperature, particle size, and moisture content are considered to be the important variables in the stream explosion. Either high temperature and short reaction time (270°C, 1 In the wet oxidation pretreatment, biomass is treated with water and air with increasing temperature and pressure. Similar to the alkaline pretreatment, a great amount of hemicellulose and lignin are solubilized while the residual solid is rich in cellulose. The residual solid is further hydrolyzed by enzymes with high rate and yield. The main advantage of the wet oxidation pretreatment over the alkaline pretreatment is replacement of alkaline by air, which could effectively reduce the chemical cost. In the biological pretreatment, microorganisms (such as soft-, white-, and brown-rot fungi) are utilized for the degradation of lignin and hemicellulose in the biomass. White and soft rots attack cellulose and lignin, while brown rot attacks cellulose. White-rot fungi are regarded as the most effective basidiomycetes for biological pretreatment of biomass. Low energy requirement and mild environmental conditions are the advantages of biological pretreatment. However, the drawback of low hydrolysis rate should not be overlooked. After pretreatment, cellulose and hemicelluloses stored in the biomass could be hydrolyzed to monomeric sugars by acid or enzymatic methods. Enzymatic hydrolysis by (hemi)cellulases is the preferred option due to the higher conversion yields and less corrosive and toxic conditions compared to the acid hydrolysis. Cellulose contained in the biomass could be hydrolyzed to glucose by the complex enzyme which consists of Cx-cellulase and cellobiohydrolase. The Cx-cellulase breaks the bonds in the amorphous regions of the cellulose molecules, and the cellobiohydrolase removes cellobiose from the nonreducing ends. The combined action of the two enzymes leads to the degradation of cellulose. So, cellobiase, which could hydrolyze cellobiose to glucose, is needed to ensure high glucose yield. Enzymatic hydrolysis of hemicellulose, which requires the action of several hydrolytic enzymes, is much more complicated than cellulose. Normally, commercial cellulases contain hemicellulase activities. However, not all the hemicelluloses contained in the biomass could be effectively hydrolyzed by the commercial enzymes due to the complex nature of the biomass. The best strategy for hemicellulosic biomass hydrolysis is to use dilute sulfuric acid at relatively mild conditions to hydrolyze the hemicellulose fraction and use commercial cellulases to hydrolyze the cellulose in the residual solid. Many challenges still have to be faced for improving the competitiveness of cellulosic ethanol production process. Particularly, the cost of enzymes used in the process is considered as one of the key bottlenecks for producing fuels and chemicals from lignocellulosic biomass. Several efforts are underway to reduce the cost of enzyme production. Some of the strategies include improving the performance of the enzymes by increasing the specific activity and thereby minimizing enzyme dosage by direct evolution and site-directed mutagenesis, reducing the cost of enzyme production by improving cellulase titers during fermentation by process engineering using cheap substrates including biomass, producing enzymes near biorefinery, or expressing enzymes in plants. Fermentation of all free sugars into ethanol is then carried out by yeasts or bacteria. Biomass hydrolysis produces a mixture of sugars (including glucose, xylose, arabinose, and mannose). However, the yeast used for industrial ethanol production can only metabolize glucose to ethanol. So, it is important to develop microorganisms that are able to metabolize other sugars except glucose and convert them into ethanol with high yield. Many attempts have been examined, such as (a) select a suitable host which is either a good ethanol producer but has narrow sugar range or a poor ethanol producer but is able to use a wide range of sugar; (b) inactivate the biosynthetic pathway resulting in unwanted byproducts to increase the yield of ethanol; and (c) transform the host with plasmids harboring the genes required for broadening the range of sugar utilization or increasing ethanol yield. An approach is to develop organisms that are able to directly metabolize cellulose and hemicellulose, thus eliminating the need of enzymes for biomass hydrolysis. Different from ethanol production using sugar and starch as substrates (metabolized by the same pathway), ethanol production from biomass includes several sugars which are metabolized by different pathways. So, it is important to design a process which can maximize the conversion of the various sugars to ethanol. The enzymatic hydrolysis may take place in a separate step followed by fermentation called separate hydrolysis and fermentation process, or it may take place together with the fermentation in a simultaneous saccharification and fermentation of hexoses process or simultaneous saccharification and cofermentation of both hexoses and pentoses. The ultimate objective is a one-step consolidated bioprocessing of lignocellulose to bioethanol, in which all the steps occur in a single reactor where a single microorganism or microbial consortium converts pretreated biomass into ethanol without added enzymes. Identification of the most appropriate lignocellulosic wastes to be used as feedstock has to be performed on a local basis taking climatic and logistic conditions, such as the availability and the current disposal methods, into account. For instance, as reported by Currently, a great amount of low value or waste lignocellulosic biomass are burned or dumped. Utilization of lignocellulosic biomass could effectively reduce the cost of raw materials (such as corn) for ethanol production. Moreover, it is a key issue to reduce the pretreatment and hydrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass for ethanol production. Genetic techniques have been applied to clone the cellulase coding sequences into bacteria, yeasts, and fungi to create new cellulase producing system with improvement of enzymes production and activity ( Utilization of genetically engineered microorganisms that could convert xylose or pentose to ethanol could also significantly increase ethanol yield and reduce the production cost. 