The present study describes the changes in mechanical properties and saliva incorporation for cheese samples with different composition and texture, and their influence on the rate of aroma release. Chewing work per cycle, salivary flow rate and chewing rate varied highly among subjects. Despite the differences in cheese hardness, at the end of mastication, bolus texture was the same for cheeses with the same lipid content. Low-fat cheeses gave harder bolus than high fat ones, despite being chewed longer, with higher work per cycle and more moisture. Salivary flow rate did not vary among cheese samples but, at the end of mastication, the amount of saliva in boluses differed depending on the hardness and fat content of cheeses. Differences in aroma release pattern between subjects could be explained by the combined effect of both chewing process and salivary flow rates.Mastication is a physiological function necessary to prepare food for deglutition. It involves different oral processes such as salivation, comminution and mixing to form a well lubricated and cohesive bolus that can be swallowed safely ( Saliva is secreted in the mouth at rest to protect the oral mucosa and to maintain the mouth homeostasy ( Chewing activity is generally evaluated by electromyography; activity of jaw elevator muscles, superficial masseter and temporalis muscles, is representative of forces applied to food during mastication. Chewing activity, which varies greatly between subjects, can also vary with food characteristics such as size and texture ( Most food sensory properties are perceived during chewing and swallowing. In recent years, more attention has been paid to studying the mastication process and its relationship with the sensory perception mechanisms. This process is determinant for i) texture and mouthfeel perception, and ii) flavour release and perception by consumers ( The present study aims to i) evaluate the extent to which bolus properties and oral physiological parameters change during consumption of cheeses that present different texture and composition, and ii) relate these changes to in vivo aroma release during food oral processing. This relationship could explain differences of perception between consumers, which is of interest to cheese producers. The procedures to prepare the eight model cheeses and to analyze aroma release are the same as described in Five subjects (one male, four females, 25.6 ± 3.3 years old) presenting good dental status participated to this study. Subjects were asked to chew cheese cubes (7 g), without swallowing, in their usual manner and, on a signal from the experimenter, to spit out the cheese bolus into containers. Boluses at three different stages of mastication were collected: i) after 10 chewing strokes, ii) after 20 chewing strokes and iii) after complete mastication, when the subject felt the need to swallow. Boluses were collected at a fixed number of strokes to compare bolus formation process between subjects and to analyse the influence of oral physiological parameters on this process. Twenty strokes were chosen because previous experiments in which subjects ate the samples showed that each of these subjects completed at least 20 strokes for each sample, 10 strokes represented the mid-term of the chewing process for the faster eater. For each test, five replicates were obtained. Two of the collected boluses were used to study the amount of saliva incorporated into each bolus and the other three were used to evaluate bolus mechanical properties. During tests, chewing activity was monitored. Muscular activity was recorded by electromyography (EMG) for superficial masseter and temporalis muscles (left and right). Data were collected as previously described by Rheological properties of cheese boluses were analyzed by penetrometry. Boluses were placed in a glass (30 mm diameter). Measurements were carried out at 25°C using a TA-XT2 Texture Analyzer (Stable Micro Systems, Surrey, UK) fitted with a 10 mm diameter cylinder probe, which penetrated the samples at 1 mm s The water content in the initial cheese samples and in the collected boluses was determined measuring the mass loss after freeze-drying (FreeZone The chewing efficiency reflects the ability of a subject to break a brittle food sample into particles, it was controlled for each subject to determine its influence on bolus mechanical properties. Chewing efficiency was measured using a dental silicone rubber test (Optosil comfort Variability in the obtained parameters was studied by analysis of variance of two factors (subject and cheese) or three factors (subject, cheese and chewing period) with interaction. Power of test for each was also calculated. Significant differences ( Division in periods of the chewing sequence allowed comparison of chewing patterns ( Mechanical properties of each bolus after 10 and 20 cycles and at the end of the chewing process were determined ( The differences in chewing efficiency among subjects ( The water content of boluses was determined at three stages of the chewing process ( Salivary flow rates during cheese consumption greatly depended on both the subject ( Moreover, no significant differences in flow rates were observed among cheese samples ( Chewing activity, swallowing events and aroma release profiles during cheese consumption were simultaneously recorded. Analysis of variance showed that variability in the rate of aroma release was attributed to subjects ( In the present in vivo study, the combined effects of chewing and salivary flow rate could explain differences between subjects ( Chewing and salivary flow rates were the same for the different cheeses so they could not affect aroma release rate. Other factors like structural breakdown and the force applied during mastication could also influence aroma release. However, in this in vivo study, these two parameters are closely related and varied simultaneously with texture and fat content. The individual contribution of these factors to aroma release during the cheese eating process could not be established. However, this study highlighted a strong interaction between oral physiology parameters on aroma release during cheese consumption. Further experimental work is planned using a chewing simulator where the parameters can be decoupled. The results of the present study provide information about the range of variations in the main oral parameters when cheese samples are eaten and the course of cheese breakdown in human mouth. These results will also enable a better fit of the chewing simulator for in vitro study of cheese aroma release before analysing the interaction between oral parameters, cheese composition and sensory perception by consumers. Cheese bolus texture was affected not only by structural breakdown due to the mechanical chewing process but also by the amount of saliva incorporated, which was dependent on both the composition and the initial food structure properties. This amount of incorporated saliva mainly resulted in a longer chewing time, although interactions between oral physiology parameters and food characteristics on aroma release were highlighted. However, it was not possible to find clear direct relationships between saliva incorporated in the food bolus and aroma release parameters because of interdependencies of both oral parameters and food characteristics. This should be solved by decoupling these parameters in further in vitro studies. The authors thank INRA and the Regional Council of Burgundy for financial support.