Conventional practices of siting all biomass preprocessing operations at the biorefinery is widely believed to be the most cost-effective solution for feedstock supply because of economies of scale. However, biomass preprocessing operations could be decentralized by moving the preprocessing operations to distributed biomass preprocessing centers, also known as “depots” located near biomass sources. This study presents a comparative case study with multiple biomass resources to analyze biorefinery feedstock supply logistics designs having distributed depots and a primary depot co-located with the biorefinery. A mixed-integer linear programming model was developed to simultaneously optimize feedstock sourcing decisions, and optimal preprocessing depot locations and size, utilizing biomass resources from agricultural residue, energy and municipal solid waste to meet carbohydrate specifications and feedstock demand for a biochemical conversion process. Results from a case study in the US showed that a biorefinery could increase its feedstock supply draw area and supply volume by 57.3%, 177.4% respectively without increasing the feedstock delivered cost by adopting distributed depot-in the feedstock supply chain design. A distributed-depot-based supply chain can be more economical by selecting optimal mix of biomass resource, optimal siting and depot scales during feedstock supply chain design. The findings from this study indicate that a biorefinery can utilize dynamic blending to meet the feedstock quality specifications as well as larger supply radius in the distributed depot-based supply chain design to access more available biomass to handle potential feedstock supply uncertainty.Biomass utilization for biofuels is recognized as a potential major source of renewable energy in the US Utilizing a wider variety of different types of biomasses can create opportunities for reducing feedstock costs. For example, feedstock cost could be reduced through the utilization of blending of lower-cost, lower-quality readily available waste materials such as municipal solid waste with higher cost, intermediate quality crop residues (e.g. corn stover), or high cost, high quality energy crops (e.g. switchgrass). Utilizing a wider variety of different types of biomasses can also create opportunities to provide consistent quality feedstock to a biochemical conversion process according to the timeline of the several biomass productions. For example, biomass having low carbohydrate content can be mixed with biomass of higher carbohydrate content at a certain ratio to achieve consistent in-feed carbohydrate specifications at the conversion facility. Pellets are an effective format of biomass to mix different types of biomass. Pellets are easy to store and do not deteriorate as the surface area exposed to biological activity is minimized by densification. As different types of biomasses have different quality, the preprocessing cost of converting raw biomass to pellet varies by biomass type. A biorefinery can deploy biomass preprocessing centers, also known as “depots” Biorefinery feedstock sourcing decisions from variety of different types of biomasses can be challenging because decisions about feedstock blending faces various constraints involving variable logistics costs from heterogeneous supply chain logistics operations (i.e., harvesting, storage, preprocessing, and transportation) of each feedstock, quality of biomass, feedstock specification for conversion, feedstock demand, biomass resource location, resource availability, and contract price with growers. Supply-chain logistics operations can be different for different biomass sources. For example, supply-chain logistics operations for agricultural residue (e.g., corn stover) are different from MSW (e.g., grass clippings) due to the source of biomass and the operations’ infrastructures. Moreover, within same type of biomass, unit operations of supply-chain logistics can be different. For example, agriculture residue, such as corn stover, can be harvested via two different harvesting methods, three-pass (conventional) harvesting and two-pass harvesting (advanced) In the literature wide range of study exists that aim to design and optimize feedstock supply chain. Our study reviewed the relevant literature in the area of feedstock supply chain design with preprocessing depot and optimization of biorefinery’s feedstock sourcing decisions from different types of biomasses to meet feedstock specification. Earlier research on feedstock supply-chain network design with depot have emphasis on hub-and-spoke supply-chain network design, considering a single biomass In the literature there are limited studies that simultaneously optimize multiple feedstock sourcing decisions and their mix ratio to meet biorefinery feedstock quality specifications. A predictive model was developed to identify optimal ratio of energy cane, switchgrass and corn stover to produce sugars at high yield This research is unique compared to the existing research in the literature. This study demonstrates that larger supply radius in the distributed depot-based supply chain design provide access to larger volume of biomass to handle potential feedstock supply uncertainty. This study also identifies the innovative optimization method needed to make distributed-depot-based supply chain more economical by selecting optimal mix of biomass resource, optimal siting and depot scales during feedstock supply chain design. Hence, this research develops a novel optimization method to determine the optimal use of biomass resources from crop residue, energy crop and MSW to be used for biochemical conversion, simultaneously taking into consideration distributed-depot-based heterogeneous supply-chain logistics operations of each feedstock, quality of biomass, feedstock specification for conversion, feedstock demand, biomass resource location, resource availability, and the price contracted with growers. Finally, this study demonstrates that utilizing a distributed depot can be more economical than a centralized depot in the supply-chain network of biorefinery sourcing multiple feedstock to meet feedstock specifications. We consider a biorefinery feedstock supply system that utilizes multiple biomass sources to meet its feedstock demand and specification for a biochemical conversion process The supply location of corn stover and switchgrass are widely distributed across the landscape and the availability of each biomass varies depending on soil quality, landscape, weather etc. Availability of corn stover follows a supply curve as projected in the resource assessment study in the US The logistics operations of corn stover and switchgrass comprises of harvesting and collection, storage, preprocessing, transportation and handling, and blending. The logistics operation of grass clippings are different from corn stover and switchgrass. Logistics operations of grass clipping consists of collection, storage, pre-processing, transportation and blending. Logistics operations within feedstock supply system are described below. In this supply chain design, a biorefinery deploys multiple preprocessing depots near biomass resources ( At the depot, the biomass is preprocessed by grinding, drying, and pelletization In this study, preprocessing of switchgrass and corn stover, incorporates two-stage size reduction with hammer mill and rotary shear, fractional milling Feedstock supply chain with distributed depot incorporates both bale and pellet transportation. Baled biomass is shipped from field side storage to the depots, while pelleted blendstocks are shipped from depots to the biorefinery. Transportation cost is estimated based on biomass physical characteristics (e.g. moisture, density) and equipment used during transportation (Table S-5). Changes in feedstock composition (e.g. carbohydrate content, ash content) and format for each operation are captured in this study. Feedstock composition changes due to dry-matter loss in the system. Feedstock format (e.g., density, shape) changes in the system due to operations such as baling, grinding, and densification. Detailed description of changes in format and quality for different biomass during harvesting, storage, pre-processing operations are presented in Figs. S-1, S-2 in the Pellets are blended in the biorefinery just prior to introduction to the pretreatment reactor feeding system, and are blended to the desired ratio during conveyance to the feeder. The desired mix of three pass corn stover, two pass corn stover, switchgrass, and MSW fraction grass clippings are identified from optimization model described in Section 2.3. This supply chain design represents conventional practices of sitting all biomass preprocessing operations at the biorefinery. Two depots are available in this case. They are: the primary depot co-located with the biorefinery and small grass-clippings depot located in the Metropolitan area ( The harvesting, pre-processing operations, storage and change in feedstock composition in this design are the same as feedstock supply chain design with distributed depot. However, depot size is expected to be bigger in this design due to fact that there is single depot for corn stover and switchgrass. The pellets of the four blendstocks are blended prior to conversion. Pellets are blended in the biorefinery just prior to introduction to the pretreatment reactor feeding system, and are blended to the desired ratio during conveyance to the feeder. The desired mix of three pass corn stover, two pass corn stover, switchgrass, and MSW fraction grass clippings are identified from optimization model for supply-chain network design with a primary depot co-located with biorefinery described in Section 2.4. The model developed in this case uses a distributed-depot structure to design the inbound feedstock supply chain of a biorefinery. The goal of the MILP model in this case is to determine a least-cost feedstock mix from crop residue, energy crop and MSW to meet conversion specifications, while also identifying appropriate depot locations and size, given that depot can be co-located with the biorefinery or can be located in any counties in the biofinery’s supply shed. The MILP model does not identify depot locations for grass clippings because this biomass are concentrated at a single location distant from the biorefinery. However, MILP needs to decide whether grass clippings should be in a least-cost blend and to determine the proportion of grass clippings in the blend. The following notations, listed in The MILP model for distributed depot contains three decision variables The objective function minimizes the total delivered feedstock cost to the throat of the reactor. The total delivered feedstock cost is the summation of the farm gate cost, transportation cost from field to depot, amortized depot construction and capital costs, biomass preprocessing cost at the depot, transportation of pellets from the depot to the biorefinery, and handling and feeding costs to the biorefinery reactor throat. The total farm gate cost is shown in Eq. The cost from field-side to depot is shown in Eq. (2), where The cost from depot to biorefinery reactor throat is shown in Eq. Transportation cost from a depot to the biorefinery, The cost objective function that minimizes the total cost of the feedstock is then defined as follows (Eq. (5)): The model has number of constraints which are described below:     Constraint Finally, constraints In order to compare the scenario “centralized-depot case” (i.e., depot location is fixed and co-located with biorefinery) with the “distributed-depot case,” a separate MILP model is developed. Because the depot locations are known, the decision variable that identifies depot locations and depot size is excluded from the distributed depot MILP formulation defined by Eqs. (1)–(19). Therefore, the objective function developed in The new formulation for a centralized depot is as follows. Constraint Subject to: Eqs. A computational framework ( The final composition of material for the logistics design (details are presented in the  Grass clippings do not have harvest and collection, storage and initial transportation cost. It is assumed that grass clipping can be collected at the depot at the cost of $11.02/dry Mg. This is a conservation assumption comparing the fact that collection and disposal of grass clippings often carry a tipping fee (negative cost) to the landfill or disposal site. This tipping fee can have a cost of $55/dry Mg This study assumed that depots can have multiple sizes and can be located at any of the counties within biorefinery’s supply shed. Depots with different sizes have different construction and infrastructure cost. Construction and infrastructure costs for depots were estimated as follows. For a fixed depot size, the total installed capital investment cost per Mg was estimated for the preprocessing, storage, and handling operations in the depot. The installed capital cost included all preprocessing, handling, and storage equipment; the estimate included instrumentation and control, piping and electrical installation, yard improvement, engineering and supervision, contractor fees, construction, and contingency. To estimate the capital layout for construction and infrastructure for individual preprocessing equipment similar to the equipment in this design, an installation factor value of 1.49 was applied, estimated based on plant design handbook for chemical engineers  The model presented in Sections 2.3 and 2.4 is applied to the case study using input data presented in Section 2.6 to understand (a) A comparative case study is presented to analyze delivered cost, optimal mix of feedstock, supply chain network (e.g. number of depot, location and size) and transportation distance in distributed depot and centralized supply chain design of a biorefinery sourcing multiple biomass resources. The optimal mix of feedstock in the distributed depot consisted of 12.15% three-pass corn stover blendstock, 75.71% two-pass corn stover blendstock, 8.23% switchgrass blendstock, and 3.91% grass clippings blendstock and would result feedstock delivered cost $91.36/Mg ( The carbohydrate, ash contents and moisture content in the blend are 59.22% 8.28%, respectively. The blended feedstock has met minimum carbohydrate spec of 59%, however, it has not met the ash spec of 5% and moisture spec of 20%. Therefore, the net delivered blend cost includes an ash dockage of $1.37/dry Mg and moisture dockage of $0.03/dry Mg. The cost components of delivered cost of each feedstock shown in Table A-1 in the appendix. The depot locations, biomass source counties and biorefinery location are shown pictorially in In this case, the depot location for the primary components of the blend is forced to co-locate with the biorefinery. The MILP model described in Section 2.4 is utilized to identify the optimal mix of blendstock. The modeled least cost for each individual herbaceous feedstock supply systems and the blend composition are shown The depot locations, biomass source counties, and biorefinery location are shown pictorially in The size of the primary three depots utilized in the supply chain design distributed depot design are 362,800 dry Mg/yr, 326,520 dry Mg/yr, 72,560 dry Mg/yr respectively. The size of the primary depot co-located with biorefinery in the centralized supply chain dosing is 715,141 dry Mg/yr. If a biorefinery changes the supply chain design with distributed depots to a supply chain design with centralized pre-processing operations at a primary depot co-located within biorefinery, the least delivered feedstock cost increases from $91.36/dry Mg to $92.32/dry Mg, the ratios of three pass corn stover, two pass corn stover, switchgrass, and MSW fraction grass clippings in the feedstock blend changes from 12.15:75.71:8.23:3.91 to 39.65:49.82:9.09:1.44. The result demonstrates that simultaneous optimization of feedstock sourcing, depot locations and size during feedstock supply chain design can make a distributed-depot-based supply chain can be more economical. We further explore the increased availability of biomass from extended supply area in the distributed supply chain design. A query is performed to quantify the available supply of corn stover and switchgrass within the economic supply area under distributed depot and centralized supply chain design. Conventionally it is believed that distant resources will always be too costly to transport, and that if they are not available in quantities larger enough to comprise more than 5% of the blend, they will not be utilized. Grass clippings in this study is a distance resource and does not have enough supply to comprise more than 5% of the blend. Hence, we expand our analysis to understand delivered cost, optimal mix of feedstock, supply chain network (e.g. number of depot, location and size) and supply area in distributed depot and centralized supply chain design of a biorefinery if grass clippings are not available. The exclusion of grass clippings from the distributed-depot case utilizes identical assumptions used in the base case, except that grass clippings are excluded. The modeled least cost and the blend composition are presented in The depot locations, biomass source counties, and biorefinery location are shown pictorially in The exclusion of grass clippings from the centralized-depot case utilizes identical assumptions when the primary depot is co-located with the biorefinery, except that grass clippings are excluded. The modeled least cost for each individual herbaceous feedstock supply systems and the blend composition are shown The depot locations, biomass source counties, and biorefinery location are shown pictorially in Given grass clippings are not available, three depots will be utilized in the distributed depot based supply chain design and depot size are 253,960 dry Mg/yr, 253,960 dry Mg/yr 290,240 dry Mg/yr respectively. The size of the primary depot co-located with biorefinery in the centralized supply chain dosing is the same as size of the biorefinery. Given grass clippings are not available, if a biorefinery changes the supply chain design with distributed depots to a supply chain design with centralized pre-processing operations at a primary depot co-located within biorefinery, the least delivered feedstock cost increases from $91.57/dry Mg to $92.64/dry Mg, the ratios of three pass corn stover, two pass corn stover, and switchgrass, and MSW fraction grass clippings in the feedstock blend changes from 33.33:66.67:0.00 to 53.41:37.98:8.6. The result demonstrates that significance change in utilization of biomass resources. These comparative results also show that simultaneous optimization of feedstock sourcing, depot locations and size during feedstock supply chain design can make a distributed-depot-based supply chain can be more economical. By comparing weighted transportation distance, it is observed that distributed depot based supply chain design increases supply area by 52.8% and is able to collect biomass from farther distance economically compared to a supply chain design with primary depot co-located with biorefinery. The modeling scenario in this study illustrates that the inclusion of distributed depots in the feedstock supply chain increased supply area of a biorefinery as well as supply volume significantly. Moreover, our study indicated that distributed depots in the feedstock supply chain can be the more economical supply chain configuration. This result held true for all scenarios modeled. This finding indicates that there are conditions in which a distributed system can be as cost-effective as a conventional approach of centrally locating the preprocessing operations at the biorefinery, while increasing the overall area in which biomass can be sourced. Previously, it was widely believed that limiting the processing operations to the biorefinery, provided a benefit from economies of scale, which could not be offset by increased supply chain efficiency due to distributed processing and increasing access to material lower on the supply curve. However, the optimization of facility siting, depot sizing and feedstock blend components, illustrates that the cost advantages of the minimally sized supply areas of conventional systems can be offset with larger overall supply areas with depots that are able to access relatively lower cost material. The optimal mix of feedstocks are different under different supply chain configuration implying that dynamic blending can be adopted to meet the feedstock quality specifications. The exclusion of grass clippings from the distributed-depot case changes the delivered feedstock cost from $91.36 /dry Mg to $92.64/dry Mg. This indicates that it is possible to reduce feedstock cost by increasing the availability of grass clippings or similar MSW in the supply shed. The managerial insights gathered from this study can be utilized by a biorefinery to design an economic feedstock supply chain. Another real-life application from this study is the understanding the cost of feedstock supply chain unit operations and role of low cost, low quality feedstock in driving down feedstock cost via blending. Feedstock has a considerable impact on the biofuel selling price. Reductions in feedstock costs along with increased availability of biomass from larger supply area can have a significant role in driving down the costs of biofuels. This study investigated biorefinery feedstock supply logistics designs having distributed depots and a primary depot co-located with the biorefinery. A mixed-integer linear programming model was developed to simultaneously optimize feedstock sourcing decisions, and optimal preprocessing depot locations and size, utilizing crop residue, energy crop, and municipal solid waste. The optimization model determines optimal supply-chain network (e.g., the optimal depot locations, required number and size of depots) while identifying the least-cost feedstock blend of a biorefinery. Results from the case study in the Unites States shows that the change of feedstock supply chain design with distributed depots to a supply chain design with centralized pre-processing operations at a primary depot co-located within biorefinery increases supply draw area and available supply by 57.34%, 177.4% respectively without increasing feedstock delivered cost. This implies that a biorefinery can leverage larger supply area in the distributed depot-based supply chain design to access more available biomass to handle potential feedstock supply uncertainty. In the case of unavailability of certain biomass resource, a biorefinery can adopt dynamic blending of various biomass sources to meet the feedstock quality specifications. Under the specific conditions modeled in this paper, the most economical supply chain configuration that is able to supply sufficient feedstock while meeting minimum quality requirements, consisted of a distributed depot. The implication is that the conventional approach of co-locating the processing operations at the biorefinery, widely considered the most economical solution, may not be the best solution in all situations. In situations, where feedstocks are widely distributed across the landscape, optimally siting facilities, determining facility sizes and feedstock blend; the trade-off between the cost of increased supply radius through distributed depots and the savings from selecting biomass from higher-producing counties with lower grower payment (e.g., contract price with grower) can make a distributed-depot-based supply chain more economical. We thank the US Department of Energy for funding and supporting this work. This work is supported by the This information was prepared as an account of work sponsored by an agency of the US Government. Neither the US Government nor any agency thereof, nor any of their employees, makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights. References herein to any specific commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the US Government or any agency thereof. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the US Government or any agency thereof. See Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: