Two distinctly different types of fish hooks are reported in literature, of which, the most common shape shows a decrease in efficiency to a minimum followed by a monotonic increase with size. The other shape exhibits an increase in efficiency with size till a critical point is reached; the efficiency then decreases till a minimum is reached, followed by a monotonic increase with size.
                  Early theories to explain fish hook phenomenon through variable bypass are shown to be simple mathematical transformations. The ‘mechanistic model’ attributes occurrence of fish hook to a sharp fall in settling velocities in a centrifugal field with change in flow from Stokesian to transient regime. This explanation is shown to be dubious and not in conformity with known principles of physics. Also, the boundary layer model and the entrainment model require considerable refinement as mechanics of fluid flow around irregular particles is not well developed. It is shown that CFD simulations show efficiency curves with or without fish hook effect depending upon the assumptions for simulation.
                  The method of sizing analyses in detection of fish hook effect is critically discussed. Most of the occurrences of fish hook are reported when sizing analyses are carried out by laser diffractometry using Fraunhofer approximation for data interpretation. When alternate sizing techniques, such as Andreasen pipette, disc centrifuge, Coulter counter, Dynamic Light Scattering etc. are used or when Mie theory is applied in Laser techniques, fish hook is not reported.
                  Fish hook effect appears to be repeatable where it was studied. However, the conditions of reproducibility are to be specified by the proponents, if the phenomenon is to find general acceptance. It is likely that fish hook would continue to be regarded as a placebo. Its exclusion in simulation models does not appear to affect cyclone performance prediction.For classifiers, efficiency, defined as the recovery of particles of size, d, to underflow can be expected to monotonously increase with size. However, an inflexion in the efficiency curve showing a dip at sub-sieve sizes has been frequently reported, more so with the advent of laser diffractometry. For hydrocyclones, this dip was first brought to light by Although, there are many reports on fish hook phenomenon in the literature, it had not received total acceptance as yet. Its occurrence is reported to be random by In an earlier paper ( Since zero sized particles do not exist, the efficiency curve can be thought of as a continuous function defined for all sizes greater than zero only. At an infinitesimally small particle size, say, є,  Conspicuously, the actual efficiency does not start at R a gradual decrease from near zero sizes to a minimum followed by a monotonic increase with increase in size The equations which are used to describe efficiency curves with fish hook, ( The anomalous shape of the efficiency curve reported by starts at zero for near zero sized particles; remains constant for some limited size range (Stage 1); the efficiency then increases with size till it reaches what they call a critical point (Stage 2); a decrease in efficiency follows till it reaches a dip; this is followed by a monotonic increase with size. Stage 1 above may not be prominent at times ( The distinctive difference between the shapes of the efficiency curve as reported by Majumder and co-workers ( Significantly, the efficiency of near zero sized particles is zero according to  Reports on the dependence of fish hook on this important variable are summarised below:     All however agree that fish hook is not likely to be seen at high solids concentration, though the limiting solids concentration is different. This is understandable as each have investigated different cyclone – material systems. In this Section, the salient features of the early theories, the more recent ‘mechanistic explanation’ and the fluid mechanics based models to explain/justify fish hook phenomenon are discussed. Early theories to explain the fish hook ( In this context, we recall that to transform the range of actual efficiency between R This logic can be extended to show that by choosing a suitable normalising function, we can transform any actual efficiency curve with a fish hook into a curve whose efficiency varies from 0 to 1. That is, theories based on variable bypass to underflow can be thought of as mere mathematical transformations ( Noticeably, all who proposed a variable bypass to explain fish hook suggested Plitt-Reid function ( A more detailed discussion on this topic is available elsewhere ( The basis for the so called ‘mechanistic’ model for the fish hook by According to them, the terminal settling velocities under gravitational and centrifugal forces, V They have implicitly assumed that all the above equations are independent of particle size and the equation to be used for computation is to be chosen based on the particle Reynolds number under free settling. They claim that the settling velocity of any particle class in a centrifugal force field can be calculated using the three equations above. To demonstrate their contention, they calculated the settling velocities, V Obviously, such a procedure results in a sudden drop in the settling velocity by a factor of G They argue that as a consequence of a decrease in the settling velocity, there is a decrease in the efficiency, resulting in fish hook effect. They further maintain that this decrease in settling velocities of particles and hence appearance of fish hook in the efficiency curve occurs in all centrifugal classifiers. The most conspicuous feature of their mechanistic model is the explicit discontinuous functional relationship between the settling velocities in gravitational and centrifugal force fields. Furthermore, by showing sample calculations, they assert that calculations can be done even when the function is undefined. For the record, we point out here that such conceptualisation is in total disagreement with the basic dictum of classical mechanics that everything is continuous in nature. In the following discussion, we show that the conclusions of Majumder et al. are dubious and based on a flawed procedure adopted by them. The relation between the accelerating, buoyancy and drag forces acting on a spherical solid particle of diameter, d, and density, ρ When U When terminal settling velocity, V In the Stokesian regime, we can use a value of 24/Re for the drag coefficient, C Accordingly, the terminal settling velocity in the Stokesian regime, V When a The important point to be noted is that the above relation is valid only when the particle motion is in Stokesian regime in both gravitational and centrifugal force fields. Obviously, the limiting size of the particles in each of the force fields is different. Using Eq. Since d In the Newtonian regime, where Re A constant of 3.00 in (8) above is a consequence of using a value of C Using Eq. Evidently, the above equation is valid only when the particle motion in both the force fields is in the Newtonian regime. Interestingly, As before, we can express the particle size, d Clearly, Eq. Also, for calculating the terminal settling velocities in any flow regime, several explicit equations, for example, by In fact, Cheng had shown that the relative error in prediction of settling velocity for the eight different explicit equations analysed by him varied between 1.660 and 7.366%. The lowest error was for the equation proposed by him, followed by the one due to Clift et al. at 2.094%. These explicit equations for velocity offer the convenience of direct calculation without any iterative method and are typically expressed in terms of dimensionless velocity V* and dimensionless size, d* defined as: Since our objective is to determine the variation of velocity with size, that is, the trend rather than the absolute velocities, any of the available equations could be conveniently applied.  The terminal settling velocities of spherical quartz particles (density 2.65 From The velocity does not fall steeply as visualised by However, as expected, the rate of increase of velocity is lower in the Newtonian regime than in the Stokesian regime; Furthermore, for comparing the calculations of As can be seen, our calculations agree with the results of Majumder et al. only to the extent that the flow regime changes (Re We begin with the calculation of the limiting particle size, d We now show the calculations as per the procedure recommended by them. For 50 Similarly for 60 Further, it is imperative to note that Eqs. In general, we may note that whenever piecewise equations are used, it is necessary to ensure that adjacent equations for each sub interval match within limits of experimental error. An excellent example is the equation(s) developed for standard drag curve by Another example of fitting a piecewise function without loss of continuity is usage of two different values of the classification index, α To summarise, the method of Majumder et al. for calculation of settling velocity as 13.50 Similarly, the velocity of 2.50 In fact, for quartz spheres, the settling velocity increases with size in a centrifugal force field of G Accordingly, the claim of a fall in settling velocity in a centrifugal field as the flow regime changes should be treated just that, a mere claim, without any basis. Noticeably, Majumder et al. have chosen not to claim a sharp fall of particle Reynolds number with size, when the flow regime changes, nor have they commented on this expected feature of motion in a centrifugal field according to their model. Furthermore, they have asserted their arbitrary procedure for calculation of settling velocities and projected a dip in efficiency and hence a fish hook for ferrosilicon (density 6.90 Significantly, they did not verify independently their claim on the fall of settling velocity from first principles; neither have they used any of the explicit equations for terminal settling velocities available in the literature. Surprisingly, they recommend calculation of settling velocities in a centrifugal field in a roundabout way; using the standard drag curve of Clift et al. for calculation of V In view of the above we can categorically conclude that the sharp fall in settling velocity under centrifugal force field is simply flawed and unsubstantiated. Therefore, the so called ‘mechanistic explanation for fish hook’ by  He then proceeds to make a first approximation of the range of sizes of coarse particles which can drag the finer particles. His next step is to estimate the size of the fluid shell moving with a particle and a further assumption/approximation for the boundary layer volume. This is followed by an approximation for boundary layer thickness. Based on this boundary layer thickness, he estimated the dragging condition, that is, the size range of fine particles which can form swarms around the coarser particles. Taking into consideration, the highly turbulent flow within a hydrocyclone, he calculated the Kolmogorov length scale of micro turbulence and r It is important to mention here that the major limitation for his explanation is the assumption that the particles are spherical in shape, although in practice they are irregularly shaped. As rightly observed by To summarise, we can say that his logical reasoning and approximations explain the data of  More recently, Recently, the hydrodynamic mechanisms of water injection on the performance of hydrocyclone were investigated by Development of a model for prediction of the efficiency curve of a hydrocyclone is the theme of recent investigations by However, their model too involves a number of assumptions and approximations, similar to the one proposed by Schubert. For example, the assumption that the solid particles are spherical is crucial for their model. Irregularity of real particles is thus a source of unquantifiable systematic errors. Additionally, as rightly noted by Accordingly, at this juncture it is safe to conclude that realistic quantitative models based on fluid mechanics for the description of fish hook effect are a long way to go in view of the major challenge in quantification of the motion of irregular particles and the characteristics of fluid flow including the boundary layer around these particles. CFD simulations of air classifiers (for example, Their model for CFD simulations is based on a key assumption that solid particles bounce back after impact with the radial vane of the classifier in a perfectly elastic collision, to reach a zone from where they report to underflow. They showed the trajectories of 10–25 Further, we may note that their CFD simulation results are subject to an implicit assumption of spherical shape of particles in addition to their explicit assumption of a perfectly elastic collision of particles with wall. Additionally, the precision of their size analyses and hence the efficiency too is unknown/unspecified. It is also relevant that the fish hooks they observed are not prominent. In this context, we may note that the experimental results as well as CFD simulation results of gas - powder flow in a Lapple cyclone by In view of the above, we conclude that further investigations are necessary to confirm the conclusions of With regards to hydrocyclones, CFD simulations by We however opine that such steep fish hooks could be due to the optical parameters used in characterising the size analyses by Coulter LS 230, the instrument used by them. These are discussed in detail in Additionally, they report that higher the operating pressure, greater is the possibility of fish hook. However, based on 161 tests on 25.4 and 50.8 The most comprehensive CFD simulation study and also the first and the only investigation focused exclusively on the fish hook effect in hydrocyclone classifiers is due to Multiphase flows in hydrocyclone can be studied using many variations of CFD models such as the Euler-Euler model, Euler-Lagrange model and Multiphase mixture model ( Some of the strategies followed by Yu and colleagues are shown in  Model validation by Once the CFD models were validated, further simulations were carried out and the results obtained were considered to be dependable. The results of their studies can be summarised as follows: An excellent agreement can be found between the simulation results and the experimentally determined efficiency curve of Further, the effect of variations in feed solids concentration from 1–25% (by Volume) and effect of fluctuations in feed solids concentration too in a cyclone of the same configuration as Hseih were studied by them through CFD route. No fish hooks are reported. The effect of the dimensions of the cylindrical, conical parts and the size of the cyclone were the subject of simulation in another extensive study ( The diameter, length and thickness of the vortex finder were the variables investigated by The effect of cone length at different feed solids concentration on the efficiency curve was the focus in another study by this group ( Fish hook effect was the main theme in another study by this group. The effects of viscosity of the fluid and the cyclone size on the efficiency curve were investigated by Significantly, they have not validated even a single result with actual experiments on any of those cyclones and at any of the conditions under which fish hook effect is reported as per their simulation results ( Conspicuously, the validation of their CFD model is based on the experimental data of Hseih, which do not show fish hooks ( It is also relevant to mention that CFD simulations for ‘b’ and ‘c’ above are based on modelling the fluid flow as turbulent, described by the Reynolds stress model (RSM); the interface between the liquid and air core was modelled by the volume of fluid (VOF) model. The outcomes of these processes are then applied in the simulation of particle flow described by the stochastic Lagrangian model. Simulation results for ‘a’ above are however based on modelling the turbulent flow of liquid – gas–solid mixture by the Reynolds Stress Model. The interface between liquid and air core and particle flow is modelled by a mixture multiphase model (Method II) and also by Lagrangian particle tracking method (Method III). We can summarise the salient features of the extensive CFD studies by Yu and colleagues, with particular reference to fish hook, as follows: The experimental data used to validate CFD models in all their simulation studies are the data of  Their extensive CFD simulations covered the effects of cyclone size; the length of conical and cylindrical parts; the diameter, thickness and length of vortex finder; feed solids concentration and its fluctuation; different feed materials (limestone and coal) and fluid viscosity on the performance of hydrocyclones. They have neither observed nor reported fish hooks in any of their simulation results except in the study where the focus was exclusively on fish hook ( The above when viewed in conjunction with the possible methods of simulation ( There are quite a few reports where neither experimental nor CFD simulation results exhibit fish hook (for example, No fish hook is reported in CFD studies of In the context of evaluation of CFD simulation results, the observation by While a detailed discussion on the relative merits and advantages of the assumptions in formulating the models for CFD simulations is beyond the scope of this paper, suffice it to conclude that depending upon how the fluid flow; interface between fluid and air core; particle motion; particle–particle interactions, etc., are modelled; the outcome of simulation results could vary significantly. The above issues apart, we can summarise that We show in We opined earlier ( Accordingly, the major focus in this section is on the technique of size analysis. Additionally, the effect of particle shape on classifier efficiency, the issues of repeatability and reproducibility and the general shape of the efficiency curve are discussed. Most, if not all, fish hooks are observed in the sub-sieve range. Interestingly, the method of measuring particle size appears to be a very significant factor whenever a fish hook is reported. In view of the many advantages, Laser diffractometry has become the most common method for characterisation of particles in the sub sieve range. Interestingly, a close scrutiny of the recent reported occurrences of fish hook reveals that fish hook is reported in all cases when the sizing is done by Laser techniques (for example, Conspicuously, when sub sieve sizing is done by any other method, fish hook effect is not observed (    Furthermore, when sizing is done by more than two methods, fish hook is observed/detected only when the size is characterised by Laser techniques ( In fact, Of these, Disc centrifuge gives Stokesian diameter of the particles, while laser technique is an optical method. They noted that fish hook is not seen in the efficiency curves of the cyclone, PoC and the total system (Cyclone and PoC combined) when sizing analyses by Disc centrifuge are used for calculations. However fish hook effect is noticeable when size analyses data from Laser diffractometry are used ( From the technical literature and information brochures on laser diffractometry supplied by various manufacturers (for example, Malvern Inaccuracy can be expected for particles below 50 Even at particle sizes above 200 In general, the results are subject to errors, when the test sample contains particles less than 2 Also, from a survey of technical specifications of various manufacturers, we can gather that in general, Fraunhofer approximation or Mie theory give similar results for particle size measurements above 100 The above limitations of Fraunhofer approximation were rightly considered by To identify a proper method for characterising the size distributions, a HELOS Laser scattering equipment which uses Fraunhofer approximation only; and a Beckman Coulter 13320c which has an option for full implementation of Mie theory. The results from the above are compared with an optical evaluation of Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) pictures of the same sample by SCANDIUM, a software package, which converts the data into size distribution by weight. The significant observation made by him is that in the To investigate the effect of errors in measurement of size distributions on the efficiency curve, In view of the above, it appears logical to infer that those who used Laser diffractometry with Mie theory to interpret the size analysis are unlikely to observe fish hook. Recent classification studies of:      Of the above, Yang et al. and Karagoz et al. used Malvern 2000, while Hwang et al., Hiraiwa et al. and Yoshida et al. used Horiba LA 920 for size analyses. Both the models of Laser equipment use Mie theory for interpretation of the size analysis Similarly, it is equally logical to conjecture that the all the investigators who use Fraunhofer approximation to interpret the size analyses, are likely to observe/detect fish hook in the efficiency curves. Detection of fish hook Noting that before the advent of Pentium based PCs, all the instruments based on laser diffractometry were using Fraunhofer approximation for data interpretation, the possibility of reports of fish hooks due to this factor cannot be ruled out. This is particularly so when the sizing analyses were done with instruments not meeting ISO 13320:1999 standards. Possibly, most reported occurrences in Furthermore, in the context of characterisation of sub micron particles by Laser techniques, Fortunately, their study provides evidence that errors in measurements of particle sizes can be easily overcome if the technique is used appropriately, Their observation thus gives credence to our earlier conjecture ( Further, it seems logical to stipulate that to establish the existence of fish hook conclusively or to validate theories to explain it (for example, The shape of particles is a significant variable which influences their motion in a fluid medium. Yet, this variable is ignored in almost all modelling efforts due to difficulties to quantify it. The boundary layer model advocated by Understandably, the effect of particle shape on the motion of solids in a fluid medium cannot be accurately quantified ( Nevertheless, the influence of particle shape cannot be ignored particularly in establishing a phenomenon like fish hook. Accordingly, any theoretical/mechanistic model for explaining fish hook phenomenon needs to provide due allowance for this crucial unquantifiable variable, the effect of which also cannot be quantified with reasonable accuracy. Similarly, any ‘observational theory’ for fish hook phenomenon also needs to establish beyond any reasonable doubt that the effect is indeed significant. More so, in view of the recent experimental studies by We maintained ( The above clearly imply that the magnitude of the effect is not prominent and is in the range of experimental errors, whether or not the fish hook phenomenon is real. In the light of above, a discussion on the repeatability and reproducibility of fish hook phenomenon is appropriate. The conditions specified in NIST Technical Note ( As per NIST, repeatability conditions include: ‘ Obviously, it is realistic to presume that all the reported occurrences of fish hook are repeatable. The criterion for reproducibility as per NIST is ‘ The above when viewed in the context of the definition for a scientifically significant physical effect proposed by In this context, we may note that at times, repeatability and reproducibility are used indiscriminately, for example by So far, the conditions under which the fish hook is reproducible have not been categorically prescribed by the proponents. No independent investigations have been undertaken either to corroborate any published occurrences of fish hook phenomenon. Although, a modified Whiten function is included in JKSimMet to account for fish hook as and when required ( As such, we reiterate that we can continue to ignore it till it is shown conclusively that exclusion of fish hook shall in fact cause significant errors in predictions of mass flows of solids and size distributions of the products. On a fundamental note, a crucial issue which deserves attention appears to be the unusual shape of efficiency curve conceived and experimentally shown by Majumder and colleagues ( They reasserted their contention in their most recent study ( Additionally, the anomalous shape of the efficiency curve reported by them is in complete disagreement with all the published reports on fish hook (for example, In this context, the assertion of Bourgeois and Majumder that these efficiency curves are determined from a carefully generated experimental data followed by a rigorous statistical analysis, also deserves due attention. In fact, they completely ruled out the possibility of measurement errors as the cause of fish hook and confidently insisted that the fish hook phenomenon is a real physical effect. We may note here that there is little doubt regarding the repeatability of their measurements. However, as their results are in complete disagreement with all the data published so far, their sizing analysis technique may need a thorough scrutiny to reconfirm that they used laser diffractometry in the correct optical mode with appropriate optical parameters and their results do not belong to the ‘90% of the false published measurements’ ( All the above, when viewed in conjunction with our detailed analysis showing that their ‘mechanistic model’ is flawed and not based on sound principles of physics, brings us back to the fundamental issue raised by The answer to the above can only be had by establishing the shape of the efficiency curve conclusively. Such an investigation would also shed light on the perplexing issue of the efficiency curves of individual minerals and the ore. As pointed out earlier, it is logical to expect that the efficiency curves of individual minerals as well as that of the ore start at R A thorough re-examination of this issue using preferably two or more techniques for sizing analysis is likely to provide deeper insights on the nature of the efficiency curve in general and the fish hook phenomenon in particular.  Two different types of fish hooks are reported in literature, of which, the most common shape shows a decrease in efficiency to a minimum followed by a monotonic increase with size. The equations which are used to describe the efficiency curve with fish hook and included in commercial software packages, for example, JKSimMet, are all for this shape only. According to Majumder and colleagues, the efficiency starts at zero for near zero sized particles; remains constant for a limited size range (Stage 1); increases with size till a critical point is reached; the efficiency then decreases till a minimum is reached and finally increases monotonically with size. The so called ‘mechanistic’ model to explain fish hook is based on dubious presumptions that in a centrifugal force field the terminal settling velocity falls sharply as the flow regime changes from Stokesian to transient regime; the principles of physics applicable to the motion of particles in the Stokesian regime only could be applied indiscriminately in the transient regime; the relation between the settling velocities under gravity and in a centrifugal force field is a discontinuous function; and that calculations could be done even if the function is discontinuous. There are two variations in fluid mechanics based theories to explain fish hook. The model based on entrainment of fines in the boundary layer of coarser particles is advocated by Schubert. Elaborate theories that fine particles acquire velocities larger than the Stokes velocity when entrained by coarse particles are put forward by Neesse, Dueck and colleagues. The fluid mechanics based theories are however, subject to a major limitation that they assume a spherical shape for solid particles and consequential systematic errors. CFD simulations show efficiency curves with or without fish hook effect depending upon the assumptions for simulation. Most of the occurrences of fish hook are reported when the sizing analyses are carried out by laser diffractometry using Fraunhofer approximation for data interpretation. It is likely that fish hook is almost certain to be detected when the sizing analyses are carried out by Laser diffractometry using this optical mode. However, when the data are interpreted using Mie theory, fish hook is unlikely to be reported. When alternate methods of sizing analyses such as Andreasen pipette. Ladeq equipment, disc centrifuge, Coulter counter, Dynamic Light Scattering etc., are applied, fish hook is not reported. Further, when two or more methods are used for size analyses, fish hook is reported only when sizing is done with Laser diffractometry and that too when the data were interpreted using Fraunhofer approximation. Interpretation of size analyses by laser diffractometry with Fraunhofer approximation is subject to errors particularly when the sample to be analysed contains a significant amount of − An issue which needs to be resolved is the shape of the efficiency curve. This would shed light on the efficiency of near zero sized particles as well. It is logical to expect that the near zero sized particles follow water irrespective of the density of minerals despite reports to the contrary. We attribute anomalies reported in literature to the instrumental techniques used and data interpretation for sizing analyses, particularly so if they are based on laser diffractometry. It is reasonable to presume that every report of fish hook is repeatable at the place where it was studied thus ensuring the condition of repeatability. However, the conditions under which it is reproducible need to be categorically specified by the proponents, if the phenomenon is to find general acceptance It is likely that the fish hook effect would continue to be questioned and regarded as a placebo till it is established beyond any reasonable doubt that ignoring this effect would cause significant errors in predictions of mass flows and size distributions of products. Nagu (Nageswararao) Karri acknowledges the inspiration and insights received while reading the works of Sri Aurobindo, in particular, Ricardo Medronho acknowledges the Lab CFD students and Prof. Tania Klein for fruitful discussions. A number of equations have been proposed for the dimensionless settling velocity as a function of dimensionless particle size. Of these, the equation(s) due to As such, the following equation(s) could be treated as explicit equation (s) for terminal settling velocity. We are listing below the equations as recorded by Clift et al.   In the above equation, Ψ, Wadell’s sphericity, is defined as:   Stokesian regime:In the laminar region, the expression for settling velocity (Eq. Newtonian regime:Eq.  acceleration drag coefficient terminal settling velocity in a centrifugal field size of particle maximum size of particle for which Stokes law applies in gravitational field and in a relative centrifugal force of G, minimum size of particle for which Newton’s law applies in gravitational field and in a relative centrifugal force of G, dimensionless particle size acceleration due to gravity ratio of centrifugal acceleration to the acceleration due to gravity terminal settling velocity in a gravitational field Best number, C Post cyclone, a secondary centrifugal gas solid separator particle Reynolds number, V d/ recovery of water to underflow terminal settling velocities in gravitational and centrifugal fields. terminal settling velocity terminal settling velocity in Stokesian regime under gravity; in a relative centrifugal force of G and in an accelerating filed of a terminal settling velocity in Newtonian regime under gravity; in a relative centrifugal force of G and in an accelerating field of a dimensionless terminal settling velocity density of solid particles and the fluid phase kinematic viscosity of fluid Wadell’s sphericity