This work explores the determination of an optimum riser (pipe) diameter for a newly-developed bubble load measuring device. Stimulus response experiments using NaCl as a tracer were carried out to measure the intensity of axial mixing as a function of riser diameter and frother concentration (bubble size). Three riser diameters (20, 30 and 50mm) were tested and conductivity probes were used to sense salt concentration at three levels above the bottom of the tube (300, 770 and 1380mm). Results indicate that the intensity of axial mixing increases with increase in riser diameter. It was concluded that the intensity of axial mixing in the 50mm riser was strong enough to compromise the bubble load quality. A general increase in NaCl concentration with increase in frother concentration at each conductivity probe was seen for all the tested riser diameters. A model based on the tanks-in-series approach was developed. Simulink was used to fit the model to measured data. It was found that 16 tanks in series and an additional parameter that accounts for salt adsorbed on the bubble surfaces adequately fitted the data.Flotation is a separation process used in many mining operations to upgrade the desired mineral concentration before further downstream processing. The operation of the flotation process is complex and is poorly understood given the immense amount of research that has been done on it. One major issue that has been identified as critical to explaining the flotation mechanism is particle loading on bubbles or “true” flotation. It is the main mechanism by which floatable particles are transferred from the pulp phase to the froth phase ( The knowledge of particle loading on bubbles is very crucial in understanding the collection zone phase sub-processes ( Applicable to ideal conditions that can only exist in the lab ( Applicable to certain sections of the plant i.e. rougher cells ( Low mass of samples taken which may have high sampling errors ( Loss of attached particles in some methods or devices which leads to incorrect results ( No attention is paid to the kind of flow regime that exists in the riser and the effect of the column/riser diameter to bubble load quality ( Most of the limitations mentioned above are associated with riser/sampling pipe sizing. This work focuses on determination of the diameter of the riser section for a newly-developed bubble load measuring device. The riser is basically a pipe that is dipped into the flotation cell to collect loaded bubbles. A riser must ensure that the bubble sample is a true representative of the bubble population. It must also ensure that no particles detach from the bubbles as they rise in the riser and unattached particles (contained in inter-bubble liquid) do not rise and report to the collection chamber. In this work, selection of a riser is based solely on its effectiveness to wash off inter-bubble liquid that rise as a result of axial mixing i.e. the effectiveness of each riser to exclude unattached particles from reaching the collection chamber. Though sampling ports to check for particle drop off within the riser are provided along the length of each riser, the quantification of particle drop off as a selection criterion for a riser is not included in this work. Sample representativeness another important performance criterion for a riser depends on the ability of the bubble load meter to limit bubble classification at the riser entrance. The equipment developed so far to directly measure particle loading on bubbles found in literature are basically divided into two sections The device developed by Using the positive displacement principle,  The bubble load meter as shown in The bubble load meter works on a positive displacement principle where the volume of gas collected in the collection chamber displaces an equal volume of water. The displaced water is pumped to the riser column and it flows down to the flotation cell. In addition to this water, the system also takes a fraction of the water in the collection chamber and circulates it back to the collection chamber. This is important in that it provides the liquid media in which bubbles can flow from the sampling section to the collection section. The displaced liquid prevents unattached particles from rising up the column with the inter-bubble liquid. At the end of each run, the valve between the sampling section and the collection chamber is closed, time taken, gas volume and mass of particles collected is recorded. Water flow control is very important in the operation of the bubble load meter. Water recirculation rate was set to be twice the gas flowrate; this ensured that the water going back to the collection chamber was equal in flowrate to the water being displaced down the column. A Watson Marlow 514 peristaltic pump was used to meter and circulate water. A water rotameter was used to verify the flowrate. It is also important to note that the volume of liquid displaced down the column is equal to the volume of air collected in the collection chamber and thus superficial liquid velocity ( The diameter of the riser determines the sample mass collected per unit time, it also influences the intensity of axial mixing and the flow regime in the riser at a given water flowrate. The intensity of axial mixing determine the quantity of unattached particles in inter-bubble liquid that rise up the sampling pipe. Hence the quantification of axial mixing was chosen as the main factor in determining the riser diameter. To quantify the effect of axial mixing, conductivity stimulus–response experiments were done with NaCl as the tracer. Three dimensionally similar pairs of brass conductivity probes were inserted at 300, 770 and 1380 The schematic of the experimental set up for the conductivity experiments is shown in The calibration procedure involved preparing NaCl solutions of known concentration and measuring their output voltage signal at each conductivity probe position for all the three risers. Models that relate output voltage To quantify the effects of axial mixing on salt transport up the riser of the bubble load meter careful manipulation of the output response from the conductivity experiments was needed. The transport of the salt tracer into the bubble load meter riser is by axial mixing upwards and the bulk flow of the water downwards. To enable calculations, the peak concentration recorded by each probe was taken as the concentration at that particular probe. Estimates of the amount of salt at a particular position in the riser were calculated using a model that represents the variation of NaCl concentration with height in each riser. This was found to be adequately represented by: Integrating Eq. In addition to quantifying the amount of salt that reaches each probe up the column, these experiments were also designed to test the effect of bubble size on salt transport up the riser. To control bubble sizes, different amount of frother concentrations were added to both the flotation cell and the collection chamber. The following frother (MIBC) concentrations were investigated (0 Two aspects of the bubble load meter riser were addressed by the conductivity experiments and these are; the effect of riser diameter on salt transport and the effect of frother (bubble size) on salt transport up the risers. This section compares and summarizes the results obtained with the three risers. It has been acknowledged that riser diameter influences axial mixing. The more intense the axial mixing the greater the amount of salt transported up the column hence the higher the chance of it reporting to the collection chamber. The intensity of axial mixing in two phase systems is dependent on the relative velocities of the two phases. The higher the velocity of the dispersed phase (bubbles in this case) the more intense the mixing phenomenon ( Adding frother affect bubble sizes up to a concentration known as the Critical coalescence concentration (CCC), beyond which addition of more frother will not change the mean bubble size. From The purpose of the conductivity experiments was to choose the best riser for the bubble load meter. It was verified that increasing the riser diameter increases the amount of NaCl transport up the column. The 50 The effectiveness of the bubble load meter in eliminating inter-bubble liquid and thus preventing unattached particles from reaching the collection chamber is dependent on the mixing taking place in the riser. To predict the response of different risers without experiments, a model based on the tanks-in-series approach for axial mixing in a pipe was developed and parameter estimation done. The main objective of the model was to help in accurately interpreting the experimental data and as a tool to select proper riser diameter without experimentation. If the riser is divided into a number of equally sized cells or tanks as depicted in Then the superficial liquid velocity If the concentration of NaCl in each of the tanks is depicted by By substituting Eqs. The displacement of water from the collection chamber by air results in a net down flow of water into the flotation cell. This water will dilute the NaCl concentration in the flotation cell. A model to depict this change in the concentration in the flotation cell is important. This is easily shown to be If The volume in the flotation cell is also changing with time as a result of the downward flow of water displaced from the collection chamber by air. This dilution needs to be incorporated into Eq. We introduce the following to simplify the notation. The ultimate objective of this axial mixing model is to determine the number of cells in series that result in a response approximating the experimental results. Determination of the number of cells for this model was achieved by comparing the model to the standard Axial Dispersion Model (ADM) Eq. Expanding Eq. If Δ  By choosing an initial To validate the developed model, the simulated model output response was compared to the experimental data. Only results of conductivity probe 1 for all risers are shown. Conductivity probe 2 and 3 results are not shown since the important parameters are equal to those for conductivity probe 1. Preliminary model fit was done on the 30  To incorporate this additional parameter into the basic axial mixing model, the parameter was defined as the fraction of the bubble surface area that is covered by NaCl. This means that the parameter is a surface area fraction and is dependent on bubble size (MIBC concentration) and the number of bubble aggregates sampled per unit time (riser diameter). This also means that this parameter is related to the superficial gas velocity ( Addition of this parameter, changed the basic model equations for the riser cells and the flotation cell from Data fit and parameter estimation was done using Eqs.  The results of model and experimental data for probe 1 for the 30  The model developed fits the experimental data well. The transport of salt up the riser is a combination of axial mixing and NaCl adsorbed on the bubble. The model without the A model which adequately predicts salt changes in the risers of the bubble load meter was successfully developed, two important parameters one for the axial mixing and the other accounting for the NaCl adsorbed on bubble surfaces. All the parameters are strong functions of riser diameter; they tend to increase with riser diameter. The A method to determine the optimum bubble load meter riser was successfully developed. A bubble load meter based on the positive displacement principle was designed. It was designed with riser diameters 20, 30 and 50