Background
                  Reverse shoulder arthroplasty (RSA) is being increasingly used for complex, displaced fractures of the proximal humerus in older patients. Anatomic tuberosity healing in RSA has been recognized to restore better shoulder function. We compared the reported clinical and functional outcomes of RSA in proximal humeral fractures with and without tuberosity healing.
               
                  Methods
                  We performed a systematic review of literature based on Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines and searched MEDLINE, CINAHL, Embase, and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials. We included all studies with RSA for proximal humeral fractures in patients older than 60 years and compared outcomes based on tuberosity healing with minimum follow-up of 12 months.
               
                  Results
                  Seven studies met the inclusion criteria. A total of 381 patients (382 shoulders) were identified. There were 53 men (18.3%) and 236 women (81.7%), with mean age of 76.83 years (range, 74-81 years). Mean follow-up duration was 29.84 months (range, 24-90 months), and the mean rate of greater tuberosity healing was 70.5%. Patients with healed tuberosity had significantly better active forward flexion (134.1° vs. 112.5°, P < .05), abduction (114.8° vs. 95.1°, P < .05), external rotation with elbow by the side (27.8° vs. 7.6°), and mean Constant score (63.5 vs. 56.6, P < .05) than with those with nonhealed tuberosity.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The RSA group with healed greater tuberosity showed better range of motion, especially forward flexion and external rotation and Constant scores, compared with the nonhealed greater tuberosity group. Tuberosity healing may influence overall shoulder function after RSA for proximal humeral fractures in the elderly, and this needs verification with future prospective studies.Proximal humeral fractures are the third most commonly encountered fracture after hip and distal radius fractures in older adults, and the incidence increases with age, especially in patients who are still active. Several surgical options are available for management of complex proximal humeral fractures. Osteosynthesis with stabilization and fracture fixation has been recommended, The reverse shoulder prosthesis (RSA) has recently become a popular alternative to HA and has been increasingly used for management of complex proximal humeral fractures in elderly individuals. Recently, healing of tuberosity in RSA has been observed to show better outcomes in improved active forward flexion, Also, in recent times there have been certain modifications in implant design to allow for suture fixation to stem and metaphyseal “fins” to resist rotational stress and large surfaces for tuberosity healing with bone graft void and ingrowth surfaces. The purpose of this systematic review was to compare clinical and functional outcomes after RSA in elderly patients with complex proximal humeral fracture with healed greater tuberosity (HT) or nonhealed greater tuberosity (NHT). We hypothesized that RSA with a HT will provide better clinical outcomes in range of motion (ROM) and functional outcome score. We systematically reviewed the literature according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines with a PRISMA Checklist ( Population with a mean age of 60 years and older who sustained a proximal humeral fracture, Treatment with reverse shoulder replacement, A comparison group including treatment with HA or no comparison group, Articles with assessment of healing of tuberosity, A minimum of 12 months of follow-up, Reported outcomes measures or scores and complications, and Any study design. We assessed each article for reported clinical outcome measures, including ROM, specifically forward flexion, abduction, external and internal rotation, and functional outcomes assessed by the Constant-Murley score (CMS), The search was performed up to March 1, 2018. A detailed search was made for all journals, and all studies relevant to topic were analyzed. We screened the MEDLINE, Embase, CINAHL, Cochrane Central Register for Controlled Trials databases ( A manual search was made for recent publications or articles in journals not indexed by databases that might be missed, abstracts from scientific meetings, and trial registries. We also used Web of Science to facilitate the reference review. Two independent reviewers (N.P.J. and S.S.M.) separately conducted the search. A structured search strategy was used to access both published and unpublished work. We used Medical Subject Headings terms to get specific subject headings and included use of keywords to search the studies for review. The keywords that were used included elderly patients, proximal humerus fracture, fracture of proximal humerus, reverse shoulder arthroplasty, reverse prosthesis, reverse shoulder replacement, tuberosity repair, tuberosity healing, CMS, complications, and ASES score. We used the Boolean operator “or” and subsequently “and” to consolidate the search results. The selection process was first piloted, which involved applying inclusion criteria to a few sample papers to ascertain whether our predefined criteria were adequate for appropriate interpretation and selection of studies. Articles were initially screened for relevance by title and abstract. We excluded articles without an abstract and obtained the full-text article if the abstract did not allow the investigators to assess the defined inclusion and exclusion criteria. A cross-reference search of selected articles was performed to obtain other relevant articles. Two independent investigators (N.P.J. and S.S.M.) separately assessed each article that met the inclusion criteria. Discrepancies were resolved by discussion to reach a consensus, and if disagreement persisted, an additional independent third reviewer (R.D.) was conferred. All articles had to be published in peer reviewed journals. We excluded case reports, conference abstracts, posters, studies on animals, cadavers, or in vitro, tumor prosthesis, instructional course lectures, and letter to editors. We collected relevant data from the articles that met the inclusion criteria after assessment of full text. We extracted all data ( We assessed the methodological quality of studies included in review using the modified Newcastle Ottawa scale The primary outcomes studied were tuberosity healing and active ROM, particularly forward flexion and external rotation measured in degrees. Secondary outcome measures included functional assessments: CMS and ASES, DASH, VAS, Simple Shoulder Test (SST), and Subjective Shoulder Value (SSV) scores. Postoperative complications were assessed including infection, dislocation, revision surgery, and nerve injury. We also examined the reported incidence of scapular notching after RSA. Continuous variables are reported as mean and standard deviation or range, and categorical variables are reported as frequency or percentages. We used the weighted mean difference (WMD) to analyze continuous outcomes in ROM and functional outcomes, if they were reported in 2 or more studies, and standardized mean difference (SMD) for outcomes reported in all studies. We identified 1102 articles through the search engine. Removal of duplicates after screening for eligibility yielded 918 studies. After screening of titles and abstracts, we retrieved 94 articles for the full-text review. Further full-text review shortlisted 12 papers, and 5 of these were excluded after further detailed review for outcomes based on tuberosity healing. Finally, 7 articles We identified 381 patients and 382 shoulders (1 bilateral) from the reviewed studies that were treated with RSA as primary surgical management for proximal humeral fracture. Of these, 68 patients (17.84%) were lost to follow-up, including 22 from death, 19 declined participation or moved out of the area, 5 were care home residents, and 16 were excluded due to incomplete data and 6 for other reasons. Therefore, 313 patients (82.15%) with 314 shoulders (82.19%) were available for final follow-up. There were 53 men (18.3%) and 236 women (81.7%), with a male-to-female ratio of 0.2. Sex distribution of the remaining 24 patients (7.6%) was not reported ( The weighted mean age of patients was 76.83 years (range, 74-81 years). The dominant arm was involved in 40 patients (23.9%) but was not reported in 244 patients (77.7%). The laterality was reported in only 1 study, Although different classification systems are used for proximal humeral fractures, including Neer, The deltopectoral approach was the most commonly used approach reported in 4 of the 7 studies reviewed in 180 patients (57.3%), The superolateral approach was used in 41 patients (13.1%) reported in the study by Gallinet et al. The Aequalis reverse prosthesis (Tornier SAS, Montbonnot, France) A total of 259 RSAs (82.5%) were cemented. The remaining 31 RSAs (9.9%) were implanted without cement. Intraoperative cement use was not reported in 24 patients. None of the studies specified use of antibiotic-loaded cement during implantation. All studies included for review described the technique for reattachment of the tuberosity and assessment of healing on radiologic assessment. All studies reported a similar tuberosity reattachment technique, specifically involving 2 horizontal and 2 vertical suture configurations. The suture materials used differed among the studies, however. Two studies, by Cuff et al For the purposes of this review, the term “tuberosity healing” refers to healing of the greater tuberosity. Most studies under review have described HT as healing of the greater tuberosity in an anatomic position. The series by Gallinet et al Clinical and functional outcomes were evaluated based on healing of tuberosity after surgery and reported in 2 groups for comparison of HT and NHT groups. The outcomes were measured in terms of active ROM of the operated-on shoulder ( External rotation with elbow by the side was reported in 6 studies. Internal rotation reporting was variable in different studies, with 2 studies Functional scores were evaluated using the CMS, ASES, DASH, SSV, and SST scores ( Scapular notching was reported in 82 patients (26.1%). Inferior scapular notching was identified using the Sirveaux classification. Complications were reported in all of the studies reviewed. There were 7 cases of deep infection, Complex proximal humeral fractures in the elderly pose several challenges in view of poor bone quality and difficult postoperative care due to impaired physiological or mental status, In this systematic review, we observed that RSA was used in elderly patients with the mean age of 77.63 ± 2.14 years (range, 74-81 years). The patient population predominantly involved women, which comprised 81.7% of the total patients included in review. This reflects normal fracture epidemiology. Anatomic tuberosity healing has been considered an important factor that might result in better ROM and functional outcomes after RSA for proximal humeral fractures. Numerous studies report tuberosity healing rates after RSA for fracture, ranging from 47% to 100%. ROM as an outcome measure was reported variably in studies under review. The weighted mean forward flexion and external rotation showed significant improvement in patients with tuberosity healing ( Similar outcomes were reported by Anakwenze et al Functional outcomes, predominantly the CMS, reported in 5 studies showed a significantly better weighted mean score in patients with tuberosity healing. Gallinet et al Klein et al Scapular notching has been reported as a form of complication in the review. This affected 26.1% of total patients included in the review. In RSA, incidence of scapular notching varies widely from 19% to 96%. Some limitations of the study should be noted. Firstly, the study is limited by the quality of the primary studies reviewed. Secondly, only 1 randomized controlled trial was included. But in this study, randomization was done between HA and RSA and not HT and NHT groups as evaluated in present review study. Thirdly, most of the studies included in the review are presented by one specialist shoulder team, and the results and the outcomes of these studies may not be reproducible or more widely generalizable. Fourthly, different implant designs from various manufacturers were used in the studies under review. Most studies used standard configuration reverse prostheses; however, Garofalo et al Fifthly, outcomes such as abduction were reported in only 3 of 7 studies included in the review. Functional scores, such as ASES, were reported in only 2 studies, and DASH, VAS, SST, and SSV scores were reported only by 1 study each. Consequently, there were limitations in using these criteria for assessment of outcomes. Sixthly, we included only 7 studies reporting 381 patients. This may not be fully representative of the population with these fractures. Finally, the limitation to the English language may have missed some of the other potentially relevant literature. Inclusion of only published studies might have introduced publication bias. In the context of increasing use of RSA for complex proximal humeral fractures in older patients, RSA with HT seems to result in better functional outcomes compared with RSA with NHT. However, due to the absence of good-quality studies, uncertainty still exists whether tuberosity fixation will improve outcomes with RSA. Further studies are needed in the form of rigorous randomized controlled trials with specific evaluation of outcomes based on greater tuberosity healing with RSA for complex proximal humeral fractures. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following is the supplementary data to this article: