Based on the landmark paper by Cundall and Strack in 1979, the discrete element method (or modeling technique) is now approaching 30 years old. The recent 4th International Conference on DEM (DEM ‘07) conference held in Brisbane in August suggests that 30 years “young” might be a more appropriate description. This is in part because increasing computational power brings ever larger problems within range of modeling. Perhaps the most visually spectacular applications are those being developed for the entertainment industry – for games and movie special effects. As is usual with the entertainment industry, a proportion of “smoke and mirrors” is always present. That vista of many space vessels locked in complex and dynamic mortal combat is likely to be computed as a field of spheres each of which is then “tiled” with an appropriate image to generate the battle scene. That said, a great deal of robust science is also happening. Several researchers are tackling the challenge of description and interaction of more complex particle shapes. The main challenge is to minimize the computational cost of the resulting increase in complexity. The potential gains in predictive accuracy available from the inclusion of shape are significant with many flows not being quantitatively accurate when spherical particles are used. A similar challenge is clear for collision models. However, more realistic particle shapes element properties are almost certainly required to make progress in this difficult area. An interesting and more fundamental question is just what level of detail of particle shape and collision model is required for the DEM model to be sufficiently realistic to be useful. From the conference papers, the answer to this question is application specific and some underlying guidelines would be very helpful. Two well supported round table sessions discussed these issues and some parallel ones in geomechanics. Several conference papers also suggest that progress is being made in relating properties of assemblages of spheres to the measurable physical properties of the solids they are purported to be representing. The other challenging area is verification (or at least some reasonable comparison) of DEM with experimental results. The outstanding paper in this area used positron emission particle tracking (PEPT) to measure the spatial occupancy probability of a single particle in a scaled tumbling mill charge and compared the results with a spatial probability distribution generated by a DEM model. A quantitative comparison of spatial probability distributions (for position, velocity and even acceleration) is worth at least a thousand pictures which are deemed to “look right” by an expert in the domain being simulated. To be fair, if the expert is of the opinion that they do not “look right”, then they almost certainly will not be. Some detailed quantitative comparisons in comminution were also reported. These models seem to be improving rapidly in terms of descriptive and (hopefully) predictive power. The DEM ‘07 conference provided an opportunity to establish an international group which will provide support to future DEM conferences. This is a significant step towards DEM becoming a mature technology. The 5th international conference on DEM will be held in London in 2010. It will be chaired by Prof. Ante Munjiza. Overall, DEM ‘07 was an excellent conference with strong technical input and plenty of opportunity for interactions between individuals and across different fields of application. The DEM gallery showcased some quite stunning visual outputs. There was also good student participation with financial assistance to students wishing to attend provided by the Centre for Sustainable Resource Processing. Thanks are also due to the other sponsors who supported the conference.