Silk is extensively investigated in bone tissue engineering due to its extraordinary mechanical properties and ability to regulate biomineralization. Protein templates regulate biomineralization process through chemical interaction with ions. However, the effect of structural differences in silk fibroin on biomineralization has not been studied in detail. In this study, Antheraea pernyi silk fibroin (ASF) and Bombyx mori silk fibroin (BSF) fibers were used as templates to study the effect of silk species on biomineralization. The results showed that silk fibroin could induce the formation of calcium-deficient hydroxyapatite in simulated body fluid (SBF), and the SBF treatment resulted in the formation of silk I crystals. Compared with BSF, ASF exhibited a higher ability to induce mineralization, which may depend on the differences in hydrophilic amorphous fractions between ASF and BSF. The amorphous fractions of ASF contain more acidic amino acids, which can provide more nucleation sites in the initial stage of mineralization, resulting in faster mineralization process and more mineral deposits. This study decodes the key role of silk fibroin fractions on biomineralization, and provides deeper insights for the study of silk fibroin as biomineralization template and bone repair materials.In nature, the inorganic layers with well-controlled crystal structure and morphology are produced by the biomineralization on protein templates [ Silkworm silk fiber, a natural animal protein fiber extracted from silkworm cocoons, exhibits outstanding mechanical properties, controllable degradability, and excellent biocompatibility [ Silkworm silks are classified as mulberry and nonmulberry, which are produced by domesticated In this study, silk fibroin fibers were used as protein templates to regulate the nucleation and growth of HAp crystals  The modified 5 times SBF was prepared by dissolving NaCl, NaHCO At the predetermined time points, the dried samples were fixed on conductive tape, and then observed with a scanning electron microscopy (SEM; JEOL, Japan) after being sputtered with gold. The size of degummed silk fibers was measured by calculating the maximum width of 50 fibers. Thermogravimetry analysis of samples was performed using TG-DTA system (NETZSCH, Germany). Samples were heated to 800 °C with a step increase of 10 °C/min under an inert nitrogen atmosphere. The FTIR analysis of samples was performed using a Bruker FTIR spectrometer (VERTEX 70, Germany) with the KBr technique. All spectra were taken in the spectral range of 4000–400 cm XRD measurement was performed to investigate the crystal structure of the samples using an X-ray diffractometer (Empyream, PANalytical BV, Netherlands) with Cu Kα radiation working at 40 kV and 40 mA to record the X-ray diffractogram in the interval 2θ range from 5° to 50° with a scan rate 10° min XPS measurements were conducted on an ESCALAB Xi+ X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (ThermoFischer, USA) with an Al Kα X-ray source (hν = 1486.6 eV) as the excitation source and a vacuum pressure of 8 × 10 It is well documented that the silk fibroin content in the Previous studies have shown that the After mineralizing for 48 h, the crystal quantities of mineralized fibers were further evaluated using thermogravimetric analysis ( The chemical structure of the deposited minerals was characterized by FTIR and XRD ( XRD curves show that original ASF fibers have intense diffraction peaks at 16.8°, 20.4°, and 24.4°, corresponding to the silk II structure ( The effect of silk species on mineral deposition was also reflected in the results of FTIR and XRD. After mineralizing for 3 h, the ASF fibers/minerals complex has shown the absorption peak at 1040 cm The chemical functionalities and surface atomic composition of the mineralized samples were further analyzed by XPS, as illustrated in the In the biomineralization process, the organic templates regulate the growth and morphology of crystals. The anionic groups on the mineralization template, which can bond with calcium ions, are considered as nucleation sites for HAp mineralization [ Both BSF and ASF consist of hydrophobic β-sheet crystalline blocks staggered by hydrophilic amorphous acidic spacers. Although the hydrophobic crystalline fractions of ASF and BSF show significant differences, there were few acidic amino acids in the hydrophobic segments of the two silk fibroins. Previous report shows that only the hydrophilic electronegative amorphous fractions of BSF induced the formation of carbonated apatite when immersed in SBF, whereas hydrophobic crystalline fractions did not template mineralization [ Based on the amino acid sequences of ASF and BSF [ Silk fibroin has been widely used as biomaterials. Previous studied have showed that different silk fibroin species have significant differences in tissue repair [ In this study, the degummed BSF fibers and ASF fibers were used as templates to study the effect of silk species on biomineralization behavior. The results showed that silk fibroin could induce the formation of calcium-deficient hydroxyapatite in 5 × SBF. FTIR and XRD results indicate that SBF treatment could induce the formation of a small amount of silk I crystals in silk fibroin fibers. ASF showed a higher ability to induce mineralization compared with BSF, which was confirmed by SEM, FTIR, XRD and TGA. The differences in hydrophilic amorphous fractions may play key roles in the different mineralization behaviors between ASF and BSF. The amorphous fractions of ASF contain more acidic amino acids, which endows ASF more COO  The authors confirm that there are no conflicts of interest associated with this publication and that there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. This work was supported by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at