In practice, it is vital to know the propagation law of settlement in soil induced by tunneling. In this paper, a novel two-dimensional subsurface settlement propagation model is established based on the stochastic medium theory. The governing equation is solved with the assumed settlement profile at the tunnel crown using the Fourier transform method. Subsequently, the sensitivity of the subsurface settlement to the model parameters B and N is discussed. A database containing 12 case histories is used to establish the relationship between the elastic modulus of soil and the model parameters B and N by the linear fitting method. Results show that the model parameters B and N can reflect the vertical propagation ability and the compression (or swelling) performance of the overlying soil, respectively. Finally, the applicability of the proposed model is demonstrated with a case study of tunneling in clays. It is concluded that the model presented in this paper is highly effective and convenient for use in practice.During tunnel construction, the original equilibrium state in the surrounding rocks and soils will be inevitably disturbed, resulting in the occurrence of settlement in the overlying soil above the tunnel until a new state of balance is eventually reached ( Quantitative representation of surface settlement induced by tunneling using a Gaussian distribution function has been widely applied in practice of tunnel construction after the initial proposal by Most previous studies mainly focused on the estimation of surface settlement. However, how the settlement trough develops in the soil below the ground surface is still not fully understood in practice. Soil is a very complex medium, having the features of uncertainty, discontinuity and randomness. During the process of tunnel excavation, the surrounding soil moves towards the tunnel due to ground loss, causing the development of subsurface settlement. From a micromechanical point of view, the movement of soil particles is very complicated; however, the deformation of the soil mass can be described mathematically from a macromechanical point of view. In view of this, The settlement at the tunnel crown is assumed as Applying the Fourier transform with respect to the spatial variable where The general solution of Eq. By applying the inverse Fourier transform to Eq. Volume loss is the difference between the volume of the actual excavated soil and the volume of the tunnel after completion. Based on field measurements, the occurrence of volume loss can be observed primarily in three main stages as the tunnel advances in the soil: (1) ahead of the face, (2) over the shield, and (3) upon the erection of the lining ( During tunnel advancement, the earth pressure balance (EPB) shield will apply pressures to the excavation face, which can minimize the magnitude of In this paper, the pattern of volume loss around the cross-section of a tunnel is presented in In order to obtain the solution for the settlement propagation model, the settlement at the tunnel crown By substituting Eq. Based on Eq. Eq. Integrating Eq. As can be seen from Eq. As A through literature review is conducted, from which a total of 12 case histories have been selected in this study to evaluate the parameters For convenience, the surrounding soil is assumed as a homogeneous, transversely isotropic medium. Reversing the direction of the vertical coordinate and setting the ground surface as In practice, the distribution of surface settlement caused by tunnel construction is easier to be measured. Therefore, the settlement parameters at the tunnel crown in Eq. For cases 1 ~ 6, in order to obtain the parameters For cases 7 ~ 12, the measured data cannot provide the calculation for the parameters The feasibility of assuming Comparisons between observed and fitted surface settlement trough and subsurface settlement above the tunnel centerline for cases 1 ~ 6 with The model in this study is based on the random medium theory, which is different from the conventional elastic–plastic theory. In order to facilitate the application of the model, the relationship between the parameters From the results of back analysis for cases 1 ~ 6 as given in In cases 7 ~ 12, Eq. If the elastic modulus of soil is known, the model parameters A case study is presented here to illustrate how the derived analytical model can be used to assess the magnitude of ground settlement induced by tunneling. The tunnel is a sewer tunnel built for the Metropolitan Water Works Authority in Bangkok, having a driving depth of approximately The soil above the tunnel is assumed as homogeneous. Based on the volume loss, the maximum settlement at the tunnel crown and the corresponding trough width can be estimated from the gap parameter The parameters By using the parameters in Eqs. (26) and (27), the surface and subsurface settlements can be evaluated using Eq. This paper proposes a novel propagation model using the stochastic medium theory to predict the subsurface settlement in soils induced by tunnel excavation. The model has few input parameters, which is the most salient advantage of the proposed method for use in practice. The analytical solution of subsurface settlement at any position can be calculated, which provides theoretical basis for empirical analysis of surface settlement. In addition, the governing equation of this model can be regarded as a medium to solve different problems by assigning different boundary conditions. For example, However, in reality, the model parameters In general, despite some deficiencies in the model, it can be regarded as a novel method to predict the propagation of subsurface settlement during tunneling with different boundary conditions. A novel settlement propagation model is proposed in this investigation. The approach uses the Fourier transform to derive an analytical solution to evaluate the two-dimensional settlement propagation when a Gaussian distribution boundary condition is applied at the tunnel crown. The sensitivity of the subsurface settlement law to the parameters The parameter B reflects the vertical propagation ability of subsurface settlement. Both the maximum subsurface settlement and the corresponding trough width are dependent on the parameter The parameter For the case study, the predicted and observed settlements are in good agreement. The difference between calculations and measurements is mainly due to the heterogeneity of the soil. Generally, the proposed model is effective and convenient for use in practice.  All persons who meet authorship criteria are listed as authors, and all authors certify that they have participated sufficiently in the work to take public responsibility for the content, including participation in the concept, design, analysis, writing, or revision of the manuscript. Furthermore, each author certifies that this material or similar material has not been and will not be submitted to or published in any other publication before its appearance in the The authors declared that they have no conflicts of interest to this work. The financial supports from the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: