This study employs the discrete element method (DEM) to simulate particulate flow and investigate mixing performance of a lab-scale double screw mixer. The simulation employs polydispersed biomass and glass bead particles based on experiments conducted in previous studies. Visual examination of particle distribution and statistical analysis of particle residence times of experimental data served as model validation. Statistical analysis indicates a maximum 9.8% difference between the experimental and simulated biomass particle mean residence time, and visual observations suggest the simulation captures the particle mixing trends observed in the experiments. Results indicate that the particle mean mixing time, non-dimensionalized by ideal flow time in the plug flow reactor, varies between 1.008 and 1.172, and it approaches 1 with increasing biomass feed rate. The mixing index profile in the axial direction shows a mixing-demixing-mixing oscillation pattern. Increasing screw pitch length is detrimental to mixing performance; decreasing the solid particle feed rate reduces the mixing degree; and increasing the biomass to glass bead size ratio decreases mixing performance. A comparison of a binary, single-sized biomass and glass particles mixture to a multicomponent mixture indicates that the binary system has similar mixing pattern as a multicomponent system. These findings demonstrate that DEM is a valuable tool for the design and simulation of double screw mixing systems.Screw conveyors/mixers are often used in solid handling processes in industries such as pharmaceutical production, food processing, mineral processing, construction and renewable energy production Achieving a relatively homogeneous particle distribution by mechanical mixing is crucial in a screw mixer in order to guarantee end product quality or enhance other transport process such as heat transfer in screw dryers and pyrolyzers. Particle segregation, which is the opposite process of particle mixing, naturally arises due to any differences in the particle size, shape, density or other particle properties especially when mechanical agitation is provided to the bed. Current design of mechanical mixers often depends on empirical correlations or a priori knowledge. For example, in the design of a pyrolyzer Solid particle mixing processes have been analyzed based on several experimental approaches such as sampling As an alternative approach, the discrete element method (DEM) is often employed to perform numerical simulations of particle dynamics. This method was first introduced by Cundall and Strack DEM has been widely used to analyze bulk material transportation characteristics, flow patterns and mixing processes in screw conveyors/mixers as well as other mixer types. Tanida et al. Particle size distribution commonly exists in particulate systems and properly considering the particle size distribution is necessary to accurately replicate the granular flow dynamics in the numerical simulation. In this research, DEM was applied to investigate particulate flow and mixing in a lab-scale double screw mixer in which polydispersed biomass particles and glass beads are transported and mixed. The DEM method was first introduced and a mixing index evaluating the mixing state of the multicomponent mixture was developed in the next section. The DEM model was then validated by comparing DEM predictions with experimental studies The geometry of the modeled double screw mixer is shown in Major dimensions of the mixer are mixing length There are two inlets which separately feed biomass material (red oak) in inlet 1 and glass beads in inlet 2 into the mixer as shown in The three parameters, screw rotation speed, flight pitch and biomass feed rate, were varied in the numerical experiments. The discrete element method (DEM) is a numerical technique that resolves each individual particle motion in a particulate system that contains a collection of particles. Heat transfer and chemical reactions can also be resolved at the particle scale with advanced particle-scale models In order to detect collisions between particles and complicated mixer walls, the mixer surfaces are discretized into triangle meshes. For example, 6816 triangle meshes are employed to represent each shaft ( Material inertial and mechanical properties in the DEM models are listed in In this system, both particle size differences among biomass particles and density differences between biomass and glass beads exist, and particle segregation is the result of these combined effects. We identify particle segregation incurred by material density difference is more detrimental to the mixing goal. In order to quantify the mixing degree between biomass and glass beads, a pseudo binary mixture was considered in which one component is glass beads and the other is biomass. The mixing index As shown in The DEM model was validated by comparing simulated results to experimental data reported in Particle distribution observed in the experimental study was qualitatively predicted in the DEM simulation based on visual examination of the snapshots from both the experimental study and DEM simulation. The smaller and heavier glass particles are partially separated from the biomass particles and sink to the bottom of the mixer covering the bottom part of the trough. The lighter and larger biomass particles are barely observed near the trough wall from the right view in both the experimental and DEM snapshots, while the biomass particles are mostly observed from the top view in both the experimental and DEM snapshots. The differences from visual observations of the volumetric fill level in the experimental mixer and simulated mixer are negligible. The back flow of glass particles observed in both experiments and DEM simulations is shown in the box in the right view. It is also observed from both the experiments and DEM simulations that a discharging slope is formed near the outlet. The DEM model was further validated by comparing with the experimental results The mixing time is an indication of how long the two materials are mixed in the double screw mixer. This is an important factor when designing a double screw reactor such as a pyrolyzer. The mixing time determines whether biomass particles reside long enough in the equipment to allow desired processes to occur, such as particle heating and chemical reactions. The mean mixing time corresponds to the average particle duration in the mixing length The mean mixing time of the biomass particles is plotted in The effects of screw rotation speed, pitch length and biomass feed rate on the mixing process in the double screw mixer were investigated. The counter-rotating down-pumping pattern of the double screws generates a slope in the bed from the trough wall to the mixer center at the transverse section of the mixer. The slope can be observed in A cross section image of the mixer (slice thickness: 6    The mixing index discussed in Some common features are observed for all cases. At the beginning, there are only biomass particles in the first few planes and the variance of the composition is zero. According to the definition of the mixing index in this study, this corresponds to a mixing index of 1. However, this does not indicate a well mixed system of biomass particles and glass beads since only biomass particles exist at these planes. Due to the back flow of glass beads shown in The first row in The second row in It is worth noting that the simulation result of the effects of pitch length on the mixing degree is not consistent with that reported by Kingston and Heindel The third row in The quantitative analysis of the mixing index at each plane is in agreement with the analysis from the visual observations of DEM simulations. Generally, screw rotation speed does not affect the mixing process in the double screw mixer significantly, which is consistent with Kingston and Heindel Three mixture systems (cases 1-2, 4-1 and 4-2 in  The current research presented a DEM study of the particulate flow in a lab-scale double screw mixer in which polydispersed biomass particles and glass beads are transported and mixed. The biomass particle size distribution was considered in the DEM model. We found that a mixing-demixing-mixing oscillation pattern exists along the axial direction in the mixer for all the multicomponent mixture systems, which is not observed in a monosized mixture system. Compared to experimental research, DEM provides more insights of the granular flow in the mixer such as particle trajectory, particle velocity, as well as local mixing state, which are either economically expensive or impossible to be measured with current experimental techniques. The model was validated by comparing the DEM predictions with experimental studies through visual examination of particle distribution and statistical analysis of particle residence time. Statistical analysis indicates a maximum 9.8% difference between experimental and simulated biomass particle mean residence time, and visual observations suggest the simulation captures the particle mixing trends found in the experiments. Screw rotation speed, screw pitch length and solid particle feed rate were varied and the effects on the mixing performance of screw mixer were quantitatively evaluated in terms of mean particle mixing time and mixing index in the multicomponent mixture system. The particle mean mixing time non-dimensionalized by the flow time in the ideal plug flow reactor varies between 1.008 and 1.172, and it approaches 1.0 when the biomass feed rate is increased. Increasing screw rotation speed in a range of 20–60 Screw rotation speed has negligible impact on the mixing degree in the screw mixer when the volumetric fill level and screw pitch remained constant. Increasing the screw pitch length is detrimental to the mixing performance due to enhanced particle axial segregation. Decreasing the solid particle feed rate results in a decline in the mixing degree, and segregation in the transverse section is increased as a possible result of free space under the shaft. Mixing performance of the screw mixer for three different mixture systems were compared. Increasing the ratio of biomass size to the glass bead size results in inferior mixing. The mixing pattern of the binary mixture of glass and biomass beads with diameters of 1 and 2 The research reported in this paper is partially supported by the Funding: This work was supported by the