In the last decade, an increasing number of countries have implemented various initiatives to reduce the use of sodium salt in the food industry. A successful example is the United Kingdom, where salt reduction strategies followed a double approach via: (i) food reformulation, by working with all sectors of the food industry and (ii) increasing awareness through public campaigns. According to the Department of Health, in 2012 NaCl intake in the United Kingdom has decreased from 9.5 to 8.1g/day since 2005. In Ireland, between the years 2003 and 2011, NaCl was reduced by up to 18% in white bread, 20% in wholemeal bread, 25% in canned and dried soups, 19% in potato crisps, and to 45% in breakfast cereals (Inguglia et al., 2017). In early 2014 the FSA published revised salt targets for 2017, in most cases the NaCl levels did not change (see Table 7.1). The long-term goals for sodium reduction set out by the US FDA are shown in Table 7.2. As a result of the ongoing campaign by public health authorities, this chapter re-examines the functions of NaCl in meat and poultry products and the effects a reduction in NaCl has on these products and gives an update on the chapter written in 2004. As with the previous chapter, this will include the effects NaCl has on flavour, texture and processing characteristics, and the critical issues when reducing NaCl. The current levels of NaCl in meat and poultry products will also be examined and details of low or reduced NaCl products that are on the market will be discussed. An outline of the ingredients and processes available to manufacturers to produce low- and/or reduced NaCl products will be addressed and finally future trends in reducing NaCl in meat and poultry products will be examined.The association between sodium and the development of hypertension has prompted public health and regulatory authorities to recommend reducing dietary intake of salt (NaCl). Hypertension is a major risk factor in the development of cardiovascular disease. Observational epidemiological studies and meta-analyses based on trials of varying methodological rigour in different populations and patient groups have provided grounds for controversy on the link between NaCl and blood pressure ( These reports state that meat and fish are some of the main sources of sodium for adults in Ireland contributing 29.8% of the mean daily sodium intake. Of this, cured and processed meats contribute 20.5% to the sodium intake. Similarly, in the United Kingdom, meat and meat products contribute 20.8% to the sodium intake. The Food Standards Agency (FSA) and the Institute of Medicine (IOM), National Academy of Science in the USA recommend an upper level of 2.4 In the last decade, an increasing number of countries have implemented various initiatives to reduce the use of sodium salt in the food industry. A successful example is the United Kingdom, where salt reduction strategies followed a double approach via: (i) food reformulation, by working with all sectors of the food industry and (ii) increasing awareness through public campaigns. According to the Department of Health, in 2012 NaCl intake in the United Kingdom has decreased from 9.5 to 8.1 As a result of the ongoing campaign by public health authorities, this chapter re-examines the functions of NaCl in meat and poultry products and the effects a reduction in NaCl has on these products and gives an update on the chapter written in 2004. As with the previous chapter, this will include the effects NaCl has on flavour, texture, and processing characteristics and the critical issues when reducing NaCl. The current levels of NaCl in meat and poultry products will also be examined and details of low- or reduced NaCl products that are on the market will be discussed. An outline of the ingredients and processes available to manufacturers to produce low- and/or reduced NaCl products will be addressed and finally future trends in reducing NaCl in meat and poultry products will be examined. Salt is one of the most commonly used ingredients in processed meat products and has been used since ancient times for the preservation of meat products due its capacity to reduce water activity and therefore retard microbiological growth. In the modern meat industry, salt is used as a flavouring or flavour enhancer and is also responsible for the desired textural properties of processed meats. Salt in the form of NaCl imparts a number of functional properties in meat products: it activates proteins to increase hydration and water-binding capacity; it decreases fluid loss in vacuum-packaged product that has been thermally processed; it increases the binding properties of proteins to improve texture; it increases the viscosity of meat batters, facilitating the incorporation of fat to form stable batters; it is essential for flavour and is a bacteriostatic at relatively high levels ( Sodium chloride has a flavour-enhancing effect in meat products, with the perceived saltiness mainly due to the Na  In a study on cooked hams, those with 1.7% NaCl were rated as salty as hams with 2.0% and 2.3% NaCl, but saltier than those with 1.1% and 1.4% ( As can be seen, NaCl has an impact on the flavour of meat products; however, one of its main functions in processed meats is the solubilisation of the functional myofibrillar proteins in meat. This activates the proteins to increase hydration and water-binding capacity, ultimately increasing the binding properties of proteins to improve texture. In a comprehensive review on reducing sodium intake from meat products, The effect of NaCl on meat proteins is most likely caused by the fact that the Cl  The extraction of myosin from myofibrils when they swell is of great relevance to meat processors. In processed meats, the salt-solubilised myofibrillar proteins form a sticky exudate on the surface of the meat pieces, which binds the meat pieces together after cooking. This layer forms a matrix of heat-coagulated protein, which entraps free water and binds the meat pieces together. In finely chopped or emulsified products such as frankfurters, bologna, etc. the solubilised protein in the continuous phase forms a protein film around fat globules, thereby retaining the fat during cooking (  Both In whole muscle product, such as cooked hams, NaCl and phosphate contribute to the disruption of muscle fibres caused by massaging, solubilisation of the myofibrillar proteins, and the production of an exudate rich in solubilised proteins. This protein-rich exudate binds meat chunks together. The beneficial effect of sodium chloride on the binding of poultry meat pieces has been demonstrated as far back as the 1970s. The preservation and shelf life of processed meats is of vital importance when reducing the NaCl levels. Historically, the empirical use of NaCl led not only to the development of new, at that time, food products but also to new forms of preservation and convenience. The convenience and increased stability of the meat products is heavily attributed to the increased NaCl levels during manufacturing. This method can be traced back to ancient Egyptians, but the interactions of Romans with Gallic and Celtic tribes who used similar ways of preservation led to the establishment of what is currently known as traditionally salted meat product ( The main attribute of NaCl on the growth and inhibition of bacteria is believed to be due to lowering the water activity ( Sodium chloride affects the various processed meats in a different way; thus, its significance on controlling the product stability varies. While in a cooked ham or an emulsified product NaCl will increase the water-holding capacity and solubilise the meat proteins, in dry-cured and fermented meats it is still very important from a microbiological perspective. Salting is a crucial factor in the starter culture activity and the subsequent evolution of the microbial association of the fermented meat ( The inhibitory role of NaCl can be replaced by classic preservatives used in the meat industry such as the salts of organic acids. Microbiologically stable meat products can be produced by reducing total NaCl levels by 40% and adding mixtures of lactate and acetate salts ( Traditionally, sodium reduction strategies in processed meats mainly involve the substitution of NaCl with other chloride salt mixtures, mainly KCl, MgCl Concluding, the importance of NaCl for the preservation and shelf-life stability of meat products has diminished since the introduction of refrigeration, innovation in packaging and heating treatments as well as the pressure from global sodium reduction trends. Salt was traditionally used in similar fashion to other solutes and humectants, such as organic acids and sucrose, for the production of stable food products, from dried and fermented foods to pickles and marmalades. In these products, The Food Standards Agency in the United Kingdom has been leading the way in trying to get both consumers and the food industry to reduce their sodium intake and usage in foods. However, the need for NaCl reduction is now commonplace in the United States and is also a key trend for both Western and Eastern Europe. As recently as June 2016, the FDA in the United States published its voluntary sodium reduction goals ( The sodium content of processed meats in Ireland and the United Kingdom is quite variable with cured meats having higher sodium/NaCl contents. Burgers or patties contain 290–590 According to the Currently, there are only a limited number of products available to the consumer at retail level ( There are a number of approaches the meat industry is using to reduce the sodium in meat products, these include (i) lowering the sodium content by stealth, (ii) complete or partial replacement of NaCl by other ingredients (iii) use of flavour enhancers and (iv) combinations of the above strategies with improved processing techniques, e.g. improved NaCl diffusion. Potassium chloride is probably the most common NaCl substitute used in low- or reduced salt/sodium foods. However, in foods treated with blends where the potassium chloride is more than 50%, a significant increase in bitterness and loss of saltiness is observed. In Ireland, the FSAI scientific committee ( Notwithstanding the FSAl’s concerns, much research has focused on reducing the sodium intake with the partial replacement of NaCl with KCl. According to  It has previously been stated that it is the chloride ion that has been primarily responsible for the functional efficiency of NaCl in meat products ( In fermented sausages, Research has also demonstrated that phosphates can be very useful in lowering the NaCl content in meat products ( In terms of sodium reduction, some phosphates are sodium salts; however, the concentration used is substantially lower than NaCl. Sodium polyphosphate contains 31.24% Na compared to 39.34% in NaCl and is typically used at 0.5% compared to 2%–4% usage rate for NaCl. The potassium salts of phosphate are also commercially available and are equally effective in terms of water binding, gelation, or ionic strength as the sodium salts (  In addition to phosphate, other ingredients and processes have been investigated in low-NaCl meat products. These are mainly binding agents that, in the absence or at reduced NaCl levels, replace salt soluble proteins. These ingredients enhance the binding of meat pieces in restructured or reformed meat products and/or increase the water binding capacity of the finished product. There is a wide variety of ingredients that can be used for this purpose and include non-meat proteins such as soya, milk, and deheated mustard; blood proteins; hydrocolloids such as carrageenan, gums, and alginates; starches such as potato, corn, wheat, waxy maize, tapioca, or rice. The gel matrix formed with these alternative ingredients provides binding through a combination of protein coagulation and gel formation rather than direct interaction with muscle proteins ( There are a number of flavour-enhancing and masking agents commercially available to enhance the salty flavour or reduce bitterness or other off flavours caused by NaCl reduction. These include yeast extracts, lactates, monosodium glutamate, and nucleotides amongst others. The umami-containing attributes from certain peptides are traditionally found in fermented and dried foods around the world. For that purpose, a natural flavour enhancer derived from a fermented soy sauce was successfully combined with KCl to replace NaCl in frankfurters ( Encapsulated ammonium salts such as chlorides, phosphates, citrates, and lactate amongst others when added to foods can reduce the amount of NaCl required and will enhance or potentiate the salty taste of the food ( To this end, the reduction of NaCl in processed meat products is a key driver in R&D in Food Ingredient companies. Companies need a deep foundation of fundamental research, coupled with meat science and process technology expertise to help meat processors achieve their NaCl targets. Taste & Nutrition capabilities are key to meet the ‘New Consumers’ requirements. Companies with in-depth knowledge of fermentation and taste technology, of which there are many, can offer a wide range of ingredients to help with NaCl reduction in meat products such as yeast extracts, natural flavours, and functional systems to maintain the functionality that NaCl brings to a processed meat product. In terms of yeast extracts, there are multiple products that can improve the flavour profile of a reduced NaCl product by manipulating the upfront flavour, giving a basic savoury taste and/or giving a lingering or enhancement of the flavour profile. As discussed previously, when NaCl is reduced it is not only the saltiness that is reduced but the complex flavour profile of a seasoning becomes unbalanced. On the tongue sodium is detected through ion channels, when replacing NaCl, most of the solutions could not use these channels for this reason they do not generate the same physiological answer. Therefore to bring back a pleasant eating experience, there is a need to stimulate cross modal interaction by using other receptors such as the G protein receptors. Sweet & umami tastes are detected with a signal through a G-protein-coupled receptor, salty and sour tastes are detected through ion channels. Amongst these alternatives, the umami receptor is the most commonly used as it does not imply a negative taste like bitterness or sourness. Products are available that can build that flavour back into the product such as the recently launched TasteSense™ technology. TasteSense™ Salt offering is based on leveraging a range of technologies including fermentation, extraction, flavour, and cooking expertise. The toolbox is composed of products that deliver on salt and umami intensity. This creates a suite of taste solutions improving the overall taste perception. This product offers a tool kit of ingredients that can be used to influence enhancement over time. These products allow meat products to have an upfront impact with a very strong short immediate impact of NaCl; middle impact roundness giving a harmonised rounded balanced taste and finally a late lingering impact giving a very clean nice lingering salty taste. TasteSense™ in combination with functional systems provides a complete solution to improve the flavour, texture, and shelf-life of a reduced NaCl meat product. The perception of NaCl in the solid form is affected by crystal size and shape. Research has been carried out using various structural forms (flaked vs granular) as a method of reducing NaCl content in meat products. Flake-type NaCl has been shown to be more functional, in terms of binding, increasing pH, increasing protein solubilisation, and improved cooking yield, in model emulsion systems ( Structurally different forms of NaCl, such as those produced by the Alberger process, are claimed to give more salty flavour by the manufacturers. The Alberger process includes products, which have a cube agglomerate structure and a Fine Flake Salt that is recommended for use in meat products. Strategies to reduce sodium in a given meat product clearly vary depending upon the salt’s functionality in the product. The ultimate goal of ingredient suppliers and meat processors is to produce great-tasting reduced sodium meat products that consumers can enjoy as part of an ongoing healthier diet and lifestyle. The strategies for and consequences of NaCl reduction have been discussed in this chapter and the technological aspects reviewed. However, the many meat products and technologies used mean that the difficulties and solutions for NaCl reduction are numerous. In this chapter, we have tried to summarise them but inevitably cannot cover everything published. Because there is no panacea in terms of a single ingredient that can be used to replace NaCl in meat products, a range of functional ingredient combinations must be developed and/or optimised in conjunction with modification on the processing parameters. Products need to be recreated that will continue to appeal to consumers. With the food industry working together with the regulatory authorities and consumer groups, the ultimate aim of reduced NaCl in the diet can be achieved, but only, in our opinion, if a cooperative approach is established and a full understanding of the technological problems associated with NaCl reduction is realised. To holistically tackle this issue, the food industry needs to produce reduced NaCl products that are similar, in terms of texture and flavour, to regular products the consumer is familiar with while Government agencies need to continue educating consumers in terms of NaCl and health. Progress is being made and meat processors have committed to reducing NaCl levels in their products. Food Companies are researching new methods, such as a multi-technology approach, to help the industry fulfil its commitments. It is important that manufacturers and ingredient suppliers can supply reduced NaCl alternatives that are cost effective and don’t affect the quality of the products. Innovation demands increased technological awareness, through the continued research in the field of food ingredients. This includes producing various combinations of ingredients, depending on customer and product requirements, to be used in low- or reduced NaCl applications that are label friendly and what the market demands. Any alteration in NaCl content of meat products requires ingredient reformulation or manipulation. Some companies have produced products that are successful in replacing or substituting sodium in processed products others have been less so. Research is continuing to look at various flavours, in particular more savoury/umami taste to enhance the flavour of reduced NaCl products. Both by using these flavours and by adding more aromatics such as herbs and spices, a reduction in NaCl can be achieved. However, NaCl cannot be totally eliminated due to its functional role in binding and improved texture of products unless other ingredients such as phosphates, hydrocolloids, etc. are added. It should also be recognised that NaCl is not only used to impart its own flavour and enhance or mask other flavours, but is very important in the area of food safety, controlling water activity and growth of microorganisms. Designing preservative strategies to maintain microbial safety in reduced NaCl products is often complicated, as each relies on combinations of different preservative factors (