Cu-Al2O3 coated Ag nanocomposite is prepared by electroless chemical deposition, followed by PM technique. Nano Al2O3 by 3, 6, 9, and 12 wt.% is firstly coated with 5 wt.% nano Ag then the above four mentioned percent are mechanically milled with nano copper for 1 h by 350 rpm. Followed by compacted under 700 MPa, then sintered at 950 °C in H2 gas inert. The microstructure and mapping were estimated to evaluate the homogeneity of constituent. The amount of relative density decreases with increasing the content of Al2O3 nanoparticles. In addition, electrical resistivity is increase gradually by the addition of Al2O3 coated Ag and thermal conductivity decrease by increasing the Al2O3 coated Ag nanocomposite content. The electrochemical behavior and corrosion resistance of the prepared samples are studied. The resultant indicates that 9 wt.% Al2O3 sample has the lowest corrosion rate. In addition, it is the most suitable for electrochemical deposition.In recent years, many researchers gave attention to the study of the metal-ceramic composites to develop the properties of the composites in order to serve specific applications Copper has been increasingly used for thermal and electronic applications due to the higher thermal and electrical conductivity, less cost, production easiness, and the corrosion resistance is better. While the copper does not have good tensile or yield strength. These properties of copper beside the wear resistance need to be enhanced by the use of adding hard ceramic materials. To enhance both the resistance of wear and mechanical properties, without reasons any decline of both the conductivities of electrical and thermal, which can be, used the addition of hard ceramic materials Copper powder particles with an average size (∼50 nm and 99.9% purity) were used as a metal matrix ( To study characteristics of morphological for grains on metallographic polished samples, the microstructure characterization studies of Cu–Al The samples were examined to certify the examined accuracy, and the mean is planned. The resistivity of electrical of samples was tested via using high-precision four-probe apparatus. To test the thermal conductivity of the samples can be used the equation Al  To get more homogeneous in the matrix of reinforcement to improve physical properties for the composite materials. To examine the effect of Al It is noted that from  We did this study as one-step electrodeposition at 50 °C using the cyclic voltammetric technique. ZnO begins to deposit in curve at deposition potential −1 V as we mentioned in It is noticeable that, presence of (Al We study the corrosion behavior of different Cu doped by different (Al  Nanostructured Al Al The relative density decreases with increasing the content of Al Increasing Al The maximum deposition current value (−142 mA cm The resistance polarization achieved a maximum value of 79 ohms cm The corrosion rate gradually decreases with presence of Al The authors declare no conflicts of interest. This project was funded by the