Monosaccharides (glucose, xylose, etc.) are valuable platform chemicals that can be produced from lignocellulosic (polysaccharide containing) biomasses via hydrolysis. Their cost-effective recovery from lignocellulosic biomass hydrolysates and further purification requires sophisticated separation technology. Adsorption and electrolyte exclusion chromatography can be used for the fractionation of hydrolysates containing mineral acids. The recovered hydrolysis acid can be recycled, which saves and reduces chemicals consumption. Chromatographic separation can be done either batchwise, using steady-state recycling chromatography, or using continuous simulated moving bed chromatography. The latter two process options offer significant increase in productivity when compared to the batchwise fractionation process. In this chapter, chromatographic and adsorptive fractionation techniques for the treatment of acidic lignocellulosic hydrolysates are reviewed. The relevant physical phenomena affecting the separation efficiency as well as various industrially applicable process options are discussed.Monosaccharides (e.g., glucose and xylose) are valuable raw materials for biofuel and chemicals manufacturing. Monosaccharides can be obtained from different types of biomasses; some of which are mainly used for human nutrition (corn, sugar beet) ( Monosaccharide-based biofuels, such as ethanol and butanol, derived from lignocellulosic biomasses can be used to substitute crude oil-derived fuels currently used for transportation and other purposes. However, it is clear that, on a sustainable level, lignocellulosic biomass-derived fuels are not enough to satisfy the need for transportation fuels. Therefore, a better option would be to use the monosaccharides derived from lignocellulosic biomasses as precursors in manufacturing of chemicals that are currently produced by the petrochemical industry (see, e.g., Blommel and Cortright, 2008; Recovery of monosaccharides from lignocellulosic biomasses is a multistep process. This is because these raw materials contain, instead of monosaccharides, polysaccharides (cellulose and hemicelluloses) that must be cleaved to monosaccharides in a process known as hydrolysis. Hydrolysis of lignocellulosic biomasses can be conducted either as mineral acid catalyzed or as enzymatically catalyzed process ( In order to improve the economics of the acid-catalyzed hydrolysis processes, the hydrolysis acid should be recovered and recycled. In addition, the by-products formed in the hydrolysis, especially in the case of dilute acid hydrolysis, should also be recovered selectively because of high value of these chemicals. The recovery of the hydrolysis acid and removal of by-products can be accomplished successfully using chromatography and adsorption. The separation is based on a chromatographic technique known as electrolyte (or ion) exclusion. In this technique, strong electrolytes are separated from nonelectrolytes and weak electrolytes using a strong ion-exchange resin as a stationary phase. The strong electrolytes are excluded from the resin due to electrostatic repulsion, while the nonelectrolytes and weak electrolytes are adsorbed to the resin ( In the chromatographic fractionation of concentrated acid lignocellulosic hydrolysates, gel-type strong acid PS–DVB cation-exchange resins in acid (H Chromatographic fractionation of lignocellulosic hydrolysates brings about interesting phenomena. This is due a cooperative effect of sulfuric acid on the sorption of the other components present in the system. This cooperation, however, complicates the separation to some extent ( Although the by-products formed in the acid hydrolysis process can be separated selectively using electrolyte exclusion chromatography, it may be more economical to separate them in a separate adsorption unit ( After the fractionation steps, the monosaccharides are led to biochemical- or thermochemical processing units (see, e.g., Blommel and Cortright, 2008; Here, the chromatographic and adsorptive separation techniques that can be used for the fractionation of lignocellulosic hydrolysates and recovery of monosaccharides from the hydrolysates are reviewed. In order to clarify the phenomena occurring during the separation, the main separation principles are presented. Short introductions of different process options available for the chromatographic/adsorptive fractionation of lignocellulosic hydrolysates are given. The effects of different variables on the separation performance are discussed. The advantages of using chromatography for the purification of concentrated acid lignocellulosic hydrolysates for fermentative ethanol production are also discussed. In addition, short overviews of the acid hydrolysis processes and the selective separation of monosaccharides from each other are provided. Lignocellulosic raw materials include wood, forestry industry and agricultural residues (corn and rice straws), bamboo, energy crops (reed canary grass and witch grass) processing waste materials, construction waste, and beet pulp ( Cellulose is the main component of lignocellulosic materials ( Hemicelluloses surround the cellulose chains. They are amorphous linear heteropolymers with monomeric side chains. Structural units of hemicellulose chains depend on the lignocellulosic raw material. The chains consist of hexose (e.g., glucose, mannose, galactose, and rhamnose) and pentose (e.g., xylose and arabinose) sugars, acetic acid, and sugar acids ( The third major constituent of lignocellulosic raw materials is lignin. It is an aromatic three-dimensional polymer consisting different kinds of phenylpropane units ( The polysaccharides (cellulose and hemicellulose) in lignocellulosic biomass can be utilized in producing monosaccharides. For this purpose, the lignocellulosic biomass must be hydrolyzed, that is, the polysaccharide chains must be cleaved to monosaccharides. Hydrolysis can be done using acids or enzymes as catalysts ( In acid hydrolysis, cellulose chains break down into glucose monomers which, in turn, degrade to hydroxymethyl furfural (HMF) ( Hemicelluloses are more easily hydrolyzed to monosaccharides than cellulose due to the completely amorphous structure ( The degradation reactions of the monosaccharides are considerably slower than the release rate of the monosaccharides in concentrated acid hydrolysis conditions ( Lignin is highly resistant for chemical and enzymatic modifications and therefore breaks down only partially during acid hydrolysis yielding phenolic compounds ( Acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of hemicelluloses is easier than that of cellulose due to the amorphous structure of the former polymer ( The actual hydrolysis reactions in amorphous cellulose and hemicelluloses and in end of crystalline cellulose chains occur as follows ( The monosaccharides obtained from cellulose and hemicelluloses can undergo further reactions in which furfural and HMF are formed from pentoses and hexoses, respectively ( The most common acid used to breakdown polysaccharide chains in lignocellulosic biomasses is sulfuric acid ( Concentrated acid hydrolysis gives a high total monosaccharide yield: even 80% or higher ( In concentrated acid hydrolysis, only small amounts of by-products (mainly acetic acid, furfural, and HMF) are formed ( In addition to the three main by-products, also a variety of phenolic compounds originating from lignin and extractives may be formed ( The disadvantages of the concentrated acid hydrolysis process are corrosion problems related to the high acid concentration and high hydrolysis acid consumption. The hydrolysis acid must be removed from the hydrolysate prior to fermentation to ethanol ( The disadvantages regarding the economy of the concentrated acid hydrolysis have made it unpopular. However, the economics of the process can be increased considerably if the hydrolysis acid would be recycled and reused instead of neutralizing. This can be done by using chromatography as has been shown by After the chromatographic purification, the monosaccharide fraction and the by-product fractions are led to downstream processing. The hydrolysis acid fraction is led to a concentration process in which the acid is concentrated to 70 Hydrolysis of lignocellulosic biomasses can also be done with dilute mineral acids. Also in this process option, sulfuric acid is usually used as a catalyst ( Due to the harsh hydrolysis conditions, the hydrolysis reactions occur considerably faster than in the concentrated acid hydrolysis process: reaction times vary between 2 and 10 To obtain higher total monosaccharide yield, two-step dilute acid hydrolysis can be used. In the first step, the hemicellulose chains are hydrolyzed with dilute sulfuric acid in “mild” conditions at a temperature between 120 and 190  Low yield of glucose in dilute acid hydrolysis is mainly due to formation of nonhydrolyzable oligomers from cellulose. Using special reactor designs, the glucose yield can be improved considerably ( Although acid recovery for reuse is not critical in dilute acid hydrolysis, the by-products formed in the hydrolysis must be removed from the hydrolysates. These compounds include furfural, HMF, acetic acid, and possible phenolic compounds ( Cellulose and hemicelluloses can be hydrolyzed highly selectively using enzymes as catalysts. ( The optimal conditions for enzymatic hydrolysis are temperature of 45–55 This chapter describes the main process options used in industrial scale liquid chromatography in fixed beds. The column is filled with adsorbent material such as activated carbon, zeolites, polymeric adsorbents, or ion-exchange resins ( The basic implementation mode of chromatography is the batch mode. In this method, an eluent (e.g., water, an organic solvent, or a mixture of these) is pumped through a column continuously and, at certain time intervals, the mixture that is to be fractionated is injected to the column at the column inlet. The components are pushed by the eluent and travel through the packed bed. The components in the injected sample travel with different velocities because they interact differently with the adsorbent material. Components that are strongly adsorbed to the adsorbent propagate slower through the column than the components that are weakly adsorbed. As a consequence, the components are separated from each other and exit the column at different times. The interactions between solute component and the adsorbent material are reviewed in Batch chromatography is commonly used on production scale in biotechnology, sweetener industry, and pharmaceutical industry ( The purity of the product fractions can be increased substantially if the middle (unresolved) part of the chromatogram is recycled back to the column inlet as shown in The benefit of SSR chromatography is increased purity with a given production rate or, alternatively, increased production rate at a given purity level. However, designing such a process is relatively difficult even with the help of a numerical simulation tool. There are five independent operating parameters (the four cut times shown in A further improvement in process performance is possible by shortening the time between two consecutive pulses such that the front of the second pulse overlaps with the tail of the first pulse. At present, there are no design methods, other than fully dynamic numerical simulations, available for such an operating mode. There are also continuous countercurrent process schemes for chromatographic separation. When properly optimized, they can yield lower eluent consumption, higher productivity, higher product concentrations, higher product purities, and enhanced utilization of the adsorbent ( In practice, a truly continuous chromatographic separation process (true moving bed, TMB) is challenging to implement. This is because continuous countercurrent movement of the solid and liquid phases is difficult to establish at high flow rates. For the solid phase, plug flow conditions are impossible to achieve due to back mixing of the solid phase. In addition, severe particle abrasion and breakage occurs during the movement of the solid phase ( Due to the impracticality of the truly continuous chromatographic separation process, a process in which the movement of the solid phase is simulated was developed by Universal Oil Products in 1961 ( In SMB chromatography, the continuous movement of the solid phase is simulated by periodically shifting the inlet and outlet ports in the direction of the liquid flow. This results in a countercurrent movement of the solid and liquid phases. If the time between the port switching and the column lengths are infinitely short, SMB and TMB processes are equal ( The principle of a conventional SMB system which can be used to separate binary mixtures into two fractions is shown in The actual separation occurs in Zones II and III ( The last zone in the SMB train, zone IV, is for the adsorption of the less retained component. It contains the columns between the raffinate outlet and eluent inlet ports ( The basic four-zone SMB system has two inlet streams (feed and eluent) and two outlet streams (extract and raffinate) ( When the ports in an SMB system are shifted toward the liquid flow, the solid phase moves to the opposite direction. This means that the first column of zone III becomes the last column of zone II and the first column of zone II becomes the last column of zone I, etc. The separation of components of a binary mixture is achieved by adjusting the flow rates and the port switching time so that the more retained component moves with the solid phase toward the extract outlet and the less retained component with the liquid phase toward the raffinate outlet. In other words, the less retained component should be made to propagate faster than the port switching and the more retained component slower than the port switching. The standard four-zone SMB can only be used for fractionations of binary mixtures. In many applications, however, the mixtures contain at least three components that need to be separated selectively. For example, in the chromatographic fractionation of lignocellulosic hydrolysates with a strong acid cation-exchange resin (sulfonated PS–DVB resin in H    Also, SMB systems with more than five zones have been investigated (e.g.,  Intermittent SMB usually has one column in each of its four zones and a single switch consists of two steps. Two different configurations exist for separation of ternary mixtures. In the first configuration, the unit is operated like a conventional SMB in the first step with two inlet (feed and eluent) and two outlet (raffinate and extract) streams. However, there is no flow-through zone IV ( In the second process configuration for intermittent SMB for ternary separation, flow passes through all four zones in the first step. However, there is no flow between zones I and II, and zones II and III. The feed is introduced to the first column of zone III, and it is recycled to zone I into which eluent is also fed. The most retained component is eluted in the first step from the last column of zone I, and the intermediately retained component from the last column of zone II. The least retained component is eluted in the second step from the outlet of the last column of zone IV. In this step, zone I is disconnected from the SMB unit and regenerated. The other three zones are connected in series, and fresh eluent is fed to the system (to the first column of zone II) in order to adjust the relative position of the two most retained components and elute the least retained component (  The most distinct difference between sequential SMB and other SMB systems for ternary fractionations is that the sequential SMB is operated without (simulated) countercurrent movement of the solid and liquid phases. This means that the ports are not switched synchronously in the direction of the fluid flow during a cycle. In principle, sequential SMB is not an MSB system, but a multicolumn batch chromatographic system with recycling. Another feature of the sequential SMB is that, according to the available patents, the column outlet streams are not split but the whole column outlet stream is taken out of the system or led to the next column ( One cycle of sequential SMB system consists of three phases: feeding, elution, and recycling. Each of these phases is conducted at least once in a cycle. One cycle of the sequential SMB consists of four to eight stages with one stage being one of the three phases given above ( In the feeding phase, the mixture that is to be fractionated is fed to one column of the SMB system. Simultaneously, eluent can be fed to another column(s), and two or three product fractions are taken out of the system. The columns from which the products are withdrawn can be connected to the column (or be the column) into which the feeding is conducted or they may be disconnected from this column. During the elution phase, no feeding of the mixture to be separated is conducted. Eluent is fed to the system, and product fractions are collected from the outlets of various columns in the system ( In the recycling phase, no eluent or fresh feed is introduced to the system and nothing is taken out of the system. The component profiles are circulated through the system in order to adjust the positions of the profiles relative to the outlet ports. All the columns can be connected in a single loop, or there may be two or more loops in which the liquid phase is circulated. There may even be simultaneously one closed loop in which recycling occurs and an open loop into which eluent is fed and products are taken out: the three phases of the sequential SMB can be done in series or they can overlap ( The eluent consumption of the sequential SMB system can be reduced up to 70% by introducing parts of the collected fractions (diluted or mixed) back to the unit as an eluent substitute. In addition, product yield and purity may be increased. Proper position and stage of recycling must be determined in a way that the components in the reintroduced fractions meet similar components (  The operating principle of the JO process is shown in In the second step of the JO process, only eluent is introduced to the system ( The number of switches in the second step can be equal or different to the number of columns. If they are equal, the feed in the first step is always introduced to the same column ( The minimum duration of the first step is the time needed for the intermediate component to reach the outlet of the first column of zone III. Too short time leads to contamination of the extract stream with the intermediate component and too long time to contamination of the intermediate component's outlet stream with the most retained component. For the duration of the second step, the effects are opposite (  Besides chromatography, also adsorption can be used to purify lignocellulose hydrolysates. The main difference to fixed-bed chromatography is that the process is operated with relatively long loading and regeneration steps, separated by a washing step if needed. Long loading steps are achieved by utilizing stationary phase materials with high capacity and strong interactions with the impurity compounds. Regeneration of such materials usually requires special regeneration agents (e.g., organic solvents, acids, or bases) and/or higher temperature to be economical. Otherwise, the operation and design of adsorption separation is similar to fixed-bed chromatography. Implementation of the fractionation of acidic lignocellulosic hydrolysates depends on the type of the hydrolysate. With concentrated acid hydrolysates, the main issue is the separation of the monosaccharides from the hydrolysis acid and recovery of the acid for reuse. In addition, the by-products formed in the hydrolysis (acetic acid, furfural, and HMF) must be separated from the monosaccharides. Chromatographic separation with strong acid cation-exchange resin can be used to fractionate concentrated acid hydrolysates in a single step; however, it has been observed that it would be more economical to do the fractionation in two steps ( With dilute acid hydrolysates, the recovery of hydrolysis acid is not essential due to low concentration of the acid in the hydrolysates ( Lignocellulosic hydrolysates contain strong (sulfuric acid) and weak electrolytes (mainly acetic acid, but may also contain formic acid and levulinic acid), and nonelectrolytes (monosaccharides, furfural, HMF). The concentrations of these components can be very different, for example, in concentrated acid hydrolysates, the sulfuric acid concentration can be onefold higher than the concentrations of the other components ( Many different separation mechanisms can be observed in the adsorption/chromatographic fractionation of lignocellulosic hydrolysates. Chromatographic fractionation of (concentrated acid) lignocellulosic hydrolysates with strong acid cation-exchange resins as adsorbents is based on electrolyte exclusion (or ion exclusion) chromatography ( In the following chapters, the separation mechanisms observed in chromatographic separation and adsorption processes are elucidated. Afterwards, a simple model, consisting of phase equilibrium models and dynamic column model, for the chromatographic fractionation of lignocellulosic hydrolysates is presented. Chromatographic separation of strong electrolytes from weak electrolytes and nonelectrolytes is based on the electrolyte exclusion. Strong electrolytes are excluded from the resin phase (i.e., the solution phase inside the resin pores) due to the electrolyte exclusion, but the weak electrolytes and nonelectrolytes are not affected and are, therefore, adsorbed to the resin. As a consequence, the strong electrolyte propagates through the column faster than the weak electrolytes and nonelectrolytes and separation occurs. No actual ion exchange occurs in the electrolyte exclusion ( The electrolyte exclusion can be explained in terms of the Donnan potential as follows. When a strong acid cation-exchange resin is put into a dilute solution of a strong electrolyte, there exists a large concentration difference between the phases. Cation (counterion, i.e., exchangeable ion) concentration is higher in the resin phase, whereas the mobile anion (coion, i.e., ion with same sign of charge as the fixed ionic group in the resin) concentration is higher in the bulk solution phase. Diffusion of cations from the resin phase to bulk solution phase and the opposite movement of anions from the bulk solution phase to the resin phase would erode these concentration differences. However, because these species are ionic, the diffusion would interfere with electroneutrality. The first few ions that try to diffuse create a potential difference between the phases known as Donnan potential which draws the cations back to the resin phase and anions back to the bulk solution phase ( The ions’ tendency to level the concentration differences between the phases is counterbalanced by the effects of the electrical field and equilibrium, called Donnan equilibrium, is formed. Donnan equilibrium means that the electrical potential of each ion is equal in the bulk solution and resin phases ( Donnan potential, and therefore also electrolyte exclusion, depends on many factors. First of all, it decreases when the electrolyte concentration in the bulk solution increases ( Although all kinds of ion exchangers (weak and strong, and anionic and cationic) can be used in the electrolyte exclusion chromatography, the separation efficiency is favored by high ionization level of the functional groups. Therefore, strong ion exchangers perform better ( The Electrolyte exclusion is higher for low valence of the counterion (exchangeable ion in the resin) due to the fact that the electrostatic force that affects the ion is proportional to the charge of the ion. However, high coion (ion with same sign of charge as the fixed ionic groups in the resin) valence leads to stronger exclusion of electrolyte ( Size of the ions also affects the electrolyte exclusion: large ions are excluded from highly cross-linked resin due to the steric effects ( Complex formation between the ions in bulk solution and counterions in the resin can also weaken the effect of the electrolyte exclusion. This mechanism is known as site sharing (Helfferich, 1995). For example, sulfuric acid is sorbed to strong base anion-exchange resin in sulfate form because the sulfate counterions can form The effect of electrolyte exclusion on the sorption of weak electrolytes (i.e., acetic acid in lignocellulosic hydrolysates) is very small. This is because of the low or nonexistent dissociation of weak electrolytes in the presence of the counterions in the resin ( Weak electrolytes and nonelectrolytes do not have a direct effect on the electrolyte exclusion ( Adsorption of nonelectrolytes on an ion-exchange resin with a hydrocarbon matrix is affected by van der Waals forces (London interactions and dipole–dipole interactions) ( London interactions depend on the molecular structure of the hydrocarbon chains of the solutes and the matrix: if these are of similar type, stronger sorption occurs ( With ion-exchange resins, interactions between polar solute groups and fixed ionic groups and counterions may be the strongest factor enhancing or reducing adsorption. Due to the ionic groups, ion-exchange resins are strongly polar adsorbents and tend to adsorb polar substances more strongly than nonpolar ( Naturally, the concentration of adsorbing component in the bulk solution phase affects sorption: the higher the concentration, the higher the adsorbed amount. However, with components having favorable (concave downward shaped) isotherms, the distribution coefficients become smaller when their concentration increases due to the fact that a limited amount of substance can be adsorbed to a certain volume/mass of adsorbent. With components having unfavorable isotherms, the distribution coefficients increase with increasing concentration at least in the concentration range that is normally used. Usually, the adsorption isotherms of nonelectrolytes are favorable at least to some extent ( Molecular size of the adsorbing components also affects sorption. Large molecules might not be adsorbed because their size prevents their diffusion into the pores of the adsorbent ( In addition to the size exclusion effect, degree of resin cross-linking affects the sorption of solute molecules of different size also through swelling pressure (see Partition means that the chromatographic separation is based mainly on the differences between the solubilities of the solutes in the mobile and stationary phases ( Salting out is a special case of partition chromatography: addition of salt to a bulk solution decreases the solubility of organic nonelectrolytes (and weak electrolytes) to the bulk solution. These components are salted out from the bulk solution phase to the solution phase inside the resin pores. In other words, the salt has a cooperative effect on the sorption of these organic nonelectrolytes. Salting out chromatography has been used, for example, in the fractionation of alcohols, aldehydes and ketones, ethers, and amines ( The salting out mechanism can be explained as follows. Only “free water,” that is, the water (or other solvent) that is not bound to ionic solvation shells, is available for dissolving nonelectrolytes and associated weak electrolytes (if these solutes do not displace solvation water, see below). Inside the pores of an ion-exchange resin, the “free water” content is low due to solvation of the fixed ionic groups and the counterions. Due to this, the nonelectrolytes are salted out from the resin phase to the bulk solution phase where the “free water” content available for dissolution of the nonelectrolytes is higher ( However, salting out works in two ways. If a strong electrolyte is added to the bulk solution, the “free water” content in the bulk solution decreases because water molecules form solvation shells with the ions of the strong electrolyte. This leads to salting out of the nonelectrolytes and associated weak electrolytes from the bulk solution phase to the resin phase (solution inside the pores of the resin) and the sorption of these species increases. This is the case, for example, when sulfuric acid is added to a solution of monosaccharides and acetic acid in the presence of a strong acid cation-exchange resin ( The salting out phenomenon has been observed in the chromatographic fractionation of lignocellulosic hydrolysates with strong acid cation-exchange resins in acid form ( Sugars can be separated from each other using cation-exchange resins with metal ions as counterions because sugar molecules can form donor–acceptor complexes with metal counterions ( Cations capable of forming complexes with ligands include Ca Ligand exchange is a highly selective chromatographic separation method, and there is a strong driving force for the sorption of ligands because the ligands are efficiently sequestered by the metal ions. The selectivity depends usually on the solution concentration. When the solution concentration is low, ligands with higher coordinative valence are favored. At high solution concentrations, however, ligands with lower coordinative valences are favored. In addition, the metal ions prefer ligands that have the strongest tendency to form complexes, enabling the separation of different ligands. Complexes are formed already when the bulk solution-phase concentration of the organic component is very low; this property can be efficiently used in the separation of ligands and nonligands ( In ligand exchange, water (solvent) molecules in the hydration (solvation) spheres of metal counterions are replaced by hydroxyl groups (or other highly polar groups like carboxylic groups) of the organic molecules resulting in complex formation ( Formation of metal–ligand complexes requires that the polar functional groups of the organic ligands are attached to adjacent carbon atoms and properly oriented (and spaced): conformation of the organic molecules (functional groups) determines their relative affinity for the metal ions, their distribution coefficients, and the stability of the complexes ( The conformation of the ligands determines the distance (sterically favorable) between adjacent hydroxyl groups. If the distance is close to an optimal distance for complex formation, or the energy required to move the hydroxyl groups to optimal distance from each other is small, a complex is formed. The optimal distance between the adjacent hydroxyl groups is determined by the ionic radius of the metal ion. With the axial–equatorial sequence of hydroxyl groups, the optimal ionic radius is approximately 1 Complex formation requires at least two functional groups in adjacent positions and in right conformation: monohydric alcohols (e.g., ethanol) do not form complexes with metal ions ( Generally, carbohydrate complexes in neutral and acidic aqueous solutions have a low stability due to the poor donor ability of the hydroxylic oxygen atoms ( Ion-exchange resins sorb solvents in which they are placed and swell due to this. The swelling results from the osmotic pressure difference between the external solution and the resin phase (solution inside resin pores): the ion concentration is considerably higher in the resin than in the external solution. Solvent is taken up in order to decrease the osmotic pressure difference between the two phases, that is, to dilute the ion concentration in the resin phase ( The solution inside the pores of a resin is under higher pressure than the external solution due to the contradictive forces of the resin matrix. This pressure difference between the external solution and the solution in the resin pores is known as swelling pressure. It affects the solvent uptake and therefore also the solvent activity in the resin. The swelling pressure increases when the resin swells due to an increase in the elastic forces opposing the swelling. The swelling pressure also increases when the degree of resin cross-linking increases due to stronger forces opposing the swelling. On the other hand, swelling tendency of a resin also decreases with increasing degree of cross-linking due to more rigid polymer network. Swelling pressure affects also the sorption of solutes, especially larger solutes (see Many forces contribute to resin swelling. First of all, the formation of solvation shells for the counterions and ionic groups, and the decrease in the osmotic pressure difference. Decrease in the osmotic pressure difference occurs when ion concentration in the bulk solution increases. The electrostatic repulsion between the ionic groups in the resin contributes to resin swelling as well as the interactions between the solvent and the resin matrix especially if the solvent is organic ( Polar solvents are better swelling agents than nonpolar solvents due to stronger interactions between the solvent and the ions and ionic and polar groups of the resin. Complete ionization of ionic groups also increases swelling because of greater solvation. Ion pair formation and association of the counterions and ionic groups decrease the solvation tendency and, therefore, also the swelling. Affinity of the fixed ionic groups toward the solvent also affects the swelling: the greater the affinity, the larger is the swelling. In addition, nature of the ionic groups affects the swelling: resins containing sulfonic acid groups swell more than resins that contain acetate groups. Ion-exchange resins with high ion-exchange capacity swell more than resin with small capacity due to the higher ion concentration in the resin which results in higher osmotic pressure difference ( Increasing solute concentration decreases resin swelling ( The effect of the nature of the counterions to resin swelling is more complex than the effects listed above. With moderately and highly cross-linked resins, the swelling is affected by the solvation tendency and size of the counterion: ions with large hydrated ionic volume result in greater swelling. However, in highly cross-linked resins, the solvation of the ions may be incomplete (steric obstructions), and in this case, resin swelling depends on the size of the actual ion ( With weakly cross-linked resins (gel-type resins), the valence of the counterion is important for resin swelling. These resins contain large amounts of free water, that is, solvent not bound to the solvation shells of the ionic species in the resin. The amount of free water depends on the number of the counterions which, in turn, depends on the valence of the ions. When univalent counterions are replaced with bivalent ions, the number of counterions is cut to half which, in turn, results in lower swelling of the gel-type resins ( The effect of temperature on swelling of common ion-exchange resins used in separation applications is not very significant. Usually, resin swelling increases with increasing temperature ( Resin volume changes affect diffusion coefficients and dispersion coefficients in chromatographic separation. When resin swells, the pore size of the resin increases and therefore also the diffusion rates are increased. The opposite is true when resin shrinks. Resin shrinking increases also dispersion and favors channeling especially at the column walls ( Accurate modeling of phase equilibria is essential for rigorous modeling of chromatographic separation processes. The phase equilibrium models include the sorption isotherm models and the possible resin swelling/shrinking model. In the earliest studies regarding the chromatographic fractionation of lignocellulosic hydrolysates, the phase equilibrium was modeled simply with constant distribution coefficients ( The modeling of the phase equilibria in the case of chromatographic fractionation of dilute acid lignocellulosic hydrolysates with gel-type ion-exchange resins is relatively easy due to low sulfuric acid concentration in these hydrolysates ( In chromatographic fractionation of lignocellulosic hydrolysates with strong acid cation-exchange resin in acid form, sulfuric acid sorption is affected by electrolyte exclusion ( Monosaccharide sorption isotherms on a strong acid cation-exchange resin in acid form are slightly unfavorably shaped (concave upward) (  Acetic acid is a weak electrolyte ( The modeling of chromatographic fractionation of lignocellulosic hydrolysates with a gel-type strong acid cation-exchange resin in H Many approaches to model resin volume changes in adsorption processes have been applied ( In this chapter, a review was given of simple empirical correlations used to describe the phase equilibrium in a system of lignocellulosic hydrolysate and a gel-type strong acid cation-exchange resin. If the reader is interested in other modeling approaches which have been used for the aforementioned system, these can be found in studies by Several dynamic column models have been used in the modeling of chromatographic fractionation of lignocellulosic hydrolysates ( In the model by The mass balance in the chromatographic column for component i over a small volume element of length Δ Danckwert's boundary conditions were used at the column inlet and outlet: Resin bed porosity  Solid film linear driving force model ( The intraparticle mass transfer coefficient can be calculated from ( The volume fraction of the polymer in reference state for water swollen gel-type strong acid cation-exchange resin (sulfonated PS–DVB resin, 8 The partial differential equations in Eq. Chromatographic fractionation of lignocellulosic hydrolysates has been studied with three types of adsorbents: strong acid cation-exchange resins in acid (H The need for adsorbent regeneration is avoided also if anion-exchange resin in sulfate form is used as an adsorbent for the fractionation of lignocellulosic hydrolysates ( The phase equilibrium in a system of concentrated acid lignocellulosic hydrolysate and a gel-type strong acid cation-exchange resin in acid (H The sorption of sulfuric acid on a gel-type strong acid cation-exchange resin (sulfonated PS–DVB resin, 8 As the sulfuric acid concentration increases, the effect of electrolyte exclusion on sulfuric acid sorption diminishes and eventually vanishes completely. The weakening of the exclusion is seen from the increasing slope of the isotherm ( Lignocellulosic hydrolysates contain many monosaccharides originating from cellulose and hemicelluloses. However, it has been observed that with a gel-type strong acid cation exchange resins in acid form they behave very similarly, and general sorption behavior can be characterized by studing only a few monosaccharides ( Glucose and xylose sorption isotherms (  Sorption of acetic acid on a gel-type strong acid cation-exchange resin in acid form is also enhanced by sulfuric acid due to salting out ( Changes in the liquid-phase composition may lead to changes in the volume of an elastic adsorbent (see The effect of sulfuric acid on the shrinking of the gel-type resin studied by    The aforementioned studies do not discuss chromatographic fractionation of concentrated acid lignocellulosic hydrolysates. Some patents (e.g.,  Pulse elution profiles of synthetic solution containing sulfuric acid (20  Sulfuric acid sorption on a strong acid cation-exchange resin is affected by the electrolyte exclusion: at infinite dilution, the exclusion is complete and sulfuric acid is not adsorbed to the resin. Due to this, the breakthrough of sulfuric acid is at void volume of the resin bed ( The model derived by  Monosaccharides (glucose and xylose) elute after sulfuric acid on a strong acid PS–DVB cation-exchange resin in acid (H If no sulfuric acid would be present in the hydrolysate, the monosaccharides would elute close to the breakthrough point of the profiles (approximately 0.45 BV in Another interesting phenomenon arising from the cooperative effect of sulfuric acid on the monosaccharide sorption is the focusing of the monosaccharides at the rear of the sulfuric acid profile ( The elution of the monosaccharides is also correctly predicted ( Acetic acid elutes after sulfuric acid and monosaccharides with a strong acid PS–DVB cation-exchange resin in acid form as adsorbent ( The degree of resin cross-linking contributes significantly to resin properties. For example, in the fractionation of lignocellulosic hydrolysates, the degree of resin cross-linking affects electrolyte exclusion and swelling as well as the sorption of components (through size exclusion and swelling pressure effects). The effect of the cross-linking degree of a gel-type sulfonated strong acid PS–DVB cation-exchange resins on the fractionation of authentic concentrated acid (30 The resin cross-linking does not affect the breakthrough of sulfuric acid because of the complete electrolyte exclusion at infinite dilution ( The degree of cross-linking does not affect the width of the front part of the monosaccharide profile ( Also, acetic acid sorption increases as the degree of resin cross-linking decreases ( HMF and furfural are completely separated from the other components regardeless of the resin cross-linking ( The effect of resin cross-linking on monosaccharide yield is shown in The effect of resin cross-linking on the monosaccharide yield with spruce hydrolysate is small ( In the fractionation of birch hydrolysate, the monosaccharide yield is more dependent on the resin cross-linking due to higher acetic acid concentration ( The productivity of the batchwise chromatographic separation process with respect to the monosaccharides ( The productivity of the separation process with respect to the monosaccharides increases with increasing resin cross-linking due to decreasing cycle time ( Economical evaluations of the chromatographic fractionation of authentic concentrated acid hydrolysates have not been done in academic literature. However,  The cut points were defined as follows. The first cut point (i.e., the beginning of the sulfuric acid fraction) was set to the point of sulfuric acid breakthrough. Beginning of the monosaccharide fraction (end of the sulfuric acid fraction, second cut point) was defined such that the ratio of the total amount of monosaccharides to the amount of sulfuric acid in moles ( End point of the monosaccharide fraction (beginning of the acetic acid fraction, third cut point) was defined by The productivity of the batchwise monosaccharide recovery process with respect to the monosaccharides (  Although Hydrolysis acid concentration has a significant effect on The dependence of Eluent consumption decreases first as the column loading increases as the amount of monosaccharides collected in the monosaccharide fraction increases ( Sulfuric acid is diluted during the elution regardless of the column loading due to the thermodynamics. However, this unwanted dilution decreases with decreasing feed concentration of sulfuric acid and increasing column loading ( At low column loadings, dilution of the monosaccharide fraction also occurs (  As seen in  The batchwise chromatographic separation was simulated using 4-m high column and a flow rate of 4 Six cycles were required for the process shown in Without the recycling of sulfuric acid fraction, the productivity is close to the maximum value in a wide range of loadings. With the recycling, maximizing the productivity requires more careful optimization. Change in the column loading from 18.2 The sulfuric acid is concentrated in the concentration step to 70 Sulfuric acid concentration in the feed to the separation unit remained constant with the recycling ( Recycling of the sulfuric acid fraction increases also the monosaccharide yield ( Recycling of the sulfuric acid fraction increases the glucose and xylose concentrations in the product fraction approximately by a factor of 2.9 and 1.8, respectively ( Acetic acid is removed completely from the system in the monosaccharide and acetic acid fractions, and therefore, its amount in the feed to the separation column was not affected by the recycling. Fermentative production of ethanol is a good way to test the effectiveness of the chromatographic fractionation of concentrated acid lignocellulosic hydrolysates.  Also, According to  Chromatographic purification of lignocellulosic hydrolysates provides a significant increase in the ethanol yield over Ca(OH) As discussed above, the purity of monosaccharides in a concentrated acid hydrolysate could be increased from as low as 20% up to 80% in a single step using fixed-bed chromatography. Higher purities are certainly possible, but the yield and thus productivity would decrease significantly. The use of steady-state recycling chromatography (see Experimental and calculated chromatograms of batch separation and SSR at steady state are presented in As seen in The potential of continuous chromatography has not been fully explored for fractionation of lignocellulose hydrolysates.  Continuous fractionation of an authentic dilute acid yellow poplar hydrolysate (sulfuric acid, glucose, xylose, and acetic acid) using a nine-zone SMB system of 20 columns has been investigated by  Japan Organo process (see Previously unpublished simulation results for separation of sulfuric acid (20 The same purity constraints were used in the calculations as in the process performance evaluation of the batchwise fractionation process (see Investigation of eluent consumption was excluded from the JO process performance study, and internal recycling stream was not utilized. Due to these reasons, the JO process was simulated without zone IV. Due to this, sulfuric acid (in raffinate) was collected also in the first step (compare to In step one of the JO process, two inlet streams exist: eluent stream and feed stream. The flow rates of the outlet streams in the first step were the same as the inlet flow rates (calculated with Eq. The effects of the outlet flow rate ratio in the second step and the durations of the first and one switch in the second step on the productivity of the JO process with respect to the monosaccharides were investigated. The productivity of the process with respect to the monosaccharides was calculated from 15 cycles were needed for the system to reach steady-state. The spatial profiles of the fractionation of concentrated acid lignocellulosic hydrolysate with the Japan Organo SMB in steady-state at the end of the first and second (number of switches equal to The spatial sulfuric acid profile in the Japan Organo SMB system ( The productivity of the JO process with respect to the monosaccharides was found to increase as the duration of the first step increased until Maximum With the Recovery yield of acetic acid can be increased considerably without significant impact on Purities of outlet streams with Average concentrations in each outlet streams in steady state are given in While concentrated acid hydrolysis produces harmful by-products in smaller quantities than dilute acid hydrolysis ( Several techniques have been proposed for the hydrolyzate detoxification, including overliming ( The literature on detoxification of biomass hydrolyzates for bioethanol production mostly considers solutions produced with the dilute acid process. According to experimental adsorption equilibrium isotherm data measured in the presence of 20 Unfortunately, long breakthrough or saturation times are associated with extensive regeneration times, and regeneration with water is not an economically feasible option. Considerably reduced regeneration times were obtained by using an aqueous ethanol solution instead (  When no organic desorbent is used, an ion-exchange resin yields the highest productivity ( Separation of individual monosaccharides from their mixture using chromatography is an established technology. Sulfonated gel-type strong acid cation-exchange PS–DVB resins in metal ion form are used as adsorbents ( Metals from groups I and II can be used as complexing counterions in chromatographic fractionation of sugars. Most commonly, Ca In the sweetener (sugar) industry, chromatography is widely used for the separation of individual sugars from sugar syrups derived from sugar cane or sugar beet (Howard et al., 1988). The most common chromatographic separation process in the sugar industry is the enrichment of fructose in fructose–glucose syrups using SMB chromatography. This syrup is a product from hydrolysis of sucrose to fructose and glucose. Sulfonated gel-type strong acid PS–DVB cation-exchange resin in calcium form is used as an adsorbent in the separation ( Other chromatographic sugar separations in the sweetener industry include, for example, the separation of galactose from lactose hydrolysates; the separation of lactulose from lactose and galactose (  The recovery of xylose from lignocellulosic hydrolysates can also be accomplished using strong basic PS–DVB anion-exchange resin in Acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of lignocellulosic biomasses is an efficient way to obtain monosaccharides for use as precursors for biofuel or chemicals production. Recovery of monosaccharides can be efficiently accomplished using chromatographic separation and adsorption. Using chromatography, lignocellulosic hydrolysates can be fractionated selectively to obtain sulfuric acid, monosaccharides, acetic acid, and other by-product fractions. The sulfuric acid can then be recycled to be reused in the hydrolysis process, and the other fractions can be led to downstream processing. Gel-type strong acid PS–DVB resin in acid (H The process performance of a stand-alone chromatographic fractionation unit for concentrated acid lignocellulosic hydrolysates seems not very promising because of low monosaccharide yield. However, since the sulfuric acid fraction (and hence the monosaccharides in this fraction) can be recycled back to the hydrolysis reactor, the entire process should be considered when carrying out a performance evaluation. When recycling is properly included in the analysis, it is concluded that chromatographic separation becomes an efficient method for the fractionation of lignocellulosic hydrolysates. There are several process options for chromatographic fractionation of lignocellulosic hydrolysates: batch chromatography, steady-state recycling chromatography, or continuous SMB chromatography. A basic four-zone SMB is inadequate for this fractionation due to the fact that more than two fractions have to be obtained, but there are more advanced SMB variants (JO, I-SMB, etc.) that can be used. Also, removal of by-products formed during acid hydrolysis can be accomplished using chromatographic separation. However, due to strong sorption of these components on common PS–DVB resins, it would be more economical to separate them in a separate adsorption unit prior to the chromatographic acid–monosaccharide separation. Adsorption using activated carbon, zeolites, polymeric adsorbents, or ion-exchange resins as adsorbents can be used for the recovery of the valuable by-products.