Traditional sink–float methods for measuring the density distribution of particulate samples rely on expensive and toxic heavy liquids. An alternative method has been developed which uses aqueous glycerol solutions in a laboratory-scale Reflux Classifier run in semi-batch mode. The high viscosity of these solutions promotes laminar high-shear flow in the channels which suppresses the effect of particle size on separation performance. Thus this technique was able to accurately measure the yield–ash curve of coal samples, and from this their density distribution could be inferred. Applying this approach to feed, product and reject samples enabled calculation of the density partition separation performance. Samples were collected from two case studies: a laboratory-scale continuous Reflux Classifier and a single spiral start from a full-scale coal handling and preparation plant. In both cases the partition curve measured by the new method was within experimental uncertainty of the partition curve measured by the standard sink–float method.The coal and mineral processing industries use a variety of separation unit operations for beneficiation, including dense medium cyclones, jigs, Reflux Classifiers, spirals and flotation cells. Ideally the partition performance of these units should be regularly measured to ensure that they are operating efficiently and in order to be able to predict the likely product grade and recovery if the feed stock varies. For large particles, partition performance can be measured relatively easily in real time by using tracer particles of varying density ( The sink–float method is the industry standard method for measuring the density distribution of particulate material. In the coal industry, this method uses mixtures of heavy organic liquids with densities ranging from 1200 up to 2400 Hence at this stage many industries are “blind” to the partition performance of their beneficiation processes at high densities and particularly at fine particle sizes. Even at lower densities, the hazardous nature of the dense liquids used makes it desirable to find alternative methods to measure the density distribution. The Reflux Classifier (RC) consists of a set of parallel inclined channels located above a vertical section with fluidising water added through the base ( In industrial processes the Reflux Classifier is operated continuously, with feed added centrally below the system of inclined channels. An underflow of dense material is continuously removed from a central discharge point in the base and the overflow of low density material exits via the launder at the top. During continuous processing, a bed of particles builds up inside the unit, producing an autogenous dense medium effect which further improves density separation performance ( However, the Reflux Classifier can also be used in a semi-batch configuration as a laboratory tool for performing density-based fractionation. In this mode, shown in For feed samples of 0.038–0.250 However, recently it has been shown that the regime of near perfect separation performance can be extended using aqueous glycerol solutions. The higher viscosity of the glycerol solutions is beneficial as it maintains the channel flow in the laminar regime, even in wider channels involving particles up to 16 Hence given the near perfect separation performance that can now be obtained in the laboratory-scale Reflux Classifier, it should be possible to use this method to infer the density distribution of material in feed, product and reject samples collected around a separation unit. From these data the partition performance of the unit could then be calculated, without needing to resort to the sink–float method. Glycerol also has the advantage of being cheap and non-toxic. This paper reports work done to test the effectiveness of this proposed method for measuring partition performance. Two different case studies are reported, a laboratory-scale Reflux Classifier and a single spiral stage at a commercial coal handling and preparation plant. Both of these case studies involved coal particles in the nominal −2.00 +0.125 Two different case studies were conducted. Case Study 1 involved the testing of feed, product and reject samples taken around a steady-state laboratory-scale Reflux Classifier with a 6 The samples for Case Study 2 were obtained from full-stream cuts collected by hand around a single spiral start operating in a Coal Handling and Preparation Plant (CHPP) in the Hunter Valley, Australia. This spiral was one of multiple spirals in a circuit where the middling streams were recycled to the feed distributor at the head of the spiral circuit. The circuit configuration and sampling points are shown in For both case studies, the collected samples were wet screened at 0.130 The experimental method used to operate the laboratory Reflux Classifier in semi-batch mode was the same as in previous published research ( The charge of approximately 3.0 Samples corresponding to different flowrates were labelled “Flow 1”, “Flow 2”, etc. Typically five to eight such flow increments were collected and the experiment was concluded when approximately 500 Two different fluidising mediums were used. A solution of 70 Each flow and remains sample was dry-screened at 0.125 This section explains how the laboratory-scale semi-batch Reflux Classifier flow fractionation results from samples collected around a separator were analysed to determine the unit’s density partition curve. Unlike the sink–float method, this test cannot fractionate samples at pre-determined density cut points. This is because each sample has a unique particle size and density distribution which produces varying hindered settling factors as the test progresses. So different samples will have different density cut points, even at the same fluidisation flow rate. However, in order to calculate partition values, we must know the amount of material in equivalent density fractions across all streams. Hence for each stream, the ash values must first be converted into densities (Section The dependency of particle density on the ash data will vary from coal to coal. Given that coals consist of a variety of macerals and may contain more than one type of gangue material, arguably there is no reason to expect a unique relationship to exist. However, in order to proceed, it is necessary to assume that on average there is a robust correlation between the particle density  As noted in previous literature ( This is a non-linear relationship which leads to data sometimes being plotted as inverse density versus ash value. However, Ultimately the form and number of parameters used in the density versus ash value correlation is unimportant. What matters is whether it reliably predicts a particle’s density based on its ash value. Clearly the simple linear model allows this to be done quite accurately, particularly in the range of interest around the density cut point. It might be argued that if the aim of this research is to develop an alternative to the sink–float method, then relying on density–ash relationships measured by the sink–float method defeats the purpose. However, for a given coal type, once the density–ash relationship has been established, it is unlikely to vary much within that seam. So in most cases there would already be existing historical data on the ash–density characteristics for that coal type. If the only purpose of the elutriation experiments was to measure density–partition performance (i.e. the yield–ash curves were not required), then it would be possible to measure the sample densities directly using liquid or gas pycnometry. This would potentially be more accurate since it would give the exact density of each sample, rather than using a correlation based on assuming the density of a sample was the average of the upper and lower density bounds of each sink–float interval. However, given the porosity of coal, some correction might be required in order to maintain consistency with the existing standards. Direct measurement of sample density would also be the best way to apply this elutriation method for measuring density–partition curves to non-coal minerals. The objective is to use the yield–ash information to generate a plot of cumulative mass versus density for each flow stream, from which partition values can then be calculated. This analysis assumes that there is a correlation between ash value and particle density and that the Reflux Classifier separates perfectly on the basis of particle density. The former assumption was discussed in Section This section presents a brief outline of the steps involved. Starting with the ash by size data for a set of flow samples from a laboratory Reflux Classifier fractionation experiment, the first step was to sort the data within each size interval into order of increasing ash value. In cases where two or more flow increments had identical ash, they were combined and treated as one. The measured ash value is the average of all material in that flow and size increment. It was assumed that this ash value applies to material at the mid-point of the increment. So for each size fraction the cumulative mass of material to the mid-point of each flow fraction was calculated by adding half the mass of that interval to the total cumulative mass of the previous increments. The next step was to use Eq. For a steady state system with no losses, reactions, breakage or agglomeration, the total mass flow rate of material in each density and size fraction in the feed should equal the total rate out in the combined product streams. Invariably the data did not appear to satisfy this requirement and this prevents direct calculation of an unambiguous partition value at each density. In order to overcome this ambiguity, the data was then mass-balance reconciled, in the same manner as would be used for any other set of experimental mass distribution data ( The above procedure uses the full information obtained from the screening of each flow increment into a number of size fractions. We refer to this as a “double fractionation” (DF) i.e. the batch elutriation into flow increments is the first fractionation, followed by the screening into multiple size fractions as the second fractionation. However, it was of interest to test how necessary it is to perform the size fractionation step prior to performing the ash measurements. Thus the above analysis was also repeated using only the total mass and average ash value of the +0.250 Once mass balance reconciliation had been performed, the density partition performance of the unit operation could be determined. Here we define the partition number as the probability of a particle in a given size and density interval of the feed exiting in the specified product stream. It was sometimes convenient to fit a standard partition curve to the data to enable determination of the density cut point The results of 12 laboratory scale Reflux Classifier experiments are presented and analysed in this paper. These are summarised in In In contrast, the coal collected in Case Study 2 was known at the coal preparation plant to be one that suffered significant slimes problems due to clay breakdown. When the samples were initially wet screened at 0.130 However, when 70 A small amount of break down does not necessarily compromise the mass-balance data reconciliation technique. Provided that all material in a given density fraction experiences the same level of break-down regardless of which stream sample it was in, then the material remaining should still satisfy the assumption that input equals output. In reality, levels of breakage during the batch laboratory tests may vary due to variations in the run times, range of flow rates, and levels of collision with neighbouring particles. However, mass-balance reconciliation is the only basis on which to proceed to analyse the data, as otherwise it is impossible to determine unambiguous values of the partition coefficients. Each flow fraction was screened and the ash value of each size interval measured. From this data the cumulative yield–ash curves for each sample were calculated. The close agreement between the original and duplicate yield ash curve for the product from Case Study 1 ( The fractionation data from the batch Reflux Classifier were analysed in accordance with the method outlined in Section In size and density intervals where there was very little material, the numerical routine would sometimes infer small amounts of solids in order to satisfy the material balances. Very small errors in these calculations can cause spurious partition values. These spurious results were filtered out by not calculating partition numbers for any size/density interval which contained less than 0.05  The variation in the fitted Sink–float fractionation was performed on the +0.250 The single fractionation result, shown in In order to put these results into context, it is important to consider how much certainty there is in the two sets of partition values that are being compared. For the sink–float samples, the head ashes of the +0.250 The span of these three results is shown in Similarly, for the samples fractionated in the Reflux Classifier, the average ash contents of the +0.25 Case Study 2 involved a set of feed, product, middling and reject samples collected from around a single spiral start at a coal preparation plant in the Hunter Valley. As described in Section   The ash–density relationship was established based on the sink–float data (  Similarly Due to the considerable scatter in the −0.250 +0.125 Because this spiral had three product streams, the two-product formula could not be used. Their relative flowrates as determined by mass-balance reconciliation of the sink–float data were 46.1% yield to product, 24.5% yield to middlings and 29.3% yield to reject. To gain some indication of the uncertainty of the raw sink–float partition values, these relative flowrates were used in In Case Study 2, going from a single to double fractionation has not significantly improved the quality of the laboratory Reflux Classifier data. Whilst the fitted curve through the double fractionation data lies closer to the fitted curve through the sink–float data, many of the individual data points are further from the sink–float data than some of the single-fractionation data points. However, the curve fit through the double fractionation data lies within 0.05 partition units of the sink–float curve fit result across most of the density range. This is comparable to the span of ±0.03 partition units variability in the raw sink–float data and within the span of ±0.11 partition units variability in the “raw” Reflux Classifier fractionation data itself. The It should also be noted that the 1500–1600 This work has confirmed the benefits of using viscous glycerol solutions to fractionate fine coal particles in a laboratory Reflux Classifier. The laminar flow and high shear rate suppress the effects of particle size and thus promote elutriation on the basis of density. The resulting fractionations closely match the yield–ash curves obtained by the sink–float method. By performing these measurements on samples of the feed, product and reject streams around a unit, it is then possible to determine the partition performance. However, unlike the sink–float method, the Reflux Classifier cannot fractionate each sample at identical density cut points. Hence, a methodology has been developed for inferring the sample density distribution from the cumulative yield–ash data. This method has been proven to work very well under ideal conditions where the samples are representative and there is a reasonable amount of “near-density” material in the sample from which to accurately determine the partition curve (Case Study 1). Even with samples that suffered significant water breakdown of particles due to the presence of clays, use of the glycerol solutions reduced the level of breakdown sufficiently to still enable a reasonable determination of the partition curve (Case Study 2). This research took place at the University of Newcastle and was funded by the This appendix presents the raw data and a full set of sample calculations for Case Study 1. For Case Study 2 refer to  The +1.40 For each size fraction the cumulative mass of material to the mid-point of each flow fraction was calculated by adding half the mass of that interval to the total cumulative mass of the previous increments. Row 4 of Row 4 also includes a lower bound of zero mass and an upper bound which is the total mass of +1.40 Row 5 in The densities at zero cumulative mass and at the total cumulative mass were estimated by linear extrapolation from the adjacent two data points. For example, Row 5 in Similarly the density of material at 94.1  By interpolation in The above steps were repeated for each size fraction of all the input and output streams. Each increment mass was then divided by the total mass of the sample to give the mass fraction. The resulting mass percentages in each interval are shown in The average ash values of the +0.125 Using this flow split, the mass of material in and out of each size by density interval was compared. Clearly the ratio of mass in over mass out was often far from unity. This deviation is a normal occurrence due to random sampling and measurement errors. This prevents calculation of an unambiguous partition value at each density. For example, in the first density interval of the +1.40 In order to overcome this ambiguity, the data was mass-balance reconciled, in the same manner as would be used for any other set of experimental size by density mass distribution data. Undersized material in the −0.125   The laboratory Reflux Classifier data were also analysed on the basis of a “single-fractionation” which assumes that there was no sizing performed on the flow samples (other than to remove any −0.250