In this paper, the theoretical energy consumption required in the zinc electrowinning process was analyzed. The theoretical energy consumption is only a half of the energy consumption in industrial production. To save energy of the production process, we studied five kinds of additives with the industrial electrolyte in the longtime zinc electrowinning process. The results indicated that the presence of non-ionic compound (thiourea) or anionic surfactant (sodium dodecyl sulfonate or sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate) adversely affected the energy consumption and current efficiency. However, an improvement in energy consumption was observed with the addition of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide. Our results should be helpful for the production of zinc electrowinning.Today over 90% of the world's zinc is produced hydrometallurgically from sulfated electrolyte in electrolytic plants. More than 80% of the total energy required by the electrolytic zinc plants derives from the electrowinning process. However, the energy consumption of the electrowinning process is pretty high due to impurities and hydrogen evolution. In order to counteract the adverse effects, additives are usually added to the electrolyte ( The cell electrolyte was prepared from a zinc electrowinning factory without further purification. For achieving the required level of zinc and acid in electrolytic cell, analytical grade sulfuric acid bought from Beijing Chemical Reagent Company and ultrapure water (18.25 MΩ·cm) produced from Water Purifier were added. All the other reagents used in the experiment were analytical grade. Thiourea and sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate (SDBS) were got from Beijing Chemical Reagent Company. Cetyltrimethylammonium chloride (CTACl) and CTABr were from Beijing Yili Fine Chemicals Co., Ltd. Sodium dodecyl sulfonate (SDS) was bought from Xilong Chemical Co., Ltd. The composition of the industrial zinc electrolyte used in this work is presented in Aluminum and lead‑silver alloy sheets were used as cathode and anode, respectively. Galvanostatic electrowinning experiment was performed in a 230 ml quartz cell with a perforated Teflon lid to accommodate the electrodes. Three anodes and two cathodes were arranged alternately with a distance of 45 mm. The sizes of the electrodes are 40 mm × 14 mm × 6.5 mm. The electrodes were immersed vertically into the electrolyte with 20 mm depth. To maintain the concentration of zinc during the electrowinning process, fresh electrolyte was pumped into the cell at a certain flow rate using a peristaltic pump and the effluent flowed to the waste tank. The temperature of the cell electrolyte was controlled at the desired value by thermostatic water bath. All the experiments were carried out with the deposition time of 24 h. The element analysis of the electrolyte in zinc electrowinning process was performed using American Thermo Scientific iCAP 6300 ICP-OES and Thermo Scientific X series Firstly it is beneficial to examine the theoretical power requirement of the zinc electrowinning process. During the electrowinning process, zinc is deposited on the aluminum cathode ( The theoretical energy consumption per ton of cathodic zinc is calculated as follows (incorporation of Faraday's Law and Joule's Law): Temperature plays a significant effect on the energy consumption of zinc electrowinning. The energy consumption decreased with increasing temperature from 3144.7 kWh/t at 32 °C to 3026.6 kWh/t at 42 °C. This decrease of energy consumption can be associated with the following two points: (1) Zinc ions diffusion rate increased on account of decreasing of the electrolyte viscosity at high temperature ( Additive executes a key role in the zinc electrowinning process. The results of energy consumption for the absence and presence of the additive in the zinc electrolyte were also presented in The main roles of additives are saving energy consumption and working as leveling agents. As mentioned above, thiourea, SDS and SDBS, especially thiourea, had a negative effect on the zinc electrowinning process. The addition of CTACl slightly decreased current efficiency and energy consumption. While in the presence of CTABr, a positive effect on both current efficiency and energy consumption was observed. These results may be attributed to the different properties of additives. Thiourea is a non-ionic compound, soluble in water. SDS and SDBS are anionic surfactant. In the zinc electrolyte they will easily dissociate to form negatively charged dodecyl sulfonate or dodecylbenzene sulfonate ion respectively. CTABr and CTACl are cationic surfactant. In the zinc electrolyte they would form positively charged ammonium ions and migrate to the negatively charged Al/Zn cathode. The different effects of CTABr and CTACl on current efficiency should be caused by anions, Br The effects of five kinds of additives on the current efficiency, energy consumption and surface morphology in the longtime zinc electrowinning process were discussed. In the presence of a non-ionic compound (thiourea) or anionic surfactant (SDS or SDBS) in the zinc electrolyte, the current efficiency declined and the energy consumption increased. On the other hand, the addition of cationic surfactant (CTABr or CTACl) slightly decreased energy consumption. The energy efficiency increased in the presence of CTABr in the zinc electrolyte. As for presence of CTACl, the energy efficiency dropped slightly because Cl The manuscript was just submitted solely to Hydrometallurgy. All the authors agree to not submit in parallel the same manuscript to another Journal. All references and images were properly cited. None. We acknowledge financial supports from the