Monolithic biochar is explored as electrode material in supercapacitor – a fast-charging, long-lasting energy storage device. Electrical conductivity of electrode is critical to supercapacitor's performance. Traditionally, biochar is used as a solid fuel for combustion where electrical conductivity is largely irrelevant and ignored. This work explores electrical conductivity of monolithic biochar and elucidates its dependence on micro and macro structures of biochar. Electrical conductivity of biochar was found to be highly dependent on its degree of carbonization. Bulk conductivity of biochar can increase by over six orders of magnitudes when its carbon content changes from 86.8 to 93.7 wt%. Transmission electronic microscope and x-ray diffraction analyses revealed the presence of graphite nanocrystals (∼3 nm) and the growth of biochar crystallinity after heat treatment at 950 °C. The highest skeletal conductivity of carbon was 343.2 S/m, found in a heat-treated sugar maple biochar with 96.2 wt% of carbon. It is higher than that of graphite single crystal in direction perpendicular to graphene plane (333.3 S/m). Moreover, it was observed conductivity of monolithic biochar increased with compressive loading and dropped to the pre-compression level when the loading was released - a new phenomenon termed “elastic behavior of electrical conductivity of biochar”.Lignocellulosic biomass is plant-based material which captures and stores atmospheric carbon dioxide via photosynthesis. This biomass is an emerging source of carbon-neutral fuel More specifically, traditional methods to store electrical energy include batteries and dielectric capacitors Although there has been some biochar conductivity data in literature, it is limited to powdered porous biochars Biochar samples for conductivity measurements were prepared from commercial charcoal products obtained from three different suppliers. As expected, commercial charcoal products were highly variable in their appearance and carbon content. Given the heterogeneous nature of commercial products, charcoal pieces were screened and selected using a visual inspection. The focus was the blackness of the sample and the continuity of the surface, i.e., no visible cracks. The biochar was produced commercially from three types of trees (sugar maple, oak and hickory) a grass and bamboo. Cylindrical biochar samples were made from large chunks of charcoal using a 5/8″ core drill bit. The cylindrical cores were reduced in length using sandpaper from grade 60 to 400 in order to meet ASTM C695-2010 specifications: an aspect ratio between 1.9 and 2.1 of length to diameter (width). The resulting length and diameter of the samples were approximately 26 mm and 13 mm, respectively. The ends of the cylinders were levelled using a bubble level and a right angle vice. Elemental analysis was carried out using a CE440 Elemental Analyzer, to measure carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen contents of biochar through combustion. Carbon content is the most important value, as it is a measure of the degree of carbonization. Carbon content of biochar is expected to be much greater than 50 wt% which is the typical value of dry wood. 1–2 mg of each sample were analyzed and results for each sample were run in triplicate and average values with standard deviation are reported for CHN content. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was carried out using a TA Instruments Inc. TGA Q500 Evolved Gas Analysis furnace. The furnace provides a controlled volume where samples are heated at designated heating rates under argon. Argon gas is used to provide inert atmosphere and prevent combustion of the samples. The sample was heated from room temperature to 100 °C by ramping at 25 °C/min, then held at 100 °C for 10 min, then heated to 800 °C at 20 °C/min and finally held at 800 °C for 10 min before stopping. The data was processed to create TGA and DTG curves, which are used to evaluate the mass-loss and its dependence on temperature. X-ray Diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed using a Rigaku MiniFlex 600 system equipped with 2.0 kW Cu X-ray tube with a graphite monochromator. Scans were carried out over the 2θ range of 10–50°, using a step size of 0.02° and scan speed of 2 s/step. Samples were crushed using mortar and pestle and meshed to achieve particle size less than 50 μm. The amount of sample used was 1–2 mg, enough to cover the XRD grid. Particle size was maintained constant for all samples to maintain uniformity. XRD analyzes biochar to detect {002} and {100} peaks of graphite crystals at 25° and 41.6°, respectively. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was carried out on a Hitachi 300 kV HF-3300 TEM/STEM with cold field emission gun technology, at 100 kV electron beam to locate crystals in biochar samples. Samples were crushed using a mortar and pestle, to achieve biochar particles thinner than 100 nm. Crushed biochar was dispersed in a small amount of isopropanol. The dispersed samples were transferred onto the TEM sample grid using a fine point tweezer. The loaded TEM sample grid was inspected under an optical microscope to ensure the presence of thin biochar particles. The electrical conductivity was measured using two different methods – one with and one without compression. A Hewlett Packard 34401 A multimeter was used to measure the resistance across the biochar, which was converted to conductivity for samples of known dimension. The electrical resistance value was recorded only after a stable reading was achieved with a good contact between the aluminum foil and the biochar sample. The equipment recorded the pressure exerted on the sample against the change in height of the sample and evaluated the peak stress and the ultimate stress. A stopwatch was used to measure the time period simultaneously with compression to correlate compression measurements with resistance. In order to determine electrical conductivity of biochar, contact resistance must be eliminated from the measured total resistance. It is achieved by measuring the resistance of samples of different sample lengths (typically 2–10 mm) and by applying a graphite powder-based contact fluid. To ensure the precision, resistance was measured under a set minimum (∼40 kPa) pressure for at least eight times, with and without contact fluid. Data in Dry biomass typically contains 50 wt% of carbon. Carbonization or pyrolysis drives out hydrogen as well as oxygen and results in an increase in carbon content of the carbonized samples (i.e. biochar). Carbon content in biochar is therefore the measure of degree of carbonization. Elemental contents of biochar samples in Carbon content of biochar is directly dependent on pyrolysis conditions. As mentioned earlier, the biochar used in this studied was commercially sourced. Compounded by the inherent variation in wood feedstock, carbon content of the commercial biochar was highly variable. However, it is generally known that a higher heating temperature and a longer heating time would result in a higher carbon content, i.e. a greater degree of carbonization. All ten samples of various degrees of carbonization were subjected to electric conductivity measurements. Bamboo was most resistive biochar and didn't provide any value during our electrical conductivity measurements. Three sugar maple biochar samples with carbon content less than 85 wt% (SM-1, SM-2 and SM-3) were hardly conductive; their conductivity was too small to measure using the experimental set-up. Likewise, two oak/hickory samples with carbon content less than 83 wt% (OH-1 and OH-2) were not conductive. There seems a minimum carbon content for a biochar to be conductive (>5.0 × 10 The conductivity of five samples with measurable values are presented in Despite the comminution, biochar particles were thicker than 100 nm so that biochar edges were used to observe crystallization in biochar. Micrographs of biochar particle edges are shown in  Electrical conductivity of biochar samples is affected by the volatile content as shown in X-Ray Diffraction spectra in Skeletal conductivity of carbon in the biochar is calculated based on the assumption that biochar is made up of two components: solid carbon and pores filled with air, and only solid carbon is electrically conductive. To calculate skeletal conductivity, volume fraction of solid carbon in biochar is determined based on the density of solid carbon (assuming amorphous) and the measured bulk density of biochar. Without compression, the highest bulk conductivity is 106.4 S/m, found with a heat-treated sugar maple biochar with 96.2 wt% carbon. Skeletal conductivity was calculated to be 343.2 S/m which is slightly greater than that of single graphite crystal in the direction perpendicular to graphene plane (333.3 S/m). The electrical conductivity for various samples increased with increasing contact pressure, up until the first fracture, which is followed by a sharp decrease in conductivity. After first fracture, there is a further decrease in measured conductivity until the sample fails. This can be observed in As observed from Sugar maple hardwood biochar were more conductive at higher peak loads than oak and hickory and withstood higher average pressure before first fracture. Also, sugar maple withstood the highest pressure before fracturing and also withstood loading for the longest time. In order to better understand the effect of compression on biochar, we loaded the biochar manually and recorded the change in conductivity. Pressure experiments were performed on samples both with and without graphite contacting fluid, which helps to eliminate the contact resistance. The pressure was kept well below the first fracture value (∼1 MPa) and as expected the conductivity increased with loading. This pressure though rigorous, does not crush the biochar in any way. However, when the pressure was released; and electrical conductivity measured after 24 h it returned to the original value, which was measured without any loading as shown in We know that biochar macrostructures resemble wood structures closely, therefore biochar may retain wood properties also. The retention of electrical conductivity of biochar after loading and unloading may be indication that biochar retains the elastic properties of wood also. We termed this phenomena “elastic behavior of electric conductivity of biochar”. In order to discuss and remove contact resistance, we will use the raw resistance measurements. The corresponding contact resistance associated with sample tested in It is anticipated that both pre-treatment of wood feedstock and pyrolysis conditions affect carbon content/structure of biochar and consequently electrical conductivity. Future work will be carried out to elucidate these anticipated effects. A method was developed to measure electrical conductivity of monolithic biochar, while eliminating contact resistances and maintaining the structural integrity of samples. This method enabled this first systematic study on a fundamental property that is particularly important to applications where biochar is used as the electrode material, such as supercapacitor. Electrical conductivity of biochar is highly dependent on its degree of carbonization which is measured by its carbon content. Higher carbon contents result in higher electrical conductivity; bulk conductivity increases from 2.5 × 10 Heat treatment of biochar at 950 °C for 8 h under an inert atmosphere substantially increased electrical conductivity, from 0.16 to 106.41 S/m. The more than 600-times increase in electrical conductivity is attributed to the increase in both the degree of carbonization (94.6–96.2 wt % of C) and the degree of graphitization confirmed by X-ray diffraction patterns. TEM images, SAD patterns and histogram revealed the presence of graphite nanocrystals (∼3 nm) in highly-carbonized biochar samples, demonstrating the importance of carbon allotrope development in determining biochar conductivity. Electrical conductivity of biochar is found to increase with compressive loading until the formation of internal fractures, which then reduces the conductivity. It was observed that the conductivity returned to the pre-compression value when the loading was released prior to the start of fracture – a phenomenon we termed “elastic behavior of electric conductivity of biochar”. Although this phenomenon is consistent with the anticipated dependence between conductivity and structure, more work is required to understand the mechanism completely. The authors acknowledge