In this study, sulfuric acid leaching was applied to recover lithium, cobalt, nickel and manganese from the cathodic active material of spent LIBs in presence of a reducing agent, sodium bisulfite. The conditions for the dissolution of valuable metals were optimized while varying the parameters such as acid concentration, leaching time, temperature and pulp density. It was found that with 1M H2SO4 and 0.075M NaHSO3 as reducing agent ∼96.7% Li, 91.6% Co, 96.4% Ni and 87.9% Mn were recovered in 4h at 368K and a pulp density of 20g/L. Kinetic data for the dissolution of the metals such as Li, Co and Ni in the temperature range 308–368K showed best fit to the kinetic model governed by the empirical logarithmic rate law. Leaching of the metals proceeded through the diffusion of lixiviant on the surface of the substrate particles, which was corroborated by XRD phase analyses and SEM–EDS of the untreated sample and the leach residues. From the leach liquor, >98% Co was recovered as cobalt oxalate (CoC2O4·2H2O) by precipitation with oxalic acid. MnCO3, NiCO3 and Li2CO3 were precipitated from the cobalt depleted solution. By this process, high recovery of Li and Co could be achieved in the solution and then in the form of carbonate and oxalate, respectively along with the recovery of Mn and Ni as their carbonates.Lithium ion batteries (LIBs) are currently one of the most commonly used batteries. A large number of these batteries have been used over the past 25 Several methods have been proposed to treat spent LIBs in order to recover its metal contents. The metal recovery from spent LIBs mainly involves the mechanical/thermal treatment, and mechano-chemical and dissolution processes. The chemical processes generally involve hydrometallurgical approach such as acid or alkaline leaching, chemical precipitation, separation and electro-chemical recovery as described in a recent review by Meshram et al Most previous researchers have reported the studies on the leaching of lithium ion batteries using H Around 20 Leaching of metals from the cathode active material was carried out in a 500-mL three necked round bottom flask with a magnetic stirrer, a sensor based temperature controller and a reflux condenser which was fitted to the flask to avoid the loss due to evaporation. The leaching experiments were performed while charging a known amount of cathode active powder in absence/ presence of the reductant viz., sodium bisulfite in the lixiviant containing the desired concentration of sulfuric acid. Effect of concentration of sulfuric acid (0.5–3 The cathode material contains 35.8% Co, 6.5% Li, 11.6% Mn and 10.06% Ni along with trace amounts of Al, Cu and Fe. The X-ray diffraction analysis of the cathode material ( Effect of H In order to examine the effect of reductant concentration on the extent of metal dissolution, the concentration of NaHSO Increase in the recovery of cobalt is attributed to the reduction of Co The effect of time (0–5 The effect of pulp density (5–50 Effect of temperature on the leaching of valuable metals was also studied using 1 On examining the leaching of various metals with time ( To find out the nature of interaction between the particles of cathode powder sample and the lixiviant, an attempt was made to fit the kinetic data obtained from the leaching experiments at different temperatures in the shrinking core models based on the surface chemical control (Eq. Kinetic data were thus analyzed by using empirical model of the leaching that may proceed by the surface diffusion of lixiviant in the substrate particles, which could be governed by the logarithmic rate law represented as The relation between the specific rate constant determined from Eq. The leach residues obtained from the experiments were characterized using XRD phase analysis ( The leaching of metals with time was further examined by comparing the change in the elemental distribution of cathodic sample with that of the leach residues ( Cobalt oxalate was precipitated by adding oxalic acid drop by drop to the leach solution (6.56 Leach liquor after cobalt precipitation was then used for precipitation of Mn and Ni. The pH of the cobalt depleted solution was adjusted to 7.5 by adding 5 After recovering Co, Mn and Ni, the precipitate of lithium carbonate was produced by adding an excess amount of sodium carbonate in the filtrate. The precipitation process can be expressed as Eq. Because of the lower concentration of Li A general flow-sheet of the entire process is given in  The cathodic material of spent LIBs containing Li, Co, Mn and Ni, can be treated by sulfuric acid leaching in the presence of sodium bisulfite as a reducing agent. Under the optimum conditions with 1 Kinetics of the leaching of Li, Co and Ni follow the logarithmic rate law which is further corroborated by the XRD phase analysis and SEM–EDS studies of the cathode material and that of the residues generated with time. Approximately 96% pure cobalt oxalate (>98% Co) can be precipitated using oxalic acid at 323 A flowsheet is worked out to process the spent LIBs of the laptops and to recover the metals such as Co, Li, Ni and Mn by reductive leaching and precipitation. The authors are thankful to the Director,