We time-studied a Caterpillar 950F front-end loader and a Caterpillar 528 grapple skidder used to extract bunched whole trees to a landing in a short rotation Eucalyptus plantation. The loader was 40–60% more productive than the grapple skidder, depending on extraction distance. Alternatively, the single loader could both extract trees and handle the landing duties, such as moving residues from the flail-chipper, whereas the skidder required a second machine (skidder or small loader) to handle landing activities. Front-end loaders appear to be very promising as extraction devices for short rotation plantations where tree characteristics, terrain and soil conditions allow them to be used.Restricted access to natural forests has made short rotation wood crops (SRWC) increasingly attractive as sources of wood fiber, and several forest products companies in the USA have established large clonal and/or seedling plantations of However, skidding may introduce dirt into the bark and foliage residues that can be used for fuel. In addition, skidder load capacity may be restricted by grapple area limitations and/or the drag force of the skidded trees. For these reasons, there is interest in alternative means of primary transport. One of these, forwarding trees with conventional front-end loaders, was proposed for SRWC over a decade ago Assuming that forwarding produces lower contamination, there is still a need to know how it compares to skidding in terms of productivity and cost. Very few studies have addressed the use of front-end loaders as forwarding vehicles. Those focused on small loaders and dealt with log-lengths rather than whole trees This study compared the performance of a grapple skidder and a front-end loader used to extract SRWC at the same site and under similar conditions. In addition, the study aimed to build a prediction model to relate productivity to the main influencing factors such as extraction distance. The study was carried out at the Simpson Tehama Fiber Farm (now Action Tree Farm) in Corning, California. The Farm consists of a In both cases, the trees were felled with a disc-saw feller-buncher; at both sites, trees were delivered to the landing and processed with flail-chipper combines. But while one contractor used a grapple skidder to move the bunched trees to the landing, the other employed a front-end loader ( The operators of the skidder and loader both had several years of experience with that type of machine. However, the loader operator was relatively new to forest operations, having left a sawmill only 6 months earlier. The operators performed all service and most of the repair work. Both operators would drive their machines from the landing to the loading site. Once there, they would maneuver to approach the load and grab one or more bunches; in many cases they moved with a partial load before picking up additional bunches. When a full load had been assembled, the machine would travel back to the landing and drop the load near the infeed of the flail-chipper, within reach of the flail's loader. The extraction cycle was split into a number of time elements: Travel Empty, Maneuver to Load, Grab, Move While Loading, Travel Loaded, and Unload; the elements are defined in The working routines of both machines were almost identical. The main difference was that the loader lifted its load clear off the ground, whereas the skidder raised only the butt ends. A second difference was in the operation of the feller-bunchers. The one working with the skidder accumulated compact bunches, while that paired with the loader saved time by dropping trees in more of a windrow fashion. The operator had directionally felled the trees, but found it unnecessary to create large, compact bunches for the loader because the loader picked them up from the side rather than from the end. Thirdly, the skidder operation utilized a second skidder The extraction time elements and related time-motion data were recorded on a Husky Hunter 2 handheld field computer equipped with Siwork3 timestudy software. Time spent by the extraction machines in landing work, in waiting (interactive idle time) at the landing, and in other delays such as servicing, breaks and repairs was also recorded. The extraction cycle elements and landing work were considered productive time; waiting and other delays were not. Daily chip output was obtained by weighing all chip loads produced during each study day. Total tree weight was estimated by applying a factor of 1.3 to the weight of the clean chips in order to account for the limbs and the bark. This was based on the operation's long-term yield of approximately 3 loads of hog fuel for every 10 loads of clean chips. All stems contained in each turn were counted. The total daily count corresponded to the total number of trees chipped, since the study continued uninterrupted for the whole day and extraction was performed by a single machine on each operation. Extraction path lengths were measured with a string machine, and flags were placed at A summary of the study time and production is shown in The main results of the time-motion study are shown in The operating conditions for the skidder and loader were not identical; the skidder's extraction distance was longer and the average tree weight was greater than for the loader. However, the difference between the capacities of the two machines for extraction is striking. Although the loader took more time for essentially every extraction element, it could produce two-thirds more than the skidder because of its larger payload. The skidder, being designed for rapid extraction, maintained higher average travel speeds on both empty and loaded travel: 30–40% faster than the loader. The latter is slower, but it can move loads that are more than twice as large. This explains the longer times taken by the loader to accumulate a load. Another key difference between the two machines was the amount of time they spent at the landing and the way they used it. The capacities of both the skidder and the loader exceeded the productivities of the flail-chippers, so they had excess time. The loader had enough time to handle the landing work. The skidder's grapple and decking blade, however, were less suited to moving residues at the landing, and the skidder did not have much excess time, so a second machine was required for landing duties. The loader, on the other hand, could both forward trees to the chipper and remove residues from under it, an operation that it performed very rapidly, being designed primarily for such tasks. The effects of several individual factors affecting productivity were tested with regression analysis of the extraction time elements ( The relationships in The forms of the relationships and the specific parameters that define them are of interest. For example, the relationships for travel time reflect the higher speed of the skidder, and the load effect comes into the travel loaded equation as a speed-related function. The loader is slower, so empty travel time increases more sharply as the distance grows. The loader encounters no skidding drag, however, so the size of the load did not seem to increase the travel loaded time through a speed-reducing effect, but rather as a fixed additional time per ton. A possible explanation resides in the need to find the optimal lift height for each load, which gets more complicated as the load size increases. Larger loads might require higher lifts to avoid dragging, but a higher lift involves a risk in terms of machine stability, especially if the load is heavy. Therefore, the time required to adjust the lift will grow with load size. Even though the time spent to adjust the lift was recorded as part of the grabbing time, minor adjustments occurred at the beginning of the return trip and could not be isolated. This effect may have been compounded by the operator's caution; he drove slowly at the beginning of the loaded travel until he felt reassured and then accelerated to normal travel speed. For both machines, loading time was related to number of bunches. The number of bunches is a good predictor of move time while loading for the skidder, but less so for the loader. That is because bunches were much less definite at the loader site, where trees had been felled directionally and essentially windrowed. Load weight was a much stronger predictor of loading time for the loader. Using the observed averages for load weight and bunches per turn for each machine, we calculated cycle times and productivities as a function of extraction distance. The results are shown in The loader as an extraction machine may be used to reduce the number of landings and possibly roading requirements by extending the maximum extraction distance. For example, a skidder can produce 60 green tonnes PMH Even though the skidder is designed to extract and the loader to handle, the loader proved to be a better extraction machine under the study conditions because of its ability to move larger loads. The loader does have potential drawbacks. It is somewhat more expensive than a skidder: purchase prices for new equivalent machines are $210,000 for a 950G loader, versus $175,000 for a 525 grapple skidder. Using standard costing formulae One might expect a loader to produce less breakage than a skidder because the loader keeps stems from dragging on the ground. In Simpson's experience, however, breakage with the loader depended primarily on stem form. Crooked stems are more readily broken by the clamp on the loader because they are gripped at a smaller diameter midsection, while the skidder grapples the trees by the butts. Although no quantitative data were collected, visual inspection of the harvested units indicated that breakage loss was relatively minor in both cases. Under the conditions of the study the loader performed better than the skidder, extracting more wood and handling landing activities as well. As an extraction vehicle, the loader benefits from a much larger payload, which it can move over reasonably long distances at an acceptable speed. To its superior productivity, the loader couples the advantage of forwarding versus skidding, i.e. reduced contamination. Of course, this is true for flat, solid terrain only; when the slope gets steep or the ground soft, the loader is penalized by its high center of gravity and its low flotation. From an organizational perspective, the loader is again the best choice. It is more versatile than the skidder and can take care of both extraction and landing management. This was evident in this study, where the alternative was between a single loader and two skidders—one to extract and the other to keep the landing clean. The loader might be termed task-versatile, while the skidder is terrain-versatile. Where the terrain allows it, the loader is a better choice because it can perform more jobs at a faster pace. Contractors who operate primarily in SRWC plantations on dry and gentle terrain should opt for the loader. On the contrary, those who harvest a variety of different stands should stick to the skidder, which has a wider range of operational capabilities. A concluding remark must be made on the adaptation of loaders to wood extraction. The standard loader is designed for operation in a wood yard and lacks some of the features that make a safe forest machine, in particular adequate guarding. Loaders used in forestry often show extensive damage, which is particularly evident in the underbody and around the cab. If a loader is used to extract wood, it should be fitted with the appropriate guarding to protect both the machine and the operator. The authors wish to thank Mr. Dave Cooper, Harvesting and Establishment Contract Supervisor at Simpson Fiber Farm, as well as the harvesting crews of the companies Tehama Brothers and Violetti Brothers—in particular the machine operators, Gus and Roberto. This project was supported in part by the USDA Forest Service Southern Research Station under Cooperative Agreement SRS-30-CA-96-058.        