This paper presents a novel and robust three-dimensional plain concrete cracking model applicable to the study of structural stability of large structures, such as dams, while considering the presence of pressurized water in propagating cracks. When leaving the elastic range, there is a transition from a continuum approach to a XFEM approach. This mechanical model is coupled with a poro-damage model where the permeability is increased as micro-cracks coalesce into macro-cracks. The crack opening computation during continuum damage is based on a local XFEM formulation without the need for a reference length in a strongly coupled hydro-mechanical formulation to update the uplift pressures. The 3D crack path computation is adapted from an analogy to the heat conduction problem to draw the envelope of the discontinuities’ tangent vector field. Six benchmark problems available from the literature, including a 96m-high arch dam, are considered and indicate the very good performance of the proposed model as well as its applicability to real industrial structures.In recent years, different numerical approaches have been proposed for the solution of crack representation and propagation. Within the framework of the FEM, there are two approaches, namely discrete and diffuse, to represent the discontinuity. In the discrete models, the crack is a geometric discontinuity. This can be modeled explicitly by an interface element In the diffuse crack models such as phase-field methods (PFM), a scalar field variable is introduced to: first, distinguish between the damaged and the undamaged phases and second, track the crack paths by an evolution equation over a fixed mesh Large 3D plain concrete structures, such as dams, must be assessed for structural safety, considering crack initiation and non-planar propagation in the presence of pressurized water under usual, unusual and extreme loads. For these structures, the failure mode is most often triggered by a few dominant discrete cracks. Robust and efficient algorithms are required to track and characterize discontinuities’ opening as they evolve from micro cracks into the continuum to discrete cracks. Without the a priori knowledge of the crack location, an efficient strategy to avoid remeshing and to follow crack propagation is the XFEM. 3D XFEM constitutive models for concrete structures were proposed in One objective of this paper is to extend to 3D our previous work This paper is organized as follows. In Section The Biot model of a porous material saturated with a fluid assumes that the solid skeleton is permeated by an interconnected network of pores filled with a moving fluid. The description of stress in the fluid is limited to its hydrostatic component. Therefore, the total stress The transport process with regard to the averaged motion of the fluid involves molecular diffusion. The molecular diffusion and viscous flow are dissipative. The positivity of the dissipation associated with the viscous flow of the fluid through the porous solid can be written in the form ( The displacements of the solid and the interstitial pressure are the unknowns of the problem. Therefore, two trial function spaces, To complete the mathematical description, the weak form of Eq. In addition, this form of the continuity equation will be expanded for the flow in damaged material in the presence of microcracks in Section Replacing the trial spaces A strategy based on a transition from a continuum approach to a kinematic XFEM approach for cohesive crack propagation is used. This process allows the benefits of the continuum damage approach to be combined with the benefits of the cohesive extended finite element method. The regularized local anisotropic continuum damage approach The non-linear behavior of concrete under monotonic loading is described using an anisotropic formulation. The behavior of a damaged material results in the constitutive relations of an undamaged material in which the usual stress is replaced by the effective stress by invoking the principle of energy equivalence The damage evolution law is proposed in The damage evolution is based on the principal strains exceeding the damage threshold The computation of the cohesive forces is based on The traction–separation law is computed using a typical decaying function related to the history parameter Following the approach proposed in  The energy dissipation of the continuous damage mechanics approach from damage initiation until the transition strain occurs must be equivalent to the energy dissipated by the cohesive model from damage initiation until the transition opening is reached; The energy remaining to be dissipated from the transition strain in the CDM model to complete material separation must be equal to that of the cohesive model; and The initial traction stress of the cohesive surface must be equal to the CDM model stress at the transition strain. Using these conditions, the parameters A parallel between material damage and increasing permeability in the porous flow model can be achieved. Indeed, damaged concrete has a large number of pores that can be filled in the liquid phase. This observation may be represented mathematically by modifying the permeability and/or the Biot coefficient as a function of the damage level. According to A single mathematical law, based on the law of mixtures which makes it possible to describe the evolution of permeability from the initiation of micro cracks until the opening of the macro crack The XFEM method requires the discontinuity paths to be identified to capture the displacement jump. Discontinuity paths identification is a complex challenge to address. In A short survey of three-dimensional concrete problems with non-planar discontinuities computed using the five tracking categories listed above is presented here. The local discontinuity tracking strategy was used on the Brokenshire test The pull out test is often used to validate 3D non planar discontinuity tracking algorithms. Even if this test is not an extrusion of a 2D geometry (this test is discussed in Section Based on the above references, it is possible to draw the following conclusions. First, there are few reference cases to validate crack tracking algorithms with complex surfaces. Second, few works deal with real 3D applications of tracking algorithms using either PUFEM The global strategy proposed in The main idea of this tracking strategy is to draw the envelopes of the discontinuities tangent vector field. An analogy to a heat conduction-like problem is used to compute the nodal isovalues (temperatures) used to draw the envelopes. A steady heat conduction problem with no internal heat source can then be solved with prescribed Dirichlet and Neumann boundary conditions. The direction normal to the plane of propagation of the discontinuity can be defined as The solution of    Every call to the tracking algorithm is dealt with the class Thereafter, for each new instantiation of the To determine the crack position at the zero level-set ( Pseudo-algorithm 6 is given for the marching cube method applied to isosurfacing extraction computation within a finite element. Marking scenarios can be found in many references  The crack position is computed using the algorithm presented in Section The computer implementation of this model is achieved in a parallel object oriented C＋＋ code. The solver and parallel data structure is provided by the package Trilinos  The Newton–Raphson algorithm is iterated until convergence is reached. The discontinuities are propagated using the CDM. In this case the CDM-XFEM switching threshold can be exceeded. When the solution is converged, the CDM-XFEM switching threshold is verified. If there are elements exceeding the threshold, the nodes are enriched, the matrix system is rebuilt and the Newton–Raphson algorithm is continued. This process is repeated as long as there are elements reaching the CDM-XFEM switching threshold. When this process is completed, the next load step is computed; During the Newton–Raphson iteration, as soon as an element reaches the CDM-XFEM switching threshold, the matrix system is rebuilt once the nodes are enriched (by increasing the number of degrees of freedom). This process is repeated as long as there are elements reaching the CDM-XFEM switching threshold. When this process is completed, the next load step is computed; All the nodes have seven degrees of freedom These solution algorithms are illustrated in  The algorithm presented in the UML activity diagram is iterated until convergence. The convergence criterion of the Newton–Raphson method is taken such that the imbalance force norm is less than 0.1% of the external loads norm and that the XFEM switching threshold is not exceeded by any element. For all the validation example presented in this section, the parameter that controls the weighting between the normal and tangential opening is taken as The first validation example is taken from the experimental study    The series of experimental tests carried out on a 180 mm square-shaped beam with an eccentric load resulting in a bending and torsion load is considered as the second validation example. This series of tests called PCT3D (Plain Concrete Test in 3D) was performed experimentally The geometry and the boundary conditions are sketched in   The load–CMOD results are compared with the experimental results in  This validation example models the pull-out of a steel anchor embedded in concrete. This is a test commonly used to illustrate the performance of 3D numerical methods, especially in applications involving a curved discontinuity surface, as considered in Only a quarter of the cylinder is modeled to simplify the problem with symmetrical boundary conditions applied on the face along the   To assess whether the CDM-XFEM method developed in this work can be applied to industrial problems, a real arch dam model was computed. The Alqueva arch dam, built on the Guadiana River, is located in Portugal near the Spanish border. It was completed in 2002, creating the largest freshwater reserve dammed by artificial methods in Europe. It is a 96-meters high double-curvature arch dam with a crest length of 458 m. The thickness at its base is between 32 and 33 meters and the thickness at its crest is 7 m. A fault located in the ground under the foundation which forms an angle of approximately To analyze the safety of the Alqueva dam, a landslide scenario of the left bank is considered. The imposed displacement applied in the fault is decomposed into tangential and normal components to the fault where the normal component is three quarters of the tangential component. This hypothesis was considered to be able to compare the numerical results with the experimental results obtained in scale models    The wedge-splitting device tested in   Multiplication of the representative element length defined as Multiplication of the projected element characteristic length Use of the CDM-XFEM method proposed herein.   Modeling interstitial pressures in hydraulic structures combined with a constitutive model for concrete, including cracking represents a major challenge for performing nonlinear computation in the field of dams. Cracks in dams have a high probability to initiate along a weak construction joint. After a certain distance along the joints, the cracks usually develop in a diagonal profile leading to failure, a mechanism that was observed at the Bouzey dam The geometry of the 41 m Ternay masonry dam is given in    This contribution has proposed a combined mechanical damage — XFEM approach for coupled hydro-mechanical computation applied to hydraulic fracturing problems. Our work has shown that the proposed method is able to simulate the propagation of non-planar fractures with complex 3D geometries. The paper provides the algorithms’ details required to effectively implement the approach. A key ingredient of this method is the discontinuity tracking algorithm. The so-called global method is used to follow discontinuities. This method has been applied by other authors, but here it is extended to much larger problems. Another important aspect is the approach proposed to define the crack opening for discontinuities computed using a continuum damage method. This aspect is extremely relevant for the simulation of hydraulic fractures and for evaluating reinforcement effects in shear loading. The crack opening computed using a local XFEM solution at the element level was compared to other methods commonly used in the literature and has shown its superiority when computing discontinuity openings across elements of different sizes, shapes and orientations. Several different examples involving the propagation of non-planar and non-smooth crack surfaces were solved with our coupled XFEM approach. The performance of the proposed model in the analysis of load-induced cracks and hydraulically induced cracks was demonstrated using reference problems. The XFEM was first published around twenty years ago, but it has not yet been successfully deployed in the industry to model quasi brittle materials. The challenges inherent when dealing with non-planar discontinuities’ tracking still exist. Commercial software does not offer the possibility to fully compute implicit discontinuities in non-planar 3D problems using XFEM. Many new extended discretization methods have been proposed since the first appearance of the XFEM method. However, to date none have been able to compute complex, large-scale cracking problems; further research is needed before these methods become mature enough to compute alkali-silicate reaction (ASR) induced cracking for problems the size of a dam. Both of these topics are the subject of ongoing research by the authors.