Objective
                  To report the radiologic and functional results of a multicenter, prospective case series of patients with comminuted lumbar fractures treated with 2-stage circumferential arthrodesis.
               
                  Methods
                  A multicenter prospective case series of 74 patients with comminuted lumbar fractures was analyzed. The strategy entailed initial posterior osteosynthesis, followed by physical replacement with an expandable titanium cage filled with autologous bone via retroperitoneal lumbotomy. The mechanism of lesion formation and epidemiologic characteristics were recorded. Clinical and quality-of-life analyses (visual analog scale [VAS], Oswesty Disability Index [ODI], Short Form 12 [SF-12]) were performed over a minimum observation period of 1 year. Radiologic parameters, including deformity measurements, were recorded at each evaluation. Fusion was analyzed by means of a 1-year monitoring scan.
               
                  Results
                  The mean patient age was 38.1 years, and median duration of follow-up was 2.1 years (interquartile range, 1.3–2.9). The distribution of fractures according to the Magerl classification scheme was as follows: A, 64.8%; B, 16.7%; C, 18.5%. At the last follow-up, fusion was considered certain in 57 cases (77%). The mean VAS score was 2.1 ± 1.3, mean ODI was 14.7 ± 8.0, mean SF-12 Physical Component Summary score was 43.2 ± 9.3, and mean SF-12 Mental Component Summary score was 50.8 ± 5.9. Correction of the regional sagittal deformity was significant during the postoperative period, with a mean increase in lordosis of 9.0° (P < 0.0001). The loss of mean correction at the last follow-up (−2.9°) was not significant.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Circumferential arthrodesis, including posterior osteosynthesis and physical replacement with an expandable cage and autologous graft, is applicable to the treatment of comminuted lumbar fractures. A high rate of fusion was obtained with significant and long-lasting correction of the sagittal deformity. Functional scores measured at 1 year suggest mild disability. The ODI, SF-12, and VAS scores were positively correlated with fusion at the last follow-up.Various therapeutic strategies for treating comminuted fractures of the thoracolumbar spine have been described. The choice of a combined anterior–posterior strategy involving 2 surgical procedures is not systematic. In published series, up to 38% of patients underwent both procedures at the same time. The purported advantages of combined procedures include increased primary stability, optimal reduction capability, decreased postoperative correction loss, The main objective of this paper is to describe the radiologic results in terms of pelvic–spinal sagittal balance and fusion in addition to the functional clinical results of a multicenter, prospective case series of comminuted fractures of the thoracolumbar spine treated with circumferential arthrodesis. Epidemiology, surgical indications, and factors influencing the quality of results were analyzed as well. Between January 2011 and January 2014, 85 patients treated for an unstable fracture of the lumbar spine (Magerl type A.3.2, A.3.3, B.2, and C fractures) were included in this prospective multicenter study conducted at 3 teaching hospitals in France (2 orthopedic surgery sites and 1 neurosurgery site). The strategy involved the systematic performance of 2-stage surgery, with posterior osteosynthesis followed by vertebral corpectomy together with reconstruction using an expandable titanium cage (VLIFT Vertebral Body Replacement System; Stryker, Kalamazoo, Michigan, USA). In this cohort, the number of levels fused was always the same according the level of fracture. The number of vertebrae included in the fusion was 4 (2 above + 1 below) for L1 and L2 and 3 (1 + 1) for L3 fractures and distal fractures. In patients with a preoperative neurologic disorder, laminectomy was performed. Patients with pathological and/or osteoporotic fractures were excluded from the study, as were patients with a history of thoracic or lumbar spinal arthrodesis. Preoperative and postoperative clinical and radiographic evaluations were performed, with a minimum follow-up of 1 year. The duration of follow-up was defined as the time between the second surgical intervention and the last clinical and radiologic follow-up. Demographic and morphological characteristics, including age, sex, and body mass index (BMI), in addition to mechanisms of injury, were collated. Each patient's initial neurologic status and clinical course were evaluated according to the American Spinal Injury Association Impairment Scale (AIS), At the start of treatment, a thoracolumbar scan was performed to evaluate the fracture according to the Magerl classification scheme After each surgical procedure, at 1 year and the last follow-up, full spinal X-rays were obtained in a standard position ( For each procedure, the posterior osteosynthesis technique used (traditional or percutaneous), the performance of laminectomy, and the time interval between the procedures were specified. The duration of surgery and perioperative bleeding were quantified, and preoperative and postoperative complications were recorded. Parameters were entered and shared using secure computer software (Keops; SMAIO, Lyon, France). The radiographic analysis used a previously validated dedicated option (OptiSpine, Birmingham and Wolverhampton, United Kingdom). We performed a descriptive analysis of epidemiologic, morphologic, and radiologic data and the main clinical and surgical parameters, along with comparative unidimensional and bidimensional analyses of clinical and radiographic results between the preoperative and postoperative periods and at the last follow-up. A correlation was sought between radiologic criteria and clinical criteria, and, among the fusion criteria, parameters of sagittal balance and clinical results. Multivariate analysis sought to identify nonfusion risk factors and poor algo-functional results at some point after surgery. In this context, variables with Of the 85 patients initially included in the study, 11 were lost to follow-up after the second surgical procedure. Only the 74 patients with complete follow-up were analyzed. The median duration of follow-up was 25 months, with an interquartile range (IQR) of 15.6–34.8 months. In this case series, age had a bimodal distribution with a group of young patients age <35 years (median age, 24 years; IQR, 21–26 years) and a group age >35 years (median age, 52 years; IQR, 48–69 years). The female:male ratio was 0.58:1. The women were younger (median age, 27 years, compared with 48 years in men;  Eighteen patients (24.3%) had multiple injuries. Neurologic disorders on admission according to the AIS are reported in The fracture distribution according to the 3 major groups in the Magerl classification was as follows: A, 64.8%; B, 16.7%; and C, 18.5%. Open posterior arthrodesis was performed in 64 patients (86.5%). In 23 of these patients (31.1%), laminectomy was performed in combination with this procedure. Percutaneous posterior osteosynthesis was performed in 8 patients (10.8%). The repartition of the levels of fracture is shown in The mean time interval between the 2 surgeries was 15.3 ± 6.2 days. No statistically significant difference in either the indications for supplementary anterior surgery or the interval between the 2 surgical procedures was found across the study sites. 74 patients were assessed postoperatively and at least 1 year using computed tomography and large-format X-rays. Fractures after the initial surgery were distributed as outlined in At the last follow-up (median, 25 months; IQR, 15.6–34.8 months), fusion criteria were considered “achieved” in 57 cases (77%). In the other patients, fusion was considered doubtful. No cases of established pseudarthrosis were observed. Across the whole cohort, 3 screws were in an extrapedicular position, with no specific clinical impact. No secondary displacement of implanted osteosynthesis material emerged during follow-up. Postoperative impaction of the cage in adjacent endplates, <5 mm, occurred in 10 cases (13.5%), with no specific clinical consequences. At the last follow-up, mean values of the ODI, SF-12 Physical Component Summary (PCS), and SF-12 Mental Component Summary (MCS) were 14.7 ± 8.0, 43.2 ± 9.3, and 50.8 ± 5.9, respectively. No statistically significant difference was observed between the study sites in regard to these functional results. At the last follow-up, sphincter disorders persisted in 6 patients (8.1%). We found statistically significant negative correlations between ODI and BMI ( The combined results of several variables were insufficient for reliable multivariate analysis in a search for models of crossed interactions. The results of combined anterior-posterior arthrodesis applied to comminuted fractures of the lumbar spine are not well documented. The benefit of a second corpectomy with graft lies in the extent of the injury-related destruction of the vertebral body. For some teams, the benefit of an additional graft by anterior approach lies in neutralization of the discs. The Thoracolumbar Injury Classification and Severity scale and the location of fractures also could be used to dictate the type of intervention (anterior, posterior, or circumferential). The technique reported here corresponds to a partial corpectomy, but with removal of the entire height of the vertebral body along with resection of the 2 discs adjacent to the fracture. Some surgeons prefer to maintain the underlying disc. Technical difficulties and morbidity vary according to the level of corpectomy. The specific anatomic relationships obviously entail differing types of complications. In front of L4 and L5, the psoas muscle is thicker, and its mobilization could be associated with greater bleeding and more lesions of the lumbar plexus nerves. Transient sensory deficits along the anterolateral thigh and iliopsoas weakness may occur, but to a far lesser degree and for only a short duration. This surgery in L4 is particularly challenging, given the need for ligation of the iliolumbar vein. L5 corpectomy is a rather uncommon procedure, because of the left common iliac vein crossing the spine diagonally anterior to this vertebra. Fortunately, those locations of comminuted fractures are rare, with only 1 case affecting L5 in our cohort. Corpectomy of L2 or L1 is generally considered easier, but still may require detaching diaphragm insertions and managing pleural perforations. Regardless of the level, segmental vessels must be identified and clipped or ligated before bony resection. The use of an expandable cage has the advantage of adjusting perfectly to local anatomic conditions in terms of height as well as lordosis. Technical practices vary among surgical teams. Some promote corpectomy first, followed by either posterior fixation or lateral plate fixation to allow for not only removal of any fractured fragments from the spinal canal, but also restoration of lordosis via expansion of the anterior cage. The morbidity associated with this type of procedure can be reduced with the use of video-assisted techniques, such as retroperitoneoscopy. Analysis of this cohort suggests good efficacy in terms of radiologic and functional results. The mean corrections of local and regional kyphosis were significant and long-lasting. For comparison, in the case series of Bouyer et al. These observations support the benefit of supplementary anterior arthrodesis to prevent postoperative loss of sagittal correction of comminuted fractures and, conversely, the absence of any impact on functional scores. Strengthening of the anterior column appears to be relevant for fractures with a McCormack classification score of >6. The time interval between the 2 surgical procedures did not differ significantly between the study sites and did not affect the clinical and radiologic results. Other teams recommend the earlier surgery alone, ensuring neural decompression and good correction of kyphosis. The functional scores obtained at the last follow-up were associated with a satisfactory quality of life, except in those patients with continuing sphincter disorders. No significant correlations between these scores and the radiologic parameters of sagittal balance were apparent. In our opinion, this is related to the insufficient size of the population studied and, thus the poor robustness of the tests used. Moreover, the achievement of fusion has an impact on functional scores. This highlights the benefit of the supplementary anterior graft, although this study remains observational. There were few complications specific to the anterior surgical procedure. However, a second surgical intervention under general anesthesia is an event associated with nonnegligible morbidity, the benefit of which should be based on long-term functional and quality-of-life scores. To our knowledge, this is the most extensive series with radiologic and functional clinical follow-up published to date. Nonetheless, the size of our cohort is insufficient for a statistical study of certain analytical aspects. Other limitations pertain to the number of patients lost to follow-up and the absence of some radiologic reference parameters. Envisioning a randomized comparative study is difficult, however, and a comparison of patient records processed according to a range of strategies appears to be more achievable. Two-stage circumferential arthrodesis of comminuted fractures of the thoracolumbar spine results in balanced, durable radiologic sagittal restoration, as well as satisfactory fusion rates. In our cohort, at the last follow-up, there was a significant correlation between the functional and quality-of-life scores obtained and the presence of bone consolidation. This correlation could not be established with the parameters for pelvic–spinal sagittal balance. The other variables with negative impacts on clinical results were BMI, ASA score, and the presence of sphincter-related neurologic disorders.