The present paper studies anaerobic bio-leaching of manganese nodules by Thiobacillus ferrooxidans separated from mining water. With the addition of suitable nutrient and reductant, the metals existing in the nodules, such as Cu, Co, Ni and Mn can be leached effectively in an acidic and anaerobic system under ambient temperature in 3 days. Manganese oxide and nickel sulfide participate in the respiration of the microbe as electron acceptor and donor respectively. Meanwhile, the ferric/ferro ions act as electron shuttles to accelerate the process.Marine nodules in the deep sea represent a promising source of a number of metals, such as Cu, Ni, Co and Mn. The extraction processes developed so far for marine modules fall mainly into two categories: pyrometallurgical pretreatment followed by hydrometallurgical processing and purely hydrometallurgical processing. Another possible process is the leaching of nodules by microbial means. Bacterial leaching of oxide minerals as well as that of sulfide minerals has been investigated extensively in recent years. It has been proved that the manganese dioxide could be dissolved by the action of a suitable reductant such as ferrous iron, and suitable microbe can catalyze the reaction ( Marine nodules were collected from the eastern Pacific Ocean in March, 2003. The metal contents (%) in the samples are: Mn 20.1, Fe 17.4, Co 0.26, Ni 0.84, Cu 0.89, respectively. Pyrite (FeS Copper, manganese, nickel, iron and cobalt contents were analyzed through atomic absorption spectrometer. The pH of the medium was adjusted by sulfuric acid addition. During bacterial leaching, pyrite was added as nutrient and reductant. The other leaching conditions were: pH It has been found that Cu is leached first, and then precipitated, perhaps in the form of CuS. Therefore, the final leaching rate of Cu is lower than Co and Ni, as shown in Under aerobic condition, T.f. catalyze the reaction between MnO Under anaerobic condition, the microorganisms are capable of utilizing MnO Under anaerobic condition, Fe  Under anaerobic condition a high bio-leaching rate of metals from marine nodules has been achieved as: Co 95.92%, Ni 93.95%, Mn 97.4%, Cu 80.35%. During leaching process, T.f. takes part in the electron transferring, MnO Supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.201760611) Comra research found (DY-105-05-04).