The deposition and separation of W and Mo from aqueous solutions with simultaneous hydrogen production was investigated in stacked bioelectrochemical systems (BESs) composed of microbial electrolysis cell (1#) serially connected with parallel connected microbial fuel cell (2#). The impact of W/Mo molar ratio (in the range 0.01 mM : 1 mM and vice-versa), initial pH (1.5 to 4.0) and cathode material (stainless steel mesh (SSM), carbon rod (CR) and titanium sheet (TS)) on the BES performance was systematically investigated. The concentration of Mo(VI) was more influential than W(VI) in determining the rate of deposition of both metals and the rate of hydrogen production. Complete metal recovery was achieved at equimolar W/Mo ratio of 0.05 mM : 0.05 mM. The rates of metal deposition and hydrogen production increased at acidic pH, with the fastest rates at pH 1.5. The morphology of the metal deposits and the valence of the Mo were correlated with W/Mo ratio and pH. CR cathodes (2#) coupled with SSM cathodes (1#) achieved a significant rate of hydrogen production (0.82 ± 0.04 m3/m3/d) with W and Mo deposition (0.049 ± 0.003 mmol/L/h and 0.140 ± 0.004 mmol/L/h (1#); 0.025 ± 0.001 mmol/L/h and 0.090 ± 0.006 mmol/L/h (2#)).Tungsten (W) and molybdenum (Mo) transition metals are valuable alloying resources used in various products such as electrochromic materials, gas sensors and lithium ion batteries, in addition to be contained in a range of materials such as special steels and catalysts for petrochemical industries [ Conventional processes that have been proposed for the extraction and recovery of W and Mo from mining ores include solvent extraction, ion exchange, membrane separation, chemical precipitation and electrochemical treatment [ This study addresses novel bioelectrochemical systems (BESs) which may provide an alternative and innovative method for the simultaneous recovery and separation of W and Mo from industrial and mining aqueous effluents [ The concentrations of W(VI) and Mo(VI) in the ores and leaching liquor of spent catalysts are dependent on the characteristics of the mining site or industrial process, with some cases presenting an excess of Mo(VI) and lower amount of W(VI) or vice-versa [ In this study, stacked BESs were constructed to investigate the impact of the W(VI)/Mo(VI) molar ratio (herein reported as W/Mo for brevity), the initial pH and the cathode electrode material on the rates of W and Mo deposition from aqueous solutions, and on the simultaneous rates of hydrogen production. The W and Mo molar ratio was varied in the range of 0.01 : 1 and vice-versa. The initial pH in the cathodic chamber containing the mixed metals ranged from 1.5 to 4.0, and stainless steel mesh (SSM), carbon rod (CR) and titanium sheet (TS) were systematically explored as cathode materials. The BESs system performance was elucidated by linear sweep voltammetry (LSV), scanning electronic microscopy (SEM), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Cathode potential, current and voltage output from the MFC units applied to the MECs (applied voltage) were employed to assess the rate of W and Mo deposition, the metals separation factor and the rate of hydrogen production. The concept of complete metal recovery was also investigated to maximize metal resources recovery, while minimizing the residual toxicity of the water. Stacked BESs were designed with one MFC (1#) serially connected with three parallel MFCs (2#) (Fig. S1) as a result of previous optimization of the modules with multiple units [ Anodic inoculation was exactly the same as previously described [ Control experiments with single W(VI) or Mo(VI) metal in solution were performed to reflect the impact of the binary-component on the system performance. Control experiments under open circuit conditions (OCCs) reflected the effect of current on W and Mo deposition. Other control experiments using the 1# or the 2# units only were performed to illustrate the roles played by each unit on system performance. The W(VI) and Mo(VI) concentrations in the catholyte were measured using standard methods [ The rates of W ( At a fixed Mo concentration of 1.0 mM, higher W concentrations favored the deposition of W ( At a fixed W concentration of 1.0 mM, a decrease in Mo concentration decreased the rate of deposition of W ( Collectively, the results in The W/Mo molar ratio also influenced the morphology of the metals deposited over the stacked BESs cathodes. Smaller and more homogeneous particles were observed on the cathodes of both the 1# (Fig. S4A) and the 2# (Fig. S4B) units at a W/Mo molar ratio of 1 : 0.01, in comparison to those at a W/Mo ratio of 1 : 1 (Fig. S4C and D). Conversely, a W/Mo molar ratio of 0.01 : 1 led to the presence of irregular deposits in the 1# unit (Fig. S4E) complemented by dense layer deposits in the 2# units (Fig. S4F).  The variation of the cathode resistances at different W/Mo molar ratios was determined by EIS ( The initial pH of the catholyte was varied in the range from 1.5 to 4.0. At acidic pH of 1.5 and 2.0 the highest rates of W and Mo deposition were observed, equaling 0.0785 ± 0.003–0.0808 ± 0.004 mmol/L/h (W) and 0.190 ± 0.004 ‒ 0.193 ± 0.002 mmol/L/h (Mo) in the 1# unit, and 0.0501 ± 0.001 ‒ 0.0548 ± 0.001 mmol/L/h (W) and 0.138 ± 0.001 ‒ 0.144 ± 0.005 mmol/L/h (Mo) in the 2# units ( Smaller polarization loss (Fig. S6), higher applied voltage ( An experiment with pH controlled at 1.5 during the entire operational period was purposely investigated to determine its effect on the metal deposition. An appreciable higher rate of hydrogen production of 2.14 ± 0.07 m The morphology of the W and Mo deposits was significantly influenced by the initial pH in the catholyte. Wider cracks and larger areas surrounded by the cracks in both the 1# and the 2# units (Fig. S7A and B) were observed at pH 1.5, in comparison to the results at pH 2.0 and 4.0, consistent with the morphology of Mn, Mo and W co-deposits in conventional electrochemical processes [ The XPS binding energies ( EIS spectra were used to identify the components of the internal resistances as a function of the initial pH. R The use of inexpensive SSS cathodes in both the 1# and the 2# units achieved the highest rate of W ( The results reported have shown that the W(VI)/Mo(VI) molar ratio significantly affected the rate of metals deposition, as well as, the rate of hydrogen production in the stacked BESs. W(VI)/Mo(VI) molar ratios smaller or equal to 1 : 1 favoured the deposition of more W and Mo in the 1# than the 2# units with a negligible effect on the rate of hydrogen production ( The deposition of binary mixtures of W(VI) and Mo(VI) in stacked BESs have shown synergistic effects on the recovery of the metals and the simultaneous production of hydrogen [ The present study has illustrated the dependency of rates of W and Mo deposition, as well as, hydrogen production on the W/Mo molar ratio, initial pH and electrode material. Mo(VI) was more influential than W(VI) in determining an increase in the rates of deposition of both metals and hydrogen production. The merit of completely depositing W and Mo at an initial equimolar W/Mo ratio of 0.05 : 0.05 gives an advantage of this technology over conventional methods such as ion exchange, chemical precipitation or adsorption [ Stacked BESs composed of MEC (1#) serially connected with parallel connected MFC (2#) have been shown to be effective in W and Mo deposition and separation with simultaneous hydrogen production. It revealed a dramatic effect of the W/Mo molar ratio, initial pH, and cathode material on the rates observed. The concentration of Mo(VI) was more influential than W(VI) in determining the rate of deposition of both metals and the rate of hydrogen production. Complete metal recovery was achieved at equimolar W/Mo ratio of 0.05 mM : 0.05 mM. Acidic pH favored both the deposition of the metals and the rate of hydrogen production. The BESs comprising CR cathodes (2#) coupled with SSS cathodes (1#) achieved optimal performance. The BESs studied here may provide an alternative and innovative method for the recovery and separation of W and Mo from industrial and mining aqueous effluents with simultaneous hydrogen production. The authors declare no competing financial interest. The authors are gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: