Uncontrolled bleeding following trauma is associated with a high risk of death. The two-dimensional (2D) nanoclay kaolinite as an effective hemostatic has been developed for early intervention to prevent blood loss. However, the interfacial interactions between kaolinite and blood cells in hemostasis, and the effects of the stacking structure or particle size of kaolinite on bleeding control are unclear. Here, the interactions between kaolinite and blood cells were analyzed qualitatively and quantitatively by using scanning electron microscopy, confocal laser-scanning microscopy, and flow cytometry. The results showed that kaolinite not only bonds with platelets but also induces platelets aggregation, and does not disturb red blood cells, which facilitates the formation of blood clotting in hemostasis. Further, kaolinite nanoclay with smaller nanosheets and looser aggregation showed higher hemostatic activity, which was attributed to the higher water absorption capacity, and the ability to activate the intrinsic coagulation pathway and platelets activation and aggregation. Accordingly, controlling the particle size or thickness and aggregate status of kaolinite or 2D nanoclay nanosheets could be an alternative strategy for enhancing the hemostatic activity of 2D nanoclay-based materials.Uncontrolled hemorrhage is the leading cause of potentially preventable death following trauma, particularly in the context of war, major natural disasters, and traffic accidents. Enhancement of hemostatic agent on the injury during prehospital emergency is a very attractive and rapid method to limit bleeding. In the past decades, medical gauze was still prevalent practice in hemorrhage control. Nowadays, emerging hemostatic materials have been designed as the rapid development of nanomaterials in biomedicine [ Natural clay minerals have been studied due to their high hemostatic activity, large-scale production, and low price, particularly for control of massive blood loss after traumatic injury owing to their high adsorbability, significant surface charge, and hydrophilicity [ Kaolinite (Al In this study, kaolinite was firstly intercalated with potassium acetate (KAc) and then exfoliated using an ultrasonic method to obtain small and ultrathin kaolinite nanosheets. The hemostatic efficiency of the obtained kaolinite samples was evaluated in vitro and in vivo. Further, the interface interactions between kaolinite and blood cells were studied using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), confocal laser-scanning microscopy (CLSM), and flow cytometry in both qualitative and quantitative ways. Kaolinite samples with different sizes (D The potassium acetate-intercalated kaolinite composite (Kaolin The structure and phase composition of the kaolinite samples were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD; DX-2700; Liaoning Dandong Hao Yuan Instrument Co., Ltd., China) using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.15418 nm) at a scanning rate of 0.02°/s with a voltage of 40 kV and 40 mA. Morphologies were visualized by field emission scanning electron microscopy (Quanta650; FEI, USA) and TEM (Titan G2 60-300; FEI). Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of the samples were obtained between 4000 and 400 cm L929 fibroblasts were used to evaluate the biocompatibility of kaolinite samples by a standard Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) assay. Briefly, L929 fibroblast cells were seeded in a 96-well plate and cultured in 37 °C, 5% CO For evaluation of blood clotting, 100 μL heparin sodium-stabilized whole blood from New Zealand white rabbits was added to 10 mg kaolinite powder placed in a 6-well plate [ BALB/C mice (6 weeks old) were purchased from Hunan Laboratory Animal Center (SLAC, Hunan, China). Experiments were performed in compliance with relevant guidelines and regulations of Central South University, and the protocols were approved by the Hunan Provincial Department of Science and Technology (China). The hemostasis time was evaluated using a mouse tail vein incision model, as described in our previous report [ Blood was drawn from healthy volunteers into vacutainer tubes containing 3.8% sodium citrate. The citrate-treated blood was isolated by centrifugation at 1000 rpm for 15 min. The supernatant, considered the platelet-rich plasma (PRP), was collected. The residual sample was separated at 2000 rpm for 5 min to collect RBCs, and RBCs were washed three times with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Fifty microliters whole blood (or PRP, RBCs) was resuspended in 1 mL PBS. Next, 100 μL blood diluent was mixed with 100 μL fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-kaolinite suspension liquid (1 mg/mL) and incubated for 5 min at 37 °C in a CLSM-special culture dish. The interaction between kaolinite and blood cells was visualized under a laser confocal microscope (Ti-E + A1MP + N-STORM; Nikon, Japan). For quantitative analysis, 100 μL PRP was incubated with phycoerythrin (PE) mouse anti-human CD61 for 30 min. Next, 50 μL CD61-labeled platelets was incubated with the kaolinite sample (50 μL, 1 mg/mL). After incubation for 30 min, the mean fluorescence intensities of FITC and PE in platelets were measured by flow cytometry analysis (BD Accuri C6 Plus; BD Biosciences, USA). For cell morphology observation, 100 μL whole blood was dropped into 0.05 g K6 powder, incubated for 5 min at 37 °C, washed three times with 0.9% NaCl solution, and immobilized with 2.5% glutaraldehyde. After dehydration, the mixture was observed by SEM. The platelet average aggregation rate was evaluated in a clinical standard test. The sample (2 mg), as an agonist, was added in 400 μL whole blood containing 3.8% sodium citrate, rotated for 10 min, and measured with aplatelet analyzer (PL-12; Sinnowa Medical Science & Technology Co., Ltd., China). Adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and 0.9% NaCl solution were used as positive and negative controls, respectively. To keep the natural stacking structure of kaolinite, three kaolinite samples with large particle sizes (K1, K2, K3) which were supplied by China Kaolin Clay Co. were used as received. Moreover, K3 with the lowest particle size was intercalated with potassium acetate and then exfoliated in water-ethanol (1:1), water, and ethanol, respectively, to prepare small and ultrathin kaolinite nanosheets. And the obtained samples were labeled as K4, K5, and K6, respectively. The diffraction peaks for K1 and K2 samples at 12.3° (001) and 26.67° (002) were sharp and intense, whereas the diffraction peaks of for K3 were weak. After intercalation and exfoliation, the diffraction peaks for K4, K5, and K6 samples widened and became weaker compared to K3 ( The cytotoxicities of the kaolinite samples were evaluated using L929 fibroblasts. Cytotoxicity evaluation was found to be concentration-dependent when treated with kaolinite powders. Cell viabilities were mostly more than 75% for samples with concentrations of less than 0.5 mg/mL, whereas cell viabilities became lower when the sample concentration increased gradually to 2 mg/mL ( In order to evaluate the influence of kaolinite samples on the blood clotting behavior, whole blood was kept in contact with the prepared samples (Fig. S1). RBCs in whole blood that were not trapped in the clots were hemolyzed with water, and the absorbance of the resulting hemoglobin solution was measured. The high absorbance value of the hemoglobin solution indicated poor clotting performance [ Next, the in vivo hemostasis activities of kaolinite samples were evaluated using a mouse tail vein incision model. The bleeding time of the injury without treatment (blank control group) was 565 ± 33 s. After covering the injury with kaolinite powder, the bleeding time was reduced to approximately half than that of the control, except for the K1 sample ( Blood cells are key blood components that are involved in hemostasis. In especial, blood platelets play a major physiological role in hemostasis. Platelets can be activated automatically until there is an injury to a blood vessel, and then adhere to the damaged portion of a blood vessel and plugging the rent in the vasculature through their adhesion, aggregation, and secretion [ To evaluate the binding probability of kaolinite samples and blood platelets, platelets were first stained with PE-conjugated anti-CD61 monoclonal antibodies and incubated with FITC-labeled kaolinite particles for flow cytometry analysis. Compared with untreated platelets, the FITC fluorescence peak shifted right, and the platelets incubated with FITC-labeled kaolinite particles exhibited stronger FITC fluorescence intensity, indicating that the binding of platelets and kaolinite particles occurred ( Hemostasis is a complex physiological process involving vasoconstriction, platelet and blood coagulation cascade [ Kaolinite samples (K2, K3, K4, K5, and K6) displayed excellent hemostatic ability, and the bleeding time is only about half of that in the blank control group. The high hemostatic activity of kaolinite was found to be related to its excellent properties, including the layered structure, abundant surface hydroxyl groups ( These three pathways contribute to the hemostatic effects of kaolinite. Notably, K1, K2, K3, K4, K5, and K6 samples, which had different particle sizes, did not show significant differences in clotting time owing to their similar zeta potentials. Accordingly, the shorter bleeding times associated with K2 and K3 treatment could be attributed to the higher water absorption capacity and greater contact with blood platelets compared with the other samples. Kaolinite samples having both ultrathin nanosheets and loose aggregation showed high hemostatic ability. Despite the novelty of these findings, further studies are still needed to elucidate the mechanisms through which blood platelets are activated by kaolinite and to determine the factors affecting the interactions between kaolinite and platelets. In summary, the bleeding times of kaolinite nanoclay were generally much faster than those of the blank time control in an in vivo assay. Kaolinite was biocompatible with RBCs and could induce platelet adhesion, activation and aggregation. Overall, our findings showed that kaolinite samples consisting of sheets with smaller size and looser stacking showed higher hemostatic activity owing to higher water absorption capacity and the ability to induce platelet activation and aggregation. Thus, our results demonstrated that the hemostatic properties of kaolinite or 2D nanoclay could be controlled by adjusting the particle size or thickness and aggregate state of the nanosheets, providing engineering tools for designing 2D nanoclay-based hemostatic agents for enhancing hemorrhage control efficiency. This work was supported by the The authors declare that they have no competing interests.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at