The novel fluorinated anionic surfactant sodium p-perfluorononenyloxy benzene sulfonate (SPBS) was successfully prepared by sulfonation of p-perfluorononenyl phenyl ether (PPE). PPE was synthesized from the intermediate perfluoro nonene and phenol as the staring reactants. The structure of SPBS was investigated by Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). The reaction conditions of preparing PPE and SPBS are optimized, respectively. The combined properties of SPBS are studied. The optimum reaction conditions of preparing PPE and SPBS are as follows: (a) synthesizing PPE: reaction temperature is 65; and the mole ratio of perfluoro nonene to triethylamine is 1:0.50; and the mole ratio of perfluoro nonene to phenol is 1:1.3; and the reaction time is 3.5h; (b) synthesizing SPBS: the mole ratio of PPE to sulfur trioxide is 1:1.20; and the sulfonating time is 60min. Results show that SPBS has excellent surface activity and combined properties.The fluorinated surfactants are known for their high surface activity, chemical resistance, stability at high temperature, hydrophobic and oileophobic properties. These various activities are very dependent on the structure and conformation of the organic fluorine group. And all these specific properties lead potentially to various interesting industrial applications such as coatings, textile, leather, paper manufacturing, ore dressing and fire extinguishing In the present paper, using the intermediate perfluoro nonene, phenol and sulfur trioxide as the staring reactants, we would like to report the convenient method to synthesize a new fluorinated anionic surfactant sodium p-perfluorononenyloxy benzene sulfonate(SPBS) (see Perfluoro nonene, which was industrial grade, was obtained from Juhua Group Corporation, Quzhou, China. Phenol, which was analytically pure grade, was purchased from Shuanglin Chemical Reagent Company, Hangzhou, China. Sulfur trioxide, which was chemically pure grade, obtained from Zhejiang Jia & Sun Chemical Co., Ltd., Shaoxing China. The acid binding agents and different reaction media, which were analytically or chemically pure grade, were used as received. Sodium sulfate, which was analytically pure grade, was purchased from Shanghai No.4 Reagent & H.v Chemical Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China. 1,2-Dichloroethane, which was analytically pure grade, was obtained from Linfeng Chemical Reagents Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China. Sodium hydroxide, which was analytically pure grade, was obtained from Xiaoshan Chemical Reagent Factory, Hangzhou, China. Phenol and perfluoro nonene were introduced into a three-necked flask with the stirrer and reflex condenser. Sulfolane was then added into the flask and the stirrer was agitated for 5  Both the above data and The plausible reaction mechanism The synthesized PPE was introduced into a three-necked flask with the stirrer and reflex condenser. 1,2-Dichloroethane was then added into the flask and the stirrer was agitated for 5    Both the above data and SPBS was combined with the hydrocarbon surfactant and inorganic salt by varying their proportion, respectively. The surface tension of combined surfactant under different concentrations was tested by the hoisting ring method. The temperature of testing was 25.0 The structure of PPE and SPBS was characterized by Fourier infrared spectrometric analyzer (Thermo Nicolet AVATAR370, USA). Influence of different acid binding agent on the yield of PPE is given in Effect of the reaction medium on the yield of PPE is shown in The orthogonal experiment table with four factors and four levels is designed to optimize reaction conditions. Triethylamie and sulfonate are selected as the acid binding agent and reaction medium respectively, which is based on the exploratory experiment. Orthogonal experiment result for optimizing reaction conditions is shown in Influence of the mole ratio of PPE to sulfur trioxide on the yield of SPBS is given in Effect of the sulfonating time on the yield of SPBS is shown in The change of the surface tension of SPBS aqueous solution and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) with their concentration is given in Influence of the concentration of sodium chloride on the surface tension is shown in SPBS is combined with hydrocarbon surfactant sodium dodecylbenzenesulfonate (SDBS). Effect of the total concentration of mixed surfactant with different mass ratios on the surface tension is given in The novel fluorinated anionic surfactant sodium p-perfluorononenyloxy benzene sulfonate(SPBS) was successfully prepared by sulfonation of p-perfluorononenyl phenyl ether (PPE). PPE was synthesized from the intermediate perfluoro nonene and phenol as the staring reactants. The resultant SPBS was investigated by Fourier transform infrared spectrometry (FTIR) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). The optimum reaction conditions of preparing PPE and SPBS are as follows: (a) synthesizing PPE: reaction temperature is 65 This work has been supported by the