As part of a geometallurgical program for the Leveäniemi iron ore mine, the Davis tube was used as proxy to classify ore types, predict iron recoveries in wet low-intensity magnetic separation (WLIMS), and to estimate liberation of mixed particles. The study was conducted by testing 13 iron ore samples with a Davis tube and a laboratory WLIMS. Ore feed was studied for modal mineralogy and liberation distribution with Automated Scanning Electron Microscopy. Data analyses to detect the patterns and data dependencies were done with multivariate statistics: principal component analysis, and projection to latent structures regression. Results show that a simple index (XLTU
                     ) based on mass pull in the Davis tube is capable of easy classification of magnetite ores. Using Davis tube mass pull and iron recovery, together with iron and Satmagan head grades may predict iron recovery in WLIMS. Also, the variability in Fe-oxides liberation pattern for magnetite semi-massive ores can be explained with the chemical composition of the Davis tube concentrate. It is concluded that the Davis tube test is better used only for marginal ores, since iron oxide minerals tend to be fully liberated in high-grade magnetite massive ores after grinding. The developed models may be used in populating a production block model.Geometallurgy is an interdisciplinary approach, which aims at linking geological and mineral processing parts of the mining value chain by means of a spatial predictive model ( The project presented here aims to develop a geometallurgical program for the Leveäniemi apatite iron ore. Its ultimate goal is to build a geometallurgical block model. The Davis tube was chosen as a proxy tool for predicting process performance parameters ( Davis tube is a standard tool for estimating the highest possible concentrate grade in magnetic separation ( The aim of this study is to find patterns in Davis tube performance connected to the mineralogical and textural description of the ore. It is assumed that the Davis tube is a nearly perfect magnetic separator without entrapment. This leads to the following hypotheses:    The Davis tube ( There are two types of parameters which impact the Davis tube performance: material properties and the operational settings of the apparatus. The Davis tube works with particles mixed with water. Particles fed to the tube are separated based on their structure ( The Davis tube is often used as a quality control tool for wet low-intensity magnetic separation (WLIMS). Magnetic separation is the primary separation technique employed in iron ore concentrators. Depending on the ore properties and processing target grade, magnetic separation can be done as either a wet or dry process, with either low- or high-intensity magnetic fields. Both WLIMS and Davis tube accomplish wet magnetic separation. However, the Davis tube, unlike WLIMS, lacks mechanical forces, has much higher degree of water drag forces, can be operated at different magnetic fields and has originally been designed only for testing fine materials. In this study the focus is on the WLIMS as the primary method used to upgrade the iron ore from Leveäniemi deposit. Normally, a lab scale WLIMS drum apparatus is the main tool for simulating iron ore behaviour in a wet low-intensity magnetic separation process. Mineral liberation properties can provide an estimation of the efficiency of the separation processes. Liberation based models are also common in mineral processing simulation ( The first relevant study of Fe-oxides liberation using the Davis tube was conducted by The impact of liberation properties on magnetic separation was studied by The empirical model developed by The Kiruna iron ore was studied for the chemical composition and separation properties by Leveäniemi is the third largest apatite-iron ore in Norrbotten area, Sweden. It is located 40 km southeast of Kiruna, northern Sweden and was discovered in 1897 ( The Leveäniemi ore is a high-grade magnetite ore. Genetically, it is described as a combination of both tabular stratiform-stratabound and breccia-style apatite iron ores. The character of the host rocks are felsic-mafic and intermediate volcanic (trachyandesitic) ( The testing procedure included sampling, metallurgical test-work, mineralogical characterisation and modelling ( Thirteen representative composite iron ore samples (each a minimum of 60 kg) were used in this study. Ten drill core samples and three pit grab samples were collected by the mine geologist to cover the full geological variation of the deposit. Samples for the Davis tube and WLIMS were crushed in a lab scale jaw crusher to <3.35 mm and then split into batches for the WLIMS and Davis tube feed. The WLIMS subsamples were later ground for 5 min in a rod mill and for 60 min in a ball mill to P Wet low-intensity magnetic separation (WLIMS) was conducted in a single step using bulk material. The average sample size was 10 kg to ensure a stable and repeatable result. The material was fed to the WLIMS with a rate of 0.5 kg/min at water rate of 3 l/min and drum rotation of 60 rpm. Two products were obtained from the test: concentrate and tailings. The WLIMS testing setup is shown in the The Davis tube test was conducted on three different size fractions: −38 µm (fine), +38–75 µm (medium), and +75–106 µm (coarse). Due to the Davis tube geometric limitations, the fraction coarser than 106 µm was not tested. The tests were done using a minimum of 60–80 g per sample, to ensure sufficient product (min 20 g) for mineralogical characterisation. However, since the Davis tube is most efficient when the sample size is below 20 g, the test for each sample was conducted in several batches 10–15 g each. The water flow was set to 0.3 l/min, the tube angle – 45 degrees, and tube oscillations The Davis tube tests were run in three steps utilizing a staged rougher approach ( Optical microscopy, using a Nikon Eclipse E600, was applied for identification of mineralogy, alterations, grain size distribution and textural properties of the Davis tube feed samples. Modal mineralogy and liberation analyses of the Davis tube feed were done on a QEMSCAN system. Fifty-two polished resins blocks representing four size fractions (−38 µm, 38–75 µm, 75–106 µm, +106 µm) of 13 ore type samples were analysed. The average number of measured particles per sample was 5000. The tests were done at LKAB’s R&D Laboratory at Malmberget, Sweden. Minerals considered to be of a minor importance and minerals, which could not be efficiently distinguished with Auto-SEM-EDS were grouped together, e.g., Fe-oxides for magnetite and hematite. Data post-processing was performed with HSC Chemistry software version 9 ( the minimum amount of mineral in a particle to be considered as liberated (Lib Threshold) is 100%, and the minimum amount of mineral in a particle to be treated as binary, ternary, complex (tolerance) is 1%. Chemical assays were prepared and analysed by ALS-Geochemistry (Piteå, Sweden) and the Technical Laboratory at LKAB (Malmberget, Sweden) using XRF. The amount of magnetic iron was measured with an electromagnetic method using a Satmagan ( In addition to the chemical assays, some process performance parameters were used in modelling ( In processing, the Davis tube tests are done on drill cores, and the minimum available information includes a mass pull and rough estimate of the feed composition from the geological database or handheld XRF analyser. The handheld XRF analyser can be used when data from the database is not easily accessible. Based on this knowledge, a new quality estimator ( Positive values of Separation in WLIMS, i.e., iron recovery, is controlled mainly by magnetic, gravity, drag, and mechanical forces. While in the Davis tube, separation is due to magnetic, gravity, and drag forces. Therefore, iron recovery for WLIMS may be written as: Any potential proxy tool for the Fe-oxides liberation prediction should be capable of a rough forecast using as little information as possible, so that additional work and costs related to the extra analysis for chemical assays or mineralogical studies will not be needed. When the Davis tube is used for predicting liberation, the simplest data may include mass pull and possibly feed composition, if the latter is available from drill core logging or portable XRF. More complex predictions require chemically assayed Davis tube products, and process performance parameters, i.e., difference indeces, and recoveries. Additionally, information by size and applying different magnetic fields strengths can be used. This study focused on considering fully liberated Fe-oxides. Studying liberation properties of mixed particles would require a more extensive sampling campaigns, with additional metallurgical testing and mineralogical characterisation. Principal component analysis (PCA) and projection to latent structures (PLS) methods were used for pattern recognition. PCA handles large number of interrelated variables by reducing dimensionality of the original data set. Dimensionality reduction is achieved by transforming the data set to the principal components (PCs) which cover most of the variation of the original data set ( PLS is an extension of PCA and was used as a mathematical tool for relation recognition in this study. PLS works as a regression model which links primary variables PCA/PLS have been widely used in mineral processing. The ore samples can be classified into two geologically different types based on the drill core assessment/logging ( Semi-massive ore has a lower content of iron (<50%) and the main non-iron minerals are silicates. Semi-massive ore, unlike massive ore, has a wider variation of minerals and textures. Magnetite is fine-grained and biotite, feldspars (i.e., albite, K-Fsp) and quartz are the main gangue minerals. The quantified mineralogy ( The mineralogical analysis can explain difference in mass pull, recoveries or liberation of the material. For instance, iron in amphiboles in mixed particles or as entrapment would give a false prediction of the magnetic separation if it is only based on the iron head grade. Modal mineralogy and mineral liberation allow ore classification solely based on mineralogical variability. The overall comparison of iron recovery in WLIMS against iron recovery in the Davis tube shows no clear correlation ( The The loading plot ( The score plot of t1/t2 ( The comparison of the loading ( Finally, the predicted One of the aims of this study was to develop a proxy model for predicting the Fe-oxides liberation by use of the Davis tube. Having a proxy model for Fe-oxides liberation will contribute to process modelling and simulation with mixed particles. Mineral liberation information deployed in a block model may also have an impact on production planning and mine scheduling. Modelling was performed in two steps. First, PLS was used to predict Fe-oxides liberation using all the data types (chemical assays, difference indices, recoveries, concentrate quality and mass pull), and tendencies were studied with loading and score plots. Second, the most influential data type was selected for building a simplified model to predict Fe-oxides liberation using PLS.  The score plot ( According to the loading plot ( The comparison of loading ( The possibility of modelling Fe-oxides liberation is promising. As follows from  The loading plot ( The score plot ( The comparison of loading ( A new estimator of ore quality, A prediction model for iron recovery in WLIMS is proposed. The model is based on the A prediction model for the Fe-oxides liberation distribution is proposed. PLS modelling has shown that Davis tube concentrate chemical assays correlate strongly with Fe-oxides liberation distribution measured by Auto-SEM-EDS and they provide enough information for building a good model. Since the prediction does not require any previous knowledge of feed composition or recoveries, the developed method may become a low-cost proxy for more expensive techniques, e.g. Auto-SEM-EDS. The main conclusion, which follows from this study, is that Davis tube may be applied only for studying marginal ores. Massive ores do not exhibit large enough variation in liberation, Davis tube recoveries and mass pulls. Thus, when Davis tube performance parameters are deployed in a block model, constant values for liberation, recoveries and mass pulls can be assigned to the blocks containing massive ore. The findings can be applied in production planning and optimization. The These results create a perspective for extending the model usage to other magnetic ore types, such as ores with significant amounts of other ferromagnetic minerals (e.g., monoclinic pyrrhotite, chromite) and ores which also include para-magnetic iron bearing minerals (e.g., goethite, hematite). The future studies can also be extended to coarser particle sizes (>106 µm), which might require adjustments of the Davis tube test to allow for processing of coarser particles. We would like to express our gratitude for support and permission to publish to LKAB, particularly Kari Niiranen, Therese Lindberg and Lewis Wild. Special acknowledgments are to Pertti Lamberg for his valuable ideas and to Abdul Mwanga and Mehdi Parian for their contribution to our understanding of geometallurgical tests. Thanks are also due to Efrain Cardenas and Kartikay Singh for assistance with experiments. This research is a part of the PREP project and financed by