Tree species influence on the soil mineralization process can regulate overall nutrient cycling in a forest ecosystem, which may occur through their effects on substrate quality, soil physicochemical properties and soil microbial community. We investigated tree species effects on soil enzyme activities in a tropical montane forest on Mt. Kinabalu, Borneo. Specifically, we analyzed C- and P-degrading enzyme activities, as well as the relationships among the enzyme activities, soil physicochemical properties, substrate quality (C, N, and P concentrations), and microbial composition in the top 5cm soils beneath conifers (Dacrycarpus imbricatus and Dacrydium gracilis) and broadleaves (Lithocarpus clementianus, Palaquium rioence, and Tristaniopsis clementis). Activities of acid phosphatase and β-d-glucosidase were significantly different among the tree species. Soil moisture, total C and N content and microbial lipid abundance (a proxy for microbial composition) could influence the enzyme activities although the relative contributions of microbial composition to the enzyme activities might be smaller. A higher acid phosphatase activity beneath Dacrydium than those beneath the other tree species can compensate for a lower concentration of P in available fractions beneath Dacrydium. This localized mineralization activity could subsequently influence soil nutrient availability in this forest.The potential effects of tree species on soil properties have been a focus of study for a long time, and the associated plant–soil interactions provide important feedbacks that regulate ecosystem processes ( However, growing evidence suggests that plant species have significant impacts not only on soil physicochemical properties and substrate quality but also more directly on the composition of soil microbial community ( The tropical montane forest on Mt. Kinabalu, in Malaysian Borneo is an ideal site to investigate the effects of plant species on microbial mineralization processes. First, in the tropical montane forest, decomposition of soil organic matter is relatively slow due to low air temperatures compared to those at lowland sites ( In the tropical montane forest, microbial P mineralization is essential for supplying trees with inorganic P, which is thought to limit the net primary productivity ( In this study, we investigated the effects of individual tree species on enzyme activities in decomposing soil organic matter. Furthermore, by examining the soil physicochemical properties (soil moisture and pH), substrate quality (total C and N concentrations, C/N ratio, total phenolics, and P concentration in soil), and soil microbial community composition, we estimated the relative contributions of the variables on soil enzyme activity. We focused on the activity of β- This study was conducted within a permanent plot in primary montane forest on the south slope of Mt. Kinabalu in Sabah, Malaysia (summit height, 4095 We selected replicate trees from five tree species that are dominant in the plot: two conifer species, We measured the activities of acid phosphatase, β- For phenol oxidase, 3,4-dihydroxy- Because the availability of soil P for organisms varies widely among P fractions, soil P was extracted and the concentration determined using a sequential P extraction (modified from After 1 A subset of soil samples collected was homogenized, frozen, and then freeze-dried for lipid analysis immediately after soil sampling. We used microbial lipid analysis (extraction of signature lipid biomarkers from the cell membrane and wall of microorganisms ( Fatty acids were analyzed using a Hewlett-Packard 6890 Gas Chromatograph equipped with a flame ionization detector and split/splitless inlet and a 25 From there we calculated abundance of total lipid and each indicator lipid. Total lipid abundance was calculated as a sum of lipids of which chain length was from 10 to 20. Indicator lipids used for calculation were as follows. Gram positive bacterial indicators included We used one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) to test tree species effects on soil enzyme activity, soil physicochemical properties, and P concentration. Post-hoc test (Tukey’s HSD for equal variance data, and Games–Howell test for unequal variance data) was performed in order to test the difference among tree species. Pearson's correlation analysis was performed on the data of soil enzyme activity, soil physicochemical properties and P concentration. For the above analyses, we used SPSS 12.0 J statistical software (SPSS Inc.). In order to examine the overall relationships among enzyme activity, soil physicochemical properties, and lipid biomarkers, we conducted redundancy analysis (RDA) with soil enzyme activities as a dependent variable and with soil physicochemical properties and lipid abundances (only indicative lipid biomarkers were used) as explanatory variables, assuming linear relationships among the variables. All variables were standardized before the analysis. We conducted RDA using the vegan package of R (  The activity of acid phosphatase and β- Most soil properties did not differ significantly among tree species ( There were significant differences in some P fractions among tree species (  The effects of soil physicochemical properties and substrate quality on soil enzyme activity were estimated through the correlation analyses. Acid phosphatase activity was significantly correlated with soil moisture, organic C, total N, and C/N ratio ( Because the primary difference in the composition of soil microbial community between coniferous species and broadleaf species was that a fungal biomarker lipid (i.e., 18:2ω6,9) was relatively dominant beneath the coniferous species ( Relative contributions of soil physicochemical properties, substrate quality and abundance of lipid biomarkers (a proxy of microbial composition) to soil enzyme activities were assessed by RDA ordination ( Different tree species had significant impacts on soil enzyme activity, soil physicochemical properties, and substrate quality were significantly different among the tree species ( Soil physicochemical properties and substrate quality partly explained enzyme activities ( We observed a significant relationship between a saprophytic fungal biomarker (18:2ω6,9) and acid phosphatase activity. The other two enzyme activities measured were not correlated with the saprophytic fungal biomarker. Other studies (e.g., The RDA ordination indicated the overall relationships among soil enzyme activity, physicochemical properties, and microbial community ( Finally, we suggest that this localized soil mineralization activity has important impacts on nutrient cycling in the forest. Previous studies suggested that poorly decomposable litter often decrease the fertility of soils ( In conclusion, soil mineralization activities were significantly different among tree species. The difference could result from the combined effects of the soil substrate quality, physicochemical properties, and microbial composition though the relative contributions of microbial composition to the difference may be smaller. A higher acid phosphatase activity beneath We thank Dr. Shin-ichiro Aiba for assisting fieldwork, Dr. Rota Wagai for assisting lipid analysis and for fruitful discussions, Dr. Sizuo Suzuki for providing us with the data on leaf phenolics, Dr. Noboru Katayama for discussions. We also thank Dr. Harry Read and members of the Balser Lab at the University of Wisconsin-Madison for their support in lipid analysis. M.U is supported by JSPS Research Fellowships for Young Scientists. This research was supported by Grants-in-Aid from the