In the present work, an α-aminophosphonate extractant di(2-ethylhexyl) [N-(2-ethylhexyl)aminomethyl] phosphonate (Cextrant 230, L) was applied for the selective extraction and recovery of Ga(III) from the chloride solutions. The extraction of Ga(III) was compared with that of other metal ions such as Fe3+, Fe2+, Zn2+, Al3+, Mg2+ and Sn2+. The extracted complex of Ga(III) was deduced to be HGaCl4·L. The extraction equilibrium constant and thermodynamic parameters (ΔG, ΔH and ΔS) were calculated. The positive value of ΔH indicates that the extraction reaction of Ga(III) is an endothermic process. The loading capacity of 30% (v/v) Cextrant 230 for Ga(III) was determined to be 0.38 mol/L. The loaded gallium can be complete stripped by distilled water. A process was established for the selective recovery of Ga(III), by which the purity of the gallium product reached 94% with a yield of 89.5%As a kind of strategic resources, gallium and its compounds are widely used in semiconductors ( Some techniques such as adsorption ( Recently, our group synthesized a series of neutral α-aminophosphonate extractants and applied them for the extraction and separation of Ce(IV), Th(IV), Zr(IV), Hf(IV), Sc(III), Cu(II) and RE(III) ( Cextrant 230 was synthesized and purified according to our previous work ( Inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES, PerkinElmer Optimal 8000) and flame atomic absorption spectrometer (FAAS, Contr AA 700) were applied to analyze the metal concentrations in a mixed solution. IR spectra were recorded on a Bruker Vertex 70 spectrometer. The sample was prepared by dabbing the organic phase over a KBr crystal and then heating it under an infrared lamp to remove the solvent. The solvent extraction experiments were carried out by mixing equal volumes (4 mL) of organic phase with aqueous solution in equilibrium tubes placed in a thermostatic air bath chamber for 15 min at 298 K ± 1 K (unless stated). The stripping experiments were performed by contacting equal volumes of the loaded organic phase with different inorganic acids at room temperature for 15 min. After the split of the phases by gravity, the metal concentration in the aqueous phase was determined. The concentration of metals in organic phase was obtained by mass balance as follows: The extraction percentage ( The distribution ratio ( The separation factor ( The stripping ratio ( The extraction of Ga The extraction of gallium with the neutral extractant Cextrant 230 (L) can be expressed by the following equation: The distribution ratio  The logarithmic expression of Eq. Owing to the small contribution of To deduce the extraction stoichiometry of gallium, a series of experiments were performed by varying the concentration of chloride ion, H Similarly, the plot of log Due to the fact that the concentration of the extractant is much higher than that of the metal, the extractant involved in the extraction complexes can be neglected and the equilibrium extractant concentration [L] can be considered to be equal to the initial concentration Based on above results, the extracted complex of Ga The effect of temperature on the extraction of Ga(III) with Cextrant 230 was studied over the range 289–313 K ( The enthalpy change ( The extracted complex of Ga(III) with Cextrant 230 was characterized by FT-IR spectroscopy in the range of 400–4000 cm The loading capacity of Cextrant 230 was measured by contacting 30% Cextrant 230 ( During the repeatedly extraction process, it was observed that third phase occurs after five contacts because of the precipitation of the extracted complex from the organic phase. So isooctanol was selected as a modifier to eliminate the third phase. The third phase was no longer present in the organic phase after the addition of isooctanol. The effect of isooctanol on the loading capacity of gallium was subsequently in For a good extraction system, it is also important to strip the metal ions from the loaded organic phase efficiently. The stripping of Ga(III) was carried out using different reagents such as HCl, H A simulated solution was prepared for the leaching of tin tails in which the possible tri Cextrant 230 was found to be an effective extractant for the selective extraction and recovery of Ga(III) from chloride medium. Ga(III) can be selectively recovered from the chloride solution containing Fe This work was supported by the