Fractures of the dens are common injuries. The classification of these fractures remains controversial. Anterior odontoid fixation is a safe and effective means of stabilizing some of these injuries. We review classification of these injuries, treatment options, and surgical indications. Anterior odontoid fixation is reviewed in further detail, with an emphasis on surgical indications and a discussion of surgical technique.Fractures of the dens comprise 18% to 20% of cervical injuries, of which 65% to 74% are Anderson-D’Alonzo type II fractures. An initial classification system for odontoid fractures was described in 1971. Three types of odontoid fractures are described in the original Anderson system. Type I fractures, fractures through the tip of the dens, are rare (none were identified in a review by Hadley and coworkers of 229 C2 fractures Not only is the classification of odontoid fractures controversial, but also there are no standards or guidelines for the treatment of type II dens fractures. Instead, only retrospective reviews or case–control series exist from which treatments are recommended. This discrepancy has created difficulty in deciding even between operative versus nonoperative treatment. In general, treatment typically is based on fracture subtypes, I through III. The most controversial are the type II fractures. Proponents of conservative care espouse the noninvasive features of rigid or nonrigid cervical collars, whereas those in favor of surgical care point out the high fusion rates with instrumented fixation. Factors that affect surgical decision-making within the type II subtype include fracture line angle (transverse and oblique orientation), amount of displacement, and degree of comminution. Nakanishi and coworkers began using this technique in 1978. Some surgeons have advocated a double-screw technique. A prospective review of 30 patients with type II fractures treated with two 2.7-mm self-tapping titanium screws showed a fusion rate of 100% and no major complications. Various modifications of the anterior technique have been described, including multiple variations of retractors Most authors agree than acute odontoid fractures with greater than 6 mm of displacement that cannot be reduced and stabilized in a halo or fractures associated with neurological deficit should be treated surgically. Historically, the common surgical treatment for type II fractures was posterior C1 to 2 fusion, including techniques such as Brooks, Gallie, and Sonntag fusions. More recently, C1 to C2 transarticular screws, and C1 lateral mass with C2 pars/pedicle screws have been advocated. For the repair of a significant number of acute dens fractures, anterior screw fixation has gained popularity. Grauer Type IIB (anterior superior to posterior inferior fracture morphology) and displaced transverse fractures are type II fractures subtypes that typically are good indications for anterior screw fixation. The advantages of this procedure include the conferral of immediate stability without the need for an external orthosis in most cases, preservation of C1 to C2 motion, a high fusion rate, and a cost-effective surgical treatment. A single odontoid screw is less expensive than posterior atlantoaxial fusion alternatives and typically results in an earlier return to work and activity for the patient as compared with external immobilization or posterior fusion. The Apfelbaum technique for anterior odontoid fixation has gained popularity and is described here. The patient is positioned with the neck neutral in the sagittal plane. With fluoroscopy in place, reduction of the fracture is attempted. Commonly, the fracture reduces with gentle traction and cervical extension. It is critical to evaluate for possible spinal canal compromise if the fracture does not reduce in extension or if there is a retrolisthesed bone fragment. The patient’s cervical spine is gently returned to the neutral position until the spikes of the Apfelbaum guide are engaged into C3. With the aid of the provided guide tube and gentle manipulation, the fracture can then be reduced under fluoroscopic control. An incision is made along anterior skin crease at the level of C5 to C6 ( The entry site for the drill is the midline, anterior–inferior edge of C2. This entry site can be slightly recessed in the anterior-most aspect of the C2 to C3 disc space. This position is confirmed on AP and lateral fluoroscopy. A 2-mm K-wire is impacted 3 to 5 mm into the desired entry site. A 7-mm hollow core hand drill is passed over the K-wire. A grove is then drilled into the anterior face of C3 and the annulus of C2 to C3 to accommodate the drill guide. A spiked outer drill guide tube is placed over the wire. This guide is used to maintain alignment during drilling, tapping, and placing of the odontoid screw. As mentioned previously, the guide also may assist in the fracture reduction and to align C2 to C3 with the odontoid C1-complex A pilot hole is drilled through the body of C2 and into the fracture fragment using a calibrated drill bit. The apical cortex of the odontoid is penetrated ( Alternatively, other fracture fixation methods have been described using an anterior cervical approach. The fracture reduction is performed is the same manner described previously. After obtaining adequate surgical exposure to the anterior–inferior C2 vertebral body, a threaded K-wire is drilled across the fracture and docked into the cortical bone of the proximal odontoid fragment. Again, biplanar fluoroscopy is used, which is critical to verify a “center-center position” for the K-wire in both planes if a single screw technique is used. The K-wire should be in the bone on all images, ensuring several millimeters for the final screw diameter. The K-wire should be at the tip of the odontoid. Appropriate fracture reduction should be verified after placement of the K-wire. The K-wire can then be gently tapped through the cortex using a small mallet. Either a cannulated screw technique or lag-screw technique can be used for final screw purchase. The most appropriate type of postoperative bracing is still debatable. We typically prefer a rigid collar such as Aspen or Philadelphia. Halo immobilization after fusion is typically unnecessary, unless fracture fixation is tenuous. Similarly, a Minerva or cervicothoracic brace typically is unnecessary after surgical fixation. Complications after the procedure have been reported ranging from 8% to 24%, Posterior C1–C2 fusion or longer posterior constructs remain the main alternative for the surgical treatment of odontoid fractures. Alternatively, the lateral approach of Barbour and Whitesides for anterior C1 to C2 arthrodesis may be used. Medical options consist of either rigid or nonrigid bracing. In this age of improved medical techniques, offering no treatment to a patient is rarely necessary. Even the type I relatively benign fractures are treated with a cervical collar. Bracing consists of either rigid (Halo vests) or nonrigid (eg, Aspen, Philadelphia collars) immobilizers. Halo vests are commonly prescribed with type II fractures but are associated with prolonged morbidity, especially in the elderly. A retrospective review of 38 patients with type II fractures treated with a halo vest compared with 40 treated surgically illustrated a significant increase in morbidity and mortality with the use of the halo vest (mortality rate of 42% compared with 20%; and major complication rate of 66% versus 36%). Type II and III fractures can be treated with a halo vest, but the success rate varies in the literature. In a retrospective review of 14 patients, fractures considered unstable (6 mm or more displacement) were reduced under x-ray and treated with a halo vest for 12 weeks. Fusion rate was 86%, but there was long-term pain with measurable fracture site motion (indicating probable pseudoarthrosis) in 29%. Stable type II and III fractures can be effectively treated with cervical (Philadelphia or Miami) collars. The results of this treatment, however, may be less then ideal. In a retrospective review of 26 patients with type II/III fractures with displacement less than 5 mm, flexion/extension movement less than 2 mm, no neurological deficit, and angulation less than 11° treated with a hard collar, the complication rate was 11% with a failure rate (operation required) of 8% whereas a pseudarthrosis rate of 26% (type II) and 14% (type III) was reported. The average patient age in that report was 59.1 years, 61% of patients had persistent symptoms at follow-up, and 39% fused in misalignment. Critics of bracing note the relatively high rate of pseudarthrosis and fear the risk of progressive myelopathy or sudden neurological deterioration. Although instability caused by a dens fracture can cause progressive myelopathy, the risk is poorly defined. Crockard and coworkers Anterior odontoid fixation is a safe technique, which has a high union rate in appropriately selected patients. The ultimate technique of fixation, whether via an anterior approach or a posterior cervical fusion, should be based on individual patient factors such as fracture morphology, medical comorbidities, and surgeon preference and experience.