Dispersion of ultrafine powders is difficult due to their high cohesion and consequent agglomeration. Dry coating with additives such as nano-silica, magnesium stearate (MgSt), or Leucine (Leu), an amino acid, may help mitigate this problem. Unfortunately, when the powders to be coated are very fine, the additives such as MgSt or Leu need to be of even finer size, requiring a separate milling process. Here, a two-step co-milling process is investigated to produce well dispersible inhalable size range (<5 µm) particles. The main advantage is that the powder to be coated and additives have starting size of several hundred microns and do not require separate pre-milling. In the first step, Potassium Chloride (KCl), used as a surrogate API, and Leu are pre-milled in a ball mill to achieve KCl coated with Leu of ∼10 µm. In the second step, simultaneous co-milling via jet-milling of pre-coated KCl down to inhalable size KCl, coated with Leu is done. The dispersibility of coated KCl was assessed through laser diffraction of dry powder at low dispersion pressure (Sympatec Rodos-Helos), corroborated via scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and FT4 powder tester measuring flow function coefficient (FFC), conditioned bulk density, and aerated energy. This assessment revealed that about 2 wt% Leu was adequate to provide best overall dispersibility. The dispersibility of milled KCl after coating with Leu was found to be better compared with uncoated and MgSt or nano-silica coated KCl. Overall, this two-step co-milling of KCl with 2 wt% Leu yielded well-dispersible, <5 µm particles from starting particles of two orders of magnitude larger sizes.Dispersion of ultra-fine powders is a major challenge, in particular for applications such as inhalation therapy, which requires the deposition of very fine powders (< 5 µm) into the lungs. Powders this fine tend to be very cohesive and form large agglomerates, which are difficult to disperse For assessing powder dispersibility and efficacy of inhaler formulations, time-consuming and laborious experiments using cascade impactors are required to provide an indication of the fine particle fraction (FPF), which is inhaled amount that may get deposited into the lungs. Such a procedure is necessary in the final stage of formulation design, although may not be necessary during the initial phase of rapid screening The main purpose of this work is to investigate the feasibility of the aforementioned two step processing to produce inhalable size range powders with adequate dispersibility, assessed through dry powder size measurement at a low dispersion pressure. Leu was chosen as the additive due to its biodegradability and advantages over other amino acids Potassium chloride (KCl) and hydrophobic amino acid Pre-milling was performed in a batch drum mixer (Diameter: 15.7 cm, Height: 7.7 cm, model 4000, Speed Selector Inc., USA) with steel balls (Diameter: 1.43 cm). The number of balls was determined to occupy half of the volume of the mixer and the amount of powder was measured to fill 50% of the remaining volume. The operating condition was selected by calculating the critical rotation speed Pre-milled 100 g powder mixtures were characterized as described in Particle size as well as powder dispersion information was obtained using a Rodos/Helos powder dispersion plus laser diffraction system (Sympatec, NJ, USA). The volume-based particle size distribution results (x The surface morphology of materials both before and after pre-milling and FEM milling was checked using a Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FESEM) (LEO 1530 170, Carl Zeiss SMT Inc., MA, USA). Samples were sputter-coated with carbon in order to improve conductivity during FESEM imaging. An FT4 powder tester (Freeman Technology Ltd., Worcestershire, UK) was used to obtain the conditioned bulk density, cohesion, unconfined yield strength (UYS), flow function coefficient (FFC, the ratio of major principle stress to UYS) and aerated energy (AE) of the prepared samples. Details about the experimental procedure are found in literature published by Freeman Technology Pre-milling step was carried out in a rotating drum with steel balls with milling time of 3 h. The size of KCl particles pre-milled with varying amounts of Leu concentration are displayed in The resultant powders from ball milling were fed into the FEM for further milling at conditions described in Considering inhalation as a specific example, the percentage of particles below fine particle fraction (FPF) cutoff size can be used to quantify the amount of powder that has a good chance to be deposited in the pulmonary area SEM images of KCl particles after FEM milling are presented in The results of bulk density and aeration tests are presented in Overall trends in bulk density, aeration and median particle size data, presented above suggests that using 2 wt% Leu concentration may provide the best overall dispersibility. As a summary, SEM images indicate Leu concentrations higher than 1 wt% is needed and shear test results hinted that 5 wt% may be best. However, 2 wt% Leu is a better value since shear test results did not show significant difference between 2 and 5 wt%, and using less amount of material would be desirable from a formulation standpoint. These results confirm the importance of Leu (or guest) concentration assessment, which was not done in previous studies Benchmarking the KCl powders produced in this study, including the improvements in cohesion reduction by processing, against other similar studies help highlight the important conclusions from this work. First, the final cohesion of KCl powders milled with 2 wt% Leu in the FEM was lower than the final cohesion values reported in other studies Subsequent investigations using other additives are compared to KCl processed with a concentration of 2 wt% Leu, for benchmarking purposes. It is noted that individual detailed assessment of each additional additive is beyond the scope of present work. KCl powders were milled with Leu, Magnesium Stearate (MgSt) or nano-silica (R972P); each at 2 wt% and using the same two-step process described in SEM images of KCl milled with either MgSt or nano-silica are displayed in The results of FT4 tests for KCl powder milled with the three different additives are displayed in The feasibility of producing ultra-fine dispersible particles (< 5 µm, i.e., inhalable size range) via a pre-milling step using a ball mill, followed by simultaneous milling and coating in a jet mill, was demonstrated. The major practical advantage of this approach is that such a two-step process enabled the use of large starting sizes of drug as well as Leu particles of several hundred microns. Specifically, the pre-milling step led to semi-coated drug particles of ∼10 µm, which were then milled down to inhalable size through second step using FEM, with excellent coating of KCl with Leu or other additives. Particle sizing at low dispersion pressure, SEM imaging, along with FT4 based assessment including FFC, bulk density, and aerated energy, all show that with the addition of Leu, fine powders with very good powder dispersibility were produced. Leu concentration was investigated ranging from 0.5% (w/w) to 10% (w/w), with 2% (w/w) Leu concentration found to provide better overall performance. The improvement in ultra-fine powder dispersion after Leu coating was compared to that for KCl which FEM-milled and coated with two other guest materials, MgSt and nano-sized silica R972P. The results indicated better outcomes for Leu coated powders, although all additives produced dispersible fine powders. Overall, this two-step co-milling of KCl with 2 wt% Leu yielded well-dispersible, <5 µm particles from starting particles of two orders of magnitude larger sizes. As a major novelty, the present process allowed for simultaneous milling of the drug and the additive in contrast to previous work when the additives such as MgSt or Leu had to be separately jet-milled to achieve finer sizes. The authors would like to thank Dr. Maxx Capece for his assistance on the project. The authors especially thank Tim Freeman of Freeman Technologies, for the use of FT4 Powder Rheometer. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 