Coronal articular fractures of the distal humerus usually involve the capitellum alone or occur in combination with the trochlea. Isolated fractures of the trochlea are uncommon, and scant information is available on their epidemiology, mechanism of injury, treatment, and outcome. We present 2 patients with isolated fracture of the trochlea and review the fractures published to date to address the epidemiology, mechanisms of injury, classification/fracture patterns, management, and results of treatment. A 66-year-old woman presented to the hospital after a fall from standing. She described a direct impact to her flexed left elbow. There was tenderness and ecchymosis over the posteromedial part of her elbow, and she had mild paresthesias in the ulnar nerve innervated fingers. Radiographs showed a fracture of the entire trochlea with anterosuperior dislocation of the fragment out of the ulnohumeral joint. A 3-dimensional (3D) computed tomography (CT) scan reconstruction better outlines the fracture and the loss of radiocapitellar alignment ( Three days after the injury, the patient had surgery under brachial plexus block. Because the fracture involved both the anterior and the posterior parts of the lateral trochlea, an olecranon osteotomy was used for exposure. The ulnar nerve was released from the cubital tunnel and placed anteriorly in the subcutaneous tissues. The fracture was reduced and secured with two 4-mm screws (Synthes Indústria e Comércio Ltda, Rio Claro, SP, Brazil) applied with interfragmentary compression. The olecranon osteotomy was reduced and secured with tension band wiring ( The patient was immobilized in a splint for 1 week before initiating stretching exercises without the supervision of a therapist. At 5 months after the injury, her elbow flexion was from 30° to 120°, and her forearm rotation was from 80° of supination to 70° of pronation. The fracture and the osteotomy were healed in good position, and her neurologic examination showed no abornormalities. The patient did not return for further evaluation. A 53-year-old man presented to the hospital after a fall from standing. He described an axial load through his hand with the left elbow slightly flexed. There was tenderness and ecchymosis over the medial part of his elbow. His neurovascular examination showed no abornormalities. Radiographs showed a coronal shear fracture of the distal humerus. A 3D CT reconstruction better outlines a fracture of the anterior half of the medial portion of the trochlea with anterosuperior dislocation of the fragment from the ulnohumeral joint ( The patient underwent surgery under brachial plexus block 1 week after the injury. Because this fracture involved only the anterior half of the trochlea, a medial skin incision was made. The ulnar nerve was identified but not released or transposed. Part of the flexor-pronator muscle origin was detached from the medial epicondyle, and the medial capsule was incised. The fracture was reduced and secured with 1 Herbert screw (Hexagon, Campinas, SP, Brazil) and two 4-mm screws (Synthes Indústria e Comércio Ltda) inserted from the nonarticular part of the trochlea ( The patient was immobilized in a splint for 1 week before initiating stretching exercises without the supervision of a therapist. At 9 months after injury, his elbow flexion was from 10° to 130°, and his forearm rotation was from 60° of supination to 70° of pronation. The fracture healed in good position, with a small amount of anteromedial HO. The patient did not return for further evaluation. Using the PubMed database, Elbow dislocation was observed in only 2 of 27 patients, but based on examination under anesthesia, 3 patients had valgus instability and 3 had varus instability. Two of 3 medial collateral ligament injuries were repaired. In the other 4 patients, the instability resolved after fracture fixation. Two patients had an associated fracture of the radial neck, 1 patient had a floating elbow, and another had a fracture of the distal radius. The predominant mechanism of injury was the indirect trauma caused by a fall on the outstretched hand associated with an axial load. Most of the 27 trochlear fractures that we identified were treated operatively with screw fixation through a medial exposure. We used an olecranon osteotomy to expose the anterior and posterior trochlea in 1 patient. An average of 16 months after surgery (range, 3-48 months), the final mean extension was 9° (range, 0°-30°), and the final mean flexion was 127° (range, 110°-150°). One fracture with incomplete reduction and inadequate fixation was revised to a hemiarthroplasty of the elbow 2.5 months after the initial fixation. The rarity of the isolated fracture of the trochlea is attributed to the lack of muscle and ligament insertions in the trochlea, We distinguished 3 types of isolated trochlear fracture: fracture of the medial rim The medial approach allows direct access to the anterior fragment of the trochlea, preserving its blood supply without the potential problems associated with olecranon osteotomy. Dubberley et al According to what we learned about trochlea fractures, they might be included in the Dubberley classification, perhaps differentiating them from capitellum-based fractures by adding the letter T (trochlea). These fractures merit surgery and usually do well. Lucas B.J. Gonçalves, his family, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated did not receive any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this paper. David Ring received royalties from Wright Medical for elbow fixation devices but did not receive any direct support for this article.