This paper reports the results of experiments done to examine the explosibility of pulverized fuel dusts (two different coals and petroleum coke) and their waste products (bottom and fly ashes). Tests were conducted for the fuel dusts alone and also blended with other fuels and ashes. The explosion parameters of interest were maximum pressure and rate of pressure rise, and ignition energy and temperature. Petroleum coke was found to present a lesser explosion hazard than the coals. Admixture of either coal or petroleum coke with fly ash resulted in explosible mixtures at volatile contents dependent on the composition of the mixture components and their particle sizes.In the current global economy, the utility industry is increasingly exploring avenues for less expensive and more environmentally benign fuels. This has led to an increase in fuel substitution in power plants. While fuel substitution has economic benefits in the form of fuel cost savings, it also changes the explosion hazard of the plant in both the fuel and ash handling systems. The scope of the current work is an examination of the dust explosion hazard of fuel substitution in fossil fuel fired power plants. This was accomplished by conducting laboratory-scale experiments to determine the relative explosibility of different fuels, ashes and blends of the two. The explosion parameters investigated were maximum explosion pressure ( Samples of fuel and ash were obtained from the Point Tupper Generating Station of Nova Scotia Power Inc. (NSPI). The fuels received were Powder River Basin (PRB) coal (a relatively young coal), Columbian coal (a low-sulphur coal), and petroleum coke (PetCoke—a byproduct of the petroleum industry). Two bottom ash samples and four fly ash samples were received; the fuels burned to produce each type of ash were different. Each batch of fuel received (coals and petroleum coke) was surface dried in the laboratory. The surface-dried fuel was sent for particle size analysis and proximate analysis to the Minerals Engineering Centre, Dalhousie University. The proximate analyses of the fuels are shown in The fuels were crushed to a nominal particle size of 70% minus 200 mesh. This size requirement was specified by NSPI as the solid fuel particle size fired at the Point Tupper Generating Station. Particle size analyses of the three fuels were performed using a Malvern Instruments 2600 Series Analyzer. The results are summarized in Each ash sample was also sent to the Minerals Engineering Centre for particle size distribution analysis and proximate analysis. The results of the proximate analyses are summarized in The basic explosibility experiments for Baseline fuel dust experiments were first done as shown in Next, testing was conducted for the coals blended with varying percentages of petroleum coke at the fixed optimum concentration of 750 Explosibility experiments of the ash samples were conducted as outlined in Explosibility experiments were also conducted for ash blended with fuel dust. The ashes used were Fly Ash C and Fly Ash D and the fuels were Columbian coal and petroleum coke. Test conditions were as shown in The MIE experiments were conducted using a MIKE 3 apparatus manufactured by Adolf Kuhner, Switzerland (as were the other pieces of equipment used in this work). This apparatus consists of a 1.2-L cylindrical glass chamber into which dust is dispersed and then ignited by an electrical spark of known energy (maximum value of 1 The test protocol in this set of experiments was similar to that employed in the The MIT experiments were conducted using a cylindrical furnace known as a BAM oven. In the operation of this apparatus, a dust cloud is generated by squeezing a rubber bulb (previously charged with sample) which directs the dust against a circular, concave metal plate of about 20 The test protocol in this set of experiments was similar to that employed in the MIE testing—with the elimination of dust concentration as a variable in the fuel blend and ash/fuel blend tests (due to apparatus limitations). The results of the baseline fuel tests ( The results of the ash explosibility tests ( With respect to the bottom ashes (A and B), neither exploded with a single 5-kJ ignitor. Again, these are expected results given the low volatile content of Btm Ash A (6.7%) and the combination of volatile content and mass mean diameter for Btm Ash B (11.9% and 220 Examples of the results from the fuel carry-over tests are given in During the fuel-carry tests, the occurrence of a phenomenon known as SEEP (Suppressant Enhanced Explosion Parameter) was observed. Some mixtures of Columbian coal and fly ash containing 70% or more coal dust, and some mixtures of petroleum coke and fly ash containing 50% or more petroleum coke, were found to yield higher explosion pressures and rates of pressure rise than the pure fuels. Still, the relative ranking of Columbian coal having higher explosion pressures and rates of pressure rise than petroleum coke was maintained. Fly ash particle size was found to exert an influence on the explosion pressure and rate of pressure rise of the fuel/fly ash blends. Coarser fly ash (i.e. Fly Ash C) resulted in slightly higher values of these explosion parameters for a given fuel (Columbian coal or petroleum coke). The amount of fuel carry-over required to form an explosible fuel/fly ash mixture was found to be such that the volatile content of the resulting mixtures was in the approximate range of 7–13% (depending on the particular fuel and the particular fly ash). As with high percentages of fuel carry-over (re. SEEP), petroleum coke carry-over at low fuel percentages had a somewhat greater impact on explosibility than Columbian coal carry-over. Nevertheless, carry-over of fuel into the ash stream increases the magnitude of the dust explosion hazard regardless of whether the fuel is coal or petroleum coke. The current work has demonstrated that precautionary measures must be taken to prevent petroleum coke carry-over, if the inherent safety benefits of substitution of petroleum coke as a fuel are to be fully realized. The results of the MIE testing are shown in The probabilistic nature of MIE testing is clearly demonstrated when the data are represented as shown in The results of the MIT testing are given in From the perspectives of explosion pressure, rate of pressure rise, spark ignition energy, and hot-surface ignition temperature, petroleum coke was found to be an inherently safer fuel than either Powder River Basin coal or Columbian coal. Blending petroleum coke with either of these coals also resulted in an inherently safer fuel. None of the four fly ashes tested, regardless of the parent fuel burned, were explosible. Of the two bottom ashes tested in a bone-dry state, only Btm Ash B having a volatile content of about 12% (moisture-free basis) was determined to be explosible under optimum conditions of ignition source configuration. The admixture of either coal or petroleum coke with fly ash resulted in explosible mixtures at volatile contents dependent on the composition of the mixture components and their particle sizes. Thus, it is critical that petroleum coke carry-over be minimized in order to fully exploit the inherent safety benefits of substitution of petroleum coke as a fuel. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of both Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (via the Nova Scotia Coal Research Agreement) and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada.