Sampling theory provides the framework to identify and statistically characterize the error associated to a given preparation protocol. According to the theory, sampling error depends on the mass of the sample extracted and most consequentially on its grain size distribution. Broken ore particle top size is a relevant parameter to be considered in order to achieve a desirable precision in a sampling protocol. This paper investigates the error in sample preparation due to the mass of sample extracted and its top size. An experiment using four different preparation procedures was used and the error associated to each of these procedures was calculated. The values of the error experimentally obtained were compared to the values forecasted by Gy's equation. The experiment demonstrates that sampling theory precision limits were valid. Results also show that precision in preparation is better achieved by sample grain-size reduction before splitting.Rigorous quality control programs continue to improve analytical techniques employed in laboratory analysis for particulate material including broken ore. In many cases, sampling extraction and sampling preparation are not treated as rigorously as the analysis itself although sampling extraction and preparation are deemed relevant to the results' quality, precision and accuracy. Recent studies demonstrated the applicability of Gy's theory ( According to Gy's model, the variance of the fundamental error ( The sampling factor ( In sieved material, the size range factor Considering sample preparation as a series of mass and size reduction, the cumulated variance of the fundamental error Twelve tests were carried out at Recreio plant (Copelmi Mineração, Brazil) involving four different preparation protocols. These preparation processes are presented in two flowcharts The experiment was designed to evaluate the effect of the mass and top size of the samples on the preparation protocol variance of the fundamental error. The experiment in flowchart 1 generated eight duplicates for comparison. Each of these eight experiments used a 100-kg starting lot (size of the sample) with similar ash content and similar top size prior to splitting. Flowchart 1 has two divisions: A and B of approximately equal weight (50 kg). The first difference between A and B is due to the mass extracted from the 50-kg split. Branch B uses less mass than A; in fact, B uses 50% of the mass used in A during splits 2 and 3. Branch A reduces the granulometry prior to splitting 2 which is not used for B. One branch of the flowchart (samples A Flowchart 1 Sample B (approximately 50 kg) was put through a different procedure. It was first split (splitting 2) into two new subsamples B The consequences of less mass extracted and larger top size used in B compared to A are analyzed, and their influence in the sampling error quantified. Flowchart 2 Next, these subsamples were crushed to 0.4 cm. In the sequence, subsamples D The idea on this second experiment was to use much less mass in the split 2 on branch D in order to enhance the effect caused by mass of the sample on the fundamental error variance. This second experiment emphasizes how the difference in mass extraction between the two protocols (C and D) affects the confidence on the results. Analytical results are depicted in Each protocol presented in Ash density=2.25 g/cm Coal density=1.30 g/cm Shape parameter ( Size parameter ( Liberation parameter ( Segregation and grouping error variance is never attempted to be estimated. Gy Additionally, there is the analytical error variance ( The variance of the global estimation error is the addition of the variance of the fundamental error obtained on each step of the protocol, plus the variance of the segregation and grouping error Precision calculated according to the sampling theory is presented for the four protocols in Duplicate difference mimics what happens in a producer–consumer situation. The first samples the lot prior to shipping while the second resample it when the load arrives at the destination. This difference is a mere approximation of the total estimation error; however, the difference interval is expected to be within the limits calculated for the total variance of the estimation error. Fundamental errors necessary in defining the precision on each of the four protocols were calculated and are presented in Along this study, 12 coal lots were analyzed using four different sample preparation protocols. According to the results depicted on The results are in accordance to the principles presented in the sampling theory, i.e., large grain size in the extract leads to large errors. Conversely, extracting small sample masses conduct to larger errors. To demonstrate this obvious conclusion was exactly one of the aims of this paper; that is, to prove the principles embedded in the theory can be properly used to address real problems. Although the theory of sampling is 50 years old, various international standards  Protocol D showed the poorest results in terms of precision among all four. In this specific protocol, sample mass was drastically reduced in the first preparation step without any prior size reduction. This led to an undesirable large precision interval. Results demonstrated the high-correlated and fundamental relationship between sample mass and grain size with the sampling precision. Consequently, the parameters used for a given sampling protocol should be selected according to the desired precision.  In analyzing the four sample protocols, one concludes that precision in preparation is better achieved by sample size reduction before splitting. This was particularly true in the first step (splitting 2) used for all four protocols. It is also verified that precision interval for protocols A and C is less than 1% for ash content; meanwhile, for protocol B, the precision interval is in the 1–2% range. Finally, the worst scenario, i.e., protocol D precision interval exceeds 3%. Gy's fundamental error variance equation provided the means to predict the precision desired. The desired precision can only be achieved by a correct definition on grain top size and mass of the sample extracted along each step of the protocol. Results demonstrated that the correct use of the rules proposed by Gy's theory convey to sampling preparation error within controlled intervals and able to be forecasted. In measuring the initial total error, one can redesign the sampling protocol according to a predefined desirable sampling error. This study was supported by CTEnerg/Finep (Brazilian Research Agency) and Copelmi Mineração.