The fabrication and characterization of thin film silicon MEMS microbridges on flexible polyethylene terephthalate substrates are described. Surface micromachining using an aluminum sacrificial layer and a maximum processing temperature of 110°C was used for device fabrication. These microbridges are electrostatically actuated and their deflection at resonance and at low frequencies is measured optically. Quasi-DC deflection with a quadratic dependence of the actuation voltage is observed, and resonance frequencies up to 2MHz and quality factors of around 500 are measured in vacuum. Bending measurements are performed by subjecting these devices to tensile and compressive strain. The low frequency response (bridge deflection as a function of the applied voltage) was measured in air before bending and after every bending step. Under tensile strain, 16.6% of the devices survive the maximum bending with a radius of curvature of 1cm, equivalent to a tensile strain 1.25%. In contrast, for compressive strain, 50% of the devices survive the bending corresponding to a radius of curvature of −0.5cm, equivalent to a compressive strain of −2.5%. Thin film silicon microresonators on flexible plastic substrates can withstand more compressive strain than tensile.Most standard microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) are fabricated with crystalline silicon (c-Si) as a substrate Microelectronics on large area flexible substrates is of great interest for applications that require low weight, robust integrated circuits, low cost and mechanically flexible substrates, biocompatibility and disposable electronics. Because of the low temperatures used in thin film deposition processes such as PECVD, magnetron sputtering and spin coating to deposit/coat thin film materials, a wide variety of substrates can be used. The field of flexible electronics has already produced devices such as thin film transistors (TFTs) The device fabrication process sequence is shown in The width, The microbridges are electrostatically actuated by applying a voltage,  Eq. The inset in Using Eqs.  Because of the details of the fabrication, the ends of the bridges have “ear”-like structures. This may change the boundary conditions of the bridge from a fixed-fixed beam model to a simply supported model, in which the ends of the bridge can have small relative displacements. A combination of these factors is similar to a loose hinge and dissipates energy at the edges reducing Another reason for the decrease of The performance of the microbridges after bending the PET substrate is evaluated by subjecting these devices to tensile and compressive strain using an acrylic apparatus in the shape of an Archimedes curve. An Archimedes curve is defined by the polar equation, Two separate PET substrates with MEMS microresonators were prepared with one subjected to tensile strains and the other to compressive strains. Evaluation of the number of working devices is made before bending by low frequency quasi-DC deflection measurements. After measurement of the devices in the initial state, the substrate was subjected to tensile or compressive strain with a radius of curvature decreasing from The strain on the top surface of the film, In Thin film silicon microbridges on a PET substrate are fabricated and their performance as actuators after being subject to bending has been demonstrated. Bending of the substrate show that 16.6% of the devices survive tensile strains of 1.25%, whereas more devices, 50%, survive higher compressive strain of −2.5%. Thin film silicon bridges fabricated on a PET substrate show resonance frequencies as high as 2 The authors gratefully acknowledge J. Bernardo, V. Soares, F. Silva, and J. Faustino for help in sample/cleanroom processing and characterization. S. Patil thanks Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia (FCT) for a post-doctoral grant (grant no. SFRH/BPD/17040/2004).