Magnetic polyacrylic acid sodium polymer (MPAAS) was prepared by chemical transformation method. Key parameters were investigated in the synthesis process of the magnetic polymer and an optimum preparation condition was gained. The structure of the magnetic polymer was characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared spectrosocopy (FTIR) and scanning electron microscope (SEM). Magnetic property of the magnetic polymer was measured by the magnet and superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID). Both the swelling ratio and kinetics and the water retention ratio and kinetics were investigated. Based on the results, it can be gained that both swelling rate and equilibrium swelling rate were lowered after magnetization while the water retention ability of the magnetic polymer is stronger than that of the polymer.Recently, many kinds of polymer material with the response to the external stimuli such as temperature, pH and magnetic field were prepared Magnetic polymer materials are applied for a wide range of areas such as separation and protein purification Magnetic polymeric material is a new type of functional polymer material, which can be prepared by these methods such as embedding method, monomer polymerization and chemical transformation Absorbent polymers can absorb a large amount of water and swell in their sizes due to high molecular weight, crosslinked hydrophilic polymers, and afterward their individual particle structures are still retained In this paper, the magnetic absorbent polymer was expected as a multifunctional absorbent polymer by introducing magnetic particles into the polymer and was prepared by chemical transformation method. As a result, the obtained magnetic adsorbent polymers can be separated under a magnetic field and their features provide an effective approach via magnetic separation. The effects of impregnation time, impregnation temperature, iron ion concentration and molar ratio of ferric ion to ferrous ion were investigated. And thus an optimum operating conditions was obtained. The structure of the magnetic polymer was characterized by XRD and IR. Magnetic property of the magnetic polymer was measured by the magnet and superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID). Swelling ratio and kinetics and water retention ratio and kinetics were also discussed. FeCl Acrylic acid (AA, 6.1 PAAS polymer was impregnated in the solution by adding FeCl The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern was collected on a Rigaku instrument with Cu-K The content of Fe At room temperature, the obtained samples were put into the distilled water. The initial sample mass, the mass of sample absorbing water and the swelling time were denoted as m The swelling kinetics was investigated by the change of the swelling capacity F with the impregnation time. The mass of sample absorbing water and the mass of saturated sample absorbing water were denoted as m Deduction available: Based on the Eq. At room temperature, the polymer was put into the distilled water until saturated. The obtained sample was weighed and the mass was denoted as m Water retention kinetics was investigated according to the equation from four to seven. Water retention ratio was calculated from Eq. According to Arrhenius Eq. Eq.   The structures of PAAS and MPAAS are characterized by using SEM observation as shown in    When the ratio of Fe      From Reaction rate constants k of PAAS and MPAAS are determined according to The following From Activation energy and pre-exponential factor could be calculated by Eqs. Activation energies of both PAAS and MPAAS are greater than zero, which indicates that dehydration process is an endothermic process and the dehydration rate increases with the increase of temperature. Activation energy and pre-exponential factor are used into Eq. And thus the result is gained as following. Therefore, when the temperature is above 0 The magnetic polymer was prepared by chemical transformation and Fe The support of