Mullite/ZrO2 coatings of the eutectic composition (80/20% (v/v) mullite/ZrO2) have been flame sprayed on both ceramic and metal substrates. Being as-sprayed coatings mostly amorphous, thermal treatments at temperatures in the range of 1000–1300°C promote crystallization leading to an increase of the hardness and elastic modulus. By in situ heating of the coatings, using the oxyacetylene torch, uncracked crystallised coatings having good mechanical properties are readily produced. The information supplied by the Al2O3–ZrO2–SiO2 phase equilibrium diagram provides insight into the complex microstructure observed in the coatings.Thermal sprayed ceramic coatings are commonly used for protection of metals and seldom ceramic components against temperature, corrosion and erosion. The feasibility of pure mullite coatings as thermal barriers for metal components in diesel engines and as environmental barriers for SiC-based components in the new generation of turbines has been considered in several works. It should be noticed that thermal spraying of mullite-based compositions generally gives amorphous coatings due to the fast cooling rates that freeze the high temperature phases, The objective of the present work is to study the viability of flame spraying mullite/ZrO Both AISI 304 L stainless steel and stoneware ceramic plates of 30 Commercially available mullite (3Al The mullite/ZrO The powders were flame sprayed onto the substrates using an oxygen-acetylene gun (model CastoDyn DS 8000, Eutectic Castolin, Spain). The torch input power was 28 Chemical composition of the mullite/ZrO Differential thermal analysis (DTA, STA 409, Netzsch, Germany) was done on the crushed coatings for studying phase changes up to 1500 The microstructure of the different coatings was analyzed on polished cross sections and on top surfaces using a field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM, HITACHI S-4700, Japan). Phase compositions were calculated from energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) standardless point analyses, using Proza Data provided by ED-XRF analysis of the starting powder mixture, the conditioned powders and the coatings, are collected in Thickness was about 100 The mullite/ZrO XRD patterns of the as-sprayed coatings were similar for both substrate systems ( Most of the splats in the coatings (marked with ■ in Compositions for each one of these phases were located in the Al DTA of the powdered coating showed two exothermic peaks at ∼1000 As seen in Hardness and elastic modulus of the as-sprayed and heat treated mullite/ZrO For the first time, mullite/ZrO The major amorphous splats forming the coatings had compositions in the mullite–ZrO This work was supported by MEC (Ministry of Education and Science, Spain), MAT 2003-06147-C04-01 and MAT2006-07118. Thanks are given to S. de Aza and F.J. Valle for helping in the equilibrium phase diagram discussion and in the ED-XRF analyses, respectively.