The ability of an extreme thermophile to oxidise a concentrate comprising of chalcopyrite (66%) and pyrite (11%) is described. A batch test at 70°C showed that a copper extraction of >98% was possible. A series of continuous tests were carried out in a three-stage pilot plant, employing standard-design mechanically agitated and aerated tanks. The effect of residence time, feed grind and the mass transfer supply of oxygen and carbon dioxide on bioleach performance were evaluated. The results showed that overall Cu extractions of 95% could be obtained. However, compared to mesophilic and moderately thermophilic bioleaching bacteria, the extreme thermophiles appeared to be more sensitive to the solids concentration employed, which may also be related to the particle size of the feed solids. Levels of oxygen consumption approaching the maximum rates currently being employed in commercial-scale bioleach tanks treating refractory gold pyritic concentrates could be achieved. To maintain these high oxidation rates, it was important to ensure that the supply rate of oxygen and carbon dioxide to the reactors was sufficient. The high copper extractions obtained in these tests showed that a process treating chalcopyrite concentrates using extreme thermophiles has the potential for further development and assessment for commercial applications.Most secondary copper sulphides can be bioleached successfully at 35–45°C, using mesophilic bacterial cultures. However, the bioleaching of chalcopyrite, the major copper-bearing sulphide mineral of commercial interest, is still a major challenge. This is because of relatively slow kinetics and poor extractions Another approach is the use of extremely thermophilic bacteria as a means to improve the leach kinetics and to achieve acceptable copper extractions. This approach has received significant attention in recent years and has been assessed extensively in batch tests at laboratory scale The work presented in this paper represents part of Mintek's research and development programme, aimed at the development of a bioleaching process for the treatment of copper–sulphide concentrates. The ability of an extreme thermophile to oxide a concentrate comprising chalcopyrite (66%) and pyrite (11%) is described. A batch test was done, followed by continuous tests carried out in a three-stage pilot plant, employing standard-design mechanically agitated and aerated tanks. A series of tests were done to assess the effect of residence time, feed grind and the mass transfer supply of oxygen and carbon dioxide on the bioleach performance. The performance of the pilot plant was monitored in terms of pH, redox potential, oxygen and carbon dioxide uptake rates, copper concentrations and residue copper and sulphides. An extremely thermophilic, iron–sulphur oxidising bacterial culture, isolated from a hot, sulphur-rich coal dump near Witbank, South Africa was used in the study The tests were performed on a copper sulphide concentrate, fine-milled in a stirred ball mill to particle sizes of A batch bioleach test was performed on concentrate with a particle size of The laboratory-scale pilot plant tests were carried out in three-stage continuously operated and mechanically agitated polypropylene reactors. The operating temperature was 70°C. The system consisted of a feed pulp tank and three reactors in series, with a container at the end for product collection. The first reactor was fed via a peristaltic pump from the feed tank and pulp transfer between the reactors was by means of gravity overflow. The reactors were fully baffled and agitation was by means of a dual impeller system, consisting of a six-blade flat-blade disc turbine (Rushton turbine) and a six-blade 45° pitch-blade turbine. The air supply to the reactors was enriched with CO The reactors were monitored daily for temperature, pH level, ORP and oxygen and carbon dioxide uptake rates. The dissolved oxygen (DO) concentrations were measured in tests 2, 3 and 4. The levels of copper and iron in solution were measured daily by atomic absorption spectrophotometry. Once steady state conditions were reached, a set of pulp samples was collected from each reactor and the residues analysed for copper, iron, silicate, elemental sulphur, sulphide sulphur and sulphate. The batch bioleach test was inoculated on day 1 after the pH was adjusted to 2.2 with sulphuric acid. The pH gradually decreased to a final value of 1.29 A summary of extractions based on the analysis of the final residue is given in The batch test confirmed that >98% Cu extraction could be obtained on the chalcopyrite concentrate at a solids concentration of 7.5% in an intensively agitated stirred reactor, without any apparent inhibitory effects or damage to the cells. In view of these results, further laboratory tests were carried out in a continuous multi-stage pilot plant to confirm the batch results. A series of continuous mini-pilot plant tests were carried out to assess the effect of residence time, feed grind and the mass transfer supply of oxygen and carbon dioxide. The tests comprised a series of five steady state tests carried out under the same conditions in a three-stage reactor system with a volume of 25 l in the first stage reactor and 12 l each in the two consecutive reactors. The impeller speed in all three reactors was set at 250 rpm. The feed pulp density was maintained at 7.5%. The pH was not controlled in any of the reactors. The variables studied were feed grind ( The data in The oxygen and carbon uptake rate data for the individual reactors also reflected the above-mentioned trend. However, the level of pyrite oxidation taking place across the reactors would also have influenced these rates. In all cases, the ORP was low in reactor 1 (363–408 mV) and increased over reactors 2 and 3 (maximum of 602 mV in test 1a). It is expected that pyrite oxidation would only have been significant once the ORP was >450 mV As expected, the highest pH values were measured in reactor 1 (2.0–2.1) and it decreased over the stage 2 and stage 3 reactors to between 1.3 and 1.5. No elemental sulphur was detected in the residues from any of the reactors. The levels of Cu in the leach solution normally rose to between 20 and 23 g/l. The exceptions were in the reactor 3 leach solutions in tests 1b and 1c, where Cu concentrations of up to 37 g/l were measured. This can be attributed to a combination of excessive evaporation and possible solids accumulation having occurred in these reactors. Bioleach processes in continuous multi-stage reactors are normally designed so that the reaction rates are highest in the stage 1 reactor. This is to ensure that the major proportion of cell growth and sulphide oxidation occurs at this stage, which generally leads to more stable process operation. The data in It has been suggested that the leach reactions in bioleach systems comprise a number of reaction sub-systems Although the batch test showed that the culture could successfully grow at a solids concentration of 7.5%, the possible negative effect of the 7.5% solids concentration on the growth of the bacteria could also provide an explanation for the poor bacterial performance in the first-stage reactor. Several papers describing the detrimental effect of high pulp densities (>5%) on the performance of extreme thermophiles have been published The build-up of leach products such as Cu and Fe to levels that become inhibitory to the bacteria, could also provide an explanation for the decrease in bio-oxidation rates. However in the present testwork, it is unlikely that the Cu in solution could have had a major effect on the bacterial growth rate since the concentration never exceeded 16 g/l in the first reactor. This is supported by the high oxidation uptake rates in the second stage reactors, where Cu concentrations of about 20 g/l Cu were recorded, and higher oxygen and carbon dioxide uptake rates were obtained. Previously published data also showed that this culture could tolerate Cu concentrations between 30 and 40 g/l An alternative explanation is that the low oxidation rates observed in the stage 1 reactor were due to oxygen and/or carbon dioxide limitation. The solubilities of oxygen and carbon dioxide decrease significantly with increasing temperature. In view of the above possible reasons for the low rates observed for the stage 1 reactor, an additional test was carried out to assess whether higher rates could be obtained if some of the above mentioned parameters were changed. The test was carried out in a three-stage reactor system with a 25-l stage 1 reactor into two 12-l reactors in series. The pulp density of the feed concentrate ( The objective of this test was to assess the effect of decreasing the feed solids concentration and simultaneously increasing the mass transfer supply of carbon dioxide and oxygen through increasing agitation intensity and inlet gas carbon dioxide content. The decrease in the feed solids concentration would also have the effect of decreasing the demand for oxygen and carbon dioxide. The steady state results obtained for this test are summarised in The data in The copper extraction in the stage 1 reactor (1.5 day residence time) was 84%, increasing to 94.7% in the stage 3 reactor. The ORP achieved in the stage 1 reactor was 437 mV increasing to 525 mV in the stage 3 reactor. The pH dropped from 1.77 in the stage 1 reactor to 1.34 in the stage 3 reactor. The final Cu concentration in the leach solution was 19.4 g/l. It is relevant to note that the oxygen uptake rate of 24.3 kg/m In view of the possible effect of the feed solids concentration on the oxidative activity of the bacteria, it was decided to carry out a further test to assess the effect of the feed grind. If the solids concentration could significantly influence cell oxidative activity, it was possible that the underlying mechanism might also be influenced by the solids particle size. The need for ultra-fine milling of feed concentrates represents an additional cost and complication for bioleach plants treating copper concentrates, and this test was intended to assess the leach kinetics and recoveries using concentrate prepared using less intensive griding. The test work was carried out in the three equally sized reactors (25 l) at a feed solids concentration of 5%. The feed concentrate was milled to a particle size of The data in In view of the favourable results obtained on the The pH was not adjusted during the run and the pH level was naturally maintained at 1.4. The ORP level stayed above 550 mV thoughout the test. Microscopic examination of the bacteria during the period of high solids concentration provided no evidence that cell damage occurred and this is confirmed by the high CO These results can be compared with data reported by Allowing for the difference in feed solids concentration, the rates and level of copper extraction in the present test show a significant improvement in the leach performance on the The results of the series of mini-pilot plant tests reported in this paper provide encouragement that commercial biohydrometallurgical processes employing extremely thermophilic bacteria for the treatment of chalcopyrite concentrates can be considered. However, while the present results are encouraging, they also serve to identify a range of questions that will need to be addressed further. Many of these are the subjects of an ongoing research and development programme at Mintek. The present results provide evidence that high rates of oxidation can be achieved for bio-oxidation of chalcopyrite concentrates using extreme thermophiles in intensively agitated laboratory reactors. Indeed, the levels of oxygen consumption achievable approach the maximum rates currently being employed in commercial-scale bioleach tanks treating refractory gold pyritic concentrates. These rates represent intensive mass transfer requirements for oxygen and carbon dioxide and there is a need to clearly define the process requirements to maximise the reaction kinetics. This is made more critical by the significantly reduced solubilities of these gases at the operating temperatures required for the extreme thermophiles. Compared to mesophilic and moderately thermophilic bioleaching bacteria, the extreme thermophiles appear to exhibit greater sensitivity to the solids concentration employed. The present results indicate, however, that this is also influenced by the particle size of the feed solids. The results suggest that ultra-fine milling of feed concentrate may not be necessary to achieve acceptable copper extraction rates and levels. There is clearly significant potential for optimising feed grind and solids concentration and this should represent a major area for future research. This paper is published with the permission of MINTEK. The various contributions to this work by members of the Biotechnology Division, MINTEK are gratefully acknowledged.