The research applies non-invasive electrical resistivity imaging (ERI) for the quantitative interpretation of electric and hydrogeological parameters in a reclaimed tailings area. Composition, porous structure and clay content do not change significantly in the tailings matrix but have influence in bulk electrical resistivity. Therefore, the tailings matrix was included in a multiphase approach known as generalized Archie's equation and modelled for interpretation of bulk electrical resistivity, water content and saturation in the vadose zone of the waste deposit. The results are consistent to explain the sensitivity of electrical resistivity to tailings hydrogeological parameters.
                  The model provides a reliable approximation of the distribution of water content and saturation in the vadose zone and describes quantitatively for the first time the role of the tailings matrix as contributor of the electrical response. It also confirms that pore-water of ionic composition and saturation are the controlling factors for the variability of the bulk electrical resistivity.
                  The method described in the paper is beneficial for predicting electrical and hydraulic parameters in tailings facilities, which is important for monitoring the integrity of these structures into the future.The management of mining waste is a major challenge in the mining industry. Monitoring of mining waste is a continuous activity and is also a key part of land reclamation and mine closure projects where structures are designed to contain the waste. Tailings storage facilities (TSFs) are examples of such structures containing mineral residues of a silty fine-sand texture generated from the ore enrichment process. Typically, the design of these structures in the mine closure context aims to minimize fluxes of water and oxygen or at least one of these elements to prevent further oxidation due to the chemical reactivity of the waste. Following land reclamation, the monitoring of these structures is critical as these areas are expected for long-term management at the surface and within the impoundment. In the last decade, failures have occurred in these structures with the major cause being water causing either an imbalance in the inventory or erosion around the foundations of the structure ( During the last decade, several techniques have been applied for investigating tailings areas, the most applied technique being Conventional approaches to interpret electrical conductivity (or resistivity) acquired by geophysical techniques are based on empirical relationships between conductivity, porosity, saturation and inner rock structure. As many of these relationships were developed for hydrocarbon industry needs, not all of them can be applied directly for interpreting geophysical data acquired in tailings areas. This study aims to determine a quantifiable relationship between electric and hydraulic parameters using petrophysical and hydrogeological principles that can apply to conductive media such as mining tailings waste deposits. Furthermore, it uses a mixing model to describe and predict hydrogeological conditions such as water content and saturation in the tailings medium. For this, data is acquired through non-invasive electrical resistivity imaging and borehole surveys in the reclaimed tailings storage facility of the former Brukunga mine site in South Australia. As in unconsolidated sand formations, tailings are materials where the physical properties depend on the structure of the solid phase and presence and composition of liquid phase. In general, grains in tailings are of relative homogeneous structure and composition within the domains of a tailings storage facility unless significant changes have occurred in methods and techniques along the mineral enrichment process. Quartz grains are the largest in tailings, whilst the fine grain fraction of the tailings comprises also clay minerals. However, the clay content in mining tailings depend on the ore and the milling process. The solid phase of sulfide minerals in tailing are present in the form of small-size isolated grains, not interconnected as in mineral deposits. Their contribution to bulk electrical conductivity depends on the mineral assemblage and ore milling process. For instance, clay content in tailings from copper ores can be as low as 1% and from gold ores about 5%. Tailings from oil sands can have about 9% and from coal as much as 26% of clay ( There are two basic differences between “natural” sediments and mining waste. First, the mineral enrichment process strips out most of the economic mineral material, but it is more likely that some minerals remains in the tailings material. Second, the liquid phase in tailings typically has high salinity due to the presence of dissolved minerals and salts. Thus, a variety of minerals are present in a form of solid suspensions or completely dissolved contributing to higher salinity of the liquid phase. Archie's laws have been used for many years in the hydrocarbon industry, and although the applicability is mostly for non-conducting matrix, it has been the base for deriving other relationships for applications in heterogeneous medium. The relationship represents the dependences between the bulk soil electrical conductivity and key soil parameters such as pore water saturation, and volumetric water content.  Site characterization involving geophysical, geotechnical and hydrogeological investigations often deal with clays. Clay influences electrochemical processes and hence the sensitivity of electrical resistivity measurements. Formations with a significant amount of clay minerals may present significant surface conduction. For this scenario, several variants to Archie's law were derived. The relation of Waxman and Smits (  In the Dual-water model ( This approach uses conductivity of free formation water ( Other empirical relationships have been developed for shale sand formations with different surface and bulk tortuosity (   In petrophysics, rock formations have a solid phase that is continuous. This does not occur on surface terrain where the soil is unconsolidated, and the solid phase is not continuous. This is the case with tailings deposits where the soil type is weakly consolidated. In order to interpret the electrical properties of tailings by applying relationships known from petrophysics ( There are few models to apply in a multiphase porous medium, and some of them are summarized by The model for In this approach, the medium comprises From this generalized approach the model equation for the tailings system is derived as: It is assumed that the air in the pores is of negligible electrical conductivity and can be neglected in Eq. Expanding the volumetric water fraction in terms of saturation (S) and porosity (φ), and replacing the notation of Eqs. The site study is a mining waste deposit in the former Brukunga mine site in South Australia ( The tailings deposit comprises silicates with some impurities of sulfides and oxides. The principal mineral assemblage in the tailings material are quartz, biotite, muscovite, and some plagioclase. Sulfide content of about 1% by weight is mainly pyrite with minor amounts of chalcopyrite. Goethite precipitates can occur in oxidation zones due to weathering of sulfides ( The elevation data corresponding to pre-mining conditions is the ground level before the deposition of tailings material in the area and constitutes the reference for the bottom of the tailings impoundment. Data on test pits are available to a few locations from site reports and provides information to reconstruct a stratigraphic profile of the study area. Sampling was conducted at locations BH15A and KAN48 ( Soil characterization on tailings samples consisted on laboratory determinations of grain size distribution and Atterberg limits in order to determine the fine fraction of clay and silt in the tailings. Volumetric clay content was determined as the fraction of particles with diameter less than 2 μm. Unified soil classification system (USCS) is used as reference to determine whether the fines in the tailings have silt or clay characteristics. Porosity, saturation ( Eq. Porosity (φ) was calculated using Eqs. Saturation was also expressed as the volume of water occupying the pore space and is given by: The tailings matrix, clay, air gas and pore water are the phases considered in the tailings impoundment. The phase fraction labelled as ‘clay’ relates also to any other mineral species below the fraction size of 2 μm that may contribute to the electrical properties of tailings. The volumetric fractions of these phases are determined from laboratory measurements of water content, porosity and saturation. In the unsaturated matrix, the volume of the voids is occupied by the liquid phase and gas phase. The volumetric liquid fraction equivalent to the volumetric water content (∅ The electrical conductivity of the pore water ( An equivalent expression in terms of water saturation ( In the saturated zone, direct sampling and reading in piezometers will provide reference of the electrical conductivity of the pore water. Stratification of chemical and electrical properties of the water column in tailings deposits is likely to occur ( A survey with several transects of electrical resistivity imaging (ERI) was conducted at the facility and one transect line is selected to evaluate the spatial variability in electric resistivity at depth and relative to saturation with pore fluids. The resistivity imaging used a multi-electrode system to obtain measurements of subsurface resistivity. The apparent resistivity measurements were obtained using a Syscal Pro Switch 96 resistivity meter (IRIS Instruments) with 96 electrodes at a 2.5 m electrode spacing. The position of electrodes along the transect line was geo-referenced using a real-time kinematic GPS unit. Measured data were pre-processed and corrected using the PROSYS II software from IRIS Instruments. Topographic data were introduced, and incongruent data caused by noise were filtered out. Inversion modelling of the measured, apparent resistivity values was carried out using the Geotomo's Res2DInv resistivity modelling software ( A stratigraphic profile was developed from site reports as shown in Tailings samples contain a mixture of silt and fine sand with minor amounts of inorganic clay. The average 50% grain size in the distribution envelope falls within the range of 0.075 mm sieve, which by USCS definition is in the limits of coarse-grained soils and fine-grained soils. The fraction of clay in the tailings materials is determined as The characteristics of the fine particles in the tailings is shown in the plasticity chart ( ERI was effective to locate the interface between the unsaturated and saturated zones in the tailings impoundment ( A relatively high resistive layer is observed along the surface in the shallow 0.5 m at the top. This also could be due to inversion artifacts that do not have importance for this inversion model. This layer comprises a 0.1 m topsoil covered with dense vegetation of thick grass that overlies a sub-layer of waste rock and soil that has been compacted to reduce water and oxygen infiltration. Based on the stratigraphic survey, the tailings material is located 1.0 m below the ground at BH15A and 1.3 m below the ground surface at KAN48. Bulk resistivity values corresponding to unsaturated tailings material is retrieved from the ERI survey and is presented in  The most important observations of the borehole data is the spatial variability of electrical resistivity decreasing with depth ( The resistivity index ( From field and laboratory information, the soil material inside the tailing can be modelled as a solid rock matrix of interconnected pores filled with conductive water and clay. The generalized mixed phase model (as in It is observed that resistivity of pore water presents spatial variability, hence Eq. Eq. The bound limits for the clay resistivity (  The model represent the connection between electrical and hydraulic parameters as seen in (c), (d), and (e) in Saturation and water content measured at different depths in BH15A and KAN48 locations are plotted for interpretation of the variability of hydrogeological tailings parameters in Isolines in In the case of the tailings at Brukunga mine site, other models including the traditional Archie's law and Waxman-Smit predicts well the distribution of medium bulk resistivity at shallow depths above groundwater level, but the discrepancy occurs as saturation increases. This pattern is also seen with the generalized mixed model adopted in this study but with a better prediction confidence in the unsaturated zone. Spatial variability in electrical conductivity of the pore-water and possible interference of metallic minerals in the tailings material can complicate interpretation of resistivity measurements. Therefore, the generalized mixing model takes into account the resistivity index According to The tailings matrix is the controlling phase of the electric response in the unsaturated zone (above 50% which is proportional to its phase volume fraction), whereas pore-water is the major responsible for the variability of the bulk electric resistivity as saturation increases ( Volumetric clay in mining tailings vary depending on many factors such as ore geology, mineralogy, and upstream processing methods. In most cases, the clay content in tailings is low because it is separated from the ore in upstream processes (e.g. crushing, comminution) that otherwise would complicate the mineral enrichment process (e.g. flotation, leaching). Clay is present at the interface between the matrix and the pore water in tailings material creating conditions for surface conditions that contribute to its geoelectric signature. For the tailings in the case study, surface conduction is not significant, but still has a relative contribution of almost 10% above the water table and less than 2% in the saturated media below the water table. This is influenced by the low volumetric fraction of clay in the medium (<1% Decreasing bulk resistivity values below the water table also suggests that pore water is increasing salinity with depth. This is confirmed by the observed water quality and variability of resistivity values in the saturated zone ranging from 0.96–1.65 Ω.m below the water table to 0.6 Ω.m in the seepage at the toe of the tailings dam. Geochemical reactions, concentration of metallic sulfides and the ionic concentration in the pore water are the most likely factors for this variability. More stable resistivity index in the unsaturated zone suggests that cleaner medium is comprising the upper zone of the tailings as leaching washed out salinity over time. This study adopts a multidisciplinary methodology for applying geoelectric imaging to quantitatively interpret hydrogeological parameters for the first time in mining waste areas. Tailings are waste materials containing minor amounts of minerals that can still influence the overall electrical response of the medium, hence their contribution requires consideration. For this a multiphase petrophysical approach known as the generalized Archie's equation was used. The expression in terms of electrical resistivity ( The model shows that electrical properties in mining tailings waste are governed by the physics of power laws. These exponential parameters are known to govern empirical relationships in petrophysics which in this case apply to the volumetric phases in the tailings medium. The mixing model applied to unsaturated mining tailings in the case study determined the exponential parameters ( In the study, the major parameter influencing variability of bulk electrical resistivity is water saturation that increases with depth. The research shows that electrical response depends on the relative contribution (RC) of the tailings matrix (RC The approach in this study applies with confidence a quantitative determination of hydrogeological parameters such as water content and saturation in conductive porous media, which is important in many hydrogeological and geotechnical investigations, and has potential to be adopted in other fields facing similar challenges. Datasets related to this article can be found at The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This project was supported by the