Oscillatory flow around a cylinder is simulated using both two- and three-dimensional finite element models at Re=2000 and KC=1, 2, 5, 10, 17.5, 20 and 26.2. The same finite element method is used in both the two- and three-dimensional models. The purpose of this study is to investigate the feasibility of a two-dimensional model for simulating a three-dimensional flow in terms of fundamental flow characteristics and hydrodynamic forces. The vortex structures predicted by the two-dimensional model agree qualitatively with those by the three-dimensional model for the flow conditions where strong correlations exist along the span-wise direction (KC=10, 17.5 and 26.2). Three vortex shedding modes are reproduced by both two- and three-dimensional models at KC=20, which is close to the critical KC number between double-and three-pair regimes. The time histories of hydrodynamic force predicted by the two models agree with each other at KC=20. The predicted Morison force coefficients by the two-dimensional model are within 18% different from those predicted using the three-dimensional model for most of the cases. The two-dimensional model captures the majority of the genuine flow structures and hydrodynamic loads of a circular cylinder in an oscillatory flow.Oscillatory flow around a circular cylinder has been of significant interests in both academic and engineering communities for many years due to its rich flow features and engineering relevance. Oscillatory flow has been widely used to approximate the wave-induced water motions around cylindrical structures in offshore engineering where structures are designed against wave forces. An undisturbed oscillatory flow (far away from the structures) is often defined as The topic of oscillatory flow around a circular cylinder can be examined through different setup of coordinate systems. In most of the experimental research, the cylinder was given an oscillatory motion in still water ( Oscillatory flow around a circular cylinder involves many complicated flow phenomena, such as boundary layer separation, vortex shedding, and flow reversal, etc. The flow shows three-dimensional effect under most of flow conditions in practical engineering. A comprehensive review about the interaction between an oscillatory flow and a cylindrical structure is given by Extensive numerical simulations have been undertaken to investigate oscillatory flow around a circular cylinder during the last three decades. Most of the numerical studies conducted so far are two-dimensional ( With the rapid increase of computational power in recent years, a number of three-dimensional numerical simulations have been carried out to investigate oscillatory flow around a circular cylinder and much improved understanding of flow mechanisms has been achieved. For examples, Honji instability ( Although three-dimensional simulations of various fluid flow problems have increased significantly in recent years due to the rapid increase in computing power, two-dimensional simulations are still widely used in engineering applications and will remain so for a period of time, mainly because of their low computational costs. This is especially important in front engineering phase when project schedules are tight. To use two-dimensional models with confidence, it is necessary to evaluate computational errors induced by two-dimensional simulations. So far, such an evaluation is unavailable for oscillatory flow around a circular cylinder, to the best knowledge of the authors. The present study is motivated primarily by this issue. In this study, sinusoidal oscillatory flow past a circular cylinder is investigated using both two- and three-dimensional models at In both of the two- and three-dimensional numerical models, Navier–Stokes equations are solved to simulate the oscillatory flow. A definition sketch of two-dimensional oscillatory flow around a circular cylinder is shown in Non-slip boundary condition is given on surface of the cylinder. On the inlet boundary, velocity is specified as Free slip boundary condition is implemented on top and bottom boundaries. At the outflow boundary, the pressure is set to be zero. At the two ends of the cylinder, periodic boundary condition is applied. The two- and three-dimensional numerical models used in this study are developed by A rectangular computational domain of 60 It is also important to ensure that the boundary layer on the cylinder surface can be captured by the mesh with reasonable resolution. For Stokes boundary layer on a plane, the boundary layer thickness can be calculated as If we use the above equation to estimate the boundary layer thickness on the cylinder surface, the above equation can be rearranged as Eq. In the dependency test for mesh density in circumferential direction, a flow with  The non-dimensional computational time step size is ∆ A feature in Two different spanwise dimensions were used in this study for different In this work, the two- and three-dimensional finite element models are used to simulate oscillatory flow past a circular cylinder at a constant For The peak values of The inline and lift forces at a section of the cylinder are calculated by integrating the pressure and shear stress over the circumference of the cylinder. The non-dimensional sectional force is defined as Strong three-dimensional features are observed in the simulation with The middle section flow structures are examined and the vorticity ( The variation of   The inline force shows strong periodicity and weak variation along the spanwise direction. The sectional ( The asymmetric vortices on the top and bottom sides of the cylinder ( The intermittent switching behaviour of the sectional lift force shown in The evolution process of the distribution of lift force along the spanwise direction of the cylinder is presented in The case of  To quantify the difference of the vorticity field, the two- and three-dimensional results about vorticity line with   The flow condition under the range of 16<   The vortex shedding at two different spanwise locations can happen in different phase angle, although they are both in the two-pair vortex shedding regime. The evolution of lift force along the spanwise direction is shown in The time histories of inline and lift forces calculated using the two-dimensional model are plotted in The results of In the above sections, the flow structures and force time histories calculated using the two-dimensional model are compared with the results using the three-dimensional model. In this section, the Morison coefficients derived from the two- and three-dimensional simulations are compared quantitatively. The drag coefficient ( The least-square method is used to calculate the values of The two-dimensional and three-dimensional model results about drag and inertia coefficient are listed in The difference of other coefficients is defined in the same way. For The strongest three-dimensionality of oscillatory flow occurs at Oscillating flow around a circular is investigated by solving the two-dimensional and three-dimensional Navier–Stokes equations using the PG-FEM method. Calculations are carried out for a constant Reynolds number of 2000 and seven The flow at The flow of The flow of The flows at  The comparison between the two- and three-dimensional results of force coefficients shows that the two-dimensional model tends to under-predict There is a good agreement of peak vorticity modelled by the two- and three-dimensional model since the peak vorticity normally appear at the boundary layer on the cylinder surface before reaching the separation point. There is obvious difference in term of detailed vortex locations between the two- and three-dimensional model results. The authors would like to acknowledge the supports from