The extraction of alumina from bauxite produces a high volume by-product which is stored in secure impoundments. In Western Australia, typically half of the by-product has a particle size in excess of 90μm and can be called Red Sand. Alcoa World Alumina (Alcoa) has three Western Australian refineries and this coarse fraction represents a potential resource of up to 20,000tonnes per day.
                  This note documents investigations into processing Red Sand through standard mineralogical processes (Low Intensity Magnetic Separator – LIMS and Wet High Intensity Magnetic Separator – WHIMS), to produce various fractions that have a higher potential value than the total sand fraction. One product is high in iron oxides, typically about 40% as Fe. Another product has high silica content (ca 93% as SiO2) and has potential use within concrete manufacture. A third fraction, comprised of a mixture of iron and silica, is suitable as general fill. Application of this technology has the potential to divert a large volume resource away from storage and into marketable commodities.Bauxite residue is a by-product from alumina refining. Typically, this residue is stored in large secure impoundments close to the refining operations. Approximately 18,000 A variety of uses for Bauxite residues have been outlined by To achieve higher value products, an investigation into magnetic separation was initiated. These separations were conducted on laboratory and pilot scale plants with results outlined here. Product development and market evaluations are currently underway. To determine if Darling Range Red Sand could be magnetically separated, a proof of concept trial was conducted using a Reading bench top magnetic separator. Analysis of the fractions ranging from 0.1 to 0.4 Experimentation was then repeated using a freshly prepared Red Sand that appeared cleaner having been washed free of mud prior to drying. On this occasion, the sand was successfully separated into three fractions. The magnetic fraction contained 56% Fe These results demonstrated that Darling Range Red Sand could be magnetically separated into potentially higher value products. Red Sand is produced as slurry, so any magnetic separation would ideally be performed in this state. It was decided to initially evaluate the low intensity wet drums or LIMS systems. The Red Sand was screened using a Kason vibrating screen to remove all materials larger than 1 Results indicated that even at the highest strength of 1000 The use of WHIMS would require a pre-treatment of LIMS to remove the highly magnetic fraction of the Red Sand. This magnetic material, identified as Maghemite, tends to cause blockages and “hold up” within the WHIMS operation, dramatically reducing the separation efficiency. Trials were conducted on a pilot scale Humboldt–Jones P40 WHIMS. Plate gap was set at 2 Feed rates were primarily governed by what would flow through the instrument and was eventually set at 6 Trials were also conducted using field strengths of 6250, 8800, 9750 and 11,200 The magnetic fraction, termed High Iron Red Sand, is a combination of goethite and hematite (about 60/40 split). High Iron Red Sand represents about 35% of coarse residue and has an iron content of around 56% Fe The middle fraction of the Red Sand is the material that cannot be readily separated and represents about 25% by mass. Particles have been shown to have a high angular nature, allowing the sand to have strong mechanical properties. With minimal processing this fraction is likely to be suitable for road embankment construction, including sub-grades and foundations. Further development will take place to enhance the separation process to minimise this fraction. Microscopy of the middle fraction indicates that the fraction consists of discrete particles of quartz and iron oxides, hence separation should be possible. The non magnetic fraction is predominantly quartz and is termed High Silica Red Sand. High Silica Red Sand has a SiO Magnetic separation of Darling Range Red Sand has been demonstrated through the combined techniques of Low Intensity Magnetic Separation – LIMS and Wet High Intensity Magnetic Separation – WHIMS. Magnetic fractions typically about 56% as Fe Application of magnetic separation technology to this new field has the potential to divert a large volume resource away from storage and into marketable commodities. The authors would like to acknowledge the assistance and support of staff at the following organisations. Alcoa World Alumina Australia’s Technology Delivery Group, Centre for Sustainable Resource Processing, CSIRO Minerals (Waterford), Curtin University Department of Engineering, Western Australian School of Mines.