This paper presents a comparison between printed circuit boards from computers and mobile phones. Since printed circuits boards are becoming more complex and smaller, the amount of materials is constantly changing. The main objective of this work was to characterize spent printed circuit boards from computers and mobile phones applying mineral processing technique to separate the metal, ceramic, and polymer fractions. The processing was performed by comminution in a hammer mill, followed by particle size analysis, and by magnetic and electrostatic separation. Aqua regia leaching, loss-on-ignition and chemical analysis (inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy – ICP-OES) were carried out to determine the composition of printed circuit boards and the metal rich fraction. The composition of the studied mobile phones printed circuit boards (PCB-MP) was 63wt.% metals; 24wt.% ceramics and 13wt.% polymers; and of the printed circuit boards from studied personal computers (PCB-PC) was 45wt.% metals; 27wt.% polymers and ceramics 28wt.% ceramics. The chemical analysis showed that copper concentration in printed circuit boards from personal computers was 20wt.% and in printed circuit boards from mobile phones was 34.5wt.%. According to the characteristics of each type of printed circuit board, the recovery of precious metals may be the main goal of the recycling process of printed circuit boards from personal computers and the recovery of copper should be the main goal of the recycling process of printed circuit boards from mobile phones. Hence, these printed circuit boards would not be mixed prior treatment. The results of this paper show that copper concentration is increasing in mobile phones and remaining constant in personal computers.This paper presents a comparison between printed circuit boards from computers and mobile phones. Since printed circuits boards as becoming more complex and smaller, the amount of materials is constantly changing. The results of this paper show that copper concentration is increasing in mobile phones and remaining constant in personal computers. Printed circuit boards of mobile phone and of computers are different, since the computer is not multilayer, unlike the printed circuit boards of mobile phone that are multilayer and copper is found between layers of resin, making the liberation of the metal, which may cause a different behavior with respect to the printed circuit board of computers face mechanical treatment. Waste of electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) is generated by discarding equipment such as spent computers and mobile phones, which is stimulated by technological innovations and has been growing yearly. Because of the amount that has been accumulated, it has become a source of valuable materials such as precious and base metals ( Considering that the lifetime of a mobile phone is approximately one year and of a computer 2–5 Assuming that the average mass of a mobile phone is around 100 Printed circuit boards are found in almost all electrical and electronic equipment, being generally composed of polymers, ceramics and metals. Thin films of tin or silver are used in the printed circuit boards to protect against oxidation ( There are two types of printed circuit boards (FR-4 and FR-2) normally used in personal computers and mobile phones. The FR-4 type is composed of a multilayer of epoxy resin, fiberglass coated with a copper layer. The FR-2 type is a single layer of fiberglass or cellulose paper and phenolic coated with the copper layer ( In the printed circuit boards from spent mobile phones, the metal with the highest concentration is copper. Considering that the copper concentration is about 33 One ton of scrap computers has more gold than can be extracted from 17 Mechanical processing of printed circuit boards may involve grinding, magnetic separation, size separation, air classification, density separation and electrostatic separation, which have all been used in industrial recycling (  The aim of this work was to carry out the characterization of printed circuit boards of obsolete computers and mobile phones by mechanical processing and to evaluate the viable recovering processes. Two types of printed circuit board scrap were studied: single layered and multi-layered printed circuit boards. The single layered printed circuit boards from personal computers (PCB-PC) were collected from spent computers of any model and brand discarded by the University of São Paulo. The multi-layered printed circuit boards from mobile phones (PCB-MP) were supplied by an international company. Only the batteries and capacitors were extracted from the PCBs. Mechanical processing was performed on about 10 The characterization of printed circuit boards was performed by mechanical processing (comminution, particle-size analysis, magnetic separation and electrostatic separation), aqua regia leaching, loss-on-ignition and chemical analysis using ICP ( The printed circuit board samples were crushed in a hammer mill followed by sieving with the help of a mesh opening grates less than 2 A sample about 100 The printed circuit board powder from the comminuting process (about 7–8 A magnetic separator can separate ferrous particles which adhere to the belt because of the magnetic attraction in the magnetic fraction, and nonferrous metals are crashed in a non-magnetic fraction by gravity ( Electrostatic separator can remove non-ferrous metals (e.g   Ionizing electrode: Rotor distance: 25 Angle: 80° Static electrode: Rotor distance: 25 Angle: 52.5° High voltage supply: 30 a 46 Motor rotation: 115 Conductive, mixed and non-conductive fractions were obtained after pass non-magnetic fraction through electrostatic separator. The results of mechanical processing (comminution, magnetic and electrostatic separation) are presented in mass balancing. Quartering samples of 1 The leached portion represents the soluble metals and was analyzed by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES). The analyzed metals were: gold, silver, iron, tin, copper, zinc, nickel, lead and aluminum. Quartering samples of 1–3 An inorganic portion was obtained that indicated metals and ceramic materials. The organic portion volatilizes and the polymers are calculated by difference of initial and final weights. The composition of printed circuit boards was calculated using the data obtained for aqua regia leaching and loss-on-ignition by Eqs. (1) and (2): In which AL denotes mean aqua regia leaching; Li is loss on ignition; M is metal fraction (%wt); P is polymer fraction (%wt). Ceramic fraction (%wt) was inferred by difference between polymers composition (determined by loss on ignition) and metals composition (aqua regia leaching). In the comminution tests, 29% (w/w) of material loss was observed for PCB-PC and 25% (w/w) for PCB-MP, because during the grinding process, the fine and light particles, probably fiberglass, are expelled by the hammer mill, but studies ( Additionally, printed circuit boards are composed of fiberglass, which is an abrasive material and therefore facilitates the generation of fine particles which are lost by the opening of the mill and the easiness of getting in suspension. The size distribution of both PCB-PC and PCB-MP after grinding is shown in According to A similar behavior of size distribution with respect to liberation of polymers and ceramics of the PCB-MP and PCB-PC was observed, even though different opening grates had been used, suggesting that PCB-MP are more easily released probably because the PCB-PC had components inserted such as resistors, transformers and integrated circuits.  It was observed that the magnetic fraction represented about 18 Conversely, comparing the results obtained in the electromagnetic separation tests, one can observe that the metal rich fraction (conductive fraction) represented ca. 50% of PCB-MP and only 28% of PCB-PC. This dissimilarity is probably due to composition differences and material liberation degree. The printed circuit boards from mobile phones are typically multilayer (FR-4 type) denoting that most of the copper are trapped inside the board. This technology made it possible to increase the complexity of the circuits in a smaller space. On the other hand, PCB from personal computers are single layer (FR-2 type) having the copper deposited on the surface. This difference between the printed circuit board types justified the higher concentration (50  The results obtained in the non-conductive fraction confirmed the influence of the printed circuit board type in the metal separation. In the PCB-PC, about 50 The results obtained in aqua regia leaching and loss-on-ignition allowed the determination of the composition of each type of PCB, as shown in The polymeric materials were concentrated in the non-conductive fraction of both samples and totaled 13 In the pyrolysis of plastic particles from printed circuit boards performed by The ceramic fraction represented 24 The obtained results are presented in the form of mass balancing ( Studies ( In the case of printed circuit boards from mobile phones, the composition reported by Studies by The metal concentrations determined by ICP-OES of PCB-MP and PCB-PC are presented in Iron is a strongly magnetic metal and was concentrated in the magnetic fraction in both samples (PCB-PC and PCB-MP), showing that the magnetic separation was efficient, with the recovery being viable for steel production. The nickel concentration found in the PCB-MP (2.6 It was also observed that because nickel is a weak magnetic metal, it was not concentrated only in a magnetic fraction, and about 50 Lead and tin are present in all fractions showing that mechanical processing was not effective in the concentration of these metals. These metals are used in welding of electronic components ( Zinc is a base metal and can be used to replace lead in the weld ( Copper is the metal of the highest percentage in printed circuit boards due to its high conductivity. The chemical analysis showed that copper concentration in PCB-PC was 20 Although the copper was concentrated in the conductive fraction, about 40 Among the precious metals, silver was found in both samples (PCB-PC and PCB-MP), but gold was found only in PCB-PC. Gold has chemical stability and is used as a thin film to prevent oxidation of electrical contacts in computers ( The precious metals in printed circuit boards can represent more than 80% of the total intrinsic value even when the concentration is less than 1 Comparing the composition of the several fractions obtained in the mechanical processing one can conclude that: Through the process of magnetic separation, it is possible to obtain two fractions: magnetic fraction, which concentrated iron; and non-magnetic fraction, which concentrated copper. Printed circuit boards from mobile phones are composed of 63 Printed circuit boards from mobile phones presented higher concentration of copper and lower concentration of precious metals than printed circuit boards from personal computers. The chemical analysis showed that copper concentration in printed circuit boards from personal computers was 20 According to the characteristics of each type of printed circuit board, the recovery of precious metals may be the main goal of the recycling process of printed circuit boards from personal computers and the recovery of copper should be the main goal of the recycling process of printed circuit boards from mobile phones. Hence, these printed circuit boards would not be mixed prior treatment. The authors wish to thank the