Reverse shoulder arthroplasty is now the standard treatment for displaced, three- or four-part, proximal humeral fractures in patients older than 70 years. Inadequate tuberosity repair or inappropriate humeral stem position are associated with poorer outcomes, notably regarding rotation and stability. Strict operative technique during prosthesis implantation is therefore crucial to obtain reliable and reproducible outcomes. The objective of this article is to describe the surgical technique for reverse shoulder arthroplasty used to treat recent proximal humerus fractures.Changes in the treatment of proximal humerus fractures in recent years include both the growing popularity of internal fixation and the declining use of hemiarthroplasty due to a preference for reverse shoulder arthroplasty (RSA) for displaced, three- or four-part fractures in patients older than 70 years In recent proximal humerus fractures, the decision to perform RSA is based on patient age and comorbidities and on the characteristics of the fracture including tuberosity displacement and comminution, the condition of the cuff and calcar, the extent of the displacement, and the risk of avascular necrosis. RSA is indicated in patients older than 70 years who have a three- or four-part displaced fracture with a high risk of avascular necrosis of the humeral head and/or poor-quality comminuted tuberosities and/or a pre-existing rotator cuff tear This procedure is not urgent and should be carried out after proper planning. The imaging work-up consists of standard antero-posterior and lateral radiographs and of computed tomography (CT) with 3D reconstruction to provide an accurate analysis of the condition and displacement of the tuberosities The procedure is performed under general anaesthesia with or without an interscalene block to ensure post-operative pain control. The patient is in the beach-chair position tilted at 30− to 60−, on the edge of the table. The position should allow free anterior and posterior shoulder movements, as well as retropulsion of the humerus. The arm is placed on a rest. Either the delto-pectoral or the supero-lateral approach may be used. With the delto-pectoral approach, reduction of the greater tuberosity is more difficult to control and access to the glenoid is less direct. Nevertheless, this approach deserves preference in patients with a fracture-dislocation injury or a fracture line extending into the metaphysis. It also has the theoretical advantages of sparing the anterior deltoid and of avoiding axillary nerve exposure. When using the delto-pectoral approach, the upper edge of the pectoralis major tendon can serve as a landmark for the height of the prosthesis and the reduction of the tuberosities. The delto-pectoral approach is a lateralised 8-to-10 The incision is made along the anterior edge of the acromion, from the acromio-clavicular joint to 38 The haemorrhagic sub-acromial bursa is excised. The long head of biceps tendon is identified and the bicipital groove is opened. Tenotomy of the biceps tendon is performed routinely. Tenodesis at the distal part of the groove is an option, although no effect of this procedure has been demonstrated. The fracture is usually located immediately lateral to the groove. The tuberosities are separated at the fracture line. The rotator interval is identified and opened down to the glenoid. The supra-spinatus tendon is excised down to the glenoid. Although this tendon can be spared, it may then place excessive traction on the greater tuberosity after the reduction ( The tuberosities are pulled apart using traction sutures and the anterior capsule is excised to release the anterior edge of the glenoid. Two retractors are placed at the anterior and posterior edges of the glenoid, respectively ( Available humeral stems fall into three categories: standard filling stems (Grammont type); filling fracture-specific stems (i.e., bearing holes to facilitate re-attachment of the tuberosities); non-filling fracture-specific stems. Non-filling stems require the addition of bone grafts taken from the head and placed at the level of the tuberosities to improve their union ( The humerus is prepared using increasingly large broaches until rotational stability is satisfactory, without seeking to achieve cortical contact, which carries a long-term risk of cortical thinning due to stress-shielding To enhance union of the tuberosities, a prosthesis with an epiphyseal and metaphyseal coating that promotes osseo-integration should be used and cement should be avoided in this area. After insertion of a distal plug, the humeral canal is rinsed and dried and cement of near-liquid consistency is introduced in the distal-to-proximal direction using a syringe The two suture loops whose needles have been removed are passed under the neck of the prosthesis. The suture loop with its needle coming from the infra-spinatus is passed from medial-to-lateral through the upper part of the sub-scapularis tendon, flush with the lesser tuberosity, skirting the medial edge of the prosthesis. The suture from the teres minor is passed from medial to lateral through the lower part of the sub-scapularis tendon in the same way ( The sub-acromial space is irrigated liberally to remove any particles of bone or cement. The shoulder is closed in layers. With the supero-lateral approach, the anterior deltoid is secured to the acromion using trans-osseous non-absorbable sutures, taking care to catch both the superficial and the deep deltoid fasciae in the sutures. With the delto-pectoral approach, the delto-pectoral interval is closed with loose stitches. The arm is placed in a splint for 45 days. Neutral rotation or abduction-neutral rotation is preferable over internal rotation to avoid placing tension on the greater tuberosity repair. Pendulum exercises can be started rapidly after the procedure. In contrast, rehabilitation is best delayed rather than started immediately. The rehabilitation modalities in these elderly patients should be tailored to the abilities of each individual patient. RSA is indicated in patients older than 70 years who have a displaced three- or four-part proximal humeral fracture. The anatomic union of the greater tuberosity provides satisfactory outcomes that are sustained over time. It is achieved by applying a rigorous surgical technique combining a specific non-filling stem with bone grafts and robust tuberosity repair. Jean-David Werthel receives royalties for shoulder prosthesis design from FH Orthopedics. Francois Sirveaux is a consultant for Tornier-Wright. The author Damien Block declares that he has no competing interest. None. David Werthel wrote the article. François Siveaux was the supervisor and primary investigator. Damien Block collected the data.