A hybrid neural network model is designed to predict the micro-macroscopic characteristics of particulate systems subjected to shearing. The network is initially trained to understand the micro-mechanical characteristics of particulate assemblies, by feeding the results based on three-dimensional discrete element simulations. Given the physical properties of the individual particles and the packing condition of the particulate assemblies under specified loading conditions, the network thus understands the way contact forces are distributed, the orientation of contact (fabric) networks and the evolution of stress tensor during the mechanical loading. These relationships are regarded as soft sensors. Using the signals received from soft sensors, a mechanistic neural network model is constructed to establish the relationship between the micro-macroscopic characteristics of granular assemblies subjected to shearing. The macroscopic results obtained form this hybrid mechanistic neural network modelling for data that were not part of the training signals, is compared with simulations based on discrete element modelling alone and in general, the agreement is good. The hybrid network responds to their inputs at a high speed and can be regarded as a real-time system for understanding the complex behaviour of particulate systems under mechanical process conditions.Granular materials and granular flows are everywhere in nature, in various industrial processes, in everyday life. We find them in landslides and avalanches, erosion, raw minerals extraction and transport, cereal storage, powder mixing in chemistry or pharmaceutics, on our table as sugar, salt or pepper, just to cite a few examples. Granular materials are sometimes considered as a fourth state of matter, different from the classic solid, liquid and gas. They exhibit specific phenomena that call for better understanding. To this end, experimental studies have been and are being conducted, but numerical simulation is increasingly seen as a means to understand both the internal mechanics and macroscopic behaviour of granular materials under actual process conditions. The recent surge in the computer power has attracted several researchers to study the underlying mechanics and physics of granular materials using advanced computational modelling tools such as discrete element modelling (DEM), e.g., In granular media, the transmission of forces from one boundary to another can occur only via the inter-particle contacts. Hence the distribution of contacts will determine the distribution of forces within the system of particles. These forces will not be necessarily distributed uniformly, even for an isotopic and homogeneous assembly of particles subjected to homogeneous applied load. This important qualitative observation of stress distribution can be seen in photoelastic studies of two-dimensional disks reported by several investigators Soft-sensor is a technique for estimating variables usually difficult to measure on-line. In general, soft-sensor technique is to construct some mathematical model (i.e., soft-sensor model) for estimating the primary variable, on the basis of a group of secondary variables selected according to some optimal criterions, which are closely related to the primary variable Back propagation neural networks are analogous to the computational models of the brain. The modelling based on neural network is one of the identification techniques to determine a model of a system according to the observed inputs and outputs signals to the system A neural network for identification generally consists of an input layer which receives input signals, an output layer which generates output signals, and some hidden layers which include a number of interconnected neurons, i.e., processing elements ( It is believed that with sufficient hidden neurons and using some special training or learning algorithm based on the known input and output data set for adjusting or training the strengths of the connections and the biases to the neurons until a stopping criterion is met, a neural network can approximate arbitrary mapping or function  In the present study, we consider the case of granular system consisting of mono-sized spherical particles. To obtain the soft-sensor signals, the DEM simulations were carried out in a three-dimensional cuboidal periodic cell. The periodic cell consisted 5000 randomly generated spherical particles with diameter 0.1 To predict the evolution of macroscopic shear stress ratio To predict the contact normal force distribution To predict the evolution of To predict To predict To predict Four-layer (including 2 hidden layers) feed-forward neural networks, as shown in Considering the complexity of these mappings, a relatively large numbers of the data (obtained from DEM simulations) are employed in the network training, including about 840 data of  The comparison between the network model results, as shown in A hybrid mechanistic neural network method has been used to establish the relationships between the key variables (micro-macroscopic characteristics) involved in the mechanical behaviour of a slowly sheared (mono-dispersed) granular system. The possible correlation between the micro-macroscopic features and strength parameters in the granular material are investigated. Conceptually, the mechanistic neural network modelling is more reliable and efficient than the convention network models. The mechanistic neural network model employed here for granular systems is generic in nature, and can complement other analytical or modelling approaches, for approximating the desired mappings. However, just like any other identification modelling techniques, for more realistic granular systems, it may require rather long identification experiments. This may involve obtaining soft signals in terms of realistic particle shapes, size distributions, surface roughness, inter-particle forces etc. However, the generic nature of the hybrid network presented here provides the basis for further increasing the efficiency of soft sensors, once more realistic soft sensors are available. Furthermore, the possibility of obtaining soft sensors using rigorous theoretical analysis or experimental methods for granular media needs to be explored in future. The research was supported by BNFL—Leeds Research Alliance in Particle Science and Engineering, UK. S.J.A and X.W. gratefully acknowledge Dr. D. Rhodes, Dr. D. Goddard and Mr. A. Milliken for their support to this study.