Serpentinite rocks are considered to be a suitable raw material for Carbon Capture and Mineralization (CCM), which has been recognized as a potential method for the management of the industrial CO2-emissions. Different serpentine minerals, that form serpentinite rocks, feature divergent characteristics that influence the eventual suitability of a serpentinite rock for CCM. The present study focuses on these characteristics, sub-divides them and explains how each characteristic influences the suitability. The carbonation method employed in this study is developed at Åbo Akademi University. The good, yet sometimes inconsistent results gained with this method, gave grounds to a closer mineralogical study. Samples in this study consist of an antigorite dominating serpentinite, a lizardite dominating serpentinite, an antigorite seam, a lizardite rock and a serpentinite rock with high water content (15.15%). A serpentinite tailing is used as a base sample. Mineralogical studies were executed with an optical microscope, Scanning Electron Microscope with Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectrometer (SEM-EDX) and X-ray Diffraction (XRD).
                  The results state that the characteristics that influence the suitability of a serpentinite rock for mineral carbonation are the mineralogical structure, parent rock and later transformation of the rock through metamorphosis or other type of alteration. The features that positively influence the suitability are more common in lizardite than in antigorite.
                  As serpentinite rocks are widely available, additional knowledge on their behavior based on the mineralogical characteristics, and understanding these variables, enables improvement of the method and widens its range of application. The results can also be used as guidelines to other rocks that are found to be possible raw materials for the carbonation method. The results do not apply to carbonation processes only, but also other purposes, for example among industrial exploitations of quarried materials and their further utilization as profitable goods.The anthropogenic CO A carbonation method, “the ÅA Route”, has been developed at the Thermal and Flow Engineering Laboratory at the Åbo Akademi University with promising results on CCM ( Observations from a previous study on materials for mineral carbonation ( As the problem is global, there are several studies supporting and contributing to the topic. For example, a study on pure serpentine minerals for large scale Carbon Capture and Storage by Mineralization (CCSM) processes ( The aim with this study is to compare how different serpentinites, lizardites dominating and antigorite dominating, as well as pure serpentine minerals, lizardite and antigorite, behave in the ÅA Route for mineral carbonation. Serpentine-group minerals consist of antigorite, lizardite and chrysotile. Antigorite forms through metamorphosis of ultramafic rocks. Antigorite is formed in the Earth's mantle at temperatures around 600 The sample is from the Hitura nickel mine in Finland and originates from ultramafic rocks metamorphosed in greenschist facies. The original rock material consists of 90% serpentinite, 5% of magnetite and pyrite, 5% of subhedral biotite (K(Mg,Fe) Sample AntN ( Sample LizN ( Sample AntF ( Sample LizIT is collected from the Elba island in Italy. It displays a blue-green fine-grained texture with calcite (CaCO Sample SerpS is collected from Piteå in Sweden. It displays a regular serpentinite rock with dark moldy green color, light veins and magnetite (Fe Texture and mineralogy of the studied rocks were determined with an optical microscope from thin sections. The chemical composition ( The sample material was ground to < The “ÅA Route”-method consists of extraction of Mg from the raw material, converting it into Mg(OH) The rock materials were crushed and sieved. The fraction chosen for experiments was 75–250 In the first stage of “the ÅA Route” ( Solid hydroxides are precipitated by raising the pH of the ion-solution produced in the extraction step. Precipitation is executed with ammonium hydroxide (NH Both the unprocessed raw material (HITRb) and the insoluble material that were left over after processing in the ÅA Route (HITRa) were studied. In a microscope it was still, even after processing, possible to identify serpentinite grains. Differences between the two samples were visible on a stereo microscope. HITRb showed only dark brown grains, mostly sitting tightly together in small groups instead of sitting alone. HITRa showed dark brown grains sitting separately from each other and some small dark grains seemed to be capsulated in a clear or slightly yellow clear material. In order to rule out the residue of ammonium salt, the HITRa-material was washed in distilled H Both HITRb and HITRa materials were then closely studied with SEM-EDX. As the crystal forms were so distinctive, it was possible to distinguish grains ( To confirm the assumption that Mg is more easily extracted from lizardite compared to antigorite, the insoluble materials from serpentinite samples (after reaction with AS) were compared with unprocessed serpentinite materials. Both types were studied with an optic microscope, a stereo microscope and SEM-EDX. No alteration was visible on the crystal forms between unprocessed and processed materials. A large part of the sample had remained unchanged but there was a noticeable difference between the different types of serpentinites. Lizardite grains had turned clear with black cores while antigorite grains had stayed unchanged. Further studying of the sample on SEM-EDX supported the observations. Mineralogical tests using XRD had estimated that all the serpentinite samples consisted mostly of antigorite (~ A mesh texture (~ Very little changes were detected in the samples before and after processing. After processing, the original light yellow-green shade had turned more yellow. Originally yellow grains had turned translucent but were still yellow. The sample consists of two textures; sheafy and mesh. Sheafiness (~ Not much change was detected in the material when studied before and after processing. The sample was very light yellow both before and after. The only visible change was that the yellow grains and the snow-like material covering them had separated from each other and appeared as own groups after processing. The textures found on AntF suggest that it has formed through serpentinization of olivine and later on experienced re-deformation. Mesh texture (~ The differences between the material before and after processing were clear. Also, this sample only displayed elongated angular grains. Unprocessed sample displayed yellow snow-like material, dark yellow grains and black grains evenly distributed all over the sample. Overall appearance was green-cream colored. Afterwards the sample had brown-yellow appearance and the snow-like areas had a slightly pink shade to them. Different grains were clearly separated from each other and displayed dark brown, black and yellow shades. The overall appearance was brown–beige. An antigorite that occurs in this type of strongly columnar habit is called a picrolite ( LizIT consists mostly of pure round lizardite grains (~ The sample displayed mostly rounded grains before processing. Afterwards the grains had a more angular, yet still rounded shape. The overall appearance before processing was light moldy green. The sample displayed very light green rounded grains together with clear icicle-like grains. Black grains were few. After processing the rounded grains were darker with more of a yellow-green shade. Also the luster was gone and the grains were matt. The overall appearance was yellow–green. Mesh texture (~ SerpS has been stated to be a dunite also in a previous study ( As the samples before and after processing were studied with a stereo microscope, it was possible to detect clear changes in the material. Unprocessed material had an overall gray appearance. Black (opaque) grains and yellow translucent grains were found together with snow-like material. After processing the material had an overall red–brown appearance and some larger black grains had remained.  Previous studies state that pyroxenes and amphiboles are unsuitable for mineral carbonation ( Blurred pseudomorphs indicate further alteration. Shearing of the original serpentine rock has altered the structure of AntF which may influence its suitability. Glassy texture is an indication of an amorphous crystal structure which may weaken the bonds in the mineral lattice. The starting point of this study proved to be inaccurate, yet suggestive, as the characteristics essential for mineral carbonation are more common in lizardite bearing than in antigorite bearing rocks. Based on this study, the characteristics that influence the suitability for mineral carbonation are the mineral structure (phyllosilicates are most reactive), the modal composition of the ultramafic rock before metamorphic alteration (rocks descended from dunite is preferable). A prolonged metamorphic alteration that transforms seems to have a positive influence for mineral carbonation. However, this needs a further study. The fact that Mg in antigorite can be substituted with Fe, whereas pure lizardite contains only Mg, supports the results of lizardite being more suitable for carbonation than antigorite. Not only are the amounts of MgO/Mg(OH) Naturally occurring pure serpentine minerals are rarely found and therefore cannot be stated as realistic raw materials for CCM. The chemical composition alone is not a reliable source when determining whether a rock is suitable for mineral carbonation. The differences or similarities between the chemical compositions do not directly correlate with the suitability. Samples that are chemically very close to each other, such as samples AntN and LizN, produced very different results. To predict results based on one characterization method alone are not fruitful in determining the suitability of a rock for mineral carbonation. Several different methods should be used together in order to get more reliable results. Interpretation based on all characterization results suggests that dark serpentinites are more promising than serpentinites with bright and light colors. The reason behind this is yet unknown, therefore this note is merely a secondary observation but may carry value. Even though this result cannot be used as a scientific method alone, it may be of help while promising material is evaluated in the field. The ICP-OES-solution samples taken before, during and after the precipitation process indicated that 80–90% of the Mg that was extracted and ended up in the solution, was successfully precipitated and collected as Mg(OH) XRD-measurements on the precipitated Mg indicate that the magnesium was mostly precipitated in the form of Mg(OH) This study contributes valuable mineralogical insights to the development of mineral carbonation and opens up the problematics that has kept it from functioning to its full potential. The study specifies the variability of the serpentinite material that was originally stated as overall suitable. Thus, the gained results show that proper mineralogical knowledge is required in order to improve the mineral carbonation process. This study shows that the original hypothesis that lizardite being more suitable for mineral carbonation than antigorite was not absolutely correct. However, it was on the right track as the substantial characteristics that positively influence a serpentinite rock's suitability for mineral carbonation, are more common in lizardite than antigorite. The main finding of this study is that serpentinites originating from dunites give better results than serpentinites originating from other types of peridodites. This is logical as amphiboles and pyroxenes have already been stated as unsuitable for mineral carbonation ( The characteristics that influence the suitability of a serpentine rock (the mineralogical structure, the parent rock and later transformation of the rock through metamorphosis or other type of alteration) need to be taken into consideration while working with carbonation processes. This does not apply only to the “ÅA route”- method, but to any process that uses natural rocks as raw material.  