Hydration-induced reactivation of spent sorbents from fluidized bed combustion has long been proven as an attractive method to achieve better sorbent exploitation so as to positively affect waste disposal, consumption of natural resources and CO2 emission issues. The present study addresses the reactivation of the sulphur capture ability of fluidized bed (FB) spent sorbent particles by either water or steam hydration. Sorbent particles are subjected to different treatments including calcination, sulphation, hydration by either water or steam, dehydration and resulphation. Processing of sorbents is accomplished by the combined use of a bench scale (40 mm ID) fluidized bed reactor (calcination, sulphation, steam hydration, dehydration and resulphation) and of a thermostated water hydrator (water hydration). Reactivation of the limestone-based sorbent is characterized in terms of hydration degree and extent/pattern of particle sulphation with a further focus on the analysis of the reactivation-induced modifications of particle microstructural/chemical properties and propensity to undergo attrition and elutriation. The effectiveness of the two processes is analyzed, with consideration on the influence of process parameters on the ultimate degree of sorbent utilization. The feasibility of sorbent reactivation is discussed in the light of the effectiveness of sorbent reactivation and of the likely operational issues associated with either process.One of the main advantages of fluidized bed (FB) combustion resides in the possibility of accomplishing Under oxidizing conditions and at atmospheric pressure limestone-based sorbents are first calcined to yield porous CaO, which is able to remove SO The present work addresses the reactivation of the sulphur capture ability of the spent sorbent particles by both water The present paper reports results of a study on reactivation of an Italian limestone by either water or steam. The influence of the parameters of the hydration process on hydration degree, extent and pattern of particle sulphation, microstructural properties of the sorbent was investigated. The effectiveness of the regeneration processes was assessed by re-injecting the reactivated materials in an FB reactor under simulated desulphurization conditions and following the calcium conversion degree and the attrition rate during the sorbent processing. Differences and similarities between reactivation by water and steam are discussed. The sorbent used in the experiments was a high-calcium (96.8% CaCO S samples were reactivated by either steam hydration (SH) or water hydration (WH). Steam hydration (SH) was carried out at 250 °C for hydration times ( SH and WH samples were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD). Moreover multiparticle samples were embedded in epoxy resin and their polished cross-sections were observed under a scanning electron microscope (SEM) detector equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) probe for the elemental mapping. SEM-EDX maps were analyzed by means of a purposely developed computer-controlled (CCSEM-EDX) technique to achieve semi-quantitative characterization of the sulphur distribution patterns across the particles. This was expressed in terms of relative percentages of the core-zone and shell-zone areas, as detailed in SH and WH samples were dehydrated (SH/D and WH/D) at 850 °C for 5 min in the FB reactor (fluidized by air at 0.8 m/s) and subjected to porosimetric characterization by mercury intrusion. SH and WH samples were resulphated in the FB apparatus under operating conditions equal to those of the first sulphation (S) tests.     Both reactivation treatments proved to be very effective in promoting further sulphur uptake upon resulphation in the FB reactor, by almost doubling the ultimate value of The renewal of the SO When comparing the two reactivation techniques, the fast hydration reaction for the WH samples determines higher ultimate  The elutriation rate The first of the above phenomena is a purely time-dependent process. The second depends on the degree of calcium sulphation in the outer particle layer which, in turn, is related to the time elapsed from the beginning of the test through the stoichiometry and the kinetics of the sorbent sulphation process. When the effect of the duration of the hydration stage on attrition is analyzed, it can be noted that the elutriation rate of sorbent material from SH samples is barely influenced by The comparison of results obtained with the two hydration techniques suggests that SH samples undergo attrition to a smaller extent than WH samples. This finding, however, should be considered in the light of the argument that steam hydration was carried out in the FB reactor, whereas water hydration was not. Accordingly, rounding-off of SH particles might have occurred to a significant extent already during hydration, so that it could not be observed during the subsequent resulphation. WH samples, instead, were not subjected to the abrasive action of the fluidized bed during hydration, and particle rounding off would entirely take place during the second sulphation of reactivated particles. Both steam and water hydration techniques are very effective tools to enhance the SO Water treatment was characterized by much faster hydration, over times in the order of tens of minutes. Hydration by steam was instead complete after times in the order of a few hours. Both water and steam reactivation determined extensive sulphur redistribution throughout the particle cross-sections, as a consequence of sulphur migration from the sulphur-rich shell to the unreacted core of the particle. In both cases sulphur redistribution contributed to the enhancement of the sulphur capture ability of the reactivated particles. The type of treatment, the hydration kinetics and the sulphur redistribution strongly affected the development of porosity after dehydration of reactivated particles, and water-hydrated/dehydrated particles appeared more porous than steam-treated ones. During resulphation in the FB reactor it was observed that for short hydration times water reactivation was more effective, while the two treatments yielded comparable results upon prolonged hydration. Reactivation by either water or steam enhanced attrition of the sorbent particles upon further processing in a fluidized bed reactor. The attrition rates of regenerated sorbents decayed during the second sulphation stage following a trend similar to that observed during the first sulphation stage. The Authors wish to thank Mrs. Clelia Zucchini and Mr. Sabato Russo for the SEM-EDX particle characterization and Mr. Sabato Masi for the porosimetric characterization. Moreover, they are grateful to Dr. Marianna Nobili and Dr. Fabio Pallonetto for their help in performing experimental tests.