In the present study, the recovery of rare earth elements (REEs) from an apatite concentrate in the nitrophosphate process of fertilizer production has been studied. The apatite concentrate has been recovered from iron ore tailings in Sweden by flotation. In the first step, the apatite is digested in concentrated nitric acid, after which Ca(NO3)2.4H2O is separated by cooling crystallization. The solution is then neutralized using ammonia whereby the REEs precipitate mainly as phosphates (REEPO4.nH2O) and together with calcium as REEn Cam (PO4)(3n+2m)/3. In this work, the degree of rare earth coprecipitation during seeded cooling crystallization of Ca(NO3)2.4H2O has been studied. The solubility of calcium nitrate tetrahydrate (Ca(NO3)2.4H2O) in acidic nitrophosphoric acid solutions in the temperature range of −2°C to 20°C has been determined. For the neutralization step, it is shown that the calcium concentration and the final pH play an important role in determining the concentration of REEs in the precipitate. It is found that reaching maximum recovery of REE with minimum simultaneous precipitation of calcium requires careful control of the final pH to about 1.8. It is further observed that the precipitation yield of REEs and iron is favored by a longer residence time and higher temperature. Finally, the effect of seeding with synthesized REE phosphate crystals as well as a mixture of REE and Ca phosphates on the precipitation rate and the composition of the precipitate was studied.Phosphate minerals, such as apatite, are one of the main sources for the production of fertilizer and phosphoric acid. The common chemical formula for apatite is Ca NPK (nitrogen, phosphorous, and potassium) fertilizers can be produced by digestion of phosphate rock with concentrated nitric acid in the nitrophosphate process (Odda process); see The process starts with digestion of the phosphate rock in concentrated nitric acid. The overall reaction, which takes place at a temperature of about 70 Calcium is a non-nutrient in NPK fertilizer and seen as a diluent. Calcium nitrate tetrahydrate is removed from the digestion solution in order to increase the nutrient content as well as to reach the appropriate CaO:P A review of literature shows that, although numerous researchers have reported details of the process ( The lanthanides can be recovered from the authentic leach solution after crystallization of Ca(NO In the present study, the key industry-relevant parameters that affect the recovery of REEs from an apatite concentrate have been investigated. These include CaO/P The apatite concentrate was dried and dissolved completely in a mixture of nitric acid, hydrochloric acid and perchloric acid at elevated temperature. Acids of PA grade and deionized water were used. The concentration of REEs, Fe, Ca, P and a number of heavy metals were measured by ICP-OES (Thermo Fisher iCAP 7400). The solid material was also analyzed by powder XRD ( The apatite concentrate was leached in 10 The leach solution was cooled in a FP50 JULABO chiller bath filled with ethylene glycol 50% (v/v) as a cooling medium. 250 The crystals were filtered off at − The precipitation of rare earth elements were carried out by partial neutralization by addition of ammonium hydroxide (25 mass %) to the leach solution. The experimental conditions, in the cooling crystallization of Ca(NO After filtration of the 150 In order to determine the composition of the precipitate, a small portion was dissolved completely in concentrated nitric acid, diluted with deionized water and analyzed by ICP-OES. For better understanding of REEs' precipitate in the solid phase, a solution with similar concentration of REEs, nitrate and phosphate ion as in the leach solution of experiment 4 but without calcium and other impurities was synthesized. The pH of the solution was adjusted to 1.2 by addition of ammonia. The REE precipitate was separated after 72 By powder XRD, the main mineral solid phase of the starting material was found to be apatite and the particle size of the grinded material typically was < The apatite contains 0.45 mass % REE out of which, 27 mass % was HREE (Y, Tb, Dy, Ho, Er, Yb) and 73 mass % was LREE (La, Ce, Pr, Nd, Sm, Eu, Gd). The concentration of REEs was mainly reported for Ce, La, Nd, Y and Dy. The efficiency of leaching was calculated according to Eq. The leaching efficiency in all experiments carried out in 10 In experiment 1, 66 mass % of total Ca was eliminated by cooling from 25 Coprecipitation of REEs with Ca(NO In the quick cooling crystallization (cooling rate of 3 The optimum end point temperature for the cooling crystallization is determined by the molar ratio of CaO: P The results of experiment 1 on the precipitation of REE from the leach solution for the rare earth elements present at the highest concentration (Ce, Nd, Y, Dy, La) and for iron are presented in Powder XRD reveals that the solid phase is predominantly a mixture of REE phosphate (REEPO In order to study the effect of end point pH on the concentration of REEs in the precipitate, the solid phases obtained under different experimental conditions were analyzed. The REE concentration in the precipitate obtained from nitrophosphoric acid solutions with almost similar CaO/P The concentration of REEs in the precipitate is greatly influenced by the calcium concentration in the nitrophosphoric acid solution. The total REEs concentration in the precipitate versus the calcium concentration in the nitrophosphoric acid solution is shown in The precipitation yield of Ce and Y as representative for light and heavy REEs under the conditions given in The results show that the yield of REE in the precipitate increases substantially with time and not even after 72 In order to promote the precipitation of REEs and increase the concentration of REEs in the precipitate, seeding was investigated (experiment 6). The elemental analysis of the seeds is tabulated in In addition, the precipitation was performed by adding synthetic REE phosphate as rhabdophane type (REEPO The precipitation yield of heavy (Y) and light (Ce) REE after 2 As is illustrated for Ce in A SEM image of the precipitate obtained in experiment 4 at a pH of 1.13 The crystal structure of the precipitate in experiment 4 was characterized by XRD. The XRD diffractogram after elimination of background and noise is shown in REEs precipitate in the solid phase was further investigated by analyzing the synthetic precipitate with XRD ( Rare earths ions may replace calcium ions heterovalently in solid phases ( As it depicted in The results show that by increasing the end point pH in the partial neutralization, the REEs precipitation yield increases, but in general because of an increased calcium precipitation, the REEs concentration in the precipitate decreases ( The precipitation yield of REEs and iron is favored by a longer residence time, especially in the range from 10 At equal residence time, the precipitation yield and the REEs concentration is higher at 60 The separation of REEs in the nitrophosphate process in a continuous operation would be performed in a continuous crystallizers where the feed upon entering into crystallizer directly come into contact with a slurry of precipitated REEs. The precipitation yield of Ce(III) in seeded precipitation was compared to the experiments with no seeding at different residence times and temperature ( The chemical speciation of the main components Ca(II), Y(III), Ce(III) and Fe(III) under conditions similar to those in experiment 4 was investigated by the MEDUSA speciation software ( For the sake of clarity, the curves for Ce(III) and Y(III) were plotted as representatives of light and heavy rare earth elements respectively ( There are some notable disagreements between the predictions and the experimental results. For instance, there is much more calcium in the precipitate obtained at pH The results demonstrate a possibility of REE separation from industrial solutions with low REE concentration, a possibility that is ignored as a source of REE production. It is shown that the REEs could be effectively separated from nitrophosphoric acid solution by using ammonium hydroxide as precipitating agent. It is also shown that, < The calcium concentration and final pH in the partial neutralization are the key factors that control the concentration of REEs in the precipitate. Higher calcium elimination during the cooling crystallization leads to a precipitate with higher REE concentration. The optimum pH for termination of the partial neutralization was found to be 1.8, where there is little loss of P The authors thankfully acknowledge financial support from the