The gradient nanocrystalline structure from the top surface to the subsurface layers of 321 austenitic stainless steel alloy was fabricated by means of severe shot peening. The microstructural evolutions including the grain size distribution and phase transformation were investigated in-depth. Experimental results showed that the dislocation slipping plays a key role in the grain refinement of this alloy and depend on the amount of imparted plastic strain, different structures including dislocation walls, dislocation tangles, mechanical twinning, lamella-shaped cells are sequentially appeared in the surface and/or subsurface grains. Due to imparting ultrahigh plastic deformation in the topmost surface, mentioned structures are converted to the nano-grains (68–82 nm) to minimize the total energy of the surface layer. In line with the grain refinement, austenite to strain induced martensite phase transformation is more affected as the plastic strain increases so that the volume fraction of latter phase reaches to 65% in the topmost surface. As a result of these evolutions, microhardness values are decreased from 281 to 120 HV in the surface layers.In recent years near-surface severe plastic deformation (NS-SPD) processes have attracted considerable attention in both of industry and academia SSP is extensively used in industry to create compressive stresses and nanocrystalline layers on the surface of different alloys. Many researchers have studied the surface nanocrystallization (SNC) via SSP during recent years. Bagherifard et al. The mentioned reports have focused on the nanocrystallization in the topmost surface and not illuminated the microstructure evolution in the sub-surface layers; however, in-depth microstructural evolutions during SSP can be more important than the topmost surface. In fact, this matter should be considered that after SSP and other NS-SPD processes the surface roughness is The chemical composition of as-received 321SS alloy bar with a diameter of 80 mm was composed of 0.021 C, 0.557 Si, 1.485 Mn, 18.104 Cr, 0.113 Mo, 9.697 Ni, 0.016 P, 0.011 S, 0.461 Ti and balance Fe (wt.%). In order to get a homogeneous chemical composition, the bar was solution annealed in argon atmosphere at 1100 °C for 2 h. Cylindrical specimens of 6.0 mm thickness were sectioned from the bar and subjected to SSP process using an air blast apparatus (KPS SHOT Co.). For the SSP, standard high carbon steel shots (S230) with a nominal diameter of 0.58 mm and hardness of 45–50 HRC were used. SSP process was carried out by a peening nozzle with a diameter of 30 mm, mass flow rate of about 8 kg/min and air pressure of 0.30 MPa for 60 min (this condition meets a surface coverage of 1000%). To generate reproducible plastic strains, the shot angle and the distance between the nozzle and top surface were set to 90° and 400 mm, respectively. The cross-sections of shot peened samples for FE-SEM observations were mechanically ground, polished and afterward etched in a solution containing 2.5 ml H     Based on the experimental data and numerical calculations, the plastic strain is decreased from the top treated surface toward deeper layers with a trend dependent on the material and intensity of SSP (imparted plastic strain) Microhardness variations with the depth from the topmost surface to the matrix of severe shot peened sample of 321SS alloy is shown in In this work, in-depth microstructural evolutions during SSP were assessed by means of XRD, SEM, TEM and microhardness tester. The main conclusions are drawn as follows. A gradient nanocrystalline microstructure with the grain size increasing from nanometer-scale to initial grain size was successfully fabricated on the surface layers of 321SS alloy by means of SSP. With increasing the amount of imparted plastic strain, from the subsurface layers to the topmost surface, degree of microstructural evolutions (grain refinement and γ → α’ transformation) are increased. In fact, according to the amount of imparted plastic strain to a given grain, different structures including dislocation walls, dislocation tangles, mechanical twinning, lamella-shaped cells and finally NGs are sequentially appeared. Both of dislocation slipping and deformation twinning have contributed in the NS-SPD induced by SSP; however, the role of deformation twinning is nearly negligible. The average grain size of the surface of treated sample measured by XRD and TEM analyses are 53 and 75 nm, respectively. The microhardness from the 10 μm below the top surface to the matrix of treated 321SS alloy gradiently decreases from 281 to 120 HV (by 134%). These variations are attributed to the amount of grain refinement and α’ formation. Authors would like to appreciate the financial support from the