We have investigated the grain size distribution (GSD) of granitoid fault rock by comparing experimentally produced gouge with fault rock from the Nojima Fault Zone. Triaxial experiments were carried out on wet and dry intact samples of Verzasca Gneiss at T
                     =300 and 500°C, P
                     c
                     =500 and 1030MPa, 
                        
                           ε
                           ˙
                        
                        =
                        0.013
                        –
                        1.6
                        ×
                        
                           10
                           
                              −
                              4
                           
                        
                        
                           s
                           
                              −
                              1
                           
                        
                     . The GSD has been determined from SEM-micrographs and is characterized by the slope, D, of its log(frequency)–log(radius) histogram. The GSD is not fractal; we observe two slopes for all GSDs. The larger grains in experimentally deformed samples have a D-value, D
                     >, of 2.04 and 2.26 for feldspar and quartz gouge. Cracked grains yield values of D
                     =1.5–1.6. Increasing the confining pressure or temperature decreases the D-value. For grains smaller than ∼2μm another D-value, D
                     <, of 0.9–1.1 is observed. The grain radius at the slope change, r
                     K, corresponds to the grinding limit of quartz, so that r
                     K probably represents a change in the dominant comminution mechanism from grinding to attrition processes. The GSD obtained from deformation experiments agrees well with results for the Nojima Fault Zone: D
                     >
                     =2.02 for gouge and 1.64 for cracked grains; D
                     <
                     =0.97. Grain size reduction in fault zones develops by a two-stage process: rupturing creates cracked grains; further displacement of fragments causes further comminution by wear and attrition. Cracked grains have been used to calculate the surface energy associated with faulting; it follows that this energy forms a small fraction in the total energy-budget of earthquakes.Major fault zones and earthquakes in the upper crust typically develop highly localized zones of deformation. At the macroscopic scale, faults usually appear as narrow, highly deformed zones or networks embedded in wide damage zones of relatively low deformation. Observations on natural fault zones have shown that this localization of deformation along faults occurs both in space and time (e.g. Within these narrow deformation zones gouge with a wide range of grain sizes has been produced (e.g. A number of definitions for fault rocks can be found in the literature (e.g. In this study, however, we will distinguish different fault rocks on the basis of microstructures rather than inferred mechanical properties (see A large number of studies has been dedicated to measuring and analyzing grain size distributions of fault rocks (e.g. For the measurements of the GSD, several different methods have been used (see An easy way to measure the sizes of the grains smaller than 2 In a previous study (  As there appears to be a link between fault rock microstructure (shape and GSD) and the mechanical behavior of faults, and since fossil fault rocks are important clues to seismic activity in the past, this study focuses on the microstructures of naturally and experimentally produced faults. In this paper we examine the influence of experimental conditions on the fault rock microstructure and we compare the results to a natural fault rock cored from a recently active segment of the Nojima Fault (Japan). The focus of the paper is on the grain size distributions ( The starting material for the study of experimental fault rocks is cored from a gneiss that was collected in the Val Verzasca (location: Swiss coordinates 704.65–126.30, The samples for the study of natural fault rocks are taken from the Nojima fault, which transects a Cretaceous granodiorite and the overlying sediments of the Kobe Group and Osaka Group ( The history, as derived from the cores, can be divided into two major deformation episodes ( Samples of Verzasca gneiss measuring 6.39 Deformation is carried out in a Grigg's solid medium deformation apparatus as described by After the experiment, the samples are quenched. To avoid loss or damage of the non-cohesive fault rocks, the jackets are punctured and the samples are impregnated with epoxy. The samples are cut along the compressional axis and the deformed length of the sample is re-measured. Thin sections are prepared (polished and carbon coated) for observation in the light and scanning electron microscope. For the grain size analysis, images with a wide range of magnifications are used. The micrographs of the experimental microstructures are collected using a Philips XL30 ESEM scanning electron microscope (20 We use Image SXM ( The resulting files of areas and perimeters were transferred to a spreadsheet program. The areas were restored by adding the pixel values of In all samples, two distinct From the experimentally deformed Verzasca Gneiss, only limited fault rock material is available. We therefore use only one combined log–log plot and one (average) For the evaluation of the largest grain sizes, light micrographs (taken with a Zeiss Axioplan Polarization microscope) are included. The difference between the slopes ( The results of the triaxial compression experiments are shown as force-displacement diagrams ( At 45 For comparison with published data, we also show a stress-strain diagram ( We have noted a difference between the measured lengths of the deformed samples and the deformed lengths calculated from the total axial displacements derived from the force-displacement records (compare In most samples deformed at The samples are deformed along relatively wide fault zones of 1.0–1.4 Using the In the experiments at Within the gouge zones, quartz and feldspar are fractured to very small grain sizes in all experiments ( The grain size distributions of all of our experiments display the same general characteristics ( Comparing feldspar and quartz we note that the On average, the grain size, The GSD of the experimentally deformed granitoid samples are shown in The reference values derived from the GSDs of sample 64nk and 38nk are the following: Increasing the confining pressure from 500 Reducing the shortening rate from 10 Increasing the axial shortening from 2.2 Deforming the sample without adding water (under room-humidity conditions) has a marked effect on the GSD. With the exception of feldspar gouge, all Increasing the temperature from 300 For the Nojima samples the GSDs are given as bulk results, i.e., the different mineral phases, in particular, quartz and feldspar, were not separated. Comparing the GSDs of cracked minerals and gouge to the experimental results, we note that the values of The GSDs of both the experimental and natural fault rocks display a number of characteristics that we want to highlight (compare The grain size Brittle deformation experiments on granitoid rock at elevated pressure–temperature conditions have been performed by The experiments on Westerly Granite at The effect of a high confining pressure (∼1 Changing the physical parameters of experimental deformation also affects the grain size distribution. The effects are discussed with reference to sample 38nk and 64nk, which have been deformed under identical temperature, pressure and shortening rate conditions. The largest effect is observed for increasing the confining pressure to ∼1 At higher temperatures, there is a decrease in the The effects of not adding water and slower shortening rate are either unsystematic (higher After 4 All experimental and Nojima fault rock samples show the same type of grain size distribution (GSD). For small grain sizes ( Higher Further comminution of grains in gouge has been observed by In the experiments performed under identical conditions (38nk, 64nk, 102nk) the variation of The range of values in the natural samples from the Nojima fault is approximately the same as those of the feldspars in experiments ( The recently formed fault rock of the Nojima Fault zone shows the same  Our results are consistent with studies of other fault zones ( The surface energy in gouge can be used to calculate a part of the energy release during an earthquake event ( If the evolution of the GSD is a two-stage process involving initial rupturing and further grain comminution in the gouge, probably by attrition, shearing, grinding, etc.; it is questionable whether the surface energy calculated from the GSD can directly be related to the seismic energy release as proposed by To estimate the surface density for our cracked minerals and gouge we use the concept of the fractal fragmentation of the cube and a simple spread sheet program. We set up a histogram of 13 (logarithmic) bins, extending from 0.03 Using the same approach to calculate surface densities for the Punchbowl Fault using the data ( The discrepancy between our data and the data published by Grains with very small radii formed by comminution have been found before in deformation experiments (  The Thus, it appears likely that Fractal dimensions are used to describe geometries that are scale-invariant ( The advantage of having a fractal distribution is the scale invariance of the measurements. Analyses performed on laboratory experiments or on hand specimens could easily be extrapolated to large fault systems. However, Several authors have commented on the ideal nature of a fractal dimension or  The analyzed fault rocks derived from experimentally faulted granite and from the Nojima fault zone consist of two different types of material, cracked grains and gouge. These can be distinguished on the basis of their microstructures and their grain size distribution (GSD). On log–log plots the GSDs display two distinct power-law fits:   Cracked grains result from initial fragmentation by rupturing. They develop into gouge by subsequent grain comminution, grinding, attrition, or shear during slip along the fault zone. These processes produce larger The grain size, Most of the experimental conditions during deformation (temperature, confining pressure, H The gouge of the Nojima Fault Zone shows Experiments and natural seismic fault rocks from the Nojima fault zone show the same GSD, although the experiments have been carried out at higher The development of the GSD is a two-stage process. First rupturing of the rock causes cracked grains that evolve to a gouge as a result of further movement on the fault zone. The surface densities calculated from the GSD of cracked minerals and gouge are 200–300 times lower than published data, confirming that the creation of surface plays a minor role in the energy budget of earthquakes. The authors thank Jan Tullis and Chris Spiers for discussion and Jan for providing thin sections of her Westerly Granite samples. We thank H.R. Rüegg and C. Schneider for technical and A. de Ronde for scientific and general support in the laboratory. W. Tschudin provided excellent thin sections. The Geological Survey of Japan is thanked for the use of their thin sections of the Nojima Fault Zone. M. Düggelin provided photographs for