The bolt-grout interface of fully grouted rockbolts has been studied with the aim of determining its constitutive law. For this purpose, axial loadings acting on the bar have been considered and theoretical and experimental research conducted. The theoretical investigations link the response of the surrounding materials (bolt, grout and ground) to that of the interface, which is not directly accessible. Pull-out tests have been carried out to obtain experimental information. Combining the theoretical developments with the test results, the interface variables can be determined. This procedure proves that, in order to study the bolt-grout interface accurately, the behaviour of the surrounding materials should be well known. From the available data, a semi-empirical formulation of the interface response is proposed. The tangential behaviour suggests that friction is not the only component to the shear stress. The normal response, which is more difficult to ascertain, depends on the bolt profile.Fully grouted rockbolts have been widely used in civil and mining engineering applications since the 1960s, as both temporary and permanent reinforcement elements. A rockbolt consists of a bar inserted in a borehole that is drilled into the surrounding ground and anchored to it by means of a fixture. According to Windsor and Thompson Fully grouted rockbolts are able to hold a combination of tensile, compressive, shear and bending loads The bolt-grout interface is defined as the contact surface between the bolt and the grout. This interface is located at the bolt radius ( The principal aim of this study is to determine the bolt-grout interface constitutive law, which depends on the combination bar-grouting material. As in the case of classic rock joints, the behaviour of this interface is defined along the tangential and normal directions. Knowledge of the bolt-grout interface behaviour is important because it leads to a better understanding of the load transfer mechanism between the reinforcement element and the surrounding ground. In addition, the interface behaviour model can be implemented into numerical software, so that the response of excavations reinforced by fully grouted rockbolts can be modelled more accurately. As proved by Laigle Even if the interface response affects both the tangential and normal directions, the literature review proves that most studies focus on the former. One of the first studies on the interface tangential behaviour was conducted by Farmer Benmokrane et al. Using the same tri-linear shear stress-slip relationship, Ren et al. Hyett et al. Using this constitutive law, Hyett et al. As a whole, the literature review proves that the bolt-grout interface of fully grouted rockbolts is not yet completely understood. To the best of the authors' knowledge, a constitutive law for the rockbolt-grout interface has not been proposed. Hyett et al. The rockbolt-grout interface behaviour is described by four variables: the shear stress Under displacement control conditions, the shear slip is imposed. Also, the radial pressure Apart from the shear slip Note that if the axial movement of the grout and the ground is blocked, the bolt axial displacement  The equilibrium of the grout and ground annuli is defined through the equation of motion: The combination of Eq. In the present research, it was supposed that the grout-ground interface remains coupled ( The combination of Eq. In order to determine the interface shear stress Eq. In terms of the constitutive law, the tangential response of the interface is described by the relationship An analytical tool has been developed by the authors to link the bond-slip relationship The use of the new tool to link  It is also explained in Pull-out tests were carried out at laboratory-scale. The tests were conducted using a new experimental bench, designed by the Department of Geosciences of MINES ParisTech A cutaway section of the new bench is displayed in A To apply the axial force to the bolt, a As shown in the cutaway section of the bench, a 30 A customised During the test, data are recorded using LabVIEW. The acquisition frequency is 5 The parameters that can be studied with this bench are: the embedment length, the confining pressure, the bolt profile and mechanical properties, the grout annulus thickness, the mechanical properties of the grouting material, the mechanical properties of the rock mass, and the roughness of the borehole wall. Even if in this study attention was focused on the bolt-grout interface, it was verified before starting the main pull-out test campaign that the bench could also reproduce failure at the grout-rock interface (thus, without the end plate) and failure of the bolt itself (ultimate tensile strength attained). Finally, it is important to note that, during a pull-out test, the embedment length does not remain constant, but decreases. The advantage of using a decreasing embedment length is that no portion of bare, ungrouted bolt, comes into contact with the grouting material at The proper preparation of the samples, and in particular the precise co-axiality of all elements, is very important to ensure the correct assembly of the experimental bench. First, the rock samples are drilled from a rock block, and a water flush is used during the process. If, at the end of the drilling operations, any minor irregularities or depressions are found in the outer surface of the rock sample, they are filled with a self-hardening filler to avoid any localised deformation. Later, in order to favour decoupling at the bolt-grout interface, the borehole wall is rifled to improve the bond between the rock sample and the grouting material. This operation is carried out using a vertical lathe and a customary steel instrument equipped with a diamond-based tool head. Circular grooves 3.5±1 The bolt is anchored to the rock sample using either a cement mortar or a resin-based grout, the rock sample being in a vertical position. The procedure slightly depends on the grouting material in use. In the case of cement, the desired water-cement ratio (hereafter In both cases, the volume of grout needed is calculated in advance. A centring pattern manufactured in Plexiglas is installed on the rock sample and around the bolt during the setting time of the grouting material to ensure that the bar is correctly centred in the borehole. The metallic tubes are prepared from long steel pipes. The external surface of each tube is threaded along 180 When the grouting material has set, the metallic tube is anchored along the protruding length of the bolt using a fast cure adhesive. At least 30 Finally, it should be noted that, with respect to the samples preparation procedure used in Forty-seven pull-out tests were carried out; their characteristics are listed in The three 25 In the majority of the tests conducted, resin was chosen as the grouting material. One of the reasons for this choice was the short setting time of resin-based grouts. Minova Lokset cartridges were used. The setting time of this resin is 3 Regarding the boundary conditions applied, it should be noticed that more tests were conducted at constant outer radial stiffness. Although both boundary conditions, The compressibility Overall, the load-displacement response of HA25 and FRP rockbolts can be described as follows (see  In conclusion, the confining pressure has an important effect on the interface response and subsequently on the test results. If the annuli split radially, their radial stiffness changes and so does the calculation of  The HA25 rockbolt appears to be the most efficient bolt in terms of load-bearing capacity. Note that the smooth bar behaves quite differently from HA25 and FRP rockbolts: at the peak load, the interface adhesion is virtually lost and the load decreases sharply to a residual value due to the absence of mechanical interlock. In the residual phase, the load decreases gradually to match the condition Regarding HA25 and FRP rockbolts, the load fluctuations are clearer for the latter. The main reason for this difference is the bolt profile, which is smoother (in terms of angle of the indentations) for the FRP bars, see In conclusion, the pull-out response depends on the bolt profile, mainly reflected by the load oscillations that may occur in the post-peak phase. Bearing in mind that the shear stress  At constant outer radial stiffness, the pressure In conclusion, the boundary conditions, and subsequently the radial effects, have a significant influence on the interface and on the pull-out response. Within this study, the measured magnitudes are: the bolt axial load Calculating As seen in In The evolution of the shear stress In the first place, it should be noticed that the computed values of the interface pressure Secondly, the shapes of the  The early pressure increase and the initial phase difference are most probably related to the joint formation (thus, A two-component model has been proposed for the shear stress. The first component, The modelled shear stress reads In Eq. Given that  From these graphs, it seems that the proposed semi-empirical model Once the interface pressure is known, the radial opening Δ Finding a model for the radial opening is more difficult than for the shear stress: The parameter The comparison of the experimental radial opening, calculated using Eq. This paper presents a method to obtain the bolt-grout interface behaviour of fully grouted rockbolts from laboratory experiments. More importantly, the interface response has not been assumed to have a specific form, but has been derived from qualitative and quantitative considerations. Given that the interface cannot be examined directly, the proposed alternative is to combine experimental data issued from pull-out tests with suitable analytical tools that let convert the measured variables (taken in the surrounding materials) into interface variables. Therefore, not only the tests should be carried out under accurate conditions, but also the surrounding materials should be well characterised. Thus, the radial splitting of the grout and ground annuli that takes place especially at lower confining pressures should be avoided, due to the difficulty of dealing with the propagation of fractures analytically. The experimental data were obtained by means of pull-out tests, conducted using a new dedicated experimental bench. This bench was calibrated and improved progressively to study the bolt-grout interface as accurately as possible. In addition, the tests carrying out and the analysis of the results have proved that the study of the interface is very demanding and that the test set-up and operating conditions should be addressed carefully. From the available data, the interface variables were derived. The determination of the shear slip and stress is relatively easy; nevertheless, the interface pressure and subsequently the radial opening require a supplementary analysis because the outer radial displacement was not measured, but calculated from the confining fluid volume variation. This restricted the number of useful tests to those held at constant outer radial stiffness conditions and in which the annuli did not split radially. Once the interface variables are determined, a semi-empirical model for the shear stress and the radial opening is proposed. The new interface model is based on a joint formation at very low values of shear slip. More tests and additional measurements are necessary to complete and validate this model, in particular the radial opening part. But, in any case, it points out that friction is not the only component to the shear stress, especially before the peak strength, and that the process of joint decoupling needs to be considered. Also, the radial opening depends significantly on the bolt profile. To conclude, the novelty of this paper lies in the method used to reach the interface itself. The interface behaviour model is not complete yet, due to insufficient data. Eventually, one of the most practical uses of this model would be its implementation into a numerical code to predict the response of a bolted structure more accurately and to help define the most suitable reinforcing pattern. In this sense, the use of pull-out tests (or, in other words, the use a tensile load on the bolt) to study the bolt-grout interface is justified: the numerical code will superimpose the contribution of each loading (axial, bending, This research has been supported by the  The following closed-form expressions have been developed within the framework of the linear theory of elasticity. The elastic constants are the Young's modulus A generalised plane stress state is supposed because in the configuration under study (see The pertinent strain-displacement equations are Combining the equilibrium Eq. As for the stresses, replacing Eqs. The constants  Let us consider a hollow cylindrical tube of elastic properties In the current case, a maximum of three tubes are to be coupled (for instance from Inverting Eq.