In the present work, emulsion liquid membrane (ELM) is investigated to select the suitable conditions for extraction of Co (II) ions from acidic chloride solutions using Cyanex 301 as extractant. The effects of extractant and surfactant concentrations, mixing speed, concentration and type of stripping solution, phase ratio, treatment ratio, and nature of diluent on the extraction rate were studies. Under the optimum conditions, extraction of cobalt in competition with nickel has been also studied for different feed mixture solution. Solvent extraction and stripping of cobalt and nickel in mixture was first carried out in order to have an idea about this extractant. Solvent extraction results show that almost 99% of cobalt and nickel are extracted with 0.1M Cyanex 301 at pH above 2 within 2min. However, Based on the stripping process, it was possible to separate cobalt and nickel at low acid concentration (0.5M) with separation factor of 502. ELM results show that under the optimum conditions, the system is selective for cobalt than nickel, especially within the first minutes of all experiments.Selective Separation of cobalt and nickel from aqueous solutions has always been a problem in hydrometallurgy due to their similar physical and chemical properties and the high degree of purity required in their applications ( The solvent extraction is one of the most popular methods used for separation of these metals ions from aqueous solutions. Among a large number of studied extracting agents, some organophosphorus compounds have demonstrated best Co (II)/Ni (II) separation ability. Di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) is the first widely used extractant for recovery of ions of Co (II) and Ni (II) and for theirs separation ( Afterward, the development of phosphonic and phosphinic acid extractants led to improvement in Co (II)/Ni (II) separation factors ( Emulsion liquid membranes (ELM) separation technique, proposed by Li ( In the present work, emulsion liquid membrane is investigated to select the suitable conditions for extraction of Co (II) ions from acidic chloride solutions using Cyanex 301 as extractant. The effects of extractant and surfactant concentrations, mixing speed, concentration and type of stripping solution, phase ratio, treatment ratio, and nature of diluent on the extraction rate were studies. Under the optimum conditions, extraction of cobalt in competition with nickel has been also studied for different feed mixture solution. Solvent extraction and stripping of cobalt and nickel in mixture was first carried out in order to have an idea about this extractant, so we have monitored the influence of the pH of the aqueous solution, the concentration of Cyanex 301, the equilibrium time on the extraction percent of cobalt and nickel and stripping percent of this metal ions from loaded organic phase by hydrochloric acid solution. Cyanex 301 and Sorbitane monooleate (Span 80) were supplied by Cytec Inc. and sigma-Aldrich respectively. Commercial kerosene (density 830 A suitable aqueous solution (10 In 250 In order to study the effect of equilibrium pH on the extraction of cobalt and nickel with Cyanex 301, experiments were conducted in the equilibrium pH range 1–6. The results, presented in The effect of equilibrium time on the extraction efficiency of cobalt and nickel from chloride solution is presented in The effect of Cyanex 301 concentration on the extraction efficiency of cobalt and nickel was studied in the range 0.01–1 Sufficient quantities of loaded organic phase were generated for carrying out nickel and cobalt stripping with different concentrations of HCl within the range 0.5–10  The selection of suitable stripping solution is considered to be one of the key factors for an effective ELM system. Here we examined the availability of stripping solutions for the ELM, which were commonly used in ELM process: HCl, H The effect of carrier concentration on the extraction of cobalt is displayed in  Effects of stirring speed on the extraction of cobalt are studies in the range of 300 through 700 The phase ratio, defined as the ratio of strip phase volume (Vs) to the membrane phase volume (Vm), showed an increase in the rates of extraction of cobalt when the volume ratio of the stripping solution to the membrane solution change from 0.5 to 1.5 because when phase ratio is large, the emulsion globules are more densely packed with the internal stripping phase droplets, this results in a decrease of the diffusion path length for the cobalt-extractant complex within the emulsion globule prior to getting stripped ( Treatment ratio defined as the ratio of emulsion phase volume (VE) to the feed phase (VF), plays an important role in determining effectiveness of ELM. As seen from The diluent is an important factor as it directly affects the stability of ELM. It is observed from Under the optimum conditions ( An emulsion liquid membrane process using Cyanex301 as extractant to extract and separate cobalt from the chloride solution has been investigated. From this study the following conclusions can be drawn: The optimum conditions have been determined experimentally as stated above. Cyanex 301 exhibited both quantitative cobalt and nickel extraction but the selectively was observed for cobalt over nickel, especially at the beginning of extraction. ELM using Cyanex 301 as extractant and HCl as stripping phase at low concentration allows simultaneous extraction (purification) and separation (during the stripping process) of cobalt and nickel. The reduced of solvent and extractant concentration amount required for extraction and separation of cobalt and nickel metals for the promising performance of this technology in practical applications. Authors express their thanks for sincere help of all staff of department of process engineering of university of Kaiserslautern through this work.