Pretreatment of organic material prior to anaerobic digestion is seen as an option to increase the overall efficiency of the process. An overview of physical, chemical, and biological disintegration (DT) of substrates in the biogas sector is given. The energy demands DT were surveyed. The technologies were evaluated by reference to the Technology Readiness Assessment Guide of the U.S. Department of Energy. The evaluation focuses on ligno-cellulosic substrates like straw. Data of a survey among biogas plant operators were analyzed regarding the prevalence of disintegration technology classes in Germany. Furthermore, biochemical methane potential tests were conducted in laboratory scale to determine the specific methane yields of un-/treated barley straw (thermal pressure hydrolysis (TPH)). A methane potential of 228mlCH4/gVS was measured for untreated barley straw; and of 251mlCH4/gVS for TPH-straw (190°C, 30min). The reaction rates in BMP were calculated between 0.0976 and 0.1443d−1.Due to the growing interest in substrates like straw or other fibrous substrates in the biogas sector, the number of disintegration-technology-brands rose during the last years in Germany ( Disintegration in this case means the (pre-)treatment of substrates for biogas plants or the treatment of the output of anaerobic digesters for the purpose of re-digestion. Disintegration aims to destruct the cell walls of the substrate and to release the cells‘ matter. In fact, disintegration technologies (DT) are applicable to increase the particle surface area or to change the quality of the substrate for a faster and easier microbial use. DT can accelerate or enhance the degradation of substrates. Hence, the whole process chain of biogas with regards to energy production could run more efficiently. DT enable biogas plants to decompose highly fibrous substrates (high in ligno-cellulosic compounds) like straw. The microbial degradation of cellulose requires much more time than the degradation of easy available substrates as e.g. starch ( Lignin is only degradable in the presence of oxygen in aerobic processes and thus without the generation of methane as an energy carrier (composting) or without the possibility of nutrient recovery (combustion). However, if the lignin does not hamper the microbiological consortium to a greater extent, the share of hemicellulose and cellulose of the ligno-cellulosic complex is degradable in an anaerobic process, which produces biogas for energy use and simultaneously a bio-fertilizer. The technologies can be distinguished into physical, chemical, and biological methods of disintegration. In general also combinations of these methods are applicable. Further details are given in chapter 3.1. The objectives of the utilization of disintegration technologies in the biogas sector are Increase of the biogas yield due to disintegration of cells and enlargement of the particle surface, Acceleration of the degradation of substrates for an higher capacity utilization of the digester, Avoiding of floating and sinking layers, or Enhancement of the management and automation of the feed-in (stirring, pumping). There are several options of disintegration for an agricultural biogas plant. Four major points for possible intervention were identified: harvest of the substrate, conservation/storage of substrate, feed-in of the digester, or outlet of the main digester. Aside from harvest the other three options are also practicable for biogas plants, in which waste or residues are treated. The effect of an accelerated formation of biogas (due to disintegration) can be observed very often ( The presented overview of physical, chemical and biological disintegration technologies (DT) is based on a market and literature research in Germany in the years 2011 and 2012. The energy demands in kWh/m Furthermore data from another DBFZ-project, which includes a biogas plant operatoŕs survey, were analyzed regarding the prevalence of disintegration technology classes operated on German biogas plants. Approximately 7500 biogas plants were in operation in Germany in 2012. Out of 980 questionnaires answered by plant operators 140 applications of DT were identified, installed on 123 biogas plants. Barley straw was chopped and spliced simultaneously in a full scale cutting mill (STZ Strohmühle, Company: Himel, Melchingen, Germany) on a farm to a maximal length of appr. 10 A biochemical methane potential (BMP) test in laboratory scale was conducted with AMPTS-device (Company: Bioprocesscontrol, Lund, Schweden) to determine the specific methane yields of un-/treated barley straw to reveal the two effects of disintegration: acceleration and enhancement. The basis for the BMP was the guideline The nutritional values of untreated barley straw and one sample of thermal-pressure-hydrolyzed straw (190 Assuming a first order kinetic for the degradation (see Eq. Pre-treatment technologies can be distinguished into physical, chemical, and biological methods of disintegration. One result of the market and literature research is that for mechanical comminution mills like agitator bead mill, hammer mills, colloid mills, and cutting mills or other technologies like Gorator, Kreis-Dissolver, jet impact reactor as well as Bio-QZ are available in Germany ( A comprehensive review about the general effects of substrate pre-treatment on AD systems was written by The reviews of A broad variety of disintegration technologies (DT) especially physical methods are offered to biogas plant operators, but the Technology Readiness Level ( The data of the operator’s survey showed clearly, aside from the large number of physical methods, also the prevalence of utilization of these technologies in practice with 81%. Hydrolysis (11%) and other biological disintegration technologies (7%) jointly have a share of 18%, while chemical technologies barely play a role with 1%. Only 12.6% of the answered questionnaires (6909 questionnaires were sent out, 980 answers) included information about the utilization of disintegration technologies in German biogas plants. The research for energy demand of various kinds of disintegration technologies was challenging. On one hand there were only few data available, on the other hand data were given in different units, some in kWh/m A biogas batch test in laboratory scale with un-/treated barley straw was conducted to reveal the two effects of disintegration – acceleration and enhancement – exemplarily. The methane formation is shown in Nevertheless, it should be noted that the acceleration and/or the enhancement of the biogas formation in discontinuous tests (due to pretreatment of substrate) does not necessarily mean that these effects occur in continuous systems. The criterion for the termination of the test (daily generated methane amount has to lie below 1% of the total methane volume) was fulfilled by all samples except for that of untreated straw. The difference between untreated and treated straw samples will probably diminish by prolonged retention time, not only for discontinuous but also for continuous AD-systems. The reason for the unexpectedly low methane yield of sample 160 While various papers were published about steam-explosion-pre-treatment of wheat straw for biogas production with different results ( In order to calculate the theoretical biogas yield stoichiometrically, the nutritional value of untreated barley straw and one sample of thermal-pressure-hydrolyzed straw (190 The theoretical methane potential is dependent on the chosen model substances, which are not yet set or standardized by the ‘biogas community’. The evaluation of any enhancing effect of a disintegration technology should be done from the upper boundary of the theoretical methane potential rather than from the comparison ‘xy% better than before’. This could lead to more comparability between the efficiencies of disintegration technologies. The reaction rate ( The process kinetics of a CSTR system for a first order kinetic is given in Eq.       The evaluation of the effects of disintegration technologies (DT) should be done with a standardized method, referring to the upper boundary of a stoichiometrically calculated methane potential. A BMP of 228 The authors would like to thank Michael Dittrich-Zechendorf, Jürgen Pröter and Kwasi Glover for his valuable contribution given during the development of the present study and wish to acknowledge the financial support of the