In line with the development of its economy, China is considering expanding civil nuclear power programs to meet its energy needs. Closing the nuclear fuel cycle is a strategic line of nuclear power development in China, which will ensure more efficient use of natural resources for nuclear fuel as well as artificial fissile materials produced by reactors (e.g., plutonium), and will minimize radioactive waste by applying “partitioning-transmutation” methods. This chapter gives a brief overview of the status and the future prospects of reprocessing and recycling of spent nuclear fuel in China, with particular regard to China’s nuclear power and nuclear fuel cycle deployment. Recent research and development of spent nuclear fuel reprocessing technology is described and some processes for the group separation of high-level liquid waste (HLLW) are also discussed. Finally, prospects for further development and future trends in managing the back end of the nuclear fuel cycle in China are discussed.accelerator driven system acetohydroxamic acid advanced process based on organic reagents bis-triazinyl-pyridine China demonstration fast reactor China experimental fast reactor China Institute of Atomic Energy octyl(phenyl)-  dihydroxyurea diamide extraction diisodecylphosphoric acid  fast breeder reactor or fast reactor fission product highly enriched uranium high-level liquid waste hydroxyl-semicarbazide hydroxyurea low enriched uranium minor actinides methylhydrazine mixed oxide molten salt reactor nuclear power plant plutonium uranium extraction pressurized water reactor research and development reprocessing pilot plant tributyl phosphate trialkylphosphineoxide  transuranic With the development of China’s economy, the domestic energy demand is expected to grow; before 2020 being predicted to reach an installed capacity for electricity production of about 58 GWe ( In the first stage, natural uranium would be used in thermal reactors; thermal reactors are the main type of nuclear power provision. Plutonium extracted from the spent fuel of these thermal reactors by reprocessing would drive fast reactors in the second stage. The second stage is mainly to develop fast reactors and realize the transition from thermal reactors to fast reactors. The final stage is the development of fission-fusion systems. Without a doubt, the success of the sustainable development of fissile energy is based on the establishment of an efficient closed fuel cycle approach with recycling of both fissile and fertile components of the spent fuel to appropriate reactor systems ( The objective of this chapter is to give a brief overview on the status and the future prospects of reprocessing and recycling of spent nuclear fuel in China, in the context of China’s nuclear power and nuclear fuel cycle deployment. Recent research and development of spent nuclear fuel reprocessing in China is described. Some processes for the minor actinides separations are also described. Finally, prospects for further development and future trends in managing the back end of the nuclear fuel cycle in China are also discussed. In the future, nuclear power will play a bigger role in improving China’s energy structure, coping with climate change, and controlling air pollution. Up to December 2013, 17 nuclear reactor units were under commercial operation and an additional 28 units were under construction. Total installed capacity reached 14833.79 MWe, accounting for about 2.11% of total electricity supply (as shown in Significant research and development (R&D) programs have been pursued worldwide, bringing the knowledge on fast reactor technology to a high level of maturity. In China, the national program on fast reactors is a part of the ambitious objective to reach a nuclear electricity ratio of more than 20% by 2050 ( In order to match nuclear power development with consideration for the domestic condition and the reality of the Chinese nuclear industry, it is necessary to set up a complete nuclear fuel cycle system ( Full utilization of uranium resources and development of FBR. Disposal of radioactive wastes safely after separation of uranium and plutonium from spent fuel. The middle-to-long-term plan to develop a closed fuel cycle has been considered, as shown in In the second stage, CDFR will be constructed based on the experience of CEFR. Furthermore, a new MOX fuel fabrication plant for CDFR will also be considered. Commercial reprocessing plants for PWR and fast reactor spent fuels, developed from the basis gained with the RPP, will need to be constructed in the near future. At the same time, metal fuel for future fast reactor and ADS technology are also under consideration. The R&D of reprocessing technologies for PWR and fast reactor spent fuels are reviewed in greater detail in the ensuing section. In the PUREX process, uranium and plutonium are recovered through multiple extraction cycles based on differences between extraction behaviors of uranium, plutonium, other actinides, and fission products. The PUREX process was first developed in the United States in the 1950s and, thereafter, it was used to treat irradiated nuclear fuel from power plants in many countries including France, the United Kingdom, Russia, India, Japan, and China. It can be safely said that the PUREX process achieved worldwide acceptance as the premier fuel reprocessing scheme, still occupies that position today, and will possibly remain there in the foreseeable future. The main process in the RPP for spent LEU fuel reprocessing is based on a mechanical headend process followed by the PUREX-type process comprising two TBP extraction cycles and tail end processes ( Demonstrate the processes, equipment, and instrumentation under hot conditions. Experience accumulation in the design, construction, and operation. Train the operational personnel. Recover highly enriched uranium (HEU) from spent fuel from research and test reactors. Undertake R&D into reprocessing technology for MOX spent fuel in the future. The designed and studied steps include the following: a shear-leach process, a clarification process including pulse filtration, porous stainless steel sintered tubes and centrifugation, a process for removal of radioiodine from the dissolution off-gas, a spent solvent treatment system using hydrazine carbonate, denitration of uranyl nitrate solution to UO At present, some R&D studies are undertaken in institutes and universities, to ensure stable and safe operation of the RPP with a modified two-extraction cycle PUREX process. The aim is to optimize the process and minimize radioactive wastes, introducing the modified process after sufficient experience is obtained with RPP. A lot of research is also being done to develop an advanced PUREX process for the future fuel cycle. Future reprocessing plants need to operate safely with minimum environmental impact and at a high level of safety. At the same time, higher requirements should be reached for the future spent fuel reprocessing due to the increase of the burn up of fuel. Research and development of salt-free technology is one of the important fields to meet these requirements. In present-day spent nuclear fuel reprocessing plants in the United Kingdom, France, and Japan, uranium and plutonium are separated by the reductive back-extraction of plutonium with hydrazine-stabilized tetravalent uranium ( Therefore, reductants play an important role in the PUREX process. One important trend in the development of a future solvent-extraction process for reprocessing is the usage of salt-free, highly efficient reductants in U/Pu separation (  high efficiency of U/Pu separation that can be achieved by DMHAN and MH in the first cycle; plutonium product solution of high concentration can be obtained in the plutonium purification cycle with a simple extraction-stripping operation instead of circumfluence extraction; and the process is simplified because of the elimination of the technetium scrubbing operation and the supplementary extraction operation.    Conventional solvent-extraction contactors, mixer-settlers or pulsed columns, have been used exclusively till now for the uranium and plutonium-partitioning step. The development of in situ electrolytic apparatus for the PUREX process is also mainly based on these two extraction contactors. Both apparatuses integrate electroreduction of tetravalent plutonium into liquid-liquid extractors. Researchers at Karlsruhe ( We designed a new type of electrolytic mixer-settler for uranium and plutonium separation (as shown in The plutonium valence adjustment back to Pu(IV) in the PUREX process is a crucial problem. In the PUREX process, Pu(IV) is reduced to Pu(III) rapidly by a reductant at room temperature, and HNO Significant experience has been obtained in the reprocessing of thermal neutron reactor spent fuels using PUREX technology. It is proven that the PUREX process or its modified versions may be used for fast reactor oxide fuels as well. However, fast reactor fuel reprocessing differs from thermal reactor reprocessing in many respects ( Higher specific activity and decay heat generation due to high fission products content. Higher plutonium content. Different assembly structure and presence of sodium on assemblies in the case of sodium-cooled reactors. High fission products content due to the high burn up and short cooling time of FBR spent fuel increases the difficulties encountered in spent fuel dissolution and actinide products decontamination (when using aqueous recycling). More codecontamination cycles to achieve targeted decontamination factors from fission products may thus be required, which leads to an additional U,Pu costripping process between each codecontamination cycle. Associated with high plutonium content are problems relating to plutonium distribution, plutonium polymerization, third-phase formation, criticality, and so on. As a result, the objective of the U,Pu costripping process is to minimize the problem of plutonium polymerization during stripping while at the same time ensuring maximum plutonium recovery. As an indispensable component of the FBR fuel cycle, the study of FBR spent fuel reprocessing in China was initiated in the 2000s. The schematic of the modified PUREX process flow sheet that is deployed for reprocessing MOX spent fuel is given in Countercurrent tests were carried out in mixer-settlers with simulated feed solutions, which contained uranium and plutonium under the condition that nitric acid concentration was adjusted to 4 For the purpose of sustainable development of nuclear energy, uranium and plutonium in spent nuclear fuel will be recovered via reprocessing, which generates high-level liquid waste (HLLW). The main remaining long-term radiotoxicity in HLLW comes from the minor actinides (MAs). Partitioning and transmutation of minor actinides is one important option for high-level waste disposal. Therefore, the separation of MA from HLLW and separation of An from Ln is of importance. Up to now, several flow sheets for MA separation have been developed or even demonstrated at the laboratory scale, using simulated or genuine nuclear fuel solutions, such as TRUEX ( The TRPO process for the removal of TRU elements has been developed since the 1980s by Tsinghua University ( In recent years, diamide ligands have also been studied in China for their extraction ability toward minor actinides ( Investigations on partitioning of HLLW for MAs have been conducted at CIAE, and the main results showed that (1) by adding DHOA, the third phase diminished while the distribution ratio of strontium decreased, thus separation of strontium should be realized using TODGA alone; (2) uranium and minor neptunium and plutonium could be back-extracted together using acetohydroxamic acid (AHA) as a complexing reagent; and (3) more than 95% americium was back-extracted with the rare earth elements (RE). With regard to trivalent actinide separation from lanthanides, a conceptual process was proposed, and has been examined with simulated HLLW in multiple-stage centrifugal extractors. From the experiments, promising results were obtained. A key challenge with the separation of minor actinides relates to the separation of trivalent actinides from the lanthanides because of their similar oxidation states, chemical properties, and ionic radii. The problem of selective extraction of actinides has been an extensively pursued area of research for over several decades in China. One type of promising extractant is Cyanex. The extraction behavior of bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid (HBTMPDTP), purified from Cyanex 301, was first studied for extracting Am BTPs (1,2,4-triazin-3-yl bipyridines) and derivatives have been identified as excellent extractants for separation of actinides(III) from lanthanides(III) in nitric acid media. These BTP molecules can bind as tridentate ligands to metal cations. The separation efficiency of An/Ln was systemically studied using DPTP (2,6-bis(5,6-di-n-propyl-1,2,4-triazin-3-yl)-pyridine) ( With the development of fast reactors (FRs) in China, accelerator-driven systems (ADS) and molten salt reactors (MSR), pyrometallurgy (dry reprocessing) is to be considered for the main route of spent fuel reprocessing and wastes partitioning, because of the high burn up (> Our recent work on pyrochemical studies mainly focuses on the measurement of basic parameters, including (1) electrochemical studies of uranium and rare earths both in molten chloride salts (LiCl-KCl) and molten fluoride salts (LiF-CaF Directions for improving the processes appear to be Minimization of TRU losses in wastes and increase of the purities of the separated actinide products. Routes to actinide products obtained through the combined use of several separations. Waste management, which is mostly corrosion-related owing to the aggressive nature of the salts. Characterization of the media and the high process temperatures need to be precisely estimated. China is considering expanding its civil nuclear power programs to meet its growing energy needs. The closed nuclear fuel cycle is the strategic line of sustainable nuclear power development in China. This will ensure more efficient use of natural nuclear fuel and artificial fissile materials produced by reactors (e.g., plutonium) and will minimize radioactive waste by applying the partitioning and transmutation method. At present, the first power reactor spent fuel reprocessing pilot plant (RPP) based on the conventional PUREX process has been completed with active commissioning in 2010. A lot of research is also being undertaken to develop an advanced PUREX process for future fuel reprocessing. An advanced plutonium and uranium recovery process has been established based on two organic reductants: dimethyhydroxylamine and methyl hydrazine. Considering the needs of further nuclear power development toward the fast reactor-based fuel cycle, recent research and development of FR spent nuclear fuel reprocessing is in progress following both advanced PUREX and pyrochemical options. Some innovative processes for the group separation of actinides from HLLW are also being developed in China.