The Chinese traditional joss paper has been recycled and silica and aluminium nanocomposite production is reported in the current research, using an alkalinization procedure. Characterization of silica and aluminium nanocomposite extracted was performed using field-emission transmission electron microscope (FETEM), field-emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM), UV–visible spectroscopy, high-power optical microscopy (HPM) and 3D nano profiler, indicates the size, shape and particle distribution, eventually reveals the purity of silica and aluminium nanocomposite synthesized. The silica-aluminium nanocrystal synthesized from joss paper waste was found to be 
                        
                           ~
                        
                     15 nm size range under FETEM analysis and FESEM analysis revealed the uniform spherical shape. The energy disperse spectroscopy (EDX) data attained from FESEM analysis affirmed the synthesis of silica-aluminium nanocomposite with greater purity since the ratio of silicon to aluminium observed in EDX spectra was 13.24 to 7.96. HPM indicated the size of agglomerated aluminosilicate is 36.74 μm whereas 3D nano profiler has proven that the height of nanocrystal synthesized from joss paper waste is 234.37 μm. Band gap value of 3.84 eV, calculated using UV–vis absorbance readings further affirmed the size of nanocomposite which is in good agreement with presented results.Silica-aluminium nanocomposite, commonly known as zeolite is naturally found aluminosiliceous mineral originated from the alkaline earth metals, well-established in recent science and industrial technology for its high porosity and ion-exchange properties. It is also recognized as aluminosilicates having three dimensional infinite framework structure varies in molecular channels and cavities. The large surface area over volume has been attained by the rigid tetrahedral structure of silica-aluminium nanocomposite poses an excellent absorption in liquid suspension with conjugation of organic and inorganic elements [ There are few highly recognized methods to synthesis silica-aluminium nanocomposite from paper waste. The most simple and famous method was a hydrothermal method, where the burned papers treated with alkaline solution at moderately high temperature, 300 °C–500 °C and allow the formation of crystalline zeolite nanoparticles by permitting the solution to cool down to room temperature [ Silica-aluminium nanocomposite has few appealing features including its porous structure, large surface area, excellent structural chemistry, excellent good stability in suspension, thermal stability, resistance to corrosion and its good biocompatibility has proven to be applied in various industries such as agriculture, water purification, radioactive substances, food supplements, and animal production. Yet it is least establish as a high potential material that is applied in the biomedical and pharmaceutical industries. The growing interest of biomedical application of zeolites is mainly due to its chemical/physical properties absorption in ion exchange capacity and its catalytic property [ Based on the above context, the current research focuses on the synthesis of high pure silica-aluminium nanocomposites in the biomedical fields. Although few methods are well established in the literature, an easy and simplified method has followed in this research for the synthesis of crystalline silica-aluminium nanocomposite from the abundant environmental joss paper waste. As illustrated in Few stacks of 5.5″ x 6” traditional gold square joss papers were collected from traditional Chinese Market in Johor, Malaysia. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH), potassium hydroxide (KOH), ethanol (C Each stack of the joss papers was untied and cleaned to remove any specks of dirt found on joss papers. A steel furnace is cleaned and prepared to burn the joss papers. After burning, the furnace was left in room temperature for few minutes to cool the burned papers. Then, the wastes were sieved using a steel sieve plate to remove unburned traces of joss paper and collect the fine joss paper burned waste. The collected joss paper waste was transferred into a closed container and kept in laboratory cabinet under room temperature until to be used. The method for silica-aluminium nanocomposite synthesis involves alkaline treatment for the joss paper waste and neutralization for the alkaline treated ash solution was followed. First, 20 g of burned joss paper waste was mixed in 400 ml of 2.5 M NaOH. The mixture was left under the stirring condition for 4 h at 100 °C. After 4 h, the mixture was left for few minutes to let the joss paper waste to settle at the bottom of the beaker. Then, the alkaline treated joss paper waste was removed completely from the solution by centrifugation and kept in 80 °C vacuum oven for 1 h to allow the waste dry completely. On the other hand, the alkaline treated joss paper waste solution was collected in a glass beaker. The solution (pH 12) was titrated with 2 M H Morphological characterizations of silica-aluminium nanocomposites were performed using field-emission transmission electron microscope (FETEM) and field-emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) to identify their precise size and shape, respectively. The nanocomposite was mixed well in 30% ethanol solution and a drop of the mixture was dropped on aluminium grid for FETEM analysis (JEM-2100F, JEOL, Japan). The sample was prepared similarly for FESEM characterization, and analyzed at 15 kV of high electron beam under 200 nm magnification (FESEM, Hitachi, S-4300 SE, Japan). Both FETEM and FESEM have provided energy dispersive spectrometer (EDX) analysis, where the weighed percentage of elements present in the nanoparticle was determined. EDX data has a major role in the nanoparticle characterization since the ratio of silica to aluminium obtained in the result, affirms the extraction of silica-aluminium nanocomposite from joss paper waste. The crystalline nature of silica-aluminium nanocomposite was examined under X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis using Cu K Joss paper waste samples collected from the above mentioned simplified method of silica-aluminium nanocomposite synthesis were analyzed under UV-Nanodrop (DS-11/DS-11, Denovix, USA). The wavelength was set from 220 to 750 nm and the absorbance reading was recorded as the sample was scanned through the UV spectra. The reading were analyzed for band gap calculation. The particle characterization of joss paper waste sample was examined under High Power Microscope (HPM) and 3D Nano Profiler (WT-250 Series, Hawk 3D Nano-Profiler, Korea). The sample prepared for HPM and 3D Nano Profiler were similar to FETEM analysis. The particles were observed under the optical microscopes at 5X magnification and the results were discussed. The research conducted has met the objective of the study where enriched silica-aluminium nanocomposite was successfully synthesized from joss paper waste. Further, the simplified alkalinization procedure proposed in the extraction of a high pure silica-aluminium nanocomposite from joss paper waste has also apparently proven with the optical characterization of the synthesized nanocomposite. The simplified method followed in the study has successfully experimented to synthesis silica-aluminium nanocomposite from joss paper waste.  Silica-aluminium nanocomposite extracted from joss paper waste was analyzed under FESEM to determine shape formed and the variation in its configuration. The crystalline state of the joss fly ash extracted silica-aluminium nanocomposite was investigated based on diffraction angle of XRD spectra. Joss paper waste samples were studied under HPM at 5x magnification. The optical imaging of joss paper samples under 3D Nano Profiler gives the information on the height of particles attached to the aluminium grid and also the distribution of particles. The image inset in Based on UV–vis absorption spectra reading, approximation for the band gap of silica-aluminium nanocomposite was calculated. The research conducted has successfully proven the synthesis of a highly pure silica-aluminium nanocomposite from joss paper waste. Joss paper waste is an extremely overwhelming waste material found in the area of the high Chinese population. Rather than spending high energy and cost in the decomposition of joss paper waste, it is highly recommended to be recycled to extract the high purity silica-aluminium nanocomposite. Moreover, the research has proven that waste can be recycled into aluminosilicate nanocomposite via a simplified experimental procedure by avoiding the consumption of high energy and costly types of equipment. The success of implementing the simplified method in the synthesis of silica-aluminium nanocomposite from joss paper waste expressed via the morphological and optical characterizations mainly, FETEM and FESEM. The spherical shape with a uniform distribution of the nanocomposite has proven the simplified method is applicable with the least variation in shape and size of nanoparticles. The size of silica-aluminium nanocomposite synthesized is approximately The authors declare no competing interests. This study was supported by “wide bandgap semiconductor packaging” under long term research grant scheme from The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at