The non-magnetic fraction of spent zinc-manganese-carbon batteries containing 20.8% Zn, 22.7% Mn, 2.65% Fe, and <0.1% Hg, Ni, Co, Cu and Pb was leached in H2SO4, H2SO4/SO2, NH3 and NH3/SO2 at 30-60°C. In acid media the complete dissolution of zinc is unaffected by SO2. However, the reductive role of SO2 increases the leaching of manganese in H2SO4 from 25% to 100% and iron from 1% to 25%. Literature results of leaching with other reductants are compared. The XRD analysis of leach residues from ammonia solutions shows the conversion of Zn5(OH)8Cl2·H2O in the feed to ZnO with low dissolution of zinc, manganese and iron. Low leaching of iron in NH3/SO2 is due to the formation of Fe(NH4)2(SO3)2 and Fe(NH4)2(SO4)2 identified by XRD analysis of leach residues. However, the formation of Zn(NH3)4
                     2+ facilitates the selective leaching of zinc in buffered SO2/NH3 solutions that contains NH4
                     +. Complete dissolution of copper also occurs in both H2SO4/SO2 and NH3/SO2. The dissolution of mercury by H2SO4 is retarded in the presence of SO2, and enhanced by NH3/SO2. Lead remains insoluble in all media, whilst the partial dissolution of nickel and cobalt is retarded by NH3/SO2.Zinc-manganese-carbon batteries (ZMCBs) consist of a carbon rod cathode with a moist paste of MnO  The spent ZMCB material consists of graphite, Zn, ZnO, MnOOH, Mn The amphoteric nature of zinc is an advantage as its leaching and separation can be conducted in acid or alkaline media, which provides several hydrometallurgical options to recycle spent ZMCBs and recover a range of value added products such as Zn, Mn Ammonia forms a series of complexes of the general formula M(NH Thus, the presence of dissolved SO In comparison to the wealth of information on the leaching behaviour of the zinc, manganese and iron in spent ZMCBs ( Spent ZMCB material of minus 8 mesh was prepared according to the procedure described in previous publications (  A solution of 1 These results are consistent with the reported data on the effect of various reducing agents listed in Any iron dissolved as Fe(II) in acid can also act as a reducing agent for manganese oxides, resulting in the precipitation or adsorption of Fe(III) ( Results from previously reported work on alkaline leaching of spent ZMCBs listed in The presence of SO The XRD pattern of the feed shown in Despite the weak association or complexation with sulfate (PbSO  The partial dissolution of Hg, Ni and Co (50-73%) compared to Cu (100%) in the NH This study explored the reducing ability of SO Considering the minor elements in ZMCBs, the NH Future work will focus on the separation of iron, manganese and trace metals from pregnant leach solutions and recovery of other value added commodities from spent ZMCBs and other types of spent batteries. Financial assistance and support from the Parker CRC for Integrated Hydrometallurgy Solutions and the Korean Institute for Geoscience and Mineral Resources under the Korean Government's Global Partnership Program (GPP) are gratefully acknowledged.