Semi-synthetic tetracyclines are commonly used antibiotics that also seem to play an important role in the modulation of the immuno-inflammatory imbalance, verified in several bone diseases. The association of a therapeutic agent (that prevents bacterial infection and induces tissue formation) to a biomaterial aiming to repair/regenerate bone defects could contribute to a more predictable clinical outcome. The present study intends to evaluate the proliferation and functional activity of osteoblast-induced human bone marrow cells, cultured on the surface of hydroxyapatite (HA) and Bonelike®, in the presence of therapeutic concentrations of doxycycline and minocycline. First passage bone marrow cells were cultured for 35 days on the surface of HA and Bonelike® discs, in the absence or presence of 1μgml−1 doxycycline and minocycline. Cultures performed in standard tissue culture plates were used as control.
                  Doxycycline or minocycline induced cell proliferation and increased the extent of matrix mineralization in osteoblastic cell cultures established in the three substrates. Also, an improved biological behavior was verified in seeded Bonelike® compared with HA. The results suggest that the local delivery of tetracyclines might associate the antimicrobial activity in implant-related bone infection with an eventual induction of osteoblastic proliferation and maintenance of the characteristic biological activity of these cells.Tetracyclines are commonly used bacteriostatic antibiotics active against a wide range of both aerobic and anaerobic Gram-positive bacteria. Their antimicrobial activity is due to the inhibition of bacterial protein synthesis, by binding to the 30 In the last years, several observations have testified the therapeutic effectiveness of tetracycline (as well as its semi-synthetic derivatives, minocycline and doxycycline) in the modulation of the immuno-inflammatory imbalance verified in several animal and human bone diseases Ceramic-based biomaterials are currently used in bone tissue repair strategies because of their adequate mechanical properties and chemical composition similar to those of the bone tissue. One of the biomaterials, hydroxyapatite (HA), has generated a great deal of interest in the last years Despite the wide application of synthetic biomaterials in the repair/regeneration of bone tissue, several clinical complications have been established and have proved difficult to remedy. Among them are osteomyelitis, septic arthritis and prosthetic joint infection, which are caused specially by Gram-positive organisms and are known to contribute to a heavy clinical and economic burden Regarding bone regeneration strategies, the association of a biomaterial and a therapeutic agent that might induce bone formation while preventing bacterial infection could, undoubtedly, contribute to a more predictable clinical outcome. In this way, the objective of this research was to evaluate the proliferation and functional activity of osteoblast-induced human bone marrow cells, cultured on the surface of HA and Bonelike Bonelike Detailed description of Bonelike For in vitro testing, discs were mechanically polished to the same final topology of 1 HA samples were also prepared as 12 Human bone marrow was obtained from orthopedic surgical procedures conducted in adult patients (aged between 25 and 45 years). Informed consent was obtained for the use of this biological material, which would otherwise have been discarded. Bone marrow was cultured in α-MEM culture medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum, 50 MTT assay was used to estimate cell viability/proliferation. This assay is based on the reduction of 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide to a purple formazan product by viable cells. Cultured cells were incubated with 0.5 Total protein content was determined by Lowry method after treatment of the cell layer with 0.1 Activity of ALP was determined in cell lysates (obtained after treatment of cultured cells with 0.1% triton) by the hydrolysis of Culture medium from cultures in control and experimental conditions was collected every 2–3 days (and cultures reefed with fresh medium) between days 10 and 35 of the culture. Analysis of Cai content was conducted using Sigma Diagnostics Kit procedure number 587. Results were expressed as millimoles per litre of ionized calcium loss from medium (Cai mmol Glutaraldehyde (3%) fixed cultures were dehydrated in graded alcohols (70, 80, 2 Results presented in this study are from three separate experiments using cell cultures from different patients. There were three replicates for each experimental situation. Groups of data were evaluated using a two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and no significant differences in the pattern of the cell behaviour were found. Statistical differences found between control and experimental conditions were determined by Bonferroni’s method. Values of Human bone marrow stromal cells were characterized for proliferation and differentiation events on the surface of the culture plate, HA and Bonelike XRD analysis revealed that, due to the reaction between the HA matrix and P The results regarding the evaluation of cell proliferation by the MTT assay are presented in Cultures grown on the surface of the culture plate proliferated gradually until day 21, followed by a decrease in the remaining time of culture. Seeded Bonelike Results regarding the activity of alkaline phosphatase are presented in ALP activity was low during the first week of culture before increasing significantly, achieving maximal values by day 14 in control and cultures established on the surface of Bonelike No significant differences were found in ALP activity in the presence of doxycycline, although, in minocycline-treated cultures, a tendency for a reduction in the enzyme activity was verified, which was statistically significant ( The presence of mineralized deposits (calcium phosphate) in the cell layer was evaluated by the analysis of Cai loss from the culture medium throughout days 10–35 and by SEM observation. The Cai (in association with Pi) is consumed in the formation of calcium phosphate deposits in the extracellular matrix, reflecting the mineralization process. In the present work, the Cai consumption reflects the changes occurring between every medium change (intervals of 2–3 days), since the medium was totally replaced at every change, so that the values were not cumulative. The results are presented on Levels of Cai were determined in the absence of cultured cells and a relatively steady value of 1.7 Cultures grown on the surface of the culture plate revealed almost no Cai loss from the culture medium, between days 10 and 17. From this day onwards, a significant and progressive increase of the Cai loss was verified and, at day 30, values around 1.35 In the presence of doxycycline and minocycline, levels of Cai followed a similar pattern. However, in cultures established on the surface of culture plate and Bonelike Representative scanning electron micrographs of the cell layer at day 21 corresponding to different experimental conditions are presented in Control cultures and seeded HA and Bonelike Each year, almost two million patients worldwide undergo bone graft surgery in order to repair skeletal lesions resulting from trauma, tumor resection or degenerative diseases Tetracyclines are broad spectrum antibiotics important in the treatment of bone and joint infections Bone marrow cells grown on standard polystyrene culture plates, in the absence of tetracyclines, presented active proliferation during the first three weeks associated with expression of high levels of ALP. The maximum levels of ALP, achieved on day 14, indicate the subjacent differentiation process being established at this stage. ALP is associated with the availability of high levels of phosphate ions, essential to the onset of the mineralization process, being subsequently down-regulated Doxycycline or minocycline affected the proliferation of osteoblastic cells in a time-dependent manner. After a small lag phase during the first week, induced cell proliferation was observed in all experimental situations, i.e. control cultures, seeded HA and Bonelike Osteoblastic cell response to tetracyclines has been addressed in only a few previous studies, performed on standard tissue culture plates. Minocycline (up to 3 The mechanisms underlying the effects of tetracyclines over osteoblastic cells remain unclear. However, changes in the collagenous extracellular matrix, expected from the well-established inhibitory effect of tetracyclines over matrix metalloproteinases In the present study, treatment with 1 Finantial support was from Faculdade de Medicina Dentária (FMDUP), Universidade do Porto, Portugal and FCT – POCI/CTM/59091/2004.