This work reviews the advantages and disadvantages of using mineral wastes for CCS and their potential in CO2 abatement, highlighting the potential applications and scenarios. This study indicates that a variety of inorganic waste materials such as pulverised fuel ash, municipal solid waste ash, cement kiln dust, biomass and paper sludge ash and sewage sludge ash are available feedstocks for Carbon Capture and Storage by Mineralisation (CCSM) in the UK. The high variability of both the waste amounts and chemical composition represent a major obstacle to the deployment of these materials in CCSM. Currently, mineral waste resources for mineral carbonation have the theoretical potential to capture about 1Mt/year CO2 in the UK, considering only the materials not recycled that are currently sent to landfill. Moreover, inorganic waste as a CCSM resource is in many ways more complex than the use of natural minerals due to uncertainty on future availability and high chemical variability and might be viable only in niche applications. For example, the use of inorganic wastes (concrete waste and steel slag) and buffer solutions in spray trickle bed systems (able to sequester 50% of the CO2 entering the system) was estimated to have costs competitive with geological storage.Fossil fuels account for 80–85% of the total of global energy production. However, their use is facing significant challenges due to the vast amounts of CO Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) is a technology that can significantly reduce the impacts of climate change by capturing the CO Due to slow progress in the deployment of technologies that store CO The process consists of reacting CO Unfortunately, the basic solid–gas chemical reaction takes place on geological time-scale and speeding it up has been the focus of researchers. In light of this, mineral carbonation technologies can be divided into two main groups: single-step processes and multi-step processes. Single-step processes involve the reaction of feedstock material with CO One of the advantages of CCS by Mineralisation (CCSM) is that the raw material is estimated to have carbon storage capacity one order of magnitude larger that global fossil reserves Alkaline industrial waste residues represent an alternative source of readily available and reactive Ca and Mg oxides suitable for CCSM. Recently, new investigations have indicated that industrial wastes require a lower degree of pre-treatment and less energy intensive carbonation conditions (at same initial content of Ca/Mg oxides), in comparison to raw minerals Alkaline waste residues present other distinct advantages over natural mineral feedstocks for CCSM, as mining is not required and the related issues such as consumption of raw materials and environmental issues have less of an impact So far, a detailed assessment of the potential waste streams in the UK, which could be employed for mineral carbonation, has not yet been conducted. This paper aims to give a detailed review of suitable candidate waste resources that are available in the UK, predicted future trends for their production. Moreover, the chemical composition of the different waste streams and how this may affect their potential for storing CO Waste materials from a wide range of industrial processes are rich in calcium and magnesium oxides and hydroxides, which are desirable source materials for CCSM. However, the consideration of waste is in many ways more complex than natural rocks. Rocks are a finite resource in a specific location that stay essentially unchanged for long periods of time and could act as a resource for hundreds of years. In contrast, a material previously considered as waste may find a use due to developments in technology. Second, technology changes can lead to the cessation of waste production. A third factor that can radically change things is legislation with increasing charging on the disposal of waste that could create markets for ‘waste’ as low value by-products. The use of waste products is therefore very unpredictable. Waste streams characterized by a high content of calcium oxides that can be used for mineral carbonation include: Recycled concrete aggregate (RCA), steel slag (SS), blastfurnace slag (BFS), pulverised fuel ash (PFA)including oil shale pulverised ash, secondary steel slags such as argon-oxygen decarburisation slag (AOD), desulphurisation slag and ladle slag, incinerator bottom ash (IBA), air pollution control (APC) residue, cement kiln dust (CKD), incinerator sewage sludge ash (ISSA), paper sludge ash (PSA), biomass ash (BA), clinical waste ash (CWA) and quarry waste and fines. CCSM using all the above materials has been demonstrated in several recent studies The assessment of inorganic waste as a resource material for CCSM technology has been carried out here considering the volumes available in the UK, their chemical composition and their location. It should be mentioned the difficulties in retrieving long-term data for past production and the unpredictable nature of future sources and availability of waste. This is far more difficult to evaluate compared to the availability and access of silicate rocks suitable for CCSM. A discussion on the future availability of waste resources is the focus of this work, along with the possibility to employ the CCSM technology as an intermediate process towards the re-use of the mineral wastes. The parameters used to assess the current and the future potential of the mineral wastes as a resource for CCSM are: Amounts available (including predicted future trends); Content of calcium, magnesium and other elements. The ‘theoretical’ maximum CO This method is based on the assumption that the total amount of Ca and Mg can be extracted from the waste and subsequently carbonated A summary of the chemical composition and theoretical and experimental CO The table shows the high variability of the same material that directly depends on the starting material (e.g. coal, iron ore). Particularly, the variation of the reactive calcium and magnesium oxides can be associated with the efficiency of the carbonation process. All steel slag, CKD, biomass ash, oil shale ash, AOD process slag, APC residue and paper incineration ash present high CaO content (40–70%) that is reflected in a high theoretical CO Recycled concrete aggregate (RCA) results from the processing of inorganic material previously used in construction and principally comprising crushed concrete. The cement component of RCA consists of a series of calcium silicate hydrate and calcium aluminate hydrate compounds, as well as calcium hydroxide, which is highly alkaline. The alkalinity of RCA can decrease due to age-related natural carbonation. Chloride ions from the application of de-icing salts to roadway surfaces or sulphates from contact with sulphate-rich soils can sometimes be present Waste cement represents a potentially large source of mineral carbon sequestration feedstock with recent annual waste concrete production of 1100 CO Recycled concrete aggregate is increasingly being seen as a valuable source of engineering materials for the construction industry in the UK. Using RCA materials potentially reduces reliance on primary aggregates and lowers the environmental impact of construction. An annual average of about 53 The UK construction sector consumes about 380 CO  Pulverized-fuel ash (PFA), also known as coal fly ash (FA), is extracted by electrostatic precipitation from the flue gases of coal-burning power stations. PFA is a fine powder made up of individual fused ash particles with a diameter of about 10–15 Furnace bottom ash (FBA) is the coarser fraction of ash produced in coal burning power stations resulting from the fusion of pulverized-fuel ash particles which fall to the bottom of the furnace. It varies in size from fine sand to coarse gravel and has a porous nature. The principal components of bituminous coal fly ash are silica, alumina, iron oxides, magnesium oxides (1–3%) and calcium oxides (5–10%), with varying amounts of carbon The global production of fly ash (∼600 About 5.6 Steel slag is the by-product of the manufacture of steel from pig iron (blast furnace) and metal scrap (electric arc furnace). Steel slag production can be subdivided in Basic Oxygen Furnace slag (BOF) (62%), Electric Arc Furnace slag (EAF) (29%) and secondary metallurgical slag such as ladle slag (9%) Steel furnace slags typically present high Ca content (34–55%) and elevated alkalinity (pH between 11.3–12.4) making them suitable candidates for CCSM. The global production of iron and steel slag was about 350 Blast furnace slag (BFS) is a by-product from the production of iron, resulting from the fusion of fluxing stone (fluorspar) with coke, ash and the siliceous and aluminous residues remaining after the reduction and separation of iron from the ore BFS typically contains calcium oxide in the range of 15–41% and magnesium oxide content ranging from 8% to 11% ( A total of 1.25 The future availability of steel slag might decline considering that the production of electric arc furnace (EAF) slag is expected to rise in the South East and can balance the decline of the basic oxygen furnace (BOF) slag. The latter is used for aggregate use and considering that the demand is expected to continue, there is little necessity to find alternative uses Incinerator bottom ash aggregate (IBA) is processed from the material discharged into the burning grate of municipal solid waste (MSW) incinerators and comprises 80% to 90% of the total MSW ash production Municipal waste IBA has showed ECO Air pollution control (APC) residue from MSW incinerators consists of particulates that originate in the primary combustion zone area and are subsequently entrained in the combustion gas stream. Then, the particulates are carried into the boiler and air pollution control system together with reaction products and excess reagents resulting from flue gas treatment. Usually APC residues and fly ash are interchangeable The major elements in APC residues are Ca (4.1–36.1 The annual tonnage of incinerator bottom ash (IBA) produced in the UK is 0.75 Air pollution control (APC) residues produced from cleaning gaseous emissions generated during combustion of wastes at incineration plants had an annual tonnage of 128,000 Cement Kiln dust (CKD) is a fine by-product of Portland cement and lime high-temperature rotary kiln production that is captured in the air pollution control dust collection system (e.g., cyclones, electrostatic precipitators). CKD, composed of fine particulates of unburned and partially burned raw materials, is collected from the combustion gases within pre-heater and kiln systems. Due to its caustic nature and potential as a skin, eye and respiratory irritant, CKD is a potentially hazardous waste. Typically, for every 100 The UK cement industry disposes of about 46,000 The production of CKD decreased considerably from 1999 to 2008, but it is expected to rise again in the near future as shown in However, the cement industry might decline in the UK due to the expected rise in the cost of producing cement as a consequence of EU regulations (EU ETS, climate change agreements, carbon reduction commitments and a carbon levy). Therefore, the availability of CKD in the UK years is unpredictable A number of other inorganic materials such as incineration sewage sludge ash (ISSA), paper and biomass sludge ash can be currently considered as a secondary resource for carbonation in the UK because of the low quantities available, and might be of primary importance in other countries based on their availability. Sewage sludge ash is the by-product produced during the combustion of dewatered sewage sludge in an incinerator. It contains between 9% and 37% of CaO Paper sludge incineration ash (PS) is the residue from incineration of the wastewater sludge from paper-making. It contains residual fibres, fillers and chemicals and contains about 45–69% of CaO Biomass ash (BA) is a by-product of the combustion of biomasses such as spent grains after beer and bio-ethanol production, rape-cake after oil extraction. Wood ash (WA) is generated from coal power station and combined electricity and heat generation plants using wood sources. BA and WA contain between 24% and 45% of CaO Processing of crushed stone for use as construction aggregate consists of blasting, primary and secondary crushing, washing, screening, and stockpiling. These operations produce significant amounts of waste, often referred to as quarry waste and fines. Usually sand and gravel workings do not produce permanent waste, while hard rock quarries produce variable amounts of quarry waste and fines. Quarry fines are the inherent fraction of an aggregate below 63 A total potential estimation of the mineral waste resource available in the UK for the CCSM was carried out with a total potential CO It has to be stressed that the majority of these waste materials are currently re-used for low-end applications to avoid landfill disposal costs and the aggregate levy in the case of primary aggregate production for the construction industry. For example, the use of the RCA into CCSM could be technically viable integrating the CCSM plant after the crushing and sieving step of the construction and demolition waste, assuming that the properties of the carbonates produced could be compatible to commercial ones and also competitive in terms of cost. Also, SS and BFS that have high ECO  Current CCSM schemes present high energy requirements and high costs compared to geological storage. Direct gas–solid carbonation of mineral wastes presents reaction kinetics too slow to be practically deployed, which results in too large an amount of materials to be moved in/out from the mineral carbonation plant Local energy policy priorities will drive the development of competing technologies such as retrofitting CCS in existing fossil fuels power plants, polygeneration via coal gasification with CCS, coal oxyfuel technology with CCS, and renewable energy. This work gives an up-to-date review of the potential applications of inorganic waste materials in mineral carbonation for the sequestration of CO Overall, the use of waste resources for CCSM should be considered as a niche market that could utilise relatively small amounts of feed material for CCSM. They may have the advantage to be often located close to the CO The authors thank the Energy Technologies Institute (ETI) that commissioned and funded the work as part of its CCS programme and Dr Mike Styles from the British Geological Survey (BGS) for the information provided.