The extraction of mercury(II) from dilute hydrochloric acid solutions has been investigated using Cyanex 923 (=TRPO) as an extractant. The extraction data have been analysed by both graphical and theoretical methods taking into account aqueous phase speciation and all plausible complexes extracted into the organic phase. The results demonstrate that mercury(II) is extracted into xylene as HgCl2·3TRPO. IR spectral studies of the extracted complex were used to further clarify the nature of the extracted complex. The loading capacity of the solvent was determined. The effect of the diluent on the extraction process of mercury has been studied and correlated with dielectric constants. The developed extraction procedure has been explored for the recovery of mercury from the brine–sludge of Chlor-Alkali industry.In recent years, increasing attention has been placed on the removal of mercury from industrial waste streams, not only from the point of view of pollution control, but also to recover mercury for potential use. Mercury, and its compounds, especially methylmercury, is extremely toxic to humans. Inorganic mercury, especially soluble mercury species can be transformed into methylmercury by the action of microorganisms under aerobic conditions. Thus, the control and removal of mercury from polluted waste streams is important. In addition to activated carbon and ion exchange processes, solvent extraction is considered to be an effective and energy saving separation technique suitable for the removal of mercury from industrial wastes A survey of the literature showed that a large number of reagents have been used for the extraction of mercury. Among neutral extractants, tributylphosphate (TBP) Cyanex 923 is a mixture of four trialkylphosphine oxides, which exhibits extraction properties similar to trioctylphosphine oxide. The above extractant has the advantage of being a liquid and is completely miscible with all commonly used hydrocarbons. Recently, Cyanex 923 has been proposed by our laboratory as a potential extractant for trivalent lanthanides and yttrium A well-type NaI(Tl) gamma ray spectrometer supplied by Nucleonix Systems, India was used to measure the gamma activity of The tracer solution of Equal volumes of the aqueous phase containing Hg(II) (0.1 mM) labeled with the radioisotope and organic phase were equilibrated for 30 min in a glass-stoppered vial using a mechanical shaker at 303±1 K. Preliminary experiments showed that the extraction equilibrium is attained within 5 min. The two phases were then separated and assayed radiometrically using a NaI(Tl) gamma scintillation counter. The distribution ratio, Mercury in the chlorinated brine–sludge of Chlor-Alkali industry was analysed spectrophotometrically using Rhodamine-6G Hg–TRPO complex was prepared by the solvent extraction method. The loading of Cyanex 923 with Hg(II) was carried out by repeated contact of fresh portions of metal solutions for 30 min. The loaded organic phase was then separated. The KBr (neat) containing a film of loaded metal ion solution was placed under an IR lamp to evaporate xylene completely. The IR spectrum of the extracted complex was recorded, and for comparison, the IR spectra of pure Cyanex 923 was also taken. The complex formation of Hg(II) with chloride ions can be described as follows: The extraction of neutral Hg(II) complexes into the organic phase with solvating extractants such as Cyanex 923 may be described as follows: It can be assumed that the concentrations of Hg From The values of stepwise stability constants (log The effect of concentration of Cyanex 923 (0.02–0.05 M) on the extraction of Hg(II) (0.1 mM) from 0.1 M hydrochloric acid solutions has been studied and the results are shown in The effect of metal ion concentration on the extraction of Hg(II) in the range of 0.01–1 mM has been investigated using 0.03 M Cyanex 923 in xylene from 0.1 M hydrochloric acid solutions. The log–log plot in The mechanism of extraction of Hg(II) was further confirmed by analysing the equilibrium data in Aliquots of 10 mL of 0.20 M Cyanex 923 were repeatedly extracted at 303±1 K for 10 min with the same volume of aqueous solution containing 5 mM of mercury and 0.05 M hydrochloric acid to determine the loading capacity of the solvent. After equilibration, the phases were disengaged and aqueous phases were analysed for mercury content. The amount of mercury transferred into organic phase in each contact was calculated by difference and the cumulative concentrations of mercury in organic phase after each stage of contact were determined. The plot of cumulative [Hg(II), g/L] The extraction of Hg(II) (0.1 mM) from 1 M hydrochloric acid solutions using 0.1 M Cyanex 923 in various diluents has been investigated and the results are shown in Mercury(II) stripping from a loaded organic system consisting of 0.1 M Cyanex 923 in xylene (0.1 mM Hg) has been investigated using various stripping agents and the results are shown in The IR spectra of the extracted complex show that the stretching frequency of The effect of other metal ions such as Zn(II) (0.1 mM), Cd(II) (0.1 mM), Ca(II) (0.01 M), Ba(II) (0.01 M), Mg(II) (0.01 M) and Fe(III) (1 mM) in solutions containing 0.1 M HCl using 0.2 M Cyanex 923 in kerosene on the extraction process of Hg(II) has been investigated and it was found that none of these metal ions are extracted into the organic phase. On the other hand, Hg(II) was found to be quantitatively extracted (% extraction=>99.9) into the organic phase under the above conditions. Thus, Hg(II) can be selectively separated from the above metal ions associated with it, in the brine sludge of Chlor-Alkali industry using Cyanex 923 in kerosene as an extractant. The developed solvent extraction procedure for the extraction of mercury using Cyanex 923 was applied for the removal and recovery of mercury from the brine–sludge of Chlor-Alkali industry. 1 g of the brine–sludge sample in 10 mL of 0.5 M hydrochloric acid was chlorinated for 10–15 min for converting mercury into highly soluble mercuric chloride complexes. The chlorinated sludge was then subjected to solid–liquid separation and the filtrate was analysed spectrophotometrically using Rhodamine 6G to determine the mercury content in the brine–sludge sample. The mercury content in the brine–sludge sample was found to be 160 μg/g of the sludge. The extraction process of mercury from the brine–sludge comprises the steps of (1) chlorination of the brine–sludge, (2) solid–liquid separation, (3) bringing the resultant filtrate liquor (pH=1.0) from solid–liquid separation containing the mercury into contact with a substantially immiscible solvent phase which comprises 0.2 M Cyanex 923 in kerosene (phase ratio=Aq: Org.=1:1; number of stages=1), whereupon the mercury to be separated selectively, reversibly transfers into the solvent, (4) stripping the solvent with an aqueous system consists of 0.01 M sodium thiosulphate or 5% thiourea in 1% HCl (Aq:Org.=1:1; number of stages=1) to recover all the mercury contained in the solvent. A schematic procedure for the extraction process is given in The results clearly demonstrate that Cyanex 923 can be used as a selective reagent for the extraction of mercury over other metal ions such as Zn(II), Cd(II), Ca (II), Ba(II), Mg (II) and Fe (III) from dilute hydrochloric acid solutions (pH=1–2). The extraction equilibrium of mercury can be explained by a simple chemically based model. Further, the laboratory studies reveal that Cyanex 923 can be used as an extractant for the selective extraction and separation of mercury from the brine–sludge of Chlor-Alkali industry. This work was supported by the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Govt. of India. The authors wish to thank Dr. G.D. Surender, Head, Mineral Processing Division and Dr. G. Vijay Nair, Director, Regional Research Laboratory (CSIR), Trivandrum for their constant encouragement.