Conventional and non-conventional flotation for mineral processing and for water (and wastewaters) treatment and reuse (or recycling) is rapidly broadening their applications in the mining field. Conventional flotation assisted with microbubbles (30–100 μm) finds application in the recovery of fine mineral particles (<13 μm) and flotation with these fine bubbles is being used as a solid/liquid separation to remove pollutants. The injection of small bubbles to conventional coarse bubbles flotation cells usually leads to general improvements of the separation parameters, especially for the ultrafines (<5 μm) ore particles. Results obtained are believed to occur by enhancing the capture of particles by bubbles, one of the main drawbacks in fine ore flotation. It is believed that by decreasing the bubble size distribution (through the injection of small bubbles), increases the bubble surface flux and the fines capture. DAF or dissolved air flotation with microbubbles, treating water, wastewater and domestic sewage is known for a number of years and is now gradually entering in the mining environmental area. This technology offers, in most cases, advantages over settling, filtration, precipitation, or adsorption onto natural and synthetic adsorbents. The targets are the removal of oils (emulsified or not), ions (heavy metals and anions) and the reuse or recirculation of the process waters. Advantages include better treated water quality, rapid start up, high rate operation, and a thicker sludge. New applications are found in the mining vehicles washing water treatment and reuse, AMD (acid mining drainage) neutralization and high rate solids/water separation by flotation with microbubbles. This work reviews some recent applications of the use of microbubbles to assist the recovery of very small mineral particles and for the removal of pollutants from mining wastewaters. Emphasis is given to the design features of innovative devices showing the potential of conventional and unconventional DAF flotation.Flotation technology is employed for more than a century in ore processing and its environmental applications are best known in the civil (sanitary), chemical and food engineering fields. DAF or dissolved air flotation, pressure flotation, or flotation with microbubbles (30–100 μm) is the most utilized process removing a number of pollutants, among others, colloids, fines and ultrafines particles, precipitates, ions, microorganisms, proteins, dispersed and emulsified oils in water ( In the mineral processing area, all employed flotation devices do not generate these microbubbles but coarser bubbles, usually between 600 and 2500 μm. According to most researchers, the lack of “mid-sized” bubbles in the cells is the main reason why the capture of the very fine particles is inefficient leading to considerable losses, an old problem in mineral processing ( Many different processes to reduce this problem have been proposed but most of them have not found practical applications yet ( But, this is not the situation in effluents treatment whereby most particles are fine (even within the colloidal range) and are readily removed by flotation because of the use of fines bubbles. Accordingly, it may be concluded that for the recovery of fine minerals particles in ore flotation the cell machine should provide a wide bubbles size distribution, which must include micro or mid-sized bubbles (100–600 μm) plus the coarser bubbles generated in conventional flotation cells. This is a great challenge! Column flotation cells generate, with their various commercial spargers, finer bubbles than conventional “rougher” cells machines, improving somewhat the recovery of the F–UF mineral particles ( Main differences between these main flotation applications are related to the concentration of solids being separated, low in DAF processes (1–3% weight basis) compared 30–40% (weight basis) in mineral separation and the volume of air which is introduced in each process ( Summarizing, DAF may be used and appears to have potential in many mining applications, namely: In solid–liquid separation and water recirculation (as in thickeners). Removal of ions from process waters which may activate gangue particles if fed to mineral flotation plants. Treatment of flotation liquid effluents removing pollutants anions, oil spills or emulsions, heavy metal ions, colloidal precipitates, residual organic collectors and frothers. Treatment of AMD-acid mining drainage removing solids generated after neutralization. In mining equipment, vehicles and big machinery washing water treatment and reuse. Treatment of filtered water from ore flotation concentrates. Recovery of valuable ions (Au, Pd, Ag, Pt). In fine mineral treatment, associated to coarser bubbles. The aim of this work is to overview the actual applications of microbubbles in mining and mineral processing operations and to forecast future trends in both areas: the flotation of F–UF fractions and the removal of particles by flotation (treatment) from liquids effluents, acidic generated waters and reuse of wastewater. Bubbles are formed by a reduction in pressure of water (treated wastewater recycled) pre-saturated with air at pressures higher than atmospheric (3 to 6 atm). The supersaturated water is forced trough needle-valves or special orifices, and clouds of bubbles, 30–100 μm in diameter, are produced just down-stream of the constriction ( Microbubbles rise under laminar flow under rigid-sphere conditions and obey Stokes' law. The rising rates are lower in cold water due to the increased viscosity of the water (example: 9.6 m h The microbubbles, after having been attached or entrapped within the flocs, increases the rising rate of the composites dramatically ( The question whether hydrophobicity is or not a prerequisite in dissolved air flotation (DAF) systems has been addressed by However, in flotation with microbubbles, mechanisms of bubble/particle (aggregates) interactions, other than the common adhesion through hydrophobic forces, have been proposed, namely ( Nucleation phenomena at solid surfaces. Part of the dissolved air in water does not convert into bubbles in the nozzles, remains in solution and “nucleate” at particle surfaces ( Bubbles entrapment or physical trapping inside the flocs or aerated flocs formation. This phenomenon ( Aggregates entrainment, by the rising bubbles (“cloud”) (see Mechanisms “a” and “b” occur only with the microbubbles and not with the coarser bubbles and explain why, in DAF, no collector or froth is required and a thick and stable float layer is formed at the flotation cell top. The rising velocity is highly dependent on particles (aggregates) density or on bubbles trapping inside the flocs. In mineral treatment, flotation of the F–UF particles by surface nucleation and entrainment may occur independently of the nature of the particles, whether hydrophobic or hydrophilic, and if gangue particles are very small this would lead to unselective flotation ( Earlier applications of the use of microbubbles (alone) in mineral particles recovery were not successful due to problems with the low lifting power of these bubbles for the coarse or dense particles, even worse, at high solids concentrations ( The potential use of dissolved gas bubbles in mineral flotation was investigated using a copper–nickel ore (Inco Ltd. in Sudbury, Canada) ( Yet, practical observations (plant) in column flotation have shown that the very fine bubbles are entrained off to the tailings! This phenomenon might be even worse using microbubbles. An extensive work on fines flotation (Cu and Mo sulfides) using DAF with microbubbles in addition to conventional bubbles has been conducted in our laboratory ( It is believed that by decreasing the bubble size distribution (through the injection of small bubbles), increases the bubble surface flux and the fines capture. It is expected that this “bubbling” approach will be utilized for the design of future flotation devices.  Yet, These controversies need further explanations but it is clear that microbubbles are able to capture small mineral particles with advantages over the coarser bubbles ( Advantages of the DAF process are the high volume of the effluents being treated (100–20,000 m The high development in the area and the new upcoming applications outside the Scandinavian countries, where this technology is commonly employed, resulted in the organization of more specific conferences and congresses. In parallel two strategic workshops took place in the last 5 years where the idea was to stress the exchange of flotation experience in mineral flotation and in water and effluent treatment. Yet, more and more events of such a nature appear to be required whereby a cross fertilization of flotation experience in mineral flotation and in wastewater treatment should lead to new and improved procedures in the mineral and metallurgical industry, the chemical and petroleum industries and domestic wastewater treatment. All these aim to an efficient reuse or recycling of water resources and wastewater. Dissolved air flotation (DAF) has gained widespread usage for the removal of contaminants and the recovery of by-products from wastewater and other industrial process streams over the last 20 years. While considered a relatively simple technology, there have been significant improvements in the technology including operating parameters, bubble generation systems, and process design. There has also been an expansion of applications using DAF over the last several years in traditional and non-traditional areas of water and industrial effluent treatment (  More, many articles ( Due to the efficient reagents and separation schemes now available, flocculation and rapid flotation have great potential as unitary or ancillary processes in many areas ( According to In Brazil we find the most notable unconventional applications found namely, the treatment by flotation of sea polluted water to feed “sea pools” in beaches, treatment of contaminated parks lagoons and, even rivers waters! ( Main conclusions of all these activities are that future technologies have to treat wastewater from mining and many other industries efficiently, not only to meet legislation standards but also to recycle or reuse water, considered a finite, vulnerable and costly (in the near future) resource. Environmental DAF industrial applications in mining and metallurgy are scarce but growing ( A DAF process to remove solids, metal ions, sulfide and molybdate anions from Cu–Mo concentrate “filtrates” is successful being employed in Chile since 2000 ( AMD-acid mining drainage from coal mines using neutralization and solid/liquid separation by DAF are now in progress in the USA ( In 1999, in the USA ( In South Brazil, at Carbonífera Metropolitana, the very same treatment was applied to an AMD generated from a coal stockpile successfully ( A new device, the Flocs Generator Reactor (FGR) has been used as an ancillary process before flotation and a new design DAF tank cell-column-like cell was employed. The FGR is a compact system whereby the flocculation of particles is assisted by the kinetic energy transfer from the hydraulic flow through a helical reactor ( The DAF unit was called FADAT or high throughput (loading capacity) flotation unit has incorporated inclined lamellae in the collection zone to enhance the aggregates floating “bed” stability and fluidization ( Accordingly, a 2 m In an AMD from a gold bearing sulfides ore, the treatment included two alternatives: the first with removal of the heavy metal (Mn included) ions exclusively and a second alternative to separate metal ions and the sulfate ions together. The latter is conducted following a novel process based on a chemical precipitation which entails the addition of lime to precipitate the metal hydroxides, and the subsequent formation (precipitation) of calcium sulphoaluminate or ettringite ( The removal of most metal ions (not the sulfate ions) is readily performed after precipitation of iron (> Regarding the “extra” removal of sulfate ions, the key of this new technique, developed in our laboratory (  DAF applied to water reuse from mining vehicles washing wastewaters is currently being performed in Brazil ( Water reuse or recycling. Water resource is getting expensive and scarce, especially in mining areas and for this reason the reuse or recycle (as process water) is important and sometimes fundamental. The potential of the so-called primary treatment is high in water reuse or recycling and DAF is considered as one of the most powerful tools to remove light and difficult-to-treat colloidal suspensions, precipitates or fine (haze) dispersions (oily or not). Thus, in any new plant addressed to water reuse, DAF process should be included in the plant design, especially those working at high hydraulic loadings. Yet, and because of the high volume of water and wastewater to treat, future DAF installations will have to change the design, incorporating new elements to enhance the hydraulic loadings. Rapid DAF is being claimed by modifying the cell design (taller tanks) and by placing lamellae inside the separation tank ( Because of the need for new technologies to solve the problem of treating loaded and huge effluent streams, it is believed that a feasible solution is the use of “rapid”, high throughput flotation units, based on a wide bubble size distribution and formation of “aerated” (entrapped or entrained bubbles) flocs ( Advances in the design, development and applications of innovative flocculation and flotation devices for successful solid–liquid separation processes have recently been reported ( Authors thank all the students and colleagues responsible for the friendly atmosphere at the LTM-Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, a public and free University and to all Institutions supporting Research in Brazil. JR dedicates this paper to Jaime A. Solari, a good friend and a pioneer in DAF research applied to the mining field.