Solvent extraction separation of divalent cobalt and nickel from sulphate solutions was studied using OPPA dissolved in n-dodecane and the optimum conditions for separation of cobalt and nickel were determined. It was found that extraction of both the metal ions increases with increase in equilibrium pH. Cobalt was preferentially extracted over nickel in all pH range, ΔpH0.5 value of 1.8 indicates the possible separation of both the metal ions from each other. Almost complete extraction of cobalt is observed at pH 4.5 where separation factor (β
                     =
                     D
                     Co/D
                     Ni) is approximately 1400, above this pH co-extraction of nickel increases and reduction in separation factor was observed. The composition of extracted species determined by slope analysis of the plots of log
                     D vs. log[OPPA]2 and log
                     D vs. equilibrium pH indicates formation of the species MA2 (HA)2 for both the metal ions. Temperature dependence studies of the extraction constant K
                     ex, showed that the extraction is enthalpy driven with unfavorable entropy. OPPA/dodecane was employed for cobalt/nickel separation from raffinate solution obtained during solvent extraction process of spent ammonia cracker catalyst leach solution. 1.0M OPPA/dodecane in counter-current extraction at O/A of 1.0 was efficiently used to separate cobalt from nickel.Extraction of cobalt and nickel and their separation have been extensively studied and reviewed from various aqueous streams, however, owing to their similar chemical properties in aqueous solutions, development of separation routes to obtain pure cobalt and nickel compounds from different primary and secondary resources is difficult using classical methods of separations such as precipitation, oxidation and crystallization. Solvent extraction using solvents selective for one of the metal ions has been successfully employed for this purpose Extraction processes for cobalt and nickel separation with Cyanex 272 are effectively used in the pH range of 6.2–7.3. This pH is difficult to adjust and maintain as it is very close to hydrolysis pH of cobalt and nickel. Therefore, there is a need for an alternate extractant which can work at lower pH, so as to eliminate the need for stringent pH control as required in the case of Cyanex 272. In the present work, the extraction and separation of cobalt and nickel from sulphate solution is carried out using octyl(phenyl)phosphinic acid (OPPA). OPPA is more acidic than its dialkyl counterpart as phenyl group has stronger drawing ability for electrons than alkyl groups, resulting in the –OH group more acidic in the case of phenyl substituted phosphinic acid. The p OPPA was synthesized according to the procedure reported elsewhere Phenyl phosphinic acid was synthesized from Friedel–Crafts reaction of benzene, phosphorus trichloride and anhydrous aluminum trichloride Extraction experiments were carried out by the conventional batch method using separating funnels. Organic solutions were prepared by dissolving appropriate amount of extractant in The extraction data generated from synthetic solutions were used for separation of both the metals from each other present in the raffinate solution of spent ammonia cracker catalyst process obtained from solvent extraction of spent ammonia cracker catalyst leach liquor. The extraction of cobalt and nickel from sulphate solution was studied using sodium salt of 1.0 The effect of OPPA concentration on the extraction of cobalt and nickel each at 0.017 The conditional extraction equilibrium concentration constant,  By substituting Eq. The log Loading capacity of OPPA was determined by contacting various concentrations of OPPA/ The effect of temperature on the extraction of cobalt and nickel was studied in the temperature range of 303–333 The plots of log Most of the liquid cation exchange extraction processes are exothermic and driven by large and negative enthalpy and opposed by the negative entropy. The extraction of cobalt and nickel by OPPA results in a negative enthalpy (ΔH Spent ammonia cracker catalyst generated by heavy water plants has been an important secondary source for cobalt production. Different methods have been used for recovery of cobalt from this spent catalyst Solvent extraction of cobalt and nickel from sulphate solution has been carried out using OPPA diluted with As OPPA is more acidic than Cyanex 272, it therefore can be used for separation of cobalt from nickel from more acidic aqueous solutions, thus, in our present studies we have seen that OPPA effectively separates cobalt from nickel at a lower pH than Cyanex 272. Use of OPPA at lower pH solves many problems associated with hydrolysis of cobalt and nickel when Cyanex 272 is employed for their separation at higher pH of 6.2–7.3. However, availability of Cyanex 272 at commercial scale makes the separation process economically viable, which is yet to be established for OPPA/ The composition of extracted species determined by slope analysis of the plot of log