A pretreatment to remove and recover base metals present in complex sulfide refractory ores is proposed as a method to improve the extraction of precious metals with thiourea. Sodium citrate solutions at pH 8 and 5 were employed to extract lead and iron, respectively, from two concentrates: one having silver in a primarily galena matrix and the other, with gold associated with pyrite. The pretreatment solutions, containing the base metals, were subjected to electrolysis and pH adjustment, before being recycled back to the pretreatment stage. The results showed that citrate pretreatment successfully extracted lead and some iron, liberating the precious metals for thiourea leaching. The citrate pretreatment solution could be reutilized, after base metal removal, decreasing the reagent and water requirements. In all cases, the citrate pretreatment improved precious metal extraction.With time, the availability of gold and silver ores that require only one leaching stage is diminishing. ( In complex or refractory minerals, gold and silver extractions in single-stage leaching are typically minimal, requiring a pretreatment to modify the ore's characteristics. The different types of pretreatments include attacking with sulfuric or nitric acid, bromides, bioleaching, pressure leaching and ultrafine grinding ( Most large-scale hydrometallurgical processes continue to use inorganic acids in their pretreatment stages ( In the leaching stage, cyanidation is still the most employed system for precious metal extraction ( In the present investigation, a sodium citrate-based pretreatment was employed to remove base metals from two complex minerals to improve the precious metal recovery in the subsequent leaching stage. Additionally, the reutilization capacity of the pretreatment solutions was evaluated. Thiourea ( The mineral samples employed in this study were two precious metal sulfide concentrates. The first was a base metal sulfide concentrate from México, containing 1.4 kg/t silver, which will be referred to as the The minerals were mechanically prepared and classified by conventional methods, obtaining 500 g of each in the particle size range between ASTM −100 + 200 mesh (75 to 150 μm). Samples of each were digested in aqua regia to determine their elemental composition by atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS, Varian SpectrAA 220 fs). The minerology of each was studied using X-ray diffraction (PANalytical X'pert-Pro with a cobalt anode, Bragg-Brentano mode); the results were analyzed employing the PANalytical HighScore Plus© (Vers. 3.0.32011) software. All solutions used for pretreatment and leaching, as well as the standards, were formulated with deionized water (Millipore Milli-Q) and analytical grade chemicals. For preparation of the “fresh” pretreatment solutions to remove base metals, sodium citrate (J.T. Baker) was added in the desired concentration and the pH was adjusted with dilute sulfuric acid. The pretreatment experiments used a proportion of 100 g mineral per liter of solution and a mechanical stirring at 400 rpm. Hydrogen peroxide (30% Once concluded, the pretreatment liquor, rich in base metal complexes, hereinafter PPS (pregnant pretreatment solution), was separated from the solid residue by conventional filtration and sent to the electrorecovery stage to recover the base metals. Subsequently, its pH was readjusted for reutilization with a new batch of fresh mineral. The pretreated solid residues were leached in thiourea solutions to dissolve gold or silver, depending on the mineral. The solutions for the leaching stage were 0.4 M thiourea (J.T. Baker) at pH 1.4. The citrate-pretreated mineral was rinsed with abundant water and air-dried. The resulting solid was added to an equal volume of the thiourea solution, maintaining the same solid to liquid ratio (100 g of the original mineral per liter of solution). In this stage, hydrogen peroxide was also used as the oxidant, but only adding 0.1 M H The laboratory-scale electrorecovery of the base metals (BM) from the PPS solutions was performed in a Pyrex® cell, using an industrial grade titanium cathode (exposed area 12 cm The subsequent electrorecovery and pretreatment stages were repeated with the recirculated solution. The general processing scheme is outlined in Precious metal leaching has been the subject of numerous studies whose objective has been to replace cyanide or mitigate its environmental impact. Although hydrometallurgical processes have in general been improved over the years, conventional non-refractory mineral deposits have been exhausted and more complex ores must be considered. According to their nature, both materials studied were considered susceptible to thiourea leaching, although gold and silver extractions did not surpass 20% after leaching for six hours ( To circumvent this situation, an auxiliary reagent (citrate) could be employed to sequester the base metals, freeing the thiourea for the precious metals. When leaching solutions of both citrate and thiourea were used, the oxidant (H Consequently, the two-step process shown in As was mentioned in the previous section, the elemental composition, including gold and silver, was determined by AAS of digested samples and are reported in As may be observed, the Silver ore contains an elevated iron and lead content, with a significant presence of other metals, such as copper and zinc. These are present in a complex sulfide matrix ( The appropriate pretreatment conditions for both ores are shown in Since the silver ore was conformed principally of galena and pyrite, in accordance with the corresponding thermodynamic analysis (see Appendix), the pH range favoring lead solubility in citrate solutions is between 4 and 8; the sulfate ion was present in small quantities since sulfuric acid was used to adjust the pH. However, even though the predictions show that the pH should not have a significant effect in this range, the lead extraction is appreciably faster at the more alkaline pH ( Assuming that silver is associated within the galena matrix, preferential attack of this phase could result in increased precious metal extraction in the subsequent leaching stage. On the other hand, since the authors have found that it is difficult to electrodeposit iron from citrate solutions, which would cause accumulation ( Silver leaching with 0.4 M thiourea solutions from the mineral without and with pretreatment (0.5 M citrate solution, pH 8) are compared in After pretreating, the citrate solution was subjected to electrolysis, pH adjustment (when necessary) and recirculation back to leach a fresh batch of mineral (1st recycle). Thereafter, the same procedure was repeated for the next two cycles (2nd and 3rd recycle). The lead extraction in each of the recycles is compared with the fresh pretreatment solution in Once pretreated to remove the associated lead, the different solid residues that were in contact with the fresh and recycled citrate solution were leached each with fresh thiourea solution. The results of silver extraction ( The mineral matrix consisted mainly of pyrite and quartz, according to the X-ray diffractogram ( Subsequent leaching of the pretreated residue with 0.4 M thiourea showed a great improvement in the gold extraction over the untreated (as-received) case ( The citrate solution was then subjected to electrolysis, pH adjustment and recycling back to the pretreatment stage. However, the iron was largely not removed by electrolysis, in agreement with the authors' previous experience ( The effect of recycling the citrate pretreatment solution on gold leaching with thiourea is shown in Finally, to analyze the effectiveness of pretreatment using fresh and reused citrate solutions, the leaching data of each precious metal was used after six hours of leaching. For the silver ore ( For the gold ore, although the results are not as favorable as those found for silver, they are still positive. Again, regardless of the number of recirculation cycles of citrate solutions, gold extraction was always better than that directly leached with thiourea. The decrease in the gold leached with recirculated solutions (three times) is close to 22% ( Regarding precious metal recovery from the thiourea leaching solutions, in both cases aluminum cementation was employed, achieving recoveries greater than 96%. The procedure employed was that reported by Hydrometallurgical pretreatment with citrate solution is proposed as an option to enhance precious metal extraction from complex mineral ores; its degree of effectiveness will depend on the nature of the mineral matrix and other inherent characteristics, such as the type of association between the precious metals and the ore components. Both minerals analyzed in this study were rendered less refractory for thiourea leaching after they had been subjected to a citrate pretreatment, which attacked and extracted the other predominant metals; silver extraction improved on the average of 56%, while an average of 42% more gold was leached after the pretreatment. This improvement in extraction could determine the viability of a large-scale mining project. Recirculation of the citrate pretreatment solution, after metal recovery and pH adjustment, was evaluated. The capacity for reuse of the recycled solutions is directly related to the degree of removal of the dissolved base metal. When the principal matrix component was galena (lead sulfide), lead recovery from the PPS was effective and the subsequent silver leach in the ensuing cycles was similar. On the other hand, insufficient attack of the more refractory pyrite, in addition to the lack of iron recovery from the PPS, resulted in a loss of gold leaching capacity in subsequent cycles. Without a doubt, this study opens a possibility to replace the more traditional pretreatment methods, such as roasting or acid attack, prior to leaching precious metal-containing materials, since it is more selective for the removal of certain base metals. The use of a citrate pretreatment permits solution recirculation and therefore the minimization of energy and reagent consumption, including water. We declare that the work is an original contribution as a result of the experience of Professor Lapidus and developed within the framework of R. Torres' activities during his stay in Mexico. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. R. Torres appreciates the  Predominance diagrams for silver and gold, in the presence of thiourea (Tu). Conditions: 0.4 M thiourea, 0.01 M of each metal at 25 °C. Designed with MEDUSA ® software. Predominance diagrams for iron and lead, in the presence of thiourea (Tu). Conditions: 0.4 M thiourea, 0.01 M of each metal at 25 °C. Designed with MEDUSA ® software.   Predominance diagrams for iron and lead, in the presence of citrate. Conditions: 0.5 M citrate, 0.1 M SO 