In order to solve the problem of poor uniformity and low depth stability in traditional tube seeding (TTS), this paper proposes a no-tube seeding (NTS) method for wheat sowing. A NTS test platform was constructed, and accuracy and uniformity of seeding quality were optimized with the ground clearance as the experimental factor. It was found that the ground clearance with the seeding accuracy and uniformity were both quadratic functions. The seeding quality was good in ground clearance range of 5∼8.8 cm, and ground clearance of 7 cm was in line with the actual seeding conditions, the corresponding seeding accuracy was 83.84 % and the variation coefficient of seeding uniformity was 14.68 %. The NTS machine was designed and grooving scheme for seeding was optimized by adopting a convex plate on the cylindrical surface of press wheel. The depth and width stability of the grooving operation was 87.35 % and 83.13 %, respectively. Experimental comparison between TTS and NTS was carried out in the field. The results showed that the seeding accuracy of NTS was 83.13 % and the variation coefficient of seeding uniformity was 15.12 %. The results also showed that accuracy of NTS was consistent with theoretical value, and was significantly better than that of TTS. Meanwhile, NTS can save 6% seeds and 5% fertilizer. The wheat emergence of NTS was robust with a wide belt and no leaking, the emergence rate of NTS was 90.46 % with higher plant height and more root quantity than that of TTS. This research fills in a literature gap for wheat precision seeding technology.China is the world’s largest producer of wheat, with annual production accounting for about 17 % of global production. Currently, the wheat planting area all over China reached 24.19 million hectares, with a total output of 128.85 million tons ( The majority of traditional wheat drill adopts tube conveying seeding ( In recent years, scholars have carried out in-depth research on precise wheat seeding technology and machine. Barr et al. ( The above research has explored the mechanical structure, spatial arrangement, shock-absorbing effect and monitoring of miss-seeding of the seeding opener, which provided references for the precise seeding technology of wheat. However, they still adopt traditional tube seeding(TTS) method, which fails to solve the problem of seeding uniformity. In view of this problem, this paper proposes a no-tube seeding(NTS) method. The NTS experimental platform was constructed and the ground clearance was optimized in order to achieve the accurate seeding and uniform distribution. The prototype was developed and the field experiment was carried out, this provided a new design reference for the research of precise wheat seeding. A NTS test platform was designed, which was mainly composed of conveyor belt, speed regulating motor of conveyor belt, electric fluted feed roller, seed box and power supply ( The working length of the fluted feed roller was selected as 2.5 cm, and the motor speed was set as 25 r/min. The linear relationship between seeding rate and time was measured through test, as follows: where, Commonly used seeding parameters were selected in the test, with belt rotation speed of 1.25 m/s and seeding wheel rotation speed of 25 r/min. The height of TTS nozzle from the ground was 15∼20 cm, so the maximum ground clearance in this test was set as 15 cm. Considering that too close to the ground would lead to easy contact between seed export and soil, resulting in blockage of pipe opening and impassability of seeding. Therefore, the minimum ground clearance was set as 5 cm. According to the above principles, this test analyzed and studied the seeding quality of NTS with the ground clearance A scotch tape with 5 cm width was attached to the center of the belt to simulate the seeding groove. The seeding accuracy ( The seeding uniformity was used to evaluate the degree of seed distribution uniformity in the seeding groove. The more uniform the seeding, the better the seed dispersion, which was conducive to seed emergence and subsequent growth. Generally, the variation coefficient of seeding uniformity( The NTS machine was designed, which was mainly composed of biaxial rotary tillage mechanism, slotting device, press wheel, seed box, fertilizer box, soil covering cutters, furrow openers, hydraulic lift and so on ( The working process of the machine was shown in The seeding device used in NTS machine was electric fluted feed roller ( In addition, seeding depth was an important parameter affected seeds emergence, while the slotting quality was a key factor that affected seeding depth. Therefore, it was necessary to optimize design of seeding slotting device. On October 27, 2018, a wheat sowing test was conducted in the test field of Hongqi Farm in Taizhou City, Jiangsu Province, China (32°33′43.6″N, 119°59′15.4″E). In order to verify the seedling emergence effect of NTS, the comparison test was carried out by using the same seeding parameters in the adjacent plots using TTS. The test site conditions and planting technical parameters were shown in The emergence of wheat seedlings was observed on February 21, 2019. Ten pieces of seedling belts with a length of 50 cm were randomly selected in the experimental field. The theoretical number of seeds per piece of seedling belt was 77.6, which was calculated by the seeding rate and the thousand seed weight. Then the emergence rate can be obtained by dividing the number of seedlings per piece of seedling belt by 77.6. Two seedlings were randomly selected from the above seedling belts and washed to measure the plant height and root quantity. The above measurement data were the average value of 10 times. Most of the seeds fell on the tape ( In order to further illustrate the relationship between the ground clearance ( According to formula (6), the relation between seeding accuracy and ground clearance was quadratic functions. In theory, when ground clearance was 7.16 cm, the maximum value of seeding accuracy could reach 83.52 %. Therefore, controlling the ground clearance played an important role in ensuring the seeding accuracy.  In order to further illustrate the relationship between the ground clearance( Formula (7) shows that the relation between variation coefficient of seeding uniformity and ground clearance was also a quadratic function. In terms of seeding quality requirements, the smaller the variation coefficient of seeding uniformity, the more favorable the discrete distribution of seeds, and the better for root development, fertilizer absorption and water absorption during seeds subsequent growth. Thereby, the maximum or minimum value of ground clearance is more favorable for the improvement of seeding uniformity. According to the above analysis, when the ground clearance ( Where technical conditions permitted, the smaller the ground clearance, the better the uniformity of seeding. For example, Two kinds of the slotting device schemes for seeding were designed, namely, ditching scheme and grooving scheme respectively, and a comparative study was made, as follows: Ditching cutter (see Special grooving wheel (see Field comparison test of the above two slotting device was carried out ( According to the related methods in standard of Field Operation Quality of Ditchers ( The test prototype and working scene were shown in The emergence of wheat seedlings was observed on February 21, 2019. It could be seen that, compared with TTS, the emergence of wheat seedlings sown by NTS machine were more robust, without the phenomenon of missing seeding or breaking of strips ( The NTS technology is applicable to almost all wheat seeding operations, and it can also be used in the dry direct seeding operations of rice in the south of the Yangtze River in China. Its multiple operation has full functions, which has good popularization and application for the one-time completion of rice and wheat planting, especially plays an important role in saving farming costs and reducing farming energy consumption.  The NTS test platform was constructed and the seeding test was carried out with the ground clearance as experimental factor. The results showed that the ground clearance had a significant influence on the seeding accuracy and the variation coefficient of the seeding uniformity. A quadratic functions was fitted the experiment, and the seeding quality of ground clearance within 5∼8.8 cm was better. When ground clearance was 7 cm, it conformed to the actual conditions of NTS, then the seeding accuracy and variation coefficient of the seeding uniformity were 83.84 % and 14.68 %, respectively. The NTS machine was designed, which could complete a single operation of rotation tillage, flattening, slotting, seeding, fertilization, soil covering, pressing and ditching. The slotting scheme for seeding was optimized, and a convex plate on the cylindrical surface of press wheel was adopted. The depth stability and width stability of the grooving operation reached 87.35 % and 83.13 %. Requirements of NTS operation can be meet. The field test results showed that the seeding accuracy of NTS was 83.13 % and the variation coefficient of seeding uniformity was 15.12 %, which was significantly superior to TTS. In addition, NTS can save 6 % of seeds and 5% of fertilizer. The emergence of wheat seedlings indicated that the wheat emergence of NTS was robust with a wide belt and no leaking, the emergence rate of NTS was 90.46 % with higher plant height and more root quantity than that of TTS. The authors declared that they have no conflicts of interest to this work. The authors gratefully acknowledge that this research was financially supported by