Au-Ag selenides were synthesized by heating stoichiometric mixtures of elementary substances of initial compositions Ag2−xAuxSe with a step of х=0.25 (0≤х≤2) to 1050°С and annealing at 500°C. Scanning electron microscopy, optical microscopy, electron microprobe analysis and X-ray powder diffraction methods have been applied to study synthesized samples. Results of studies of synthesized products revealed the existence of three solid solutions with limited isomorphism Ag↔Au: naumannite Ag2Se – Ag1.94Au0.06Se, fischesserite Ag3AuSe2 - Ag3.2Au0.8Se2 and gold selenide AuSe - Au0.94Ag0.06Se. Solid solutions and AgAuSe phases were added to the phase diagram of Ag-Au-Se system. Crystal-chemical interpretation of Ag-Au isomorphism in selenides was made on the basis of structural features of fischesserite, naumannite, and AuSe.The low temperature selenides of silver and gold (naumannite, β-Ag In contrast to Ag-Au-S, phase diagram Ag-Au-Se is less studied and requires further research. Phase diagrams can be used in pyrometallurgy to provide a better understanding of the process and behavior of the components during smelting and solidification. Selenides have become widely used to help assess conditions of ore formation of precious metals Experiments on the synthesis of phases of Ag Optical microscopy, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), electron microprobe analysis (EPMA) and X-ray powder diffraction methods were applied to study synthesized substances. A polished section was prepared from synthesized phases for microscopy analyses. Studies on the chemical composition of the synthesized substances were carried out using MIRA 3 LMU SEM (TESCAN Ltd.) combined with microanalysis system INCA Energy 450+ on the basis of the high sensitive silicon drift detector XMax-80, and WDS INCA Wave 500 (Oxford Instruments Ltd.). Operation conditions: accelerating voltage, 20 X-ray powder diffraction patterns were collected on a Stoe STADI MP diffractometer (CuKα1 radiation, Ge(111) monochromator, 40 Results of studies of solid-phase synthesized products with the initial predetermined compositions Ag At х=0.25 (#2, SEM photos of polished fragments of four polyphase samples from the experiments with х=0.25, 0.75, 1.25 and 1.75 (#2, 4, 6, 8,   Study of the phase relationships and microstructure of synthesized samples allowed us to improve the ternary diagram of the system Ag-Au-Se ( We analyzed isomorphism of Ag–Au in synthesized phases from the viewpoint of their structural features. Cubic fischesserite structure Ag Monoclinic structure of β-AuSe In orthorhombic naumannite structure Results of our studies prove the existence of a series of natural solid solutions among Ag-Au selenides: Au-bearing naumannites and Ag-rich fischesserites. The electron microprobe analysis data of these minerals known from literature data confirm the presence of Au impurity in naumannites  Limited isomorphism Ag ↔ Au was established in selenides: Ag New phases – three solid solutions and petrovskaite-like phase of AgAuSe were introduced to the phase diagram of Ag-Au-Se. Ag-Au isomorphism in selenides is limited by structural features of fischesserite, naumannite, and AuSe. Contents of gold in selenium and selenium in gold are below the detection limit of microprobe analysis. This work is supported by Integration project N48 from the