Arteriosclerotic vascular disease is a major cardiac health problem in westernized countries and the primary cause of mortality in diabetic patients. Recent data have raised serious safety concerns with the antidiabetic rosiglitazone, a thiazolidinedione with peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPAR-γ) agonistic activity, in regard to cardiovascular risks. A common feature of atherosclerosis is vascular mineralization. The latter is formed by vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) through complex processes that are similar to mineralization in bone. The aim of the current study was to investigate the effect of rosiglitazone on mineralization in cultured human VSMCs. We found that rosiglitazone stimulated mineralization by, at least in part, induction of caspase-dependent apoptosis. Furthermore, rosiglitazone-induced oxidative stress was correlated with stimulated osteoblast-like differentiation of VSMCs. Treatment of rosiglitazone-supplemented VSMC cultures with the caloric restriction mimetic and antioxidant resveratrol diminished rosiglitazone-induced oxidative stress, osteoblast-like differentiation and mineralization. In conclusion, this study reveals novel insights into the relationship of rosiglitazone and cardiovascular events by providing a model that links rosiglitazone-induced osteoblast-like differentiation, oxidative stress and apoptosis with mineralization in VSMCs. In addition, we position resveratrol in this model acting to reduce rosiglitazone-induced oxidative stress, osteoblast-like VSMC differentiation and mineralization.Vascular mineralization is a prominent feature of advanced atherosclerosis. Although atherosclerosis and vascular mineralization are currently considered to form separate genetic entities, mineralization contributes to the overall morbidity of atherosclerosis by causing an increased risk for myocardial infarction Bone-associated proteins such as osteonectin, osteocalcin, and matrix Gla protein have been detected in mineralized vascular tissues. Therefore, vascular mineralization has been considered to be an organized and highly regulated process that is similar to mineralization in bone tissue. Vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) are currently considered as being responsible for the formation of vascular mineralization in vivo. In more detail, mechanical and inflammatory redox signals from the aortic vasculature have emerged as secretagogues for BMP that lead to activation of endothelial NADPH oxidases and subsequent generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) Rosiglitazone is a synthetic peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPAR-γ) agonist belonging to the thiazolidinedione class of compounds and is currently prescribed as an antidiabetic drug. It improves insulin sensitivity and lowers blood glucose and lipid levels. Despite these beneficial metabolic actions, serious cardiovascular side effects have been reported for rosiglitazone in recent epidemiological studies In the current study, we investigated the effect of rosiglitazone on mineralization in human VSMCs. We found that rosiglitazone increased mineralization by combined stimulatory actions on osteoblast-like differentiation, oxidative stress and caspase-mediated apoptosis of human VSMCs. The caloric restriction mimetic and antioxidant resveratrol counteracted this by reducing rosiglitazone-induced oxidative stress, apoptosis and osteoblast-like VSMC differentiation. Human coronary artery smooth muscle cells (VSMC; Lonza CC-2583) were cultured as described in The human pre-osteoblast cell line SV-HFO was cultured as described previously Rosiglitazone (Cayman Europe) was added to the cultures every 2–3 ALPL, DNA, protein and calcium measurements were performed as described previously Superoxide radicals were measured using Mitosox red mitochondrial superoxide indicator (Molecular Probes, Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Microscopic images were processed using Cell profiler software ( Total reactive oxygen species were measured using the cell-permeable non-fluorescent probe 2′-7′-dichlorofluorescin diacetate (DCF-DA; Sigma) which is de-esterified intracellularly and turns into highly fluorescent 2′,7′-dichlorofluorescin upon oxidation. Culture medium was replaced with 10 Apoptotic cells were counted by fluorescent-activating cell sorting using FacsCanto II apparatus (BD Biosciences) after staining with 1 RNA isolation, cDNA synthesis and quantitative RT-PCR (QPCR) have been carried out as described recently Data presented are the results of at least two independent experiments performed in at least triplicate. Values are the means Human vascular smooth muscle cells were induced with dexamethasone and beta-glycerophosphate to differentiate in an osteoblast-like manner and to produce and mineralize an extracellular matrix formed in a three-week time period VSMCs were cultured in the continuous presence of 10 We studied the localization of mineralization spots and areas containing accumulated superoxide anion radicals microscopically. Interestingly, spots with accumulated superoxide anion radicals were found in overlay or in close proximity to mineralization sites in VSMC culture dishes. In more detail, we found after automatic image processing that 93% of the identified calcifying spots co-localized with mitosox-stained spots ( We aimed to further investigate whether oxidative stress plays a direct role in the observed rosiglitazone-mediated stimulation of mineralization. Oxidative stress can cause mitochondria-dependent apoptosis and has been suggested as pro-mineralizing signal in the development of atherosclerosis In order to investigate whether rosiglitazone and resveratrol affect osteoblast-like differentiation of VSMCs, we studied the activity and expression of confirmed osteoblast differentiation marker genes in cultures supplemented with rosiglitazone and resveratrol. We found that the activity of alkaline phosphatase, an enzyme important for the initiation of mineralization, was significantly enhanced in rosiglitazone-treated VSMCs ( The current study has revealed three novel findings. First, rosiglitazone directly stimulated mineralization in cultured human VSMCs, an in vitro model for vascular mineralization. This effect was at least partly caused by induction of caspase-dependent apoptosis. Second, rosiglitazone induced oxidative stress that was correlated with increased osteoblast-like differentiation and mineralization of VSMCs. And third, the caloric restriction mimetic and antioxidant resveratrol diminished rosiglitazone-induced oxidative stress, apoptosis, osteoblast-like differentiation and mineralization. These findings are summarized in a model depicted in The identified rosiglitazone/apoptosis/mineralization cascade envisions a novel mechanism that may serve as a new explanatory model for the clinically observed increased risk for myocardial infarction in rosiglitazone-treated diabetic type 2 patients The finding of the current study that rosiglitazone induced mitochondrial dysfunction and ROS in human hyperglycemic VSMCs is novel but supported by several studies in other cell types including N1S1 rat hepatoma cells In addition to the observed stimulatory role of rosiglitazone in apoptosis-mediated mineralization that is correlated with increased oxidative stress, the current data show a second mechanism that is a direct stimulation of osteoblast-like differentiation of VSMCs. In support of this, our group has shown recently that rosiglitazone-activated PPAR-γ accelerates osteogenic differentiation from human mesenchymal stem cells that is ultimately followed by increased oxidative stress and mitochondria-dependent apoptosis leading to a premature onset of extracellular matrix mineralization and a reduced number of osteoblasts The observed resveratrol-mediated inhibition of rosiglitazone-stimulated osteoblast-like differentiation of VSMCs as shown by a reduction in the activity of the well-characterized osteogenic differentiation marker enzyme alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and expression of RUNX2 is novel. In addition, we found that resveratrol decreased basal ALP activity. The latter is in contrast to the data reported from studies in the murine pluripotent mesenchymal cell line ST2 The stimulatory effect of rosiglitazone-activated PPAR-γ on BMP2 expression in osteogenic VSMCs reported in this study is novel but supported by observations in osteoblasts. In more detail, Siddhivarn et al. found that delta-12-prostaglandin J2 which is a precursor of an endogenous PPAR-γ ligand, 15-deoxy-delta-12,14-prostaglandin J2, induces BMP2 expression and bone nodule formation in the murine osteoblast cell line MC3T3-E1 In which manner the reported resveratrol-mediated effects exactly translate into an in vivo situation is still under debate and may depend on additional determinants like nutritional conditions and possibly metabolic status. In support of this, resveratrol suppresses atherosclerosis in hypercholesterolemic mice (lacking both apolipoprotein E and LDL receptor) on a high fat diet In conclusion, the current study provides new insights into the relationship of rosiglitazone and cardiovascular events by providing a model that links rosiglitazone-induced oxidative stress, apoptosis and osteoblast-like differentiation of VSMCs with mineralization. These data are particularly interesting in regard to the clinically observed increased risk for myocardial infarction in rosiglitazone-treated diabetic type 2 patients The authors declare no potential conflicts of interest. The authors thank Prof. Dirk Duncker (Erasmus MC, Rotterdam) for proofreading the manuscript.