The fifth Coal Research Forum meeting on ‘Coal Research and its Applications’ was held at the University of Edinburgh from 6th to 8th September 2004. The aim of the conference, as for the previous meetings, was to bring together the academic coal research community and those in industry who also carry out coal research or have an interest in the applications of such research. There was one change in that the meeting was termed ‘European Meeting’ in place of ‘UK Meeting’ to reflect the trend of increased participation of coal researchers from all over Europe, from Russia to Romania, Greece, Serbia, the Czech Republic, Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden, Spain and Portugal. Well over 100 delegates attended the three day meeting to receive the 101 presentations consisting of four keynote lectures, fifty-six other lectures and forty-one posters. The conference opened with a keynote lecture by Dr Allan Jones, E.ON UK, who spoke about the issue of fuel flexibility for coal fired power stations. Other keynote lectures covered trends in emissions from coal combustion (Dr Lesley Sloss, IEA Coal Research), coal gasification for advanced power generation (Dr Andrew Minchener, IEA Clean Coal Centre) and trace element emissions during co-combustion (Dr R Meij, KEMA, The Netherlands). Pulverised coal combustion and its various ramifications were, understandably, the subject of the largest number of presentations with separate sessions on CO The first session was on pulverised coal combustion and included contributions on the development of wall burners for the combustion of low volatile coal, conventional hard coal-fired power plant with advanced steam conditions, a review of the situation of coal-fired power plants in Russia and the impact of ash re-firing on power station performance. CO The co-combustion session had presentations on co-firing with biomass, meat and bone meal, and on some of the operational effects of the co-combustion processes. In the image analysis and modelling session, the emphasis was on predictions of burnout, comparison of the effects of combustion of brown coal with and without moisture removal (by the MTE process), some effects of ash-refiring, computational modelling of coal bunkers, flame-temperature measurement, modelling low temperature carbonisation of solid fuels in a heated rotary kiln for production of a clean fuel-gas, and the development of a burnout predictor for carbon in ash. The second day of the meeting had three more sessions in a very full day. Sasol's syngas production, hydrogen production through integrated gasification reactions, catalytic decomposition of ammonia in coal gasification products, effects of co-gasification with edible oil waste, the products from co-processing coal and FCC slurry and the simultaneous hydrogenolysis of coal liquefaction residue and tyre rubber were the topics presented under the heading of cleaner coal technologies. The beneficiation and handling session had seven presentations covering the behaviour of phosphorus during combustion of doped coal, bacterial desulphurisation, coal handleability, pneumatic transport of pulverised coal, the abrasive and erosive behaviour of coal and fine coal pelletising. Under the deposition and mineral matter heading, papers were given on mineralogy of furnace deposits, the effect of mineral additions on ash deposition, mineral composition and coal properties and the effects on power station ash behaviour of coal mineral transformations. A three paper coal conversion session described the CVI of carbon to enhance coke strength, more-advanced characterisation of the fluid phase during coal carbonisation and the behaviour of chlorine during coal pyrolysis. The trace elements session had papers on mercury emissions, capture of alkali and heavy metals, trace element mobilisation in cement kilns, possible forms of occurrence of trace elements in coal and the transformation of arsenic during coal pyrolysis. The final session had talks on NO The forty-one poster presentations were grouped under similar headings and were accompanied by a buffet reception on the first evening. The presentations, both oral and poster, were generally of a high standard and led to good discussions both during the sessions and afterwards. The breadth of the presentations is clearly demonstrated by the above summary of the meeting which, in addition to the European participation, drew delegates from Australia, China, Colombia, the Czech Republic, India, Indonesia, Korea, Pakistan, South Africa and Sweden—quite an international gathering. Thanks to my colleagues on the Organising Committee and the contributors of presentations, some two dozen of which are in this Special Issue, the attendees were treated to an informative conference held in the enjoyable surroundings of Edinburgh. This series of Coal Research Forum meetings continues to go from strength to strength and this success has ensured the continuation of the series with the 6th meeting already arranged to be held at the University of Kent at Canterbury from the 5th–7th September 2006.