C3N4 nanosheets, which have high hardness and excellent thermal and chemical stability, were used in the electroless nickel-phosphorous (NiP) bath to deposit the NiP–C3N4 nanocomposite coatings (NCCs) on API X100 carbon steel (CS). The effect of plating time, pH, surfactant type and C3N4 concentration on the mechanical, chemical, and electrochemical properties of the electroless NiP–C3N4 NCC were thoroughly stated. The morphology and structure of the NiP–C3N4 NCC were investigated using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) and X-ray diffraction (XRD). The results indicated that the alkaline electroless bath produced a NiP–C3N4 NCC with a microhardness 250 HV200 higher than that produced from the acidic one. A small addition of polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP) as a surfactant was sufficient for increasing the homogeneity of the nanocomposite coating and, consequently, its microhardness. The corrosion performance of the NiP–C3N4 NCC prepared at the optimum conditions was studied in a 3.5 wt% NaCl solution through electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and Tafel analysis techniques. An electroless bath of 0.5 g L−1 C3N4 offered a nanocomposite coating with the highest microhardness and superior corrosion resistance. It has an efficiency of approximately 96% that decreased gradually, losing about only 2% after one week and 20% after one month of immersion time in the aforementioned chloride solution.The rising demand to mitigate corrosion and improve the wear resistance of the metals and alloys used for engineering applications cannot be ignored or overemphasized. Coatings, generally, are broadly used in the oil and gas industries. Electroless plated coatings, specifically, play a central role in the coating of the internal parts of pipes, valves, nuts, risers, pumps, and special tools for their unique capability to uniformly plate objects with intricate geometries [ The incorporation of hard carbon nitride (C API X100 carbon steel substrates, with a size of 20 × 30 × 10 mm Firstly, the electroless NiP–C To evaluate the effect of the plating time on the NCC characteristics, different times, namely 1, 2, 3, and 5 h, were used where the other parameters were kept at “values shown in The plating solution was ultra-sonicated for 1 h to disperse the C Secondly, the electroless NiP–C The evaluation of the surface morphology and elemental analysis of the synthesized coatings was done using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Nova NanoSEM 450, ThermoFischer Scientific, Eindhoven, Netherland) and energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDX, Bruker detector 127 eV, Bruker, Leiderdorp, Netherlands), respectively. The thickness of the ENP coating was also measured using SEM by cross-sectioning the coated specimens. Vickers microhardness tester (FM-ARS9000, Future-Tech Corp., Tokyo, Japan) was utilized to measure the microhardness at a load of 200 g for 10 s. To get accurate results, the hardness measurements were repeated five times on each sample, and the average value was calculated. Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) was used to inspect the heterogeneities (surface roughness) of the coated specimens. An MFP3D Asylum research (Asylum Research, Santa Barbara, CA, USA) atomic force microscope equipped with a silicon probe (Al reflex coated Veeco model–OLTESPA, Olympus, Tokyo, Japan; Spring constant: 2 Nm The corrosion resistance of both electroless NiP and NiP–C Potentiodynamic polarization (PP) tests were performed after immersing the specimens in a 3.5% (w/w) NaCl solution and holding them at the open-circuit potential for 20 min. Anodic and cathodic polarization curves were obtained using a scan rate of 0.167 mV s Based on the electroless bath parameters, the characteristics of the prepared NiP–C It is reported that the incorporation and distribution of the hard particles throughout the NiP surface are influenced by the plating time [ As the plating time passes, the C Lowering the number of spherical nodules means decreasing the deposition of the nickel in the coating. Indeed, the EDX measurements shown in The deposition rate (R) (mg h It is reported that microhardness is dependent on the content of the phosphorous in the coating. As it decreases, the microhardness increases [ It could be concluded that the optimum deposition time for the NiP–C The kinetics of the deposition process is greatly influenced by the pH of the electroless bath. The EDX analysis summarized in From Eq. In the alkaline electroless bath, the NiP–C  Additionally, the cross-sections of the NiP–C It is notable that the surface morphology and the porosity of the coating are highly affected by the type of the surfactant, which plays a significant role in the shaping of the coating due to various interfacial behaviors [ Furthermore, the addition of a surfactant in the electroless bath increases the deposition rate of the composite coating to about 51%, on average. This is attributed to reducing the interfacial tensions between the hydrogen bubbles and the deposited substrate and/or the bubbles and the plating solution. Reducing surface tension leads to the quick removal of the adsorbed hydrogen gas bubbles. Since hydrogen gas is one of the products of the electroless deposition reduction reactions, removing it shifts the deposition reaction to the direction of the reduction of Ni According to the EDX results in Although the incorporation of C In this part, the effect of different C  It can be claimed that the presence of C  Additionally, it can be seen in   It is noted that Bode and phase angle plots for the NiP–C The equivalent electric circuits that demonstrate the EIS spectra and simulate the electrochemical behavior of the coatings are depicted in The values of The n values of the composite coatings ranged between 0.55 and 0.9, as shown in The Bode/phase plots for the NiP–C For further investigation of the corrosion behavior of the newly developed NiP–C  Comparing the results of the EIS and the Tafel polarization curves confirms that both techniques are effective in studying the corrosion behavior of these types of coating, as the difference in the obtained protection efficiencies is within the 5% range. The effect of different times of plating (1, 2, 3, and 5 h), pH (4.5, 6.5, and 8), and type of surfactant (anionic (SDS), cationic (CETB) and polymeric (PVP)) on the morphology, composition, deposition rate, and microhardness of the NiP–C Further increase in the plating time until 5 h in an acidic electroless bath (pH of 4.5) yields NiP–C The alkaline electroless bath (pH of 8) produced a NiP–C The addition of the surfactant during the deposition process increases the deposition rate about 51% on average, making a clear change in the surface morphology of the composite coating with a void-free cross-section. Although the cationic surfactant (CETB) increases the incorporation percentage of C The NiP–C Based on EIS and potentiodynamic polarization results, the corrosion protection efficiency of the NiP coating significantly improves by the presence of small amounts of C This work was supported by the NPRP grant #  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at