Bacterial resistance to antibiotics is a serious public health problem which is due to the immoderate and often inappropriate prescription of antibiotics. As a result, the exploitation of new bioactive molecules with limited or no side effects from natural sources and their adoption as a therapeutic alternative to synthetic molecules have become priorities. It is in this perspective that our study was undertaken with the objective was to investigate the phenological stage effect on the yield and chemical composition of essential oils extracted from Tunisian Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus globulus L.) aerial parts. The synergitic effect of this essential oil with conventional antimicrobials was also evaluated against nine pathogenic bacteria and Candida albicans ATCC 10231. The cytotoxicity of these combinations was tested on Vero cells. Gas chromatography–mass spectrometry analysis showed two different chemotypes depending on the growth stage which were characterized as 1,8-cineole (13.23%) at vegetative stage and p-cymene at full flowering (32.19%) and fructification (37.82%) stages. A predominance of monoterpene hydrocarbons (72.84%) during the fructification stage was detected with p-cymene (12.58%–37.82%) and α-pinene (10.41%–13.39%) as the determinants of this class. In relation to the phenological stage, Eucalyptus essential oil showed potent capacity to reduce stable free radical DPPH (IC50 up to 740 μg/mL) and moderate ability to reduce the concentration of iron ions (EC50 and IC50 up to 2 and 12 mg/mL, respectively). Eucalyptus globulus essential oil was active against the different bacterial strains especially during the vegetative and full flowering stages (MIC = 2 mg/mL) against Bacillus cereus ATCC 14579 and Enterococcus faecalis ATCC 29212. Candida albicans ATCC 10231 was more sensitive than bacteria during the fructification stage. The combination of Eucalyptus essential oil with ampicillin revealed a partial synergy effect toward Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (FICI of 0.53). Nevertheless, an addition effect was recorded under the combination of amphotericin B and Eucalyptus essential oil. The cytototoxity activity showed that these associations enhanced cell viability and made Eucalyptus essential oil non toxic toward Vero cells. The results showed that the precious Eucalyptus oil in association with antimicrobial agents could be not only a promising alternative but also a potential molecular complex which is hardly recognizable by microorganisms.Since its discovery until today, antibiotic has led to great advances in therapeutics and contributed to the rise of modern medicine. In addition, the introduction and clinical use of the first classes of antibiotics have considerably reduced the mortality attributable to previously incurable diseases. Therefore, the effectiveness of antibiotic therapy in controlling and limiting the spread of pathogens has given optimism that all infectious diseases can be eradicated ( In spite of the proven track record of these antimicrobial standards, ampicillin and amphotericin B were known for their side effets and toxicity including diarrhoea, a macular rash, a stomach pain, nausea, vomiting, rigors, fever, hypertension or hypotension, and hypoxia ( This imbalance increases the risk of therapeutic failure and the emergence of side effects of antibiotics such as nephrotoxicity, ototoxicity and tendinopathy ( In the search for bioactive molecules, the exploration of natural resources appears as a promising alternative. In fact,due to its biodiversity, these molecules constitute a large reserve of active substances especially essential oil (EO). The complexity of its chemical constituents makes it extremely difficult for bacterial germs to develop resistance. These molecules protect the human cells from damage caused by free radicals that would be involved in the development of cardiovascular diseases, certain cancers, and other diseases related to aging ( Tunisia is one of the richest Mediterranean countries in plant genetic resources of these natural antioxidants given the diversity of its bioclimatic stages. The genus Eucalyptus from the Myrtaceae family is part of the wide range of spontaneous medicinal and aromatic plants that characterize the Tunisian flora. Despite the number of researches focusing on the antimicrobial activity of Eight bacterial strains: African green monkey kidney normal cell lines (Vero; ATCC no. CCL81) were kindly provided by the laboratory of clinical virology, Pasteur institute of Tunis, Tunisia.  Dried aerial parts (100 g) were placed in a round-bottomed flask and 1000 mL of distilled water was added. All was subjected to hydrodistillation by Clevenger apparatus for 90 min in accordance with European Pharmacopoeia method ( The analysis of EO volatile compounds by gas chromatography (GC) was carried out on a Hewlett–Packard (HP) 6890 GC (Palo Alto, CA, USA) equipped with a flame ionization detector and an electronic pressure control injector. A polar polyethylene glycol HP Innowax and a 5% diphenyl, 95% dimethylpolysiloxane apolar HP-5 capillary columns (30 m × 0.25 mm, 0.25 mm film thickness; HP) were used. The flow of the carrier gas (N Volatile compounds analysis by In this analysis, the purple-colored DPPH (1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl) was reduced by the so-called antioxidants into pale yellow hydrazine. So, antioxidant effect on this radical translated its ability to give hydrogen radical ( Thus, the formula for calculating the percentage of inhibition was as follows :   The concentration of EO providing 50% inhibition (IC The reducing power of an extract was associated with its antioxidant power. The reducing ability of studied EOs was determined according to the method of An aliquot of 2.5 mL of trichloroacetic acid (TCA) (10%) was added to stop the reaction. Then, the tubes were centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 min A volume of 2.5 mL of the supernatant was added to 2.5 mL of distilled water and 500 μL of a 0.1% solution of FeCl The chelating capacity was determined according to the method of Antibacterial activity was analyzed by the disk diffusion method ( The minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) was determined by microdilution method as described by The initial microbial concentration was adjusted to 5 × 10 The combinatory effect of EOs with each other or with conventional drugs (ampicillin and amphotericin B) was evaluated using a 2D checkerboard method as previously described ( FIC (A) = MIC (A) in combination/MIC (A) alone FIC (B) = MIC (B) in combination/MIC (B) alone The ∑ FICI values were interpreted as follows: ≤0.5, The method used was described by The 50% cytotoxicity concentration (CC All analyses were performed in triplicate and the data were reported as means ± standard deviation of three samples. Statistical analysis was performed with STATISTICA ( The results illustrated in Chemical analysis of Eucalyptus EO was characterized by a clear dominance of monoterpene hydrocarbons with a percentage reaching up to 72.84% during the fructification stage (data joined EO yield, This class was followed by oxygenated monoterpenes class which attained its maximum during Eucalyptus vegetative stage (34.01%). This high percentage was related to 1,8-cineole production at the first stage of development with a percentage of 13.23%. This amount was approximately 2 times greater than that at full flowering stage, while the amount of α-terpineol was higher during full flowering stage (6.91%) by comparison to the other stages (4.41%–5.75%) ( In the present study and during the vegetative stage, Eucalyptus EO presented other oxygenated monoterpenes such as 4-terpineol, trans-pinocarveol, endo-borneol and methyleugenol which brought a modest contribution in respective contents ranging from 1.12% to 6.23%. The data presented in In another hand, the time of harvesting of this plant has significant effects on chemical composition of this volatile oil. Indeed some compounds like α-thujene, delta-3-carene, 1-terpineol, fenchone, (+)-trans-isolimonene, spathulenol, β-pinone and The antioxidant activity of The free radicals scavenging activity of The antioxidant activity of aerial parts EO was also evaluated by ferric-reducing assay and showed moderate antioxidant activity in comparison with ascorbic acid (EC Generally, the highest antioxidant activity of many other aromatic herbs was recorded at full flowering and fructification stages which was consistent with these findings (  Given the drawbacks of metal ion Fe As it is the first work, no available data exists on the antioxidant activity of the EO from Thus, to defend against the oxidative stress generated by these free radicals and transition metals, the body needs a diet rich in natural antioxidants extracted from plants. These substances can restore cellular homeostasis by minimizing the production of pro-oxidants and the generation of neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer ( The antimicrobial activity of As shown in Results showed a variability of the antibacterial activity according to Eucalyptus phenological stage and the microorganism. Eucalyptus EO was active against the studied bacterial strains where the IZ reached up to 38 mm essentially during the vegetative stage against For the other strains, Eucalyptus EO has been shown to be more active against Gram-positive bacteria than Gram-negative. This could be due to membrane structure of Gram-negative bacteria where the lipopolysaccharide at surface prevent the diffusion of hydrophobic molecules and porins that block the transit of molecules with high molecular weight ( These results were confirmed by the MIC values and also reported in With regard to In another hand, as shown in In order to reduce side effects of synthetic antimicrobial agents as human drugs, the synergy between According to antimicrobial sensitivity tests, results showed that ampicillin and amphotericin B were found as the best drugs against bacterial and fungal clinical pathogens ( The combination of Eucalyptus EO with ampicillin revealed a partial synergy effect against MRSA with FICI of 0.53. Interestingly, this synergy reduced the MIC value of the antibiotic by 32 fold. A considerable reduction of the MIC values to the half of the studied EO against MRSA was also noted. In fact, this type of combination may increase the sensitivity of the strain toward EO in one hand essentially as this strain is commonly known for its resistance towards most conventional antibiotics and minimize side organoleptic effect of EO when it is used as preservative in food industry in another hand. Synergism between EOs and antibiotics against MRSA clinical isolate has been discussed elsewhere. Indeed, the combination of Shiraz oregano ( Earlier reports highlighted a synergistic effect of EO of other Eucalyptus species with antibiotics against bacteria such as Regarding the effect of combined application of EOs against Based on these results and given the complex composition of EOs, mixing them with antimicrobials can broaden the spectrum of action against microorganisms and have several target sites of action ( Due to its complex chemical composition, EO must be used with extreme imprudence as it can present very serious dangers during an independent and random use ( As given by Several researches have reported the cytotoxicity of many EO plants but they are very scare concerning Eucalyptus species. Indeed, in this study the higher cytotoxicity of In another hand, the cytotoxicity test was done on the three envisaged combinations. Results demonstrated that the two combinations; (EO/ampicillin) and (EO/amphotericin B) with Eucalyptus MIC (in combination) 31.25 μg/mL were not toxic toward Vero cells. Therefore, despite the cytotoxic effect of pure In the search for new bioactive molecules, we turned the attention to aromatherapy for the purpose of synergistic action with antibiotics. For this reason and in order to find the best time to produce Eucalyptus EO, its content and chemical composition were evaluated under the influence of phenological stage. GC–MS analysis showed the predominance of monoterpene hydrocarbons during fructification stage accompanied with an optimum of yield extraction. The potentiating effect of The authors declare no conflict of interest.