A technique named Aerated Flocs Characterization (AFC) was developed and validated to characterize multiphase systems that are formed in flocculation–flotation (with microbubbles) systems at laboratory scale. Synthetic polyacrylamides were used to flocculate dispersed particles models of kaolin, activated carbon and iron hydroxide colloidal precipitate, Fe(OH)3. Aggregation and solid/liquid separations were conducted in a dissolved air flotation (DAF) apparatus, which consisted of a flotation cell connected by a release needle valve to a pressure vessel, employed for water saturation at 4atm and microbubbles formation. The aerated flocs exhibited very rapid rising rates (>60mh−1) as a result of bubbles adhesion, bubble surface nucleation and bubbles growing and entrapped inside the flocs. All these conformations may adhere or lead to the formation of very light (low density) flocs. The number of bubbles attached or entrapped inside the flocs determines the aeration degree in the so-called aeroflocs, property which depends, among others, on solids type (hydrophobicity); this being very noticeable when compared to activated carbon particles with the less hydrophobic model suspensions. The size distribution, up-rising rates, shape factor, fractal dimension and density of the flocs were determined using this image analysis technique. In addition, the bubble positioning, floc structure and bubble size were monitored. The AFC technique was found to be very reliable showing high statistical reproducibility and appears to have a good potential to characterize particles, aerated flocs and bubbles.Flocculation followed by flotation with microbubbles (Dissolved Air Flotation-DAF) has been widely applied industrially, mainly in water and wastewater treatment contexts, with some advantages over settling or filtration ( In flotation with microbubbles, a number of bubble/particle (aggregates) interactions have been proposed, namely adhesion of bubbles, bubbles nucleation, entrapment and entrainment ( The formation of aerated flocs (structures with high rising rates) has been observed by some authors who describe these flocs as having a large size, low density, rapid up-rising rates, low moisture content and high resistance to shear ( Some researchers believe that the formation of aerated flocs occurred either through entrapment of small bubbles within flocs, nucleation of bubbles at floc/water interfaces, or polymer coiling as a result of salting out effects at the aqueous/air interface ( Flocs are usually characterized by structural and hydrodynamic properties such as the size, shape factor, fractal dimension, settling velocity, up-rising rate and strength to shear. The size and structure of flocs are considered important parameters for industrial processes because they are closely linked to solid/liquid separation efficiencies. Several researchers ( Floc size is an important parameter that can be determined from the perimeter, surface area, volume, surface-volume, Another important feature of flocs is the fractal geometry, which expresses how the volume is occupied by primary particles in a nominal volume containing a floc. The fractal theory is defined in linear, planar or volumetric terms (one-, two- or three-dimensional values). According to The up-rising rate of the flocs is also a very important measure of the solid/liquid separation process kinetics and is often calculated using the Stokes equation. This theory is usually adapted for flotation by considering an incompressible and spherical solid. However, for aerated flocs which exhibit a high volume of air bubbles (and hence low flocs density); errors in the actual value of their rising rate are found. In fact, the bubbles interactions with flocs are a dynamic process leading to a continuous change in the ratio air/floc mass or flocs density.  However, in addition to a better understanding of the basis of mechanisms involved in the formation of aerated flocs, the field of water and wastewater treatment still needs research on advanced techniques for accurate floc characterization and observation of multiphase systems. The aim of this work was to develop and validate a technique named Aerated Flocs Characterization (AFC) to characterize multiphase systems in flocculation–flotation processes by using different suspension models and dissolved air flotation (DAF) or flotation with microbubbles. Main measurements on physical and interfacial properties of floc, microbubbles coalescence, and attachment onto flocs and type of solids are reported. The AFC was inspired by the LubaTube, which, according to The AFC takes into account the principle of atmospheric pressure balance. In other words, when a cylinder filled with water is turned upside-down, opened and immersed in a water container, the water column in the cylinder can stay above the water level by equilibrating the pressure. Thus, a floc flow can rise into the column and can be well characterized (details in The main component of the AFC is the rising tube that consists of an acrylic circular tube with a total length of 40 Additionally, different acrylic tubes of 5  Samples of kaolin (Cadam®), high-purity activated carbon (Carbomafra®) ( The reagent FeCl The flocculation–flotation studies were carried out by using a dissolved air flotation (DAF) unit, composed of a 5 A 2.0 A solution of FeCl 2.5 All suspensions were flocculated with an optimal flocculant concentration under a sequence of rapid and low agitations (1 During the flotation mechanism, the tube of the AFC was opened, a floc flow was sampled and its rising rate was measured. In this stage, the tube was opened for, approximately, 2–3 The flocs sampled reach the top window and remain there. This happens due to the fact that the fluid in the tube is under vacuum. Thus, the flocs rose in a laminar regime without interactions. The sampled flocs stayed at the top window, as well as the “attached” bubbles that had a good stability for a long time (not turbulence or down flow generated). Although this fact had been well observed in this work, the top images of the flocs within 5 Also, it was not observed that a formation of a layer of flocs was at the top window, because this is controlled and avoided by the sampling time. Consequently, the sampling time used in this work allowed to obtain a representative population, as well as, a fairly good individual positioning of the flocs at the top window. The AFC tube was filled with water and the air was expelled by a vacuum formed when immersed at 6 The digital cameras were used in manual mode, thus, automated features were disabled allowing a manual control of important parameters, among others, digital zoom, focus, resolution, exposure time and aperture settings. This was done to keep a suitable control and uniformity of the conditions of the image capture stage, in all studies. An illumination device was installed opposite to the cameras to provide suitable contrast for the images. Videos were recorded without any changes of the camera position or its focus; therefore, the established magnification was kept constant during the recordings of the flowing flocs. The manual focus operated at the maximum depth mode to give three times the magnification. Thus, the camera features were adjusted manually, as well as, the positioning of the cameras and tube. Within the tube filled with water was inserted a calibrated scale in the flocs flow zone. Thus, video recordings were captured and the images were treated in the absence of the fish eye effects. The same procedure was performed with the camera coupled in the microscope to capture images instead of video recordings. These procedures were conducted in all experiments and all videos and images were calibrated. A schematic of the apparatus is shown in Additionally to sampling using AFC, a sample of subnadant suspension from flotation cell was collected after 1 The same procedure using AFC was used to characterize the air bubbles, but in this case, the flotation cell was filled only with water (in the tube absence of particles). The microbubbles were injected into the flotation cell and were sampled during their up-rising in the box above the tube. It is important to emphasize that for the bubble size distribution studies, the images were captured immediately, because these bubbles might coalesce on function of the time. All recorded videos and captured images were processed using image analysis software named Image Tool 3.0, developed by researchers from the where ( Now, all objects (flocs) in the frames, were recognized and numbered. All objects were characterized including the mass centers parameter. When the frames were overlapped, the numbers attributed to the same object in the different frames were identified and registered manually. A list containing the pairs of attributed numbers to the same object with their correspondent mass centers was obtained. Finally, these numbers and characterization data were computed in a excel spreadsheet to make calculations of the distance between the two mass centers. The identification of the same floc was fairly and reliable and avoids errors committed by the algorithm, from the software. Therefore, it is believed that the obtained data are precise and have satisfactory statistical reproducibility mainly because a large population of flocs (approximately 200 flocs were analyzed in each study).  Other characterization parameters (such as the The shape factor ( The fractal dimension was determined in planar terms using a two-dimensional analysis. This parameter ( where The effective floc density ( The parameters as fractal dimension, shape factor and density were expressed as mean values (arithmetic mean data). Bubble images were treated using the same procedure used to characterize the flocs. However, in this case, the longer diameter (major axis length) was determined, because when the images receive the threshold treatment, the bubbles appear with both an irregular form and small white areas that are caused by light reflection onto the bubbles during the studies (see Another important fact was the elimination of those objects that constituted both touching bubbles and bubbles on the frame border. The flocculation–flotation studies of the activated carbon particles, using the anionic polymer A100 showed satisfactory performance in terms of particles removal (99%) with low residual turbidity (8.3 In this aggregate flow, flocs had a wide size distribution in the range of 0.7–3.3 The microscopic analysis of this multiphase system showed plenty of microbubbles in all structures of flocs. This fact is due to hydrophobic interactions between carbon particles and microbubbles; the latter remaining stable inside the floc structure with no bubble coalescence being observed. However, the faster flocs (85 Flocculation–flotation studies of the kaolin particles using the non-ionic polymer 920SH was very effective yielding low residual turbidity (24.8 Here, the floc population had a size distribution in the range of 0.5–3.3 The microscopic analysis of the multiphase system formed by water/bubbles/kaolin flocs suggested that some flocs had several air bubbles in their floc structures, while others only included a few bubbles. This result was the opposite of activated carbon model, where the flocs exhibited plenty of bubbles. This difference can be explained by the chemical–physical properties of these particles, because carbon particles are more hydrophobic than kaolin and, therefore, they have more of an affinity for air bubbles (hydrophobic interactions). Although some kaolin flocs exhibited fewer bubbles (less hydrophobic mineral), the high up-rising metrics persisted due to the presence of large bubbles in these so-called aeroflocs.  The presence of these large bubbles into flocs may be due to enhancement of the air volume inside the flocs. In other words, the DAF generated microbubbles (30–80 The flocculation–flotation studies of Fe(OH) This floc population showed a size distribution in the range of 0.5–2.9 The microscopic analysis of this multiphase system showed a great number of bubbles in all the flocs observed ( Some flocs had many large bubbles and yielding faster up-rising values. This fact may be due to the very open and porous floc structure which allows a very tight packing of many bubbles that grew more readily than those distant bubbles in the compact flocs.  Another important feature is that results and discussions, presented in this work, confirmed that fractal dimension appears to be not relevant to the up rise rates, a fact which is in agreement with The bubble characterization suggested a size distribution in the range of 10–230 Finally, it is believed that AFC technique may be utilized to study other different factors apart from those aiming in this work; namely the reagent chemistry effects, ionic strength, and presence of ultrafines, bubble–particle attachment rates, in general flocculation–flotation processes. A technique to characterize multiphase systems, named volume time time interval distance  shape factor fractal dimension area radius floc density mass mean value of the initial turbidity concentration saturation pressure Nephelometric Turbidity Units Aerated Flocs Characterization Dissolved Air Flotation The authors would like to thank Cadam® and Carbomafra® by supplying the kaolin and activated carbon samples and, to Floerger®, Kemira® and Cytec® companies with special tanks to Dr. D.R. Nagaraj for technical information and provision of flocculants. The authors also thank all colleagues for the friendly atmosphere at the LTM (31