The aim of this study was to investigate whether complexly constituted phenolic extracts from apple seeds may be utilised for the recovery of natural coloured antioxidant preparations, which might serve as potential food or cosmetic ingredients.
                  In a first step, the recovery of phenolic compounds was optimised by varying crucial extraction parameters. A single extraction step at 25°C using an acetone–water mixture (60:40, v/v) and a solid-to-solvent ratio of 1:8 (w/v) for 1h was found to be appropriate to achieve both high phenolic yields and antioxidant activities.
                  In a second step, differently produced apple seed extracts and a phloridzin model solution were enzymatically treated by mushroom polyphenol oxidase to investigate the rate of pigment synthesis. Depending on the extraction procedure applied, synthesis rates, pigment yields and colour properties significantly differed. Compared to the phloridzin model solution, extracts recovered from the seeds showed comparable and even better results, thus indicating such preparations to be a promising alternative to synthetic yellow dyes.Apples ( Colour is one of the most important characteristics of foods and beverages, strongly determining consumers’ acceptance. Since some of the synthetic azo dyes commonly applied in industrial food processing have been associated with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) ( Since the aforementioned studies were conducted with pure chemicals in model solutions, the aim of the present study was to investigate whether complexly constituted phenolic extracts derived from apple seeds are suitable for the recovery of coloured antioxidant preparations, which may serve as potential food or cosmetic ingredients. In a first step, the recovery of phenolic compounds should be optimised by investigating the effects of varying extraction parameters on the contents and antioxidant activities of apple seed extracts. In a second step, different extracts and a phloridzin model solution should be enzymatically oxidised using mushroom PPO to evaluate the efficiency of POPj pigment synthesis. If not stated otherwise, all reagents and solvents were of analytical or HPLC grade and were bought from VWR (Darmstadt, Germany). Ethanol (96%) was obtained from Nedalco Alcohol (Heilbronn, Germany). Phloridzin (purity For most experiments, dried apple seeds kindly provided by Herbstreith & Fox (Neuenbürg, Germany) were used. They were recovered from industrial dried apple pomace by sieving and manual separation from other pomace constituents. For some experiments freeze-dried apple seeds of different cider and dessert apple cultivars (harvest 2008) were used. Ripe apple fruits (‘Idared’, ‘Jonagold’, ‘Roter Ziegler’, ‘Boskoop’) were obtained from Hohenheim University research station for horticulture (Stuttgart, Germany), local growers and from the local market. Seeds obtained from industrial apple pomace were ground continuously for 30 s using a laboratory mill and exhaustively extracted with To optimise the extraction procedure for polyphenols from apple seeds, crucial parameters of the standard extraction protocol, such as type and proportions of solvents (ethanol, methanol, acetone) in water, solid-to-solvent ratios (1:8, 1:16, 1:24, w/v), extraction time (1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 24 Moreover, the influence of different grinding techniques on the phenolic contents of the resulting apple seed extracts (ASEs) was investigated. For this purpose, continuous grinding (‘30 Finally, the influence of the sample material itself was studied by extracting apple seed flours from different authenticated apple cultivars with aqueous acetone (30:70, v/v) for 1 Defatted seeds from industrial apple pomace were ground (5 The aforementioned ASEs and a phloridzin model solution, each containing approx. 0.5 Colorimetric measurements were carried out using a Perkin-Elmer Lambda 20 spectrophotometer (Perkin-Elmer, Rodgau-Jügesheim, Germany) equipped with UV WinLab software (version 2.85.04) and WinCol software (version 2.05). HPLC analyses were carried out using an Agilent HPLC series 1100 chromatograph (Agilent, Waldbronn, Germany) equipped with ChemStation software, a model G1322A degasser, a model G1312A binary gradient pump, a model G1329/G1330A thermo-autosampler, a model G1316A column oven, and a model G1315A diode array detector. Spectra were recorded from 200 to 600 LC–MS analyses were performed using the same HPLC system as described above connected on-line to a Bruker (Bremen, Germany) model Esquire 3000 Individual polyphenolics and phloridzin oxidation products (POPj) were quantitated using external calibration with corresponding reference compounds. Where standard compounds were absent, quantitation was achieved using the calibration curves of structurally related constituents applying a molecular weight correction factor ( Separation of phenolic compounds in ASEs was performed according to Phloridzin oxidation products (POPj, POPi), phloridzin, phloretin 2′-xyloglucoside and chlorogenic acid in enzymatically treated ASEs were separated using a Waters SunFire C18 column (250 For the synthesis of POPj, a solution of phloridzin (2.6 All photometric measurements were performed in duplicate with a Biotek microplate spectrophotometer (Power Wave XS, Biotek Instruments, Bad Friedrichshall, Germany) equipped with Gen5 software (Ver. Total phenolic contents (TPCs) of the ASEs were determined applying the Folin–Ciocalteu assay according to Spectrophotometric determination of the antioxidant activity was performed as previously described ( Antioxidant activity was determined according to a method previously reported ( Aqueous Trolox solutions were used for calibration of both the TEAC and FRAP assay. Antioxidant activities were calculated as μmol Trolox antioxidant equivalents (TAE)/g defatted matter. All experiments were performed at least in duplicate. Significant differences ( The effects of varying crucial extraction parameters on the efficiency of polyphenol extraction from apple seed residues were assessed by means of Folin–Ciocalteu, TEAC and FRAP assays. Some of the extracts were additionally analysed by RP-HPLC. In general, polyphenol recovery was strongly determined by the solvent chosen for extraction of the plant material. Regarding their TPCs, extraction efficiencies with different hydroalcoholic solutions were very similar ( Comparison of all solvent systems evaluated in this study revealed acetone (60–70%, v/v) to be the optimum extraction medium for polyphenol recovery from apple seeds, both with regard to TPCs and antioxidant activities. This is consistent with the findings of a previous study demonstrating that aqueous acetone extracts of apple seeds exhibit higher TPC values than those obtained by ethyl acetate or hydromethanolic extraction ( Extraction time and solid-to-solvent ratio are also known to influence extraction yields. As illustrated by Temperature may have great influence not only on the solubility of a solute, but also on its stability. In our experiments the effect of different temperatures on extraction yields was investigated. Since acetone–water was shown to be most efficient, this extraction medium was used in subsequent experiments. Due to the low boiling point of acetone (56 Since extraction yields are strongly dependent on the particle size of the sample material, and consequently on the comminution procedure applied, different grinding protocols, such as continuous grinding (‘30 Sample material itself may also play an important role for extraction yields. While there are several studies dealing with the phenolic contents of apple fruits showing cultivar-dependent differences ( Investigations into different apple seed tissues revealed the seed coats to exhibit a TPC of 8.10 Identification of individual phenolic constituents was achieved by comparing their retention times, UV/Vis and mass spectral data with those of reference compounds. According to their elution order and mass spectral behaviour, peaks 6, 7, 8 were assigned to the dihydrochalcones 3-hydroxyphloridzin ( Compounds 12–16 showed UV/Vis spectral data characteristic of flavonols. Each of these compounds provided an [M−H] Syntheses of the pigment POPj upon oxidation of various ASEs and a phloridzin model solution were monitored by HPLC over a period of up to 32 According to Interestingly, pigment formation started immediately after PPO addition. This is in disagreement to previous studies, reporting the existence of a lag period due to the necessary conversion of the enzyme into its active form ( In contrast to the remaining samples, the aqueous extract E showed a completely different behaviour upon oxidation. POPj was detected only after a lag phase of about 3.5 Compared to the aqueous extract E, pigment formation was markedly enhanced for extracts A and B obtained by a liquid–liquid extraction of the latter. For both extracts, synthesis rates of 0.098 As apparent from In contrast, POPj content of the phloridzin model solution was significantly lower (0.16  Enzymatic treatment of ASEs revealed marked differences in POPj pigment formation. Depending on the extraction procedure, synthesis rates and pigment yields significantly differed, most likely due to varying PPO inhibition. Compared to the phloridzin model solution, ASEs generally exhibited higher pigment yields and colour brilliance. A simple extraction with aqueous ethanol (50%, v/v) has proven to be the most effective way for the obtention of coloured extracts from apple seeds, resulting in a maximum yield of 0.71 The results of the present study demonstrated that apple seeds might be fully exploited for the recovery of coloured preparations displaying antioxidant activities which may represent an interesting alternative to synthetic dyes. Altogether, the sequential extraction of highly unsaturated fatty oils ( The authors would like to thank Mr. Christian Hüttner for his excellent technical assistance in performing POPj formation experiments. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 