Mechanical properties, synthesis behavior, microstructure and oxidation resistance of Ti5Si3-based composites prepared by combination of mechanically activated self-propagating high-temperature synthesis (MASHS) and spark plasma sintering (SPS) in Ti-Si-Ni and Ti-Si-Ni-C systems were investigated. Ti5Si3-Ti2Ni composite was synthesized in Ti-Si-Ni system while Ti5Si3-TiC-Ti2Ni was formed in the Ti-Si-Ni-C. Microstructural analyses showed that Ni and C extensively distributed in Ti5Si3 phase and formed interstitial and substitutional solid solution titanium silicide. The activation energy values of 126 and 135 kJ/mol were calculated for initiation of combustion reaction in Ti-Si-Ni and Ti-Si-Ni-C systems, respectively. The isothermal oxidation behavior of the samples in air atmosphere was studied by TGA analysis and near the same oxidation resistance was detected. The fracture toughness of fabricated composites in Ti-Si-Ni and Ti-Si-Ni-C systems reached to 5 ± 0.1 and 6.1 ± 0.12 MPam1/2, respectively. The higher fracture toughness in Ti-Si-Ni-C system is related to the uniform distribution of TiC in the composite.Proper oxidation resistance, high melting point, suitable creep resistance and high specific strength make titanium silicide (Ti The addition of metal elements significantly decreases the ignition temperature of the synthesis and reduces the crystallite size of the products. The product purity is also increased by adding metallic alloying elements [ Self-propagating high-temperature synthesis (SHS) has been used for fabrication of various silicides and intermetallics [ The objective of this study was to investigate mechanical properties, synthesis behavior, microstructure and oxidation resistance of Ti Elemental powders of Ti (112379 Merck, 98% purity, ∼150 μm), Si (215619 Sigma Aldrich, 99% purity, ∼44 μm), graphite (104206 Merck, 99% purity, ∼50 μm) and Ni (112277 Merck, 99% purity, ∼10 μm), were mixed according to the following compositions (at.%): Ti-37.5Si, Ti-30Si-7.5Ni and Ti-27Si-7Ni-11C. The sample codes and compositions are listed in The combustion reactions were carried out in the SHS reactor under a continuous flowing of highly pure argon. The tungsten coil was used to ignite the samples. The phase composition of combustion products was characterized by XRD (Philips PW 3710) using Cu Kα radiation at 40 kV and 30 mA. All XRD experiments were carried out with a step size of 0.02° (1s/step). The XRD peak shifting was used to define the lattice parameters. The microstructure of products was studied by scanning electron microscope (Vega/Tescan) equipped with an energy-dispersive spectrum (EDS) analyzer. A line scanner pyrometer which detects 40 data per second was used to determine wave velocity and combustion temperature of the reaction. Repeated experiments were conducted for three times and errors were identified (±20 °C). The synthesized samples were grounded by pestle and mortal. The isothermal oxidation test was carried out by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) on grounded samples which were passed through a 100 mesh (150 μm) sieve. The TGA furnace was heated at 10 °C/min to 1000 °C and held for 13.5 h in the air atmosphere. The density of synthesized powders measured by gas pycnometer and considered as theoretical density. The grounded powders were put in a graphite die (height of 30 mm and diameter of 32 mm) and placed in the spark plasma sintering apparatus (20T-10, China) in vacuum atmosphere. The graphite plungers with height of 30 mm and diameter of 30 mm as well as graphite spacers with height of 40 mm and diameter of 50 mm were used. The graphite foil was used to avoid adhesion of powders to die and temperature was measured by pyrometer. The constant pressure of 50 Mpa was applied to die and heating rate about 60 °C/min employed during the sintering process. The bulk density of products was measured by Archimedes method. The sintered sample was polished using 1000 grit SiC. The nanoindentation test was used to measure Young's modulus and nanohardness of the samples. The Vickers indentation test was employed to measure microhardness and fracture toughness with the load of 49 N and holding time of 10 s. XRD patterns of synthesized TS, TSN and TSNC are shown in  Average crystallite size and lattice strain of the synthesized products were calculated by using the Rietveld method ( Presence of Ni in the systems is also beneficial for grain size reduction. The volume fraction of Ti The activation energy of reactions can be calculated by the following formula: Where T The SEM micrograph of the fracture surface of TSN is illustrated in The isothermal oxidation test was conducted by TGA apparatus to measure the mass gain of TSNC, TSN and TS as a function of time. Based on the TGA study ( The time-temperature-displacement graphs of TSN and TSNC are shown in The XRD patterns of sintered samples are shown in The Young's modulus and nanohardness of the samples were measured by nanoindentation test. The load-displacement curves of the composites are shown in The cracks emanate from the corner of the indenter were used to determine the fracture toughness of the materials. This technique has some drawbacks, such as spalling and the presence of multiple cracks which cause the method less accurate compared to other methods. However, widespread usage of the method makes it suitable for the comparative purpose. Some of the common equations which are used to calculate fracture toughness for redial-median cracks (which is the case in this study according to c/a ≥2.5 criterion) are summarized in It can be seen that the fracture toughness of the TSNC is higher than TSN and TS. Magnified images of the crack path through the samples are shown in The effect of Ni and C addition into the Ti-Si system was studied and following results were achieved: In situ Ti The activation energy of combustion synthesis is reduced by adding Ni into the Ti-Si system. The XRD patterns and mapping micrographs illustrate that C and Ni atoms distribute extensively in the Ti The addition of Ni and C into the Ti-Si system has a deleterious effect on the oxidation resistance of the systems due to the formation of Ti The fracture toughness of fabricated composites in Ti-Si-Ni and Ti-Si-Ni-C systems reached to 5 ± 0.1 and 6.1 ± 0.12 MPam The authors thank the Semnan University and Materials and Energy Research Center to full research support.