Treatment of periprosthetic distal femur fractures and comminuted intraarticular distal femur fractures with previous arthritis remains a difficult challenge for orthopedic surgeons. Previous case series have shown that distal femur replacement (DFR) can effectively compensate for bone loss, relieve knee pain, and allow for early ambulation in both of these fracture patterns. Owing to the typical low-energy mechanism of these injuries, a bilateral injury treated with DFR is rarely encountered. We present a patient with traumatic open left Rorabeck III/Su III periprosthetic distal femur fracture and closed right intraarticular distal femur fracture (AO fcation 33-C2) with end-stage arthrosis treated with single-stage bilateral DFR. We suggest that in patients with similar injuries, single-stage bilateral DFR can provide the benefits of early mobilization and accelerated recovery.Periprosthetic distal femur fractures and comminuted intraarticular distal femur fractures with bone loss and previous arthritis are both difficult challenges for orthopedic surgeons. Incidence of periprosthetic distal femur fractures is 0.3-2.5% after primary total knee replacement (TKR) and 1.6-38% after revision TKR and will only become more common as the number of TKR procedures continues to increase Multiple classification systems for periprosthetic distal femur fractures have been proposed to help guide the treatment, including those developed by Rorabeck ( Given the success of DFR in appropriately selected patients with Rorabeck III/Su III periprosthetic distal femur fractures and comminuted intraarticular distal femur fractures with arthrosis, we adopted this treatment strategy for a patient with such fractures bilaterally An 80-year-old female with past surgical history of left TKR in 2005 at an outside facility presented to our hospital after being involved in a motor vehicle collision resulting in open left periprosthetic distal femur fracture ( After discussing the risks, benefits, and alternatives to different treatment options, the patient was taken to the operating room within 24 hours of arrival for irrigation and debridement of her open fracture. The on-call operative team planned open reduction internal fixation of the open left periprosthetic distal femur fracture after obtaining radiographs and computed tomography scan that made the fracture appear amenable to fixation. After making a lateral approach to the left femur, her fracture was found to be more comminuted than anticipated, and the bone-prosthesis interface was not intact. An intraoperative decision was made to close the lateral incision and place an external fixator with referral to the arthroplasty service for evaluation for a possible DFR. Pin site care consisted of placement of chlorhexidine-soaked gauze that was changed daily. This external fixator placement allowed for stability of the fracture site and decompression of the zone of injury to assist with pain control. For the right distal femur fracture, closed reduction was performed with placement of a knee immobilizer. On postoperative day 1, the patient was hypotensive and transfused with 2 units of packed red blood cells for hemoglobin to reach 6.5 g/dL. Risks, benefits, and alternatives of treatment options were discussed with the patient and her family. She elected for bilateral DFR with the primary benefit of early mobilization. With the trauma team’s assistance, the patient was transfused with an additional unit of packed red cells with posttransfusion hemoglobin level of 9.7 g/dL. The decision was made to allow a week in between procedures to allow this patient with low physiologic reserve to recover before a repeat general anesthesia and surgery. In addition, the implants required for the procedure took a few days to be obtained as these are not routinely used at our institution. Once the patient was optimized and all implants were available, the patient was taken to the operating room on the 7th day after admission. She received 2 grams of preoperative cefazolin. Her left lower extremity was addressed first, and no tourniquet was used. The external fixator was removed, and pin sites were debrided and washed with betadine. The previous lateral approach to the distal femur was used. The femoral component was removed and noted to have minimal bone attached. The tibial component was also noted to be loose, and it was removed along with the surrounding cement without difficulty. The wound was copiously debrided and irrigated. A fresh distal femoral cut was made at a level just outside the area of fracture propagation. The resected bone and implant were used to help estimate the appropriate implant size. Left DFR was performed using Orthopedic Salvage System (Biomet, Warsaw, IN) implants ( Postoperatively, the patient was made weight-bearing as tolerated to both lower extremities and worked with physical therapy daily. She was standing on postoperative day 1 and walking a few steps using a walker on postoperative day 5 when she was discharged to a rehabilitation facility. She was seen on postoperative day 10 for first follow-up and was walking approximately 100 feet per day. At her 6-week postoperative follow-up, she was walking 2 miles daily using a walker. We allowed full activity as tolerated with the goal of the patient being able to build up her conditioning as soon as possible. We considered this benefit of increased activity worth the possible increased risk of aseptic loosening with a high level of activity at this early stage. She recently presented for 1-year postoperative follow-up. She walks 1-2 miles per day and uses a cane for longer distances for stability. She denies pain in either leg, although she occasionally reports “tightness” in the legs upon waking in the morning which resolves with activity. She is driving, maintaining her home, and living independently. Her surgical incisions are well healed without evidence of infection. She achieved knee range of motion from 0° to 110° bilaterally. One-year postoperative radiographs were obtained demonstrating unchanged alignment of her previously placed protheses with no signs of loosening ( Both native and periprosthetic distal femur fractures have been associated with poor outcomes and 1-year mortality approaching 25%, compared with hip fractures Results of treatment with DFR for periprosthetic distal femur fracture and complication rates vary in the literature with the majority of this information coming from small case series. Mortazavi et al. reported on a series of 20 patients treated with DFR and found a 50% complication rate which included urinary tract infection, intravenous line sepsis, symptomatic pulmonary embolism, peroneal nerve palsy, and recurrent fractures. In this series, there was a 25% reoperation rate, all for additional femur fractures requiring either implant revision or open reduction internal fixation More recent studies on DFR treatment for periprosthetic distal femur fractures have shown fewer complications with patients achieving earlier ambulation and frequently returning to preoperative activity levels and independent living like our patient. Jassim et al. reported on a series of 11 patients treated with DFR, with 3 patients having complications (anemia, cellulitis, peroneal nerve palsy) and none requiring reoperation at 33-month average follow-up Similar to periprosthetic distal femur fractures, native distal femur fractures with preexisting arthrosis are a challenge for orthopedic surgeons to treat as they are often intraarticular with bone loss due to comminution in patients with multiple medical comorbidities and poor bone stock Limitations to this study include relatively short follow-up time of 1 year postoperatively; however, this is consistent with previous studies. A previous report showed that follow-up periods for DFR for periprosthetic distal femur fractures are usually <48 months because of the frail elderly nature of these patients Bilateral DFR can be a viable treatment option for Rorabeck III/Su III periprosthetic distal femur fractures and comminuted intraarticular distal femur fractures with previous arthritis. We present a patient with open left Rorabeck III/Su III periprosthetic distal femur fracture and closed right comminuted intraarticular distal femur fracture (AO Classification 33-C2) with end-stage arthrosis after trauma successfully treated with single-stage bilateral DFR. We suggest that in elderly patients with similar injuries, bilateral DFR can effectively compensate for bone loss, relieve knee pain, provide stability, and allow for early mobilization resulting in satisfactory patient outcomes. This work was supported by funding from John Peter Smith Hospital. 