Platinum-group element concentrates are made into a matte that is low in iron, low in sulfur, and enriched in platinum-group elements by smelting and converting. Smelting removes most gangue minerals as molten slag. Converting removes most iron and sulfur by oxidation with air and oxygen. In combination, these two steps upgrade the feed concentrate containing 150g/t platinum-group elements into a converter matte containing 2000g/t PGMs. The converter matte is suitable for further processing to high-purity PGMs, nickel, copper, and cobalt (discussed in 
                  Chapters 36 and 37
                  
                     Chapter 36
                  
                  
                     Chapter 37
                  
                  
               ).Platinum-group element concentrates are made into a matte that is low in iron, low in sulfur, and enriched in platinum-group elements by smelting and converting. Smelting removes most gangue minerals as molten slag. Converting removes most iron and sulfur by oxidation with air and oxygen. In combination, these two steps upgrade the feed concentrate containing 150 This chapter describes smelting and converting of flotation concentrates containing nickel, copper and iron sulfides that are rich in platinum-group metals (PGMs) [150 The main steps in the smelting and converting process are as follows: drying of the concentrate; smelting of the concentrate to a furnace matte that is enriched in platinum-group elements; and, converting of the furnace matte to produce a final converter matte. The concentrations of typical concentrates containing platinum-group metals are given in The dried product contains less than 0.5% of water. This low water content is imperative because water can cause hydrogen explosions in electric furnaces. The dried concentrates are smelted in electric furnaces because the sulfide content in the concentrate is too low (sometimes less than 15%) for autothermal (flash) smelting. In other words, the amount of heat produced by the reactions is insufficient to heat and melt the feed. In addition, the slags from the smelting of these concentrates have high melting points (up to about 1600 °C) due to the presence of magnesium and chromium in the pyroxenite and chromitite gangue ( The principal objective of smelting the concentrate is to produce molten matte that is considerably richer in platinum-group metals than the feed concentrate. This objective is achieved by rejecting the gangue rock in the concentrate to molten slag by (i) melting the concentrate feed in the furnace with electrical energy; and, (ii) allowing the melted concentrate to separate by gravity into two immiscible molten layers. These two immiscible layers are (i) a dense sulfide matte layer with a density of about 5 South African concentrates usually contain enough silica to ensure that the two phases are immiscible. All of the PGMs have a much greater affinity for the sulfide matte phase rather than the oxide slag phase in the electric furnace. This assertion is underscored by the observation that the PGMs occur in nature as sulfides (such as cooperite, PtS), alloys (such as isoferroplatinum, Pt The mineral assemblies containing the platinum-group metals are small, sometimes less than 10 In order for the sulfides to efficiently collect the platinum-group metals, the feed to the smelting furnace must contain sufficient sulfides. Concentrates from the Merensky Reef contain 40% or 50% sulfides, and, as a result, they are efficient collectors. Concentrates from the UG2 ores may, however, contain only about 10% sulfides, which may be too low for efficient collection of the platinum-group elements. This can be remedied either by blending UG2 and Merensky concentrates, or by including high-grade nickel or copper concentrates, which contain about 90% sulfides, into the charge. Concentrates made from UG2 ores contain considerable chromite, FeCr Problems associated with chromite are minimized by (i) rejecting chromite to tailings during flotation; and, (ii) minimizing the internal recycle in the smelter complex of high-chromium materials, such as converter slag, to the smelting furnace. These procedures permit steady, efficient smelting with between 2 and 3% of chromite in the feed concentrate. Industrial smelting of concentrates containing platinum-group metals is mostly done in rectangular electric furnaces with six large carbon electrodes. The operating details of some furnaces are given in Smelting is continuous. The slag is always covered with concentrate. Concentrate is charged as needed to maintain this condition. Slag flows out of the furnace almost continuously through a water-cooled copper taphole. It is granulated in water and either sent to a flotation plant for the recovery of platinum-group metals, as shown in Matte is tapped intermittently from a water-cooled taphole as needed to maintain a specified level of matte in the furnace. The furnace produces much less matte than slag, that is, the production ratio of matte to slag is typically 0.2. As a result, the matte outflow is intermittent. The start-up, steady-state and shutdown procedures of electric furnaces used for smelting nickel–copper matte were described in Smelting of concentrates containing platinum-group elements requires more energy than smelting of hot nickel–copper calcine. Smelting platinum-containing concentrates requires about 800 the feed concentrate to a PGM furnace is at ambient temperature while the nickel–copper calcine is hot, about 400 °C; and, the operating temperature of smelting furnaces is about 1550 °C, which is about 250 °C hotter than nickel–copper smelting furnaces, which are operated at about 1300 °C. The higher operating temperature is required because of the high melting point of the MgO and Cr The molten matte is sent to converting, either as molten matte or as solid matte that has been granulated using water. Converting the furnace matte entails oxidizing the iron and sulfur in the matte using air or an air–oxygen mixture. The objective is to produce a molten matte that is enriched in platinum-group metals and is relatively low in iron and sulfur. This converter matte is a suitable feed for the refining of the metals. Peirce-Smith, top-blown rotary and Ausmelt continuous converters are used. Operating data for converters used in the converting of furnace mattes rich in platinum-group metals are given in The feed to the converter is a furnace matte that typically contains 40% Fe, 27% S and 0.1% platinum-group metals, while the product from the converter, referred to as the converter matte, typically contains 0.6%–3% of Fe, 20% S and 0.25% platinum-group metals. The low iron content of this converter matte is advantageous, since it minimizes the precipitation of iron residues, such as jarosite, during hydrometallurgical refining. This, in turn, minimizes the loss of platinum to waste residues. The converter matte is also sulfur deficient, that is, it contains less sulfur than is stoichiometrically needed to form Ni it encourages precipitation and isolation of an alloy phase rich in platinum-group metals during slow cooling of the matte; and, it minimizes the sulfur input to the hydrometallurgical refinery, which minimizes the amount of acid that must be neutralized in the base metals refinery. The traditional matte-converting equipment is Peirce-Smith converters, which were described in Top-blown rotary converters are used at the Stillwater smelter, USA. They are described in A continuous top-blown converter (Ausmelt) is used to convert all the furnace matte from three smelters at Anglo American Platinum. This type of furnace is described in the following section. Ausmelt converting entails continuously blowing dry furnace matte, oxygen and air, silica flux and coal into the hot molten bath of a vertical furnace ( Energy required for heating is provided by the oxidation of iron and sulfur and by the burning of the coal in the feed ( The principal advantage of continuous converting at Anglo American Platinum is the production of a continuous stream of an offgas that is rich in The principal disadvantage of the process is the rapid wear of the refractory lining of the furnace, which necessitates a second standby converter. The slag also contains considerable quantities of payable metals, that is PGMs, nickel, copper and cobalt. As a result, the slag needs to be processed in a separate slag-cleaning furnace, as shown in The heart of the Ausmelt furnace is the lance, which consists of the following features: a central pipe through which solid furnace matte, silica flux and coal are blown into the furnace; and, an annulus between this pipe and an outer tube through which air/oxygen gas is blown into the furnace. The outer tube extends into the hot matte–slag emulsion of the converter. The inner pipe ends about 1 A curved blade gas ‘swirler’ is attached around the outside of the central pipe near the bottom end, extending outwards towards the outside tube. These blades force descending cool feed gas against the outer tube, extracting heat from the tube and causing slag to freeze on the outer tube where it enters the molten bath. This solid slag layer protects the lance and is a key design feature of the converter. Without it, the lance would be rapidly consumed. Steady-state converting entails the following ( supplying the solid and gas feeds at a constant rate; continuously removing offgas and tapping slag; and, periodically tapping matte, through a separate taphole, to maintain a specified level in the furnace. The iron content in the product matte is controlled by adjusting the feed rate of oxygen (in both air and oxygen) while maintaining the feed rate of the furnace matte. The product temperature is mostly controlled by the feed rate of coal. Virtually all PGMs are produced via matte smelting and converting of sulfide concentrates. A departure from this is the the oxidization of all the sulfur in the concentrate in a fluidized-bed roaster, with excellent capture of sulfur dioxide; the reduction smelting of the resulting calcine into a molten iron alloy that contains approximately 80% of Fe, 8% Ni, 3% Cu, 1% Co and 600 the converting (oxidation) of iron from this molten alloy to make feed for hydrometallurgical production of PGMs, nickel, copper and cobalt. Planning for a commercial plant is underway ( Platinum-group element concentrates are made into a matte that is relatively low in iron and sulfur, and enriched in platinum-group elements by smelting and converting. Smelting removes most gangue minerals as molten slag. Converting removes most iron and sulfur by oxidation with air and oxygen. In combination, these two steps upgrade the feed concentrate containing 150