In complex fractures of the proximal tibial metaphysis and epiphysis, possible adverse outcomes after internal fixation include not only joint surface incongruity, but also lower limb malalignment requiring revision surgery. Navigation has been proven effective for the intraoperative control of lower limb alignment during osteotomy and knee arthroplasty. In complex traumatic fractures, temporary fixation by a locking screw plate allows sensor positioning followed by navigation maneuvers to adjust lower limb alignment. If malalignment is found, the construct can be modified economically by altering the diaphyseal fixation without modifying the metaphyseal screws. The objective of this study was to describe the use of navigation in three patients who required internal fixation of tibial-plateau fractures.Internal fixation is challenging in tibial-plateau fractures. Complex metaphyseal and epiphyseal fractures type 41A3 or 41C in the AO classification raise the greatest difficulties The patient is supine with a tourniquet at the root of the thigh, which rests on a semi-circular pad to place the knee in 90° of flexion. This position allows intra-articular access, which is crucial in this type of fracture. A vertical incision is made on the midline and the subcutaneous tissue is detached. The capsule is opened medially and laterally or, in some cases, the anterior tibial tuberosity is elevated to simultaneously expose both tibial plateaus. The proximal tibia is first reconstructed using grasping forceps, K-wires, or isolated screws then reduced onto the diaphysis and, finally, stabilized by an anatomic plate, which is usually placed on the lateral aspect of the tibia, under the tibialis anterior muscle. For fixation of the plate to the epiphysis, preference is given to locking screws. The plate is partially and provisionally fixed to the diaphysis by two screws. Anatomic plates carry a risk of bone pull-back to the plate if cortical or cancellous screws are used for fixation. As bone geometry varies across patients, the result is loss of fracture-site reduction, which is an additional risk factor for lower limb malalignment. The use of locking screws circumvents this problem, provided the plate is not at too great a distance from the bone, as this would lead it to protrude under the skin. If only compression plates are available and locking screw fixation is not possible, another plate should be placed on the medial side to avoid varus displacement of the construct. At this stage, fluoroscopy is used to check the quality of the joint surface reduction and the absence of intra-articular or excessively long screws. A sign of good construct alignment in the coronal plane is that the direction of the metaphyseal locking screws is parallel to the joint surface and to the diaphyseal screws. The navigation system is then installed. This step requires strong bone fixation to allow the acquisition maneuvers required for navigation. We use Orthopilot™ (B-Braun-Aesculap, Tuttlingen, Germany), which is a cinematic and palpating system used without preoperative imaging The above-described technique was used in 3 patients. One patient was a 24-year-old woman with an AO 41C3 tibial-plateau fracture who required early surgical revision after initial treatment by internal fixation without navigation. The metaphyseal screws were not parallel to the joint surface ( In the remaining 2 patients, the navigated technique was used for the first-line treatment. Both patients had AO 41C2 fractures. In 1 of these patients, the HKA angle measured by intraoperative navigation was 178° after internal fixation. Postoperatively, the radiographic HKA angle was 181° on the injured side and 180° on the opposite side. The HKA angle in the other patient was 180° intraoperatively and 180° postoperatively on both sides. No navigation-related adverse events were recorded. In practice, patient installation must allow knee flexion and extension, as well as hip circumduction, as these movements are needed for the acquisitions after provisional fixation and the HKA angle must be measured at different degrees of flexion. The thigh should therefore be placed on, but not attached to, a pad, whose removal should not adversely affect the rest of the surgical procedure. A motorized leg support may facilitate the procedure. One of the limitations to the use of navigation for complex tibial-plateau fractures is medial comminution, which requires a medial plate in addition to the lateral plate, raising challenges to provisional fixation and its subsequent modification. This limitation can be circumvented by using a locking screw plate. Navigation increases the operative time by 5 to 10 In the patients described here, the difference between the HKA angles measured by navigation and on postoperative radiographs ranged from 0° to 3°. Similar variability has been reported in knee arthroplasty DS declares invitations to conferences as an attendee (with paid travel and accommodation expenses) by B-Braun, Smith&Nephew, and SBM. The other authors declare that they have no competing interest. None. Vibert Benoit: conceived the study, reviewed the medical files, and drafted the article. Pailhe Regis: conceived the study and drafted the article. Morin Vincent: reviewed the medical files and revised the article. Rubens-Duval Brice: revised the article. Saragaglia Dominique: conceived the study and revised the article.