Elderly adults currently represent the most rapidly growing segment of the patient population. As the number of geriatric patients increases, the incidence of acetabular fractures in this population can be expected to increase as well. Optimal management of these injuries is controversial. Patient factors, such as preinjury functional level, medical comorbidities, and poor bone quality, can confound the treatment plan, as can injury characteristics, such as fracture pattern and articular damage. Although open reduction and internal fixation has been advocated as the gold standard for any displaced acetabular fracture, in the elderly patient alternatives, including percutaneous fixation and total hip arthroplasty, either acute or delayed, should be considered. Exact indications for each of these options are often unclear. Although it is helpful to follow a logical algorithm in determining the best management for the geriatric acetabular fracture, the importance of individualizing treatment cannot be overemphasized.It has been estimated that by the year 2030, 17% of the American population will be >65 years of age. It has been well documented that fractures on the femoral side of the hip should be treated surgically in an expeditious manner with immediate mobilization to avoid the disastrous complications associated with prolonged recumbency. When one evaluates the elderly patient with an acetabular fracture, the same principles must hold true. Sparse literature on the subject suggests unacceptable complication rates and poor clinical outcomes when geriatric acetabular fractures are treated nonoperatively. Although the treatment algorithm for younger patients with acetabular fractures has been clearly defined, the optimal method of treatment in the geriatric patient is unclear. Several factors related to the host as well as injury pattern may confound the treatment plan and deserve careful attention. However, it must be emphasized that prompt mobilization is the key to successful management of these fractures. In most cases, geriatric acetabular fractures are the result of low-energy falls, although traffic and pedestrian accidents do occur. In the elderly patient with osteoporotic bone, these fractures are often highly comminuted and displaced and involve the anterior column and blowout of the quadrilateral plate. Posterior wall involvement and hip dislocation are also common. Of equal importance are patient-specific factors that may affect the treatment plan. The elderly patient often has multiple medical comorbidities leading to a diminished physiological reserve and a reduced potential for healing. Osteopenic or frankly osteoporotic bone may compromise quality of fixation and accuracy of reduction, increasing the risk of construct failure and posttraumatic arthritis. Preexisting osteoarthritis of the hip can also have implications toward the ideal treatment strategy. Some patients may have a low preinjury level of function or baseline mental status, which may translate into a poor rehabilitation and a longer recovery period. Optimal treatment of the elderly patient with an acetabular fracture requires that each of the previously mentioned factors be considered. Although variables associated with a satisfactory outcome in this group of patients have been incompletely defined, it is clear that the goal of treatment should focus on immediate mobilization. Nonoperative treatment, open reduction internal fixation, percutaneous techniques, and acute or delayed total hip arthroplasty all are reasonable options. In formulating the ideal management of these patients, the treatment plan must be highly individualized. Historically, the standard of care, nonoperative management of acetabular fractures in the elderly population, frequently leads to a poor outcome and should be reserved for a small selected subset of infirm patients. Optimal surgical treatment for displaced acetabular fracture in the elderly patient is a subject of controversy. In previous literature, surgical management has yielded only slightly better results when compared with nonoperative treatment. Most elderly patients with displaced acetabular fractures are best treated with open reduction and internal fixation ( When proceeding with open reduction, a single standard approach (either a Kocher-Langenbeck approach for a posterior pattern or an ilioinguinal approach for an anterior injury) is preferred over extensile or 2-incision techniques. Although considered the gold standard, open reduction and internal fixation of acetabular fractures is associated with its own risks, especially pertaining to perioperative medial complications, intraoperative blood loss, neurovascular injury, postoperative infection or wound problems, and heterotopic ossification. Gay et al In a recent study by Gary et al, Certain injury characteristics place the elderly patient with an acetabular fracture at high risk for needing a future total hip arthroplasty, including extensive comminution, impaction, or abrasion of the articular surfaces of the acetabulum and femoral head, severe preexisting osteoarthritis, and associated femoral head or neck fracture. When conservative management is pursued, subsequent arthroplasty may be complicated by malunion or nonunion of fracture fragments, thereby necessitating the use of bone grafting, acetabular rings or cages, and realignment osteotomy. For acute arthroplasty with internal fixation, the difficulty lies in obtaining stable fixation of the acetabular component, which requires restoration of the acetabular columns although anatomic reduction is not required. Short-to-mid term results after acute internal fixation and total hip arthroplasty have been promising. In their study, Mears and Velyvis Delayed total hip arthroplasty can certainly be a reasonable option for the geriatric patient after an acetabular fracture. Arthroplasty reconstruction can be performed for posttraumatic arthritis after cases treated nonoperatively or initially with open reduction and internal fixation. Technical pitfalls, however, may be encountered. In cases treated nonoperatively, nonunion or malunion of the acetabulum can make arthroplasty challenging. In cases of previous surgery, the possibility of infection is increased, and retained hardware can be obstructive. Furthermore, late reconstruction is plagued by dissection in a scarred soft-tissue sleeve, increasing the potential for technical problems and intraoperative complications. In addition, delayed arthroplasty has a much greater rate of early failure when compared with total hip arthroplasty for primary osteoarthritis of the hip. In a previous retrospective review coauthored by the senior author, With a rapidly growing elderly population, increasing numbers of geriatric acetabular fractures can be expected. Treatment of these patients involves complex decision-making that takes into consideration injury- and patient-specific factors. The optimal management of these fractures as a whole is controversial, and it appears that the best approach is to highly individualize treatment plans to each patient. Immediate mobilization is fundamental and should remain a high priority. Accepted treatment paradigms include conservative management, acute open reduction internal fixation, percutaneous techniques, and acute or delayed total hip arthroplasty. In determining a management route, it is important to take into account the patient's preinjury level of function and medical comorbidities, as well as injury characteristics. Open reduction and internal fixation remains the gold standard. The use of percutaneous and limited fixation techniques may be applicable in selected cases. Arthroplasty for management for geriatric acetabular fractures is an attractive option especially in cases at high risk for developing posttraumatic arthritis.