Permeability is one of the most important parameters for CO2 injection in coal to enhance coalbed methane recovery. Laboratory characterization of coal permeability provides useful information for in situ permeability behavior of coal seams when adsorbing gases such as CO2 are injected. In this study, a series of experiments have been conducted for coal samples using both non-adsorbing and adsorbing gases at various confining stresses and pore pressures. Our observations have showed that even under controlled stress conditions, coal permeability decreases with respect to pore pressure during the injection of adsorbing gases. In order to find out the causes of permeability decrease for adsorbing gases, a non-adsorbing gas (helium) is used to determine the effective stress coefficient. In these experiments using helium, the impact of gas sorption can be neglected and any permeability reduction is considered as due to the variation in the effective stress, which is controlled by the effective stress coefficient. The results show that the effective stress coefficient is pore pressure dependent and less than unity for the coal samples studied. The permeability reduction from helium experiments is then used to calibrate the subsequent flow-through experiments using adsorbing gases, CH4 and CO2. Through this calibration, the sole effect of sorption-induced strain on permeability change is obtained for these adsorbing gas flow-through experiments. In this paper, experimental results and analyses are reported including how the impact of effective stress coefficient is separated from that of the sorption-induced strain on the evolution of coal permeability.Knowledge of changes in coal permeability due to coal matrix swelling/shrinkage strain is crucial for the evaluation of both primary gas production from coal reservoirs and for CO Coal swelling/shrinkage due to gas adsorption/desorption is a well-known phenomenon and is regarded as a key component for coal reservoir permeability behavior during primary and enhanced coalbed methane recovery (e.g. Many experiments have been completed to evaluate the separate influences of the effective stresses and sorption-induced strains on the evolution in permeability ( The law of effective stress was first presented by The effective stress coefficient, in a cross-section in the porous material, denotes the ratio of the area occupied by the fluid to the total area ( Many researchers have studied the effective stress coefficient, but almost exclusively for rocks. For instance, However, If porosity is very small (e.g. Similar to derivation of Biot's coefficient (i.e. Eq. Therefore, the effective stress coefficient in this case can be defined as: It should be noted that both volumetric strain and the variation in permeability could be used to quantify ‘elastic properties’ of the media. As mentioned above, Based on the variation in permeability, In this work, a series of experiments were conducted using both non-adsorbing and adsorbing gases all under the constant pressure difference condition, which was defined as the differential pressure between confining stress and pore pressure. Firstly, the effective stress coefficient was obtained from flow-though experiments with a non-adsorbing gas (helium). In these experiments, the impact of sorption induced strain is negligible. Furthermore, Klinkenberg effect can be neglected at high pressures. Thus, any permeability reduction is considered to be due solely to the variation in the effective stress coefficient. Secondly, the permeability reduction from the experiments conducted with the non-adsorbing gas was used to calibrate the subsequent experiments using adsorbing gases (carbon dioxide and methane). As a result, the effect of sorption-induced strain on permeability change was obtained. The schematic of the Triaxial Multi-Gas Rig used for this work is shown in We use the pressure transient method to conduct the gas flow experiments in the low permeability samples ( Thus permeability can be obtained from Eq. Two Australian coal samples from the southern Sydney basin were used. The coal samples were bituminous coal from the Bulli seam and cored to 4.50 The coal cores were first dried in a heated vacuum oven and the weight was measured. Then the cores were installed in the sample cell and consolidated with a few load cycles before carrying out experiments to make sure results were repeatable. The samples were allowed to equilibrate for a few days inside the cell in the vacuum to remove the residual gas and to reach the desired temperature. Three gases were used including helium, methane and carbon dioxide. Measurements were conducted at 45 For core No. 01 tests, permeability was firstly measured using helium at a constant pressure difference (defined as confining stress minus pore pressure) of 3.0 For core No. 02 tests, constant pressure differences with 2.0 and 3.0 The evaluation of coal effective stress coefficient and the elimination of effective stress effect from sorption-induced strain effect are conducted through the following six integrated steps: (1) measure permeability using helium gas under constant pressure difference conditions; (2) calculate the effective stress coefficient; (3) calculate the additional effective stress value and obtain the real effective stress value; (4) evaluate the permeability change induced by the additional effective stress for adsorbing gas injection under constant pressure difference conditions; (5) calibrate the permeability value to eliminate the effective stress effect; and finally (6) obtain the sorption-induced strain effect only on permeability change. Permeability measurements for the helium flow-though experiments are shown in In order to calculate the effective stress change, we firstly need to know how the effective stress determines permeability change. An exponential functional form has been widely used to calculate permeability with effective stress variation ( It should be noted that the original work from both From Eq. The experimental results for cleat compressibility in the presence of different gases are listed in The average compressibility values for helium, Because the pressure difference was kept unchanged throughout the helium injection test (Δ Substituting cleat compressibility values into the above equation, then the effective coefficients ( Therefore, the effective stress coefficient is not a constant ( It shows that the constant pressure difference method (original data) underestimates the effective stress effect on permeability change. The underestimation becomes more significant as the pore pressure increases. In order to compare the difference between original results and corrected results, an arbitrary error For core No. 01, the error changes from 3.44% at 2.1 It is reasonable to assume that the effective stress coefficient is constant for each test, as the pressure difference was kept constant in our experiment. Based on the calculated effective stress coefficient, Following the same procedure as for the methane injection data, the comparison between the uncorrected permeability data and corrected data for core No. 01 and core No. 02 using CO From A summary of the permeability errors, as defined in Eq. In the following part, comparison of permeability change between sorption-induced and effective stress induced is conducted to evaluate the contribution from each process. Based on the corrected permeability data, the absolute permeability reduction value, Δ The comparison is shown in This set of tests shows that the effective stress induced permeability reduction is close to that induced by CH This study has demonstrated that the effective stress coefficient for coal is not equal to unity and may be effective stress dependent. This conclusion is derived based on the experimental observations of a series of gas flow-through experiments all under the conditions of a constant pressure difference between confining stress and pore pressure. First, the effective stress coefficient is obtained by the non-adsorbing gas (helium) flow-though experiments. In these experiments, the impact of gas sorption is negligible and any permeability change with pore pressure is considered to be due to the variation in the effective stress coefficient. Second, the change in permeability resulting from the non-adsorbing gas experiments is used to calibrate the subsequent experiments using adsorbing gases (carbon dioxide and methane) where the sole effect of sorption-induced strain on permeability change is obtained. This finding may be more important because even though coal is a weak rock, the grain compressibility is larger than expected, especially at high pore pressures. Comparison between measured permeability data and calibrated results demonstrates that the effective stress coefficient could play an important role in the evaluation of permeability change in adsorbing gases. This work was supported by