Gypsum-bonded investment, which is commonly used in gold casting, can cause several defects such as gas porosity from the decomposition of gypsum. Thus, the insight study in the behavior of gypsum-bonded investment can lead to resolve the problem in casting process. It consists of SiO2 (α-cristobalite and α-quartz) as a refractory and gypsum as a binder. During burn out process, the dehydration of gypsum, the inversion of cristobalite and quartz and the III–II CaSO4 transition were determined using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) coupled with thermogravimetry analyzer (TGA) and in-situ X-ray diffraction (in-situ XRD). Calcium carbonate (CaCO3) layer on the gold product surface after casting was investigated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). It is believed to be attributed to the reaction between CO2 from residues of carbonized wax and CaO from the decomposition of CaSO4. This observation is may be responsible for high roughness and low quality in the gold casting.Investment casting or lost wax casting provides high precision of product details and superior surface quality of the products. Hence, this casting process is suitable for complex shape products in jewelry industry. For the investment casting of gold and silver, the jewelry manufacturers typically prefer to use gypsum-bonded investment as its thermal properties are appropriate for commercial-grade alloys casting Traditional gypsum-bonded investment powder consists of a mixture of calcium sulfate hemihydrate (CaSO This study aims to gain better insights into the thermal behavior of gypsum-bonded investment, the reaction in casting process and the difference between prior and post polishing surfaces of the jewelry casting products. To achieve better understanding, several advanced characterization techniques such as Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) coupled with Thermogravimetry Analyzer (TGA), In-situ X-ray Diffraction (In-situ XRD), Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FE-SEM), X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) were used to investigate the behavior of investment from the beginning to the end of investment casting process. These better insights in the investment material will be beneficial to the jewelry manufacturers for the development of burnout cycle and casting process in the jewelry production. For example, the local factory can reduce the burnout time that will increase the productivity and may improve the rate of product rejection due to sub-standard quality which is found to be 2–5% in the local factory. The chemical composition of commercial gypsum-bonded investment powder (G-CAST APEX, Gesswein Siam Co., Ltd., Thailand) and commercial 18 Next, to prepare investment slurry, fresh investment powder was mixed with water following the recommendation from the powder manufacturer which has a water/powder ratio of 38 The structural change of the investment during burnout cycle process is the key to control both physical and mechanical properties of the mold. Therefore, in-situ XRD experiment was conducted to capture any change in structure of the investment mold starting from the green mold through the end of burnout process. In this experiment, during heating, the measurements were done at room temperature, 70 Finally, two gold alloy samples with 75% purity (18K-gold) were cast by a commercial jewelry casting process. The chemical composition of the gold alloy is 75.1%Au, 12.3%Ag and 12.6%Cu. In this study, the investment flask with a size of 3”x4” was used for cast the two gold samples in centrifugal casting machine. Induction heating was used to melt the gold alloy and the centrifugal casting was done under Argon gas atmosphere. The casting temperature and flask temperature were set to 980 The X-ray diffraction pattern of the commercial investment powder is shown in The morphology of each phase in the powder was identified using FE-SEM technique. As shown in Note that there are two main types of calcium sulfate hemihydrate, the alpha and the beta form In order to investigate particle distribution of the investment powder, particle size analysis was performed using laser diffraction particle size analyzer. The result illustrates rather broad size distribution of the particles ranging from sub-micron to over hundreds of microns with the average particle size of approximately 28.5 The thermal behavior together with weight change during burnout cycle of the green molds is shown in The second DSC endothermic peak with the following hump can be detected around 130 The first dehydration stage of gypsum takes place at the temperature around 100 The morphology and chemical compositions of the investment after burnout were investigated and illustrated in The result from When the temperature reach 375 Regarding thermal expansion viewpoint, gypsum binder shrink upon heating when it loss water of crystallization (up to 2% in volume As shown in previous studies As for the expansion of quartz, it also displays a sudden change in expansion at its transition temperature (∼570 As these thermo-physical characteristics of the investment during burnout are crucial to product quality, the development of burnout process should consider both the thermal expansion and phase transition temperature. The good burnout step should keep heating rate slow until alpha cristobalite completely transforms to beta phase. Moreover, the temperature should be held above phase transition temperature of both cristobalite and quartz to stabilize the thermal expansion. Finally, the holding time should be sufficient to allow for the complete transformation of each phase. XPS result of unpolished gold sample after casting is shown in Although the origin of this calcium carbonate film is unclear, it is hypothesized that the formation of calcium carbonate during jewelry investment casting might be related to the reaction between calcium oxide and carbon dioxide gas as a result of the following sequence. First, calcium sulfate in the investment mold could react with carbon residues from carbonized wax within the gold casting temperature range (750 Finally, during solidification, calcium oxide can react with carbon dioxide to generate calcium carbonate as follows In the meaning of this discovery, it is indicating that the carbon residues from in-complete burnout wax pattern could lead to the formation of reaction layer and the sulfur dioxide. These could potentially affect the amount of porosity defects produced in the castings as well as degrading surface quality of the final product. It is worth noting that the calcium carbonate layer on the as-cast specimen could plausibly occur as a result of contamination in the cleaning process (i.e. the dry off of calciferous water on the rough as-cast surface). The surface of the polished specimen is smoother and thus the amount of contaminarion could be less. However, prior to the surface characterization using XPS technique, sputter cleaning was applied to the surface of both unpolishing and polishing samples in order to remove any contamination layer. The XPS analysis of polished gold alloy sample, as shown in The gypsum-bonded investment powder contains 34.26%wt quartz, 33.85%wt cristobalite, and 31.89%wt CaSO From the manufacturing viewpoint, reduction of crack defects and increasing strength of the mold can be done by cautiously chosen the preferred burnout profile through the following temperature ranges: 80 At the stage of pouring the molten gold into the mold, the thermal decomposition of CaSO The authors would like to thank,