In this investigation, we discussed the flotation behavior of oxidized coal treated by different pre-wetting times. The pre-wetting time is 1min, 2min, 3min, 4min and 5min, respectively. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and contact angle measurements were used to indicate the surface properties of oxidized coal. XPS results show that the hydrophobicity of oxidized coal is very low and the oxidized coal should be pre-wetted quickly as there are many hydrophilic functional groups and few hydrophobic functional groups on the oxidized coal surface. In addition, there are also many cracks and holes on the oxidized coal surface from SEM pictures. The cracks and holes should be covered or filled up with water during pre-wetting process. Contact angle measurement results show that the contact angle between the water drop and oxidized coal surface decreases rapidly with the increase of measurement time. Both of the combustible matter recovery and concentrate ash content decrease with the increase of pre-wetting time.Oxidized coal is usually difficult to float using the oily collectors However, the effect of pre-wetting time on coal flotation has not been well researched. The pre-wetting time may have a significant effect on the flotation of Taixi oxidized coal. Piskin and Akgun considered that a short premixing time, just 1 In this investigation, we discussed the flotation behavior of oxidized coal treated by different pre-wetting times. The pre-wetting time was 1 The oxidized coal samples were provided by Taixi Coal Preparation Plant in China. The coal mine was oxidized heavily due to the spontaneous combustion. The unoxidized coal cannot be obtained due to this coal mine which has been oxidized completely. The coal samples were screened to pass 0.5 For the indication of surface properties of Taixi oxidized coal, the oxidized coal samples were pressed into the plate. The XPS experiments were carried out at room temperature in an ultra high vacuum (UHV) system with the surface analysis system (ESCALAB 250Xi, America). The base pressure of the analysis chamber during the measurements was lower than 1.0 The FEI Quanta 250 SEM was used to analyze the surface morphology of oxidized coal. The magnification time was fixed at 2000, 4000, 10,000 and 20,000, respectively. The oxidized coal samples were prepared by surface cleaning using absolute ethyl alcohol. After surface cleaning, the coal samples were dried in air. Before SEM, the coal samples were sputter-coated with a layer of gold. The details operating parameters of SEM were as follows: HV was 30.00 The oxidized coal was firstly pressed into the plates. The plates of oxidized coal were measured using water contact angle analyzer (JC2000D), such as a water droplet on the surface of coal plate in air. The contact angles were obtained at different measurement times as a water droplet contacted on the coal plates. The measurement time ranged from 0 In this investigation, the oxidized coal was pre-wetted at a flotation cell and the impeller speed of flotation machine was 1910 Where The binding energies corresponding to appropriate peaks in coals are as follows: C1s: Peaks at binding energies of 285.3 The C1s peaks are fitted as shown in As shown in   However, the concentrate ash content also has a decrease while the pre-wetting time increases. It can be concluded that a longer pre-wetting time may be useful to obtain a low ash content concentrate. The middle or high ash content coals may be more difficult to float at a longer pre-wetting time than at a shorter pre-wetting time. The middle or high ash content coals have also the chance to contact with the collector and get into the froth concentrate. If the pre-wetting time is short, the hydration shell on middle or high ash content coals will be very thin. In other words, a short pre-wetting time has a positive effect on the flotation of middle or high ash content coals. However, the middle or high ash content coals will be difficult to contact with the collector or bubbles if the middle or high ash content coals are pre-wetted after a long time. After a long time pre-wetting process, the pre-wetted coals with low ash content should be much easier to contact with the collector than the pre-wetted coals with middle or high ash content. The pre-wetting time should have a significant effect on oxidized coal flotation. XPS, SEM and contact angle measurements results indicate why the oxidized coal is difficult to float. The oxidized coal has many hydrophilic functional groups, such as C═O, C―O and COOH. However, there are few hydrophobic functional groups, such as C―H and C―C. In addition, there are lots of cracks and holes on the oxidized coal surface which may be filled with the water in flotation pulp. While the oxidized coal is pre-wetted in flotation pulp, the oxidized coal surface will be wrapped by the hydration shell which makes the oxidized coal difficult to contact with oily collectors and bubbles. Flotation results show that both of the combustible matter recovery and concentrate ash content decrease with the increase of pre-wetting time. A longer pre-wetting time may be useful to obtain a low ash content concentrate. The pre-wetting time should have a significant effect on oxidized coal flotation. This work was supported by the Excellent Innovation Doctoral Research Scholarship of China University of Mining and Technology, the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51374207) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51304192).