Nanocomposite NiO:Au thin films, formed by gold nanoparticles embedded in a nickel oxide matrix, have been grown by reactive pulsed laser deposition (R-PLD). Two actively synchronized nanosecond laser sources, a KrF excimer laser (248nm) and a Nd:YAG laser (355nm), were used for the simultaneous ablation of nickel and gold targets in oxygen ambient. The morphology, composition, and optical properties of the obtained nanocomposites were investigated and were found to correlate with the concentration of Au nanoparticles. Further, the NiO:Au nanocomposites have been tested as hydrogen sensors. Embedding Au nanoparticles into the NiO film matrix reduced the sensors operating temperature and improved their performance by orders of magnitude.Hydrogen sensing is important for many industrial applications because hydrogen becomes explosive in air with a lowest explosion limit (LEL) of 4% (40,000 Recent studies have shown that NiO thin films can be used successfully as sensing materials in gas and humidity detection devices Thin films containing noble metal nanoparticles have become an intensive area of research due to their interesting functional properties that find applications to the electronic, glass, sensing, catalysis, semiconducting, and computing industries Nanocomposite NiO:Au has been developed previously by pyrolysis In the present study, special emphasis has been placed on correlating the fluence of the laser beam incident on the Au target, with the NiO:Au nanostructure properties, such as Au concentration, film surface morphology, and optical properties. Additionally, the sensing response of the NiO:Au nanocomposites to hydrogen has been systematically investigated. Hydrogen detection was achieved at operating temperatures much lower than those found in the literature The experimental method has been described in a previous publication The Ni and Au targets were placed in a high vacuum chamber. The depositions occurred at 40 The surface morphology of the NiO:Au compounds was investigated with the aid of a JEOL JSM 6380-LV scanning electron microscope (SEM), equipped with an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS). Rutherford backscattering spectroscopy (RBS) was performed with the aid of a tandem ion accelerator at Hydrogen sensing tests were performed in an aluminum vacuum chamber filled with dry air at atmospheric pressure. The samples were resistively heated and the hydrogen concentration was calculated based on the partial pressures by an MKS Baratron gauge. At a constant bias voltage of 1 Initially, all tests were performed under static gas pressure conditions. Pure hydrogen was obtained directly from a bottle and the least partial pressure that could be measured was limited by the accuracy of the Baratron gauge. In a later stage, we employed two computer-controlled mass flow meters (Bronkhorst High-Tech) that allowed us to perform sensing tests under dynamic pressure (flow) conditions. In order to try out smaller concentrations, hydrogen was mixed with dry nitrogen in a premixing chamber, thus achieving dilution factors below 10 In EDS spectra from the “film background” of NiO:Au nanocomposite thin films, deposited with 1.3 To investigate the film composition and to seek further evidence for the presence of Au in the nanocomposite films, we employed the RBS technique, which we have employed in PLD-grown NiO films in the past proving they are stoichiometric Noble metal nanoparticles interact strongly with light through the resonant excitation of collective oscillations of their conduction electrons (surface plasmon resonance, SPR). The SPR band characteristics are related to the nanoparticles size The measured absorbance, Pulsed laser-deposited NiO is a p-type semiconductor and the charge carriers are the holes in the valence band. Hydrogen sensing manifests itself in the reduction of the film conductivity, as it was shown in  The mechanism for hydrogen detection in air for the p-type NiO semiconductor is the following The embedded Au nanoparticles contribute both to the reaction between hydrogen and oxygen, acting as catalysts, as well as to charge transport in the device, acting as nanoelectrodes, depending on their size. From the structural and optical data presented above, we know the Au nanoparticles have an average size of 22 Smaller Au nanoparticles are dispersed on the surface of NiO nanocrystallites and function as catalysts: they improve the sensor performance by a   Applying a versatile technique with two actively synchronized lasers and two metallic targets, nanocomposite NiO:Au thin films were fabricated. The fluence of the Nd:YAG laser, which was used for the deposition of Au, determined the volume fraction of Au into the NiO film matrix. This was verified by SEM/EDS measurements as well as by RBS experiments. The latter have shown that there exists a linear dependence of Au amount on the fluence of the Nd:YAG laser for the employed fluence range. Optical absorption measurements have revealed the SPR band of the Au nanoparticles in the 590 The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the Hellenic General Secretariat for Research and Technology through a bilateral Greek-Slovak Research Agreement (2006-08) as well as a partial support from the “Nano-structured organic-inorganic hybrid materials–synthesis, diagnostics and properties” program No.2005ΣE01330081 of TPCI/NHRF as a “Centre of Excellence”, 2005. One of the authors (I.F.) would also like to thank the TPCI/NHRF for the financial support in the frame of a 2 years scholarship. They also want to thank Drs. A. Lagoyannis and S. Harisssopoulos, from the Institute of Nuclear Physics, NCSR ‘Demokritos’, Athens, Greece, for the recording of the RBS spectra at the tandem ion accelerator.