Printed circuit boards (PCBs) from discarded personal computer (PC) and hard disk drive were crushed by explosion in water or mechanical comminution in order to disintegrate the attached parts. More parts were stripped from PCB of PC, composed of epoxy resin; than from PCB of household appliance, composed of phenol resin.
                  In an attempt to raise the copper grade of PCB by removing other components, a carbonization treatment was investigated. The crushed PCB without surface-mounted parts was carbonized under a nitrogen atmosphere at 873–1073K. After screening, the char was classified by size into oversized pieces, undersized pieces and powder. The copper foil and glass fiber pieces were liberated and collected in undersized fraction. The copper foil was liberated easily from glass fiber by stamping treatment.
                  As one of the mounted parts, the multi-layered ceramic capacitors (MLCCs), which contain nickel, were carbonized at 873K. The magnetic separation is carried out at a lower magnetic field strength of 0.1T and then at 0.8T. In the +0.5mm size fraction the nickel grade in magnetic product was increased from 0.16% to 6.7% and the nickel recovery is 74%.
                  The other useful mounted parts are tantalum capacitors. The tantalum capacitors were collected from mounted parts. The tantalum-sintered bodies were separated from molded resins by heat treatment at 723–773K in air atmosphere and screening of 0.5mm. Silica was removed and 70% of tantalum grade was obtained after more than 823K heating and separation.
                  Next, the evaluation of Cu recycling in PCB is estimated. Energy consumption of new process increased and the treatment cost becomes 3 times higher comparing the conventional process, while the environmental burden of new process decreased comparing conventional process.
                  The nickel recovery process in fine ground particles increased energy and energy cost comparing those of the conventional process. However, the environmental burden decreased than the conventional one.
                  The process for recovering tantalum used more heat for the treatment and therefore the energy consumption increased by 50%, when comparing with conventional process. However, the market price for tantalum is very large; the profit for tantalum recovery is added. Also the environmental burden decreased by the recycling of tantalum recovery. Therefore, the tantalum recovery is very important step in the PCB recycling. If there is no tantalum, the consumed energy and treatment cost increase in the new process, though the environmental burden decreases.Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipments (WEEEs) should be recycled because they contain many kinds of valuable materials. Most of WEEEs include printed circuit boards (PCBs). In Japan, 20–30 Recovery of metal from PCB has been carried out using several methods, such as crushing, separation and leaching ( In this paper, at first, the mechanical crushing and water explosion method are employed to remove the mounted parts on PCBs. The underwater explosion is very convenient to liberate the different density of materials ( After the removal of mounted parts, copper and nickel recovery is subject of the carbonization treatment. Pyrolysis of PCB has been studied but these studies were mainly focused on the pyrolysis gas and char constituent ( The incinerated gas is treated with water, since the exhausted gas containing Br On the other hand, the tantalum capacitor, as one of the valuable mounted electric parts in the removed mounted parts, is collected by the eddy current separation. In this study, the tantalum capacitor is collected from mounted parts on the hard disk drive. The recovery method from tantalum capacitor is studied by the heating method. Tantalum recovery is carried out in the production process of tantalum capacitor; however, the tantalum is not recycled from the used capacitor or PCBs ( In the copper smelter, PCB is usually chopped the handling its size for the furnace by mechanical crushing and then heated. It is difficult to recover low grade of rare metals in fine crushed parts. Also aluminum metal complicates slag handling. Many kinds of mechanical crushing methods are developed to liberate the mounted parts from the PCB ( The underwater explosion ( There are several crushers being used in order to liberate the mounted parts on PCB such as the inclined crusher ( Next, the liberated mounted parts are sieved in 4 Surface mounted parts are removed from crushed PCBs and bare boards are obtained. Char with size over 4 Though the carbonization at higher temperature is effective to recover copper foil, glass fiber can be liberated most from char carbonized at 873 The carbonized char of −4  In an attempt to recover nickel and remove unnecessary elements during the copper smelting, crushed waste PCB as shown in the former section is treated by means of heat treatment and magnetic separation. Many multi-layered ceramic capacitors (MLCCs) including nickel have been mounted on PCB. The schematic illustration of multi-layer ceramic capacitor ( The magnetic materials by the magnetic separation of as-received MLCC contain many lead wire parts. Here, only the MLCC without lead wire was heated in several conditions and separated by the magnetic separator. The result is listed in Schematic illustration of tip type tantalum capacitor is shown in The flowsheet to recover tantalum from mounted parts of PCB is shown in In the material balance of tantalum with the two-step heat treatment process, under 0.5 The final recovered tantalum powder should be fed into tantalum refining process from tantalum ore. The treatment capacity of PCB is estimated to be 20 The flowsheets of copper and nickel recovery in conventional copper smelter and the new recycling process using carbonization treatment for the treatment of print wiring board (PWB) with chip capacitor after crushing of PCB (−4 The consumed energy is estimated by using life cycle inventory analysis (LCIA). The equipments in the process of 20 The heavy oil is used as a fuel for the heat treatment and is estimated as 30 On the other hand, the inventory data of conventional copper smelter are used in the literature ( The comparison of consumed energy between conventional flow and new flow in the flowsheet of The comparison of energy consumption between conventional flow and new flow show in The comparison of energy consumption between conventional flow and new flow containing the tantalum capacitor recovery process of mounted parts shown in The economic evaluation on copper and nickel recovery from printed wiring board is shown in We found that the unit fuel cost is 0.2 The copper and nickel in the typical PCB for personal computer contain 15% and 0.46%, respectively as shown in On the other hand, the tantalum in the PCB for personal computer is 0.1% as shown in If the tantalum capacitor is selectively collected from various types of PCB, it is useful for the economical point of view. Characterization factors and integration factors in LCIA are from the database of LIME2 ( Total environmental burden of conventional and new flows in For the recycling of tantalum from the PCB for hard disk drive, the inventory data of conventional and new flow in The parts mounted on printed circuit board (PCB) were liberated by underwater explosion and mechanical crushing. On the bare board, 95% of copper with foil form could be liberated from carbonized bare board by stamping treatment. Glass fibers were selectively pulverized by stamping treatment and about 110 As one of the mounted parts, the multi-layered ceramic capacitors (MLCCs) including nickel were carbonized at 873 The other useful mounted parts are tantalum capacitors. While epoxy resin molding IC parts was pulverized at 723–773 When the evaluation of Cu recycling in crushed of PCB (size fraction: +4 The nickel recovery process in fine ground particles increased approximately 18% of energy and 30% energy cost comparing those of the conventional process. However, the environmental burden decreased than the conventional one. Tantalum recovery process used more heat for treatment, thus the energy consumption increased 50%, when comparing with no recycling process. However, the tantalum market value is large; therefore, the profit of $5600/t-PCB is added as a result of tantalum recovery. Also the environmental burden decreased by the recycling of tantalum recovery. Therefore, the tantalum recovery is very important for the PCB recycling. If there is no tantalum, the consumed energy and treatment cost increase in the new process though the environmental burden decreases. This study was supported in parts through