Previous research showed the effectiveness of bacterial strains as flotation reagents on Hematite beneficiation. The aim of this work is to study and evaluate Rhodococcus ruber as a biocollector. The sample was conditioned with the biomass suspension by stirring under specific conditions as particle size, biomass concentration, pH solution and conditioning time. The results showed a change in hematite zeta potential profile after interaction with R. ruber, and its adhesion onto the mineral surface was higher at pH 3 and at concentration of 0.60g/L (109
                     cells/mL). Flotation studies were carried out in a 0.23L modified Partridge–Smith cell flotation, and the highest floatability (84%) was achieved at size fraction −53μm +38μm under the conditions mentioned before. Complementary floatability studies were performed using the conventional frother Flotanol D24 combined with the R. ruber biomass, finding interesting results for the bigger particle size range. Thus, this research aims to evaluate the efficiency of bioflotation of minerals, particularly hematite, and the potential use of R. ruber as biocollector, projecting its future application in mineral flotation industry.The application of microorganisms in mineral beneficiation is not relatively new. For more than 20 Upon its promising future application in conventional flotation, it is further needed to remark how mineral bioflotation works, which could be attained by fundamental studies. A fundamental flotation study can be developed by using pure minerals. Moreover, one may consider that the adhesion of the microorganisms onto the mineral surface is mainly related to an attractive and repulsive forces between the cell wall and the mineral surface. Therefore, the separation of the desirable mineral depends on the selectiveness of the bacterial strains for a mineral surface, conferring to them hydrophobic or hydrophilic properties ( Previous studies indicate that the hematite bioflotation succeeded using other hydrophobic non-pathogenic bacteria such as  Pure hematite was used in this study. The sample was provided by a local supplier,   From now on, the cellular suspension is named as bioreagent or biomass, and its concentration was quantified first by dry weight on an oven at 60 Zeta potential measurements were made using the Zeta Meter 4.0+ apparatus (Zeta-Meter, Inc., Staunton-USA), using the electrophoresis technique. The evaluation of the zeta potential profiles of pure hematite was carried out before and after interaction with the In the adhesion experiments, 0.25 Microflotation experiments were performed in a modified Partridge–Smith cell flotation. For each of the evaluations were varied the pH of the solution, the biomass concentration, and the particle size range. An amount of 0.5 A sample of hematite after interaction with the biomass suspension was centrifuged at 4000 Zeta potential (ZP) measurements were carried out with the aim of evaluate a possible variation of the electrokinetic properties of hematite after interaction with The IEP of hematite was found at pH 5.5 approximately. According to literature, the IEP point of hematite fluctuates between a pH range of 4.8–6.4 ( The literature shows that the zeta potential profile of a mineral can change after interaction with bacterial cells. This modification is achieved through adhesion/adsorption of bacterial cells and/or metabolic products onto the mineral surface. The zeta potential tests also help to elucidate the mechanisms involved in the interaction between bacterial cells and mineral surface. According to several authors ( Studies of bacterial adhesion provide important information about the affinity of the microorganism towards the mineral surface. This ability depends on the functional groups of the bacteria cell wall and of the mineral surface. The −53  In order to evaluate the effect of    Microflotation studies were carried out in a modified Partridge–Smith cell. For the flotation experiments, using Particles exhibiting hydrophobic surface properties became attached to the bubbles. Depending upon the properties of the solution the bubbles either formed froth or burst. Floated particles were retained in both cases, either in the froth or on the annular floor of the upper section, and were collected at the end of the test by washing through the side tube. The gas flow rate was standardized at 15  The flotation studies were done for different particle sizes: −90 Before flotation experiments were performed, blank assays were made to know how much of the initial mineral sample was carried just by air bubbles (no addition of biomass or frother), expressed as % floatability, or how much was burst to the froth by agitation, expressed as % entrainment. As particle size decreases, the percentage of entrainment also decreases, whilst % floatability achieved higher values. Biomass concentration was varied in order to find an optimal concentration of According to The effect of According to In the flotation process, an important variable, perhaps the most important, is pH of the suspension. This statement is supported by the fact that mineral surface or the bacterial cell wall is activated through dissolution or hydrolysis reactions. For this stage of the work, floatability studies, were performed at a constant particle size range and biomass concentration 0.15 As it can be seen in The previous flotation results are in good accordance with the former zeta potential and adsorption results, where it was presented a higher interaction between Some studies reported a wide floatable pH range, well below the IEP of hematite. Strong flotation of hematite from pH 3 to 11 was reported, using octadecylammonium chloride C According to Finally, according to Depending on the pH of the suspension, some flotation reagents, as amines, can act as collector and as frother ( As mentioned in the Literature review, some microorganisms currently used as bioreagents can also behave as biofrothers. The property of reduce surface tension of water was conferred naturally to these microorganisms due to the presence of amides in their cell walls, which could make them behave as frothers. However, the use of an ordinary frother was not reported in the literature. Thus, the flotation experiments using flotanol, as frother, followed the same experimental procedure. The mineral was conditioned with the biomass suspension inside the Partridge–Smith cell under constant stirring with a magnetic agitator for 5  The effect of flotanol in function of pH and biomass is shown in Results of hematite bioflotation demonstrated the affinity of For smaller particles size (−53   For the  Moreover, The results presented in this paper showed the strong affiliation between The authors acknowledge