In the fields of regenerative medicine and tissue engineering, the shortcomings of autografts and allografts are driving the research of effective synthetic grafts. In particular, nanotechnology applications are being extensively studied due to the nanosized nature of the interactions between cells and the extracellular matrix of body tissues. This chapter provides an overview of the use of bioactive and bioresorbable nanoceramics for regenerative medicine purposes, focusing on tissue engineering strategies where release of the nanoceramics has a therapeutic effect for healing and regeneration. Especially, the strategy of incorporating nanoceramics in 3D polymeric matrices for bone, skin, or peripheral nerve regeneration is reviewed and discussed. In the fields of regenerative medicine and tissue engineering, the shortcomings of autografts—limited availability, donor site morbidity, and risk of infection at the donor site—and allografts—risk of immune rejection and disease transmission—have motivated the research of effective synthetic grafts that can be alternatives to auto- and allografts Nanoceramics for biomedical applications, and more specifically tissue engineering/regenerative medicine and theranostics, are classified as bioactive, bioresorbable, or bioinert. Bioactive glass nanoceramics (nBG) present unique properties. As nBG degrade they release ions that can promote osteogenesis and angiogenesis. Moreover, these materials convert to a biologically active carbonated apatite material that firmly binds to bone Bioresorbable nanoceramics are calcium-phosphate (CaP) materials including, but not limited to, hydroxyapatite (HA), tricalcium phosphate, dicalcium phosphate dihydrate (brushite), octacalcium phosphate, or biphasic calcium phosphate Bioinert nanoceramics are titanium, alumina, and zirconia-based materials. These materials are characterized by bioinertness, fracture toughness, and high mechanical strength. For instance, titanium and its alloys possess corrosion resistance, which makes them major players in the reconstruction of bone tissue The aim of this chapter is to provide an overview of the use of bioactive and bioresorbable nanoceramics for regenerative medicine purposes, focusing on tissue engineering strategies where release of the nanoceramics has a therapeutic effect for healing and regeneration. Bioceramics in general can be categorized as oxides or nonoxides. Alumina, zirconia, and titania fall under the oxide category whereas silicon carbide and silicon nitride come under the nonoxide category ( A variety of techniques have been used for the synthesis of nanoceramics due to their availability in multiple forms. These are essentially divided into top-down and bottom-up processes An excellent study encompassing the various methods of CaP nanoceramic fabrication is listed in a paper by Hong et al. Another extensively studied and researched bioactive ceramic Bioglass 45S5. It is a multicomponent oxide glass with four main components: 45% SiO Bioactive glasses can be fabricated via two main methods including the conventional melt-quenching method or the sol–gel method ( During melt quenching, certain quantities of raw materials such as SiO The selection criteria for choosing the most suitable technique for manufacturing bioglass depends on several factors since the overall aim is to manufacture a composition that would allow controlled bioactive behavior for a successful clinical application. The melt-quenching method allows the melting and casting into molds shaped for specific applications. However, the technique maybe limited to the problem of presence of metallic ions forming unwanted alloys. On the other hand, the sol–gel method permits the expansion of the compositional range at lower processing temperatures without compromising the bioactivity of the system. The sol–gel method is most commonly used in the biomedical field due to the added benefit of functionalizing these systems by the addition of biomolecules during the preparation of sol. This is advantageous because the physicochemical properties are not compromised as lower temperatures as used Nanoceramics are nanometer-sized particles usually <100 Although nanoceramics have improved bioactivity and lead to a better tissue integration upon implantation, there exist several technical challenges in their production. High cost, poor reproducibility, ineffective control of variables, and low yield of final products are common challenges during the synthesis of bioceramics As mentioned in the introduction of this chapter, bioactive and bioresorbable nanoceramics have been shown to be osteoconductive and, some of them, osteoinductive. Therefore these nanoparticles are highly attractive for bone repair and regeneration in orthopedics or dentistry applications. However, while nanoceramics can be directly injected in small bone defects, they cannot be injected to repair large bone defects. This is because the apatitic structure obtained upon dissolution of the particles will not be porous enough to allow cell migration and proliferation and good vascularization of the new bony tissue Collagen is the most frequently used protein in the fields of biomaterials and regenerative medicine due to its ubiquitousness in the human body Since plastically compressed dense collagen gels mimic the structural and mechanical properties of native osteoid, Martelli et al. investigated the effect of hybridizing dense collagen gels with osteoinductive nBG particles as scaffolds for bone tissue engineering Bone repair and regeneration in avascular necrosis of the femoral head (ANFH) is difficult due to the edema and high pressure caused by ischemia and hypoxia. Core decompression (CD) is commonly used for treating early ANFH, although its efficacy is still controversial. To improve the efficacy of CD on ANFH, Wang et al. proposed a tissue engineering strategy where bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) were combined with a scaffold made of nHA/collagen I/poly- The current clinical treatment of bone tumors requires surgery. Nevertheless, tumor cells may remain around bone defects after surgical intervention. Therefore fabrication of scaffolds for both tumor therapy and subsequent bone regeneration is a clinical need. Rong et al. developed an osteoconductive and osteosarcoma-inhibitor porous scaffold made of collagen and nHA that was loaded with poly(lactic- Finally, an interesting study by Forero and et al. presented the development of a scaffold made of gelatin, chitosan, and nHA ( Chitin and chitosan are natural polysaccharide-based polymers with attractive properties for their use in the engineering of various tissues (e.g., bone, skin, cartilage), wound healing, and drug delivery. Chitin and chitosan are biocompatible, biodegradable, and possess antibacterial, nonantigenic, and adsorption properties. Their main advantage is that they can be easily processed into various shapes and forms such as gels, micro- and nanoparticles, nanofibers or beads. Scaffolds made of chitin or chitosan possess high, interconnected, gradient porosity. For bone tissue engineering purposes, it has been shown that chitin or chitosan-based scaffolds are osteoconductive and enhance bone formation in vitro and in vivo Chitin is obtained from the shells of marine crustaceans, sponges, insects, or fungi and comprises 2-acetamido-2-deoxy-β- Incorporation of nHA into chitin or chitosan scaffolds is commonly achieved by homogeneously mixing precursor solutions for nHA with chitosan solution, which results in the Combination of chitosan, nHA, and other materials has also been explored Composites of chitin or chitosan incorporating nBG have also been widely researched and their preparation typically involves simple homogenization of the nanoparticles with a chitosan solution by blending or sonication Alginates are natural polysaccharide-based linear anionic copolymers of (1–4)-linked β-mannuronic acid and α-guluronic acid monomers Alginate-based hydrogels can incorporate bioactive and/or bioresorbable nanoceramics as reinforcing agents that also add osteogenic and osteoconductive properties to these materials, making them potential and suitable candidates for the treatment of bone defects. For example, Saini et al. recently reported the preparation of macroporous, 3D spongy scaffolds composed of alginate, gelatin, and poly(vinyl alcohol) where nanosilver hydroxyapatite was incorporated into the 3D spongy scaffolds As explained earlier in this chapter, fabrication of scaffolds for both tumor therapy and subsequent bone regeneration is a clinical need. Luo et al. recently proposed an injectable hydrogel of alginate and chitosan containing the chemotherapy drug cisplatin and polydopamine-decorated nHA. The hydrogel showed sustained release properties for cisplatin, effectively ablated tumor cells (4T1 cells) in vitro, and suppressed tumor growth in vivo. The injectable hydrogel also promoted in vitro adhesion and proliferation of bone mesenchymal stem cells Finally, in a last example of alginate-based hydrogels incorporating nBG, Rottensteiner–Brandl et al. encapsulated rat bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) into alginate dialdehyde/gelatin hydrogel with and without nBG. Results showed high cell survival in vitro for up to 28 days with or without nBG, thus proving the cell-friendly encapsulation process. After subcutaneous implantation into rats, high cell survival was observed 1 week after implantation; however, a notable decrease was seen after 4 weeks. The observed immune reaction was very mild, which proves the biocompatibility of the scaffold. Constructs incorporating nBG showed higher numbers of viable MSCs and lectin-positive endothelial cells, thus showing higher angiogenesis. Nevertheless, this difference was not significant. After these promising results, the authors are now focusing on improving long-term cell survival and differentiation potential of encapsulated cells in vivo Skin is the largest by weight and fastest-growing organ in the human body. It acts as a thermoregulatory and sensory organ and also as a protective barrier. The skin is comprised of two basic layers: the superficial thin epidermis (0.1–0.15 Silicate-based bioglasses are the oldest bioactive glasses known and therefore were the first to be investigated for skin wound healing applications. For instance, 45S5 Bioglass ionic extracts effectively promoted fibroblast proliferation and migration as well as enhanced the secretion of collagen type I, thus accelerating wound healing The strategy discussed throughout this chapter of dispersing nanoceramics in polymeric matrices has also been explored for wound healing applications. For instance, Chen et al. fabricated an electrospun nanofibrous membrane of chitosan/polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)/nBG with a spatially designed structure as a wound dressing for accelerating healing of chronic wounds. The membrane showed excellent biocompatibility, antibacterial activity, and a regenerative promotion effect. In vivo experiments in rat Peripheral nerves can suffer physical injuries caused by trauma leading to a significant loss of sensory or motor functions. Nerve regeneration can be achieved clinically with nerve guide conduits (NGCs), a concept that has existed for more than a decade and has evolved to a clinical reality as an alternative to autologous nerve grafting. An ideal NGC should be biocompatible, biodegradable, permeable to allow nutrients and waste diffusion, mechanically robust while flexible, and electrically conductive. Researchers have used a biomaterial approach to build functional artificial NGCs. One of the strategies used is to combine nBG and polymers, both natural and synthetic, of which some examples are given below. Koudehi et al. developed a nBG/gelatin NGC with a pore size of 10–40 In the fields of regenerative medicine and tissue engineering, the shortcomings of autografts and allografts have motivated research on effective synthetic grafts. In particular, nanotechnology applications have been extensively studied due to the nanosized nature of the interactions between cells and the ECM of tissues. This chapter provides an overview of the use of bioactive and bioresorbable nanoceramics for regenerative medicine purposes, focusing on tissue engineering strategies where release of the nanoceramics has a therapeutic effect for healing and regeneration of various tissues. The strategy of dispersing nanoceramics in a polymeric matrix has the potential advantages of sustained release of nanoceramic particles, biomimicry when ECM-like polymers are used, and custom-fit implants when combined with additive manufacturing techniques. This work was supported by the Restoration of Appearance and Function Trust (UK, Registered Charity No 299811) charitable funds.