Pseudomonas cepacia (PC) lipase was encapsulated in silica and aluminosilicate gels made by different chemical processes. Some samples were dried by the supercritical method in CO2 to obtain aerogels, while other ones made by the same wet chemical procedure were dried by evaporation to produce xerogels. The biocatalysts which were obtained were compared in the esterification reaction of 1-octanol by lauric acid. In all cases, the aerogels performed better than the corresponding xerogels. This biocatalysis behavior is discussed in relationship with the textural and structural characteristics of the gels, studied by nitrogen sorption, 
                        29
                        Si
                      NMR and 
                        27
                        Al
                      NMR. It is proposed that supercritical drying avoids a simultaneous compression of the gel network and of the enzyme, hence improving the biocatalytic activity.In biocatalysis, it is often advantageous to use immobilized enzymes rather than free enzymes, because this makes it more convenient to separate them from the products of a chemical reaction. Also, the supported enzymes can easily be cleaned and used in further reactions. For this purpose, many immobilization techniques have been investigated and review papers on the question have been published On the other hand, it is well known that the drying technique can drastically change a gel texture, as a consequence of the capillary stresses to which a gel network is subjected during drying. Considering that an enzyme itself consists of a proteidic chain which is folded onto itself in a complex open architecture, somewhat like a gel, it may eventually be, itself, very sensitive to drying stresses. In the present study, we report on the influence of CO The enzyme used in this study was the lipase from The silica precursors used in this study were propyltrimethoxysilane (PTMS), methyltrimethoxysilane (MTMS), tetramethoxysilane (TMOS) and tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS) all 98% pure from Aldrich. The aluminum precursor was aluminum tri- In a first series of samples, silica sols were prepared according to a method derived from Schwertfeger et al. In the second series of samples, the chemical protocol was similar to the first series except that PTMS was replaced by MTMS as the precursor of hydrophobic silica and the hydrolysis ratio was A third series of samples were made from enzyme suspensions according to a technique detailed by Reetz et al. A fourth series of samples were aluminosilicate gels. For this purpose, the Alsb precursor was first chelated with etac, with a molar ratio of etac to Al ≈1.7. This technique was combined with prehydrolysis of the silicon precursor in 2-propanol as the solvent, about 2 h before adding Alsb. The cation molar ratio of Si to Al was ≈1.5 and the total molar ratio of 2-propanol to (Si For each type of chemical protocol, xerogels and aerogels were made and given labels summarized in The porous texture of the samples was characterized by recording the nitrogen sorption isotherms, on samples first desorbed at 200°C. In most cases, these sorption isotherms were recorded on samples recovered after a catalytic test, as explained further on. The structure of the gels was mostly characterized by The catalytic activity was determined in a model esterification reaction of lauric acid by 1-octanol previously used by Reetz et al. A practical question was first to know whether the sorption isotherm of an aerogel changed significantly if it was recorded in a sample after catalysis, or in a separate unused sample. Hence the sorption isotherms of a set of three similar AMzv aerogels made in similar conditions were first examined. One sample was examined before catalysis, the second sample after catalysis followed by extensive washing in isooctane and acetone and drying by evaporation, the third sample after catalysis, washing and drying by the supercritical method. It appeared that their sorption isotherms were very similar to each other, within the natural data spread for samples submitted to a similar history (≈10%). They were of type IV in the Brunauer, Deming, Deming and Teller (BDDT) classification The xerogels had very different isotherms. For the silica XPzv and the aluminosilicate XAlz, these isotherms were still type IV but with a marked H2 hysteresis loop A special mention must be made for the Reetz type gels which roughly appeared as being non-porous. Their isotherms were virtually impossible to determine. The most extensive attempt was made for an ARzv aerogel. In the adsorption branch, equilibrium was still not achieved after ≈3 h for any single data point, so that the process had to be stopped to proceed to the next data point. In spite of this, several days were necessary to complete the adsorption branch. Moreover, when trying to register the desorption branch, the sample actually kept adsorbing nitrogen. A Brunauer, Emmett and Teller (BET) analysis of the out of equilibrium adsorption branch provided a specific surface area of ≈108 m Regarding the direct aerogels dried without intermediate liquid exchange for acetone, it appeared that the aluminosilicate DAlz ( The gel pore size distributions reported in In agreement with general knowledge, the drying technique had a drastic effect on the pore specific volume The effect of these largest mesopores was drastic on the esterification kinetics with the aerogels. These kinetics of esterification were compared for three similar AMzv samples in a different comminution state, including a small monolith (cylinder with diameter and height ≈1 cm) and a sample reduced to powder well below 200 μm. The kinetics reported in It is common to compare the initial esterification rate for an immobilized enzyme, to that for the same free enzyme. For the present study, the data are gathered in While it was not possible to have any direct grasp on the effect of supercritical drying on the enzyme structure, it was possible to compare aerogel structures with and without enzymes, by Previous structure investigations have shown that lipases such as PC can actually adopt two conformations, an open one and a closed one Actually, given the gel-like network structure of a lipase, as mentioned in The absence of a simple relationship between the enzyme size and the pore size in the gel which surrounds the enzymes, is quite normal. Indeed, the enzyme is dispersed in a sol before gelation, so that the gel network builds a porous microcapsule around the enzyme molecules, whatever their size, as illustrated in In more detail, In the xerogels, it is probable that the drying capillary stresses at least partially crushed the enzyme, which was sufficient to cause a loss of activity. Microcracking of the gel also certainly occurred, producing the small but observable increase in all mesopores above 4 nm ( It was known that the conformation of lipases encapsulated in a gel could largely be improved by grafting appropriate functionalities, such as hydrophobic groups, on the gel network which surrounds the enzyme. This study showed that a complementary and significative improvement could be achieved by reducing the capillary stresses which operate during drying. In particular CO The authors acknowledge the help of the CNRS and the `Institut de Recherches sur la Catalyse', of Lyon, France, who funded this work as part of an `Incitative Program'.