Metal dust explosions in machining industries have caused large losses in recent years. In order to evaluate and control the ignition likelihood of metal dusts generated during machining operations, it is necessary to determine the ignition characteristics such as minimum ignition energy (MIE) and minimum ignition temperature (MIT). The aim of this paper is to investigate the inerting effect of calcium carbonate (CaCO3) on these ignition characteristics. Six kinds of typical metal dusts and two kinds of pure atomized metal powders were used to determine the MIE and MIT of dust cloud in the presence of CaCO3. To provide a practical guidance for metal dust explosion prevention, the recommended percentage of CaCO3 were discussed based on the inerting effect.Metal dusts can represent significant dust explosion hazards due to their high ignition sensitivity and explosion severity. In August 2, 2014, a catastrophic aluminum dust explosion accident occurred in a buffing workshop of Kunshan Zhongrong Metal Products Co., Ltd. in Jiangsu province of China, which caused 146 deaths and 114 serious injuries. The direct financial loss was 351 million CNY. Previous studies have shown that the addition of an inert powder into a combustible dust and air mixture is a recognized method to reduce or eliminate the fire and explosion likelihoods ( Metal dusts give usually strong explosions with pressures more than 1 MPa, with possibility of deflagration to detonation transition (DDT). Introduction an inert powder usually need too much material to decrease the explosion severity to a safety level. However, metal dusts generated during machining operations are quite different from the pure metal powders due to the introduction of many non-metal materials and the fact that they are usually alloy dusts ( The main ignition sources expected in mechanical processes are mechanical sparks, hot surfaces, non-explosion-proof electrical apparatus, electrostatic discharge and hot-work. Hot-work ignition sources such as welding and cutting, which have very strong ignition capability, can't be avoided during maintenance or repairing. In this case, ignition prevention has to be implemented by safety management, such as cleaning the dust and other combustible materials in the hot-work operation areas. Ignition sources from electrical apparatus can be avoided by using explosion proof electrical apparatus. Electrostatic spark discharge (ESD) ignition sources, can be avoided by proper bonding and grounding due to the electric conductibility of metal dusts. The main objective of this paper is to investigate the possibility to prevent mechanical sparks and hot surfaces by adding inert dust. The mechanical sparks in mechanical processing industry are mainly generated from collision and friction of large particles and tools under normal operation conditions, such as grinding, polishing, sand blasting and shot blasting. These ignition sources are not as strong as that from welding or cutting. The hot surfaces are mainly the shells of the electrical apparatus. In this paper, the ignition characteristics of six kinds of metal dusts and two kinds of pure atomized metal powders in the presence of calcium carbonate (CaCO CaCO The MIE of a dust-cloud is the minimum electrical energy discharged from a capacitor, which is just sufficient to effect ignition of the most easily ignitable concentration of a dust/air mixture at the atmospheric pressure and room temperature. The MIE is mainly used to assess the likelihood of an ignition by energy during dust processing and handling, such as the mechanical spark and electrostatic discharge. In the current research the MIE was tested by a standard apparatus referred to the relative standards ( The MAIT is the minimum temperature at which a dust cloud will self-ignite under the specified conditions of test. The MAIT is mainly used to assess the likelihood of an ignition by hot surfaces, such as the hot surfaces of mechanical friction and heating. In this paper the MAIT was tested by a standard “Godbert-Greenwald” furnace referred to the relative standards ( These metal dusts usually have different microstructures and complex compositions. To obtain detailed information of the particle size of the eight samples and the inert powder, particle size distributions were measured by a laser particle size analyzer. The particle size distributions and the SEM photographs are shown in The MIE test results of the eight samples mixed with 0%, 25%, 50% and 75% CaCO Generally the samples fall into 2 groups according to the slopes of the curves in The MAIT test results of the eight samples mixed with 0%, 25%, 50% and 75% CaCO Generally the MAIT test results are similar with the MIE. The samples also fall into 2 groups according to the inerting effect of CaCO Except the Al–Mg alloy dust, the inerting effect of CaCO It is a common sense that when MIE>1000 mJ, the dust is very hard to be ignited by spark ignition sources. Therefore, MIE>1000 mJ can be set as the energy criterion for inerting effect. To prevent ignition of combustible dusts, surface temperature of electrical apparatus is restricted to a series of temperature values ranged from 85 °C to 450 °C ( As can be seen in the MIE test results, the Al–Mg alloy dust (sample 6) is hardly to be inerted by CaCO By determine the ignition characteristics of eight kinds of metal dusts, it can be concluded that (1) adding CaCO This research was supported by the