From practical point of view, determining the decarburizing depth is important in quality control of steel parts as it has undesirable effects on the mechanical properties such as hardness, wear and fatigue resistance. Traditional destructive methods of determining the depth of decarburized layer include metallographic and hardness test which are time-consuming and costly. Since response to eddy current is sensitive to chemical composition as well as microstructure of the material under consideration, the non-destructive method can be used in determining the depth of the decarburized layer in steel parts. It is mainly due to the difference in the microstructures, and as a result, in the magnetic properties of the decarburized layer with other parts of the specimen. In the present study at the first step, the magnetic properties of decarburized carbon steel bars (0.45wt.% C) were evaluated using an electromagnetic sensor and correlated with the microstructure changes from surface to the core of the sample. At the second step the steel bars were held in 900°C for different period of times and the depth of decarburizing layers were measured using hardness testing. Finally, the non-destructive eddy current technique was used and the response of test samples to the induction current including primary and secondary voltages, normalized impedance, phase angle and harmonic analysis parameters were investigated. Results show an acceptable accuracy in comparison to the destructive method.Austenitizing of steel is the primary step of all heat treatment processes. At the austenitizing temperature, carbon can easily diffuse to the surface of sample and exits as carbon monoxide (CO). Carbon content loss of the surface in steel has undesirable effects on some physical and mechanical properties of steel such as corrosion and fatigue resistance According to The International Standard ISO 3887, micro-structural observation and plotting hardness profile are two main methods for measuring decarburizing depth which are time consuming and expensive, besides, examining all parts is not possible by these methods. With increasing quality requirements, demand for more effective testing techniques has grown. Due to this, the application of process integrated non-destructive testing, which offers the possibility of non-destructive material characterization, has been increasingly emphasized in the recent years. This results in saving time and energy as well as providing 100% quality inspection in mass production lines. While various Non-Destructive Evaluation (NDE) techniques may be used on steels, one group is unique to steel — the magnetic methods such as magnetic hysteresis. The measurement of hysteresis yields a number of independent parameters, each of them changes, to some degree, with stress, strain and microstructure. On the base of magnetic properties changes, there is a strong potential for research on the new applications for the nondestructive eddy current (EC) method. Sensitivity of this method to chemical composition, microstructure and residual stress makes it a reliable alternative to the conventional destructive methods such as metallographic and mechanical tests There have been many researches to evaluate the microstructure changes using this nondestructive method. For instance, pearlite percentage of plain carbon steels and ductile cast irons In the present study an investigation was made on magnetic properties as well as complete EC responses of decarburized steel parts. An electromagnetic sensor has been used to evaluate microstructure changes of decarburized steels. Measured magnetic properties changes (saturated magnetic flux density (B AISI 1045 steel rods are used in this study. The chemical composition of the samples is shown in  Correlation between micro-hardness and microstructures has long been used to determine the decarburizing depth of steels. In the present study, hardness is 180 In general, magnetic hysteresis curve and its related parameters can be affected by changing microstructure characteristics of steel parts. For example, increasing the case depth of induction hardened parts changes the magnetic properties of the sample. A similar trend can be seen as a result of an increase in pearlite percentage of mild carbon steel. The B–H curves become wider, providing higher H In the present study, magnetic hysteresis loops for three microstructures (different percentage of ferrite in decarburized steel) at three distances from the surface are plotted. The measurement parameters extracted from the hysteresis loop in general vary monotonically with distance from the surface. As On the contrary, considering coercivity at different distances below surface, the tendency was observed in opposite direction. Coercivity represents the intensity of the applied magnetic field required to reduce the magnetization of that material to zero. By increasing the pearlite percentage, carbide layers and grain boundaries density due to the formation of lamellar structure of pearlite will be increased and thus the obstacles that can pin the domain walls and restrict their motion, will be increased. This requires a higher reverse field to unpin domain walls and contributes to a higher energy loss and as a result the coercivity increases. On the other hand, no correlations could be found between retentivity and micro-structural features. In fact it has been reported that retentivity is mostly affected by carbide morphology. In the present investigation, all the microstructures from the surface to the core exhibit the same lamellar carbide morphology, with the exception of iron carbide percentage which increases with increasing in pearlite percentage. The difference in magnetic properties of the decarburized zone (with higher percentage of ferrite microstructure) and core of the specimen is the base of eddy current method capability to determine the decarburized depth of steel rods. The response of eddy current testing is affected by two major parameters of the sample. These two parameters are microstructure and residual stress The first step for nondestructive evaluation of decarburizing depth is optimum frequency determination. Optimum frequency has been chosen by two methods: 1—Applied regression analysis between decarburizing depths and eddy current outputs, and 2—using electromagnetic skin depth equation. In the first method relations between different EC outputs and decarburizing depths in the range of 10 The skin depth decreases with increasing frequency and also with conductivity as well as permeability. At very low frequencies, if the skin depth is much larger than the decarburization layer thickness, the contribution to the eddy current outputs from the decarburized layer is too small compared to that from the core ferrite–pearlite, which is also ferromagnetic, to permit the former to be detected. On the other hand, if the skin depth is smaller than the decarburized layer thickness, the variation of the decarburized layer thickness cannot be detected as only part of the decarburized layer is being detected. Thompson and Tanner If the relative permeability and conductivity of the decarburized ferrite layer is taken as 717 and 0.67 As a result, considering both mentioned methods, 50 The measured parameter is induced voltage and the calculated parameters are impedance of coil and phase angle. Eventually the correlation coefficient (R  The relationships between decarburizing depth and calculated parameters (phase angle and normalized impedance) are shown in In As it is discussed, coercivity and hysteresis loss of decarburized zone is much lower in comparison to the core of the sample. Indeed in decarburized steels, by increasing decarburizing depth hysteresis loss decreases due to increase in ferrite percentage and so magnetic permeability increases. Thus, considering Eq. where Consequently, according to the following equations, by increasing magnetic permeability ( According to Eq. To investigate the effect of decarburizing depth on impedance plane, Eqs. The results of the calculations are presented in Another analysis for an indirect characterization of decarburizing depth is the harmonic analysis of eddy current signals The harmonic analysis of eddy current signals is based on the fact that a primary electro-magnetic field caused by a sending coil is influenced by a secondary electro-magnetic field in opposite direction. This phenomena result from the induction of eddy currents inside of the material and the magnetic behavior of the material. The variations in the magnetic properties influence the magnitude of the output signals. Therefore at the final step of present investigation, harmonic analysis (Fast Fourier Transformation) at the frequency of 50 As it is shown in  Magnetic properties changes due to different microstructure in the surface and the core of the decarburized steels have been studied. The increase in coercivity and the decrease in magnetic saturation as a function of distance below the surface have provided the potential of eddy current method for evaluation of these steels. Considering the importance of the determination of optimum frequency in nondestructive surface characterization, two methods (1 — electromagnetic skin depth equation, and 2 — applied regression analysis) have been implied and 50 At the optimum frequency the relationships between decarburizing depth of the samples and various eddy current responses were investigated and normalized impedance (R