Background
                  Despite an improved understanding of coronoid anteromedial facet (AMF) fractures, the optimal treatment protocol and technique have not yet been established. The goals of the study were to describe the characteristics of AMF fractures, to suggest a surgical strategy, and to report the outcomes after treatment according to this protocol.
               
                  Methods
                  This was a retrospective study of 19 patients with AMF fractures between 2010 and 2012. Eight patients were excluded because of secondary olecranon fracture, radial head fracture, and elbow dislocation, leaving 11 patients with isolated AMF fracture in the study cohort. There were 7 men and 4 women, with an average age of 42 years (range, 29-62 years). Fracture classification, injury pattern, and accompanying collateral ligament injury were analyzed. O'Driscoll subtype 1 fractures were treated with lateral collateral ligament (LCL) repair; O'Driscoll subtype 2 and subtype 3 fractures were treated with buttress plating and LCL repair. Plain radiographs were used to evaluate union, arthritic change, and joint articulation. Functional outcomes were evaluated with range of motion and the Mayo Elbow Performance Score.
               
                  Results
                  Two patients had O'Driscoll anteromedial subtype 1 fracture, 4 patients had subtype 2, and 5 patients had subtype 3. Two patients with subtype 1 fracture had associated posterior dislocation; 9 patients with subtype 2 or subtype 3 had associated varus posteromedial injury. All 11 patients had associated LCL injury, and 6 patients had associated medial collateral ligament injury. The mean range of motion was 128°, and the average Mayo Elbow Performance Score was 89 points. Qualitatively, patient outcomes were scored excellent in 4 patients, good in 6 patients, and fair in 1 patient.
               
                  Conclusion
                  AMF fractures are almost always accompanied by collateral ligament injuries. Thus, our surgical strategies, which include collateral ligament repair, are able to stabilize and result in favorable clinical outcomes. On the basis of our results, we recommend LCL repair alone for subtype 1 fractures and buttress plating and LCL repair for subtype 2 and subtype 3 fractures.The coronoid process plays an essential role in anterior stability of the elbow joint. The anteromedial facet (AMF) of the coronoid protrudes medially from the ulna metaphysis, widening the articular surface to act as a secondary stabilizer to varus instability. The AMF is vulnerable to strong varus stress because about 60% of the facet is not supported by the ulnar metaphysis. Although the characteristics of AMF fracture have been reported in a small number of studies, This retrospective case series study of AMF fractures of the coronoid process was performed according to the guidelines of our Institutional Review Board. Between October 2010 and February 2012, a single surgeon (J.S.L.) treated 19 consecutive patients who had fracture of the AMF of the coronoid process. Of the 19 patients, 8 had accompanying proximal olecranon fractures (5 patients) or terrible triads (3 patients), and these were excluded from the study. Thus, this study enrolled 11 patients with isolated AMF fractures. All patients were observed for a minimum of 2 years clinically and radiographically. Each patient's medical records and radiographs were reviewed for demographics, injury details, operative findings, and information about clinical and radiographic follow-up. There were 7 men and 4 women included in this study, with an average age of 42 years (range, 29-62 years). The mechanism of injury was a fall from a standing height (5 cases), a fall from a great height (3 cases), a fall off a bike (2 cases), and a sports injury (1 case). There were no open fractures. One patient had ipsilateral injuries of the distal radius and a third metacarpal base fracture, and one patient had ipsilateral distal radius and humerus shaft fractures ( All patients were evaluated with plain radiographs and 3-dimensional computed tomography (3D CT), and 7 patients were also evaluated with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Two orthopedic surgeons (J.S.L., an upper extremity specialist with 14 years of experience; and S.M.P., a fourth-year orthopedic resident) and one musculoskeletal radiologist (J.Y.J., with 10 years of experience in musculoskeletal imaging) evaluated plain radiographs, 3D CT scans, and MRI studies. All preoperative, immediately postoperative, and final postoperative radiographs for each patient were analyzed to confirm fracture classification, fracture pattern, and other associated radiologic findings (e.g., union, reduction loss, arthritic change, heterotopic ossification). Coronoid fractures were classified according to the Regan and Morrey system Final clinical follow-up required an examination documenting elbow range of motion (ROM) and complications. In addition, patients were asked to complete the Mayo Elbow Performance Score for functional evaluation. This score assesses pain intensity, ROM, stability, and function. Scores higher than 90 were considered excellent; 75 to 89, good; 60 to 74, fair; and below 60, poor. Our surgical protocol was based on the biomechanical study of Pollock et al. Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in the supine position on a radiolucent operating table. Either a posterior global incision or separate lateral and medial incisions were used. For exposure of the coronoid fracture, the ulnar nerve was first identified and mobilized, and the interval between the 2 heads of the flexor carpi ulnaris at the floor of the cubital tunnel was approached. The elbow was flexed slightly to expose the fracture site, and the fracture fragments were reduced anatomically and fixed temporarily with Kirschner wire (K-wire), with a focus on the large fragments. After the template was applied, a 2.4 titanium miniplate (Synthes, Inc, West Chester, PA, USA) was cut and bent to fit the contour of the AMF, considering the shape and size of the fragment. Large fragments were fixed with a screw. If the fragment was too small and comminuted to be fixed with a screw, one end of the plate was made into sharp prongs by cutting at the hole to grasp the small fragment. While the fracture fragments were reduced by the plate, a 2.4-mm screw was inserted through the opposite intact cortex of the ulna. In this way, the contoured plate was fixed for wrapping around the AMF and acted as a buttress. At the end of the operation, K-wires were removed ( Detachment of the LCL from the humeral origin was repaired with Bio-SutureTak anchor sutures (Arthrex) placed through drill holes at the isometric point of the lateral epicondyle (10 elbows including 4 bone avulsions), with a lateral approach through the Kocher interval. The mid-substance tear was repaired by direct suture with use of an absorbable suture material (1 elbow), but it did not seem to achieve secure repair. In cases of O'Driscoll subtype 1, small coronoid fragments that were considered to be loose in the joint were excised through the lateral approach before LCL repair. After coronoid fixation and LCL repair, the MCL was repaired if there was residual instability. Two cases had an avulsed fragment of the MCL at the humeral site that was repaired with a bone suture; another case with tendinous rupture of the MCL from near the humeral origin was repaired with an anchor. After all fixation and ligament repair had been done, stress testing was performed and joint congruency was confirmed under fluoroscopy. After coronoid fixation and ligament repair, the patient was splinted with the forearm in a neutral position and the elbow at 90° of flexion. Prophylactic radiation therapy to prevent heterotopic ossification was not routinely used. At postoperative day 4 or 5, the splint was removed and a hinged dynamic elbow brace was applied for passive flexion and extension exercises from 30° of extension to full flexion. Gentle active assisted exercise was also allowed. At 4 weeks postoperatively, the patient was allowed full extension, and gentle active assisted pronation and supination exercises were begun with the elbow at 90° of flexion. After 6 weeks, the hinged dynamic elbow brace was discontinued, and full active ROM exercises were recommended. All patients were evaluated with 3D CT preoperatively, and 7 patients were also evaluated with MRI preoperatively. According to the Regan and Morrey classification system, The mean duration of follow-up was 31 months (range, 24-38 months). The average arc of flexion and extension (± standard deviation) was 128° (±12°), with a mean flexion of 134° (±8°) and average flexion contracture of 6° (±7°). The average Mayo Elbow Performance Score was 89 (±11) points. The results were categorized as excellent in 4 patients, good in 6 patients, and fair in 1 patient. At the final follow-up, the ulnotrochlear and radiocapitellar articulations were maintained in all patients. Nine patients treated with open reduction and internal fixation had complete osseous union on the final follow-up radiographs. Tiny heterotopic ossification was radiographically evident in 2 patients, neither of whom required additional surgery; their mean range of flexion-extension was 110°. One patient had evidence of a little residual joint incongruity, but his functional score was excellent. Two patients complained of postoperative ulnar neuropathic symptoms. One patient already had neuropathic symptoms at the time of injury. For this patient, we explored and transferred the ulnar nerve to the anterior subcutaneous area, after which the patient fully recovered by 3 months. The other patient still had mild numbness of the ulnar nerve territory at 25 months postoperatively ( There were no complications, such as postoperative wound infection, implant failure, or stiff elbow, that required reoperation. No patients had radiographic or clinically persistent varus posteromedial rotatory instability after surgery at final follow-up. Fracture of the coronoid process usually occurs in combination with injury to the ligaments or bones around the elbow. This study revealed that O'Driscoll subtype 1 fracture was associated with posterior elbow dislocation injury, whereas subtype 2 and subtype 3 fractures were associated with varus subluxation. Although it is not possible to ascertain whether the different subtypes have different injury mechanisms, subtype 1 may be caused mainly by the rotational force rather than by shear force on the bone, whereas subtypes 2 and 3 may be reversed. The ligament injuries associated with a small coronoid fracture may play a more important role in elbow instability than the fracture itself. Therefore, LCL repair alone without bone fixation is sufficient to maintain elbow stability in subtype 1 fractures. In contrast, restoration of the bone structure as well as of the ligaments is essential in subtype 2 and subtype 3 fractures. Several authors have emphasized the importance of repairing the lateral ligamentous complex. Doornberg and Ring Several techniques for fixation of the coronoid fracture have been introduced, including transosseous suture through the bone tunnel, suture anchor, K-wire, and screw fixation of the AMF fragment. However, severe comminution and multiple small fragments cannot be fixed by the suture, K-wire, and screw technique. As with any study, this study had some limitations. The low incidence of this specific fracture pattern compelled us to study a small number of cases and to perform a retrospective analysis of the data. For these reasons, our results may not reflect the whole injury pattern of this fracture. Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that even small fractures were always associated with collateral ligament injury and that MCL injury may be more frequent than was previously thought. Another limitation was the relatively short follow-up period. Because of this, we could not assess the development of late complications, such as post-traumatic arthritis or implant failure. However, 24 months is thought to be sufficient to determine fracture healing, stability, ROM, and early surgical complications in fracture pattern and treatment studies. Even though this was not a long-term follow-up study, our results support following the guidelines for treatment based on the size of the fragment. Finally, the evaluation methods of ligament injury were inconsistent. MRI was recommended for all patients, but 4 patients could not undergo MRI because of personal reasons. Previously, some studies reported that the utility of MRI is controversial and not reliable for diagnosis of LCL injuries. Unlike the typical coronoid fracture, isolated AMF fracture of the coronoid is usually accompanied by collateral ligament injury, so the surgeon should take more interest in the ligament injuries. If an unstable elbow remains after coronoid fixation and LCL repair, the surgeon should check for a hidden MCL injury, particularly in subtype 2 fractures. Restoration of the ligament is more important than bone fixation in subtype 1 because this injury may be related to posterior dislocation. In subtypes 2 and 3, anatomic reduction and fixation with a miniplate of the AMF and ligament repair are needed because it acts as a bone buttress that resists the varus force and provides joint congruency. In this respect, we regard buttress plating with a miniplate to be especially useful in comminuted AMF fracture. We would like to thank Dr Tyler K. Merceron (School of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA) for revising the English grammar of this manuscript. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.