In this work, we characterize the microstructural and rheological properties of silver manganese mineral pulps during a bioleaching process in a continuous stirred-tank reactor (CSTR). Analysis of the dissolution kinetics of Manganese in the pulp during the bioleaching process reveals a dissolution level of 20–23% during 36–48 h. This percentage allows the extraction of large percentages of silver (Ag) during the cyanidation process, thus obtaining 64 wt% of Ag. The maximum value of viscosity attained in the medium (especially between 48 and 72 h) is an important parameter, since it may cause processing setbacks such as in-homogeneous agitation and increase in transport energy. Several factors contribute to the continuous change of viscosity in the media such as mineral wearing, the presence of the excreted bacterial exopolysaccharide (EPS), pH changes, particle size modifications due to mineral wear (plus corrosion) and changes in density of the medium. For this reason, it is of great importance to monitor the rheological behavior of the mineral pulp during the bioleaching and cyanidation processes. The mineral pulp behaves as a weak gel as reported in linear viscoelastic measurements.In recent years, the mineral industry has shifted to the mining of low-grade ores due to the depletion of conventional high-grade ores. For low-grade ores resources, biological processing can be economically more effective and an environmentally friendlier alternative to traditional hydro-metallurgical and pyro-metallurgical processes ( Based on the above premises, in this work we characterize the microstructural and rheological properties of silver manganese mineral pulps during the bioleaching process. Samples of manganese silver minerals used in this study were provided by the First Majestic Silver Corp. Metallurgical Laboratory, corresponding to the cyanidation tails of the Encantada plant. Initially the ore has a head law of 331.5 g/t Ag and 3.1 wt% Mn. Cyanidation obtains only 60% of Ag dissolution, leaving a residue or tail grade of 130 g/t Ag and 2.7% Mn. This residue or tail law is what we use for the bioleaching tests and subsequent cyanidation. Mineral compositions of the ores tails (residue) are analyzed using quantitative X-ray diffraction (XRD) as shown in  Heavy liquid separation (HLS) at the specific gravity of 2.9 g/cm Separation of a native strain from the iron concentrate of Bioleaching tests require a 10 L CSTR tank with paddle mixer, to which we add 9 K culture media with a microbial concentration of 10% (v/v). Operation conditions included agitation speed of 700 rpm, 1.5 vvm (temperature and volume of air under standard conditions per volume of liquid per minute) aeration and a constant pH value of 4, solid content of 30%, granulometry of 70% −200 mesh and 72 h retention time. Characterization of the pulp samples every 24 h provides the amount of Mn dissolved in silver. The pulp obtained from the bioleaching process was washed and leached with sodium cyanide at a concentration of 1000 ppm during 72 h. Samples were extracted every 12 h for rheological characterization and filtered under vacuum (number 42 millipore paper). Analyses of the liquid and solid phases to determine Ag and Mn using atomic absorption spectroscopy also included liquid-phase titration to determine free cyanide using silver nitrate with a rhodanine indicator upon adding potassium cyanide up to the equilibrium point. pH values were kept between 10.5 and 11.0 by adding calcium oxide. Dissolved oxygen rapidly reached saturation values (8 mg/L, approx.) without further change during the leaching process. FTIR analysis before and after the bioleaching and cyanidation processes (Nicolet 6700 - diamond point, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) employs the potassium bromide disk technique (KBr), providing 100 scans with resolution of 1 cm Microscopy observations follow the method of During the bioleaching process, the method followed includes extraction of samples every 12 h for the rheological characterization. Tests include steady state simple-shear and linear oscillatory flow. A vane geometry was used to prevent sedimentation in a controlled-stress rheometer (AR–G2 TA Instruments), with temperature control (Lab Companio, RW-0525G) at standard temperature conditions of 25 °C. Plots of viscosity   The peak at about 3400 cm The peaks at 1150 cm A low amount of Mn (2.74%) is usually present as    Finally, In this work, analysis of silver manganese pulps during the bioleaching and cyanidation processes included dissolution kinetics, FTIR, morphology, and rheological tests. The dissolution kinetics revealed that manganese dissolves up to 23% at 48 h process time, allowing the exposure and liberation of silver from the mineral ore and thus increasing the extraction and diminishing the cyanide used during the cyanidation process. Validation of the silver exposure appears in the FTIR spectra of samples extracted at different cyanidation times. The mineral pulp behaves as a shear-thinning fluid with a complex rheology which changes during the bioleaching process attaining a maximum viscosity at 48 h process time. The mineral pulp is a viscoelastic material with predominant viscous behavior but with Results of this bioleaching process shed light on the optimization and extraction of Ag, diminishing the cyanide amount used during the conventional cyanidation process. The increase in viscosity attained during the bioleaching process has an important effect on the power consumption of mixing, because of the larger amount of time (days) needed for these bioprocesses. We acknowledge the financial support from