The polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) mixture Aroclor 1254 alters bone tissue properties. However, the mechanisms responsible for the observed effects have not yet been clarified. This study compared the effect of Aroclor 1254 on the expression of osteoblast differentiation markers in MC3T3-E1 cells with the corresponding effect of the dioxin reference compound 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), and two PCB congeners belonging to the category of non-dioxin-like PCBs. The aim of the study was to quantify the relative influence of dioxin-like and non-dioxin-like PCB-components on osteoblast differentiation. Expression of marker genes for AhR activity and osteoblast differentiation were analyzed, and relative potency (REP) values were derived from Benchmark concentration-effect curves. Expression of alkaline phosphatase and osteocalcin were decreased by both Aroclor 1254 and TCDD exposure, while the PCB-congeners PCB19 and PCB52 slightly induced the expression. The relative potency of Aroclor 1254 for inhibitory effects on osteoblast differentiation marker genes was within the expected range as estimated from the chemical composition of Aroclor 1254. These results are consistent with previously observed bone modulations following in vivo exposure to Aroclor 1254 and TCDD, and demonstrate that the inhibitory effects of Aroclor 1254 on osteoblast differentiation by the dioxin-like constituents are over-riding the contribution of non-dioxin-like PCBs.Experimental studies have demonstrated that exposure to the potent aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) ligand 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo- Bone tissue is continuously undergoing remodeling; a regulated process that is essential for the maintenance of bone size, shape and quality ( In addition to altered bone tissue properties and modulated bone cell differentiation by exposure to TCDD alone, also the polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) mixture Aroclor 1254, containing both dioxin-like and non-dioxin-like congeners, has been shown to alter bone tissue properties similarly to TCDD in terms of decreased bone diameter, cortical thickness and cortical bone mineral density, as well as lower bone stiffness and strength in rats following perinatal exposure ( The aim of this study was to elucidate how exposure to Aroclor 1254 and TCDD affects the differentiation of osteoblastic cells, and to quantify the relative influence of dioxin-like and non-dioxin-like PCB-components. The expression of runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and osteocalcin (OCN) were used as markers for the various phases of osteoblast differentiation, and time-dependent effects by TCDD were explored. In order to further investigate in a quantitative manner the relative influence of dioxin-like and non-dioxin-like components of the PCB mixture on bone cell differentiation, the dioxin-equivalent potency of Aroclor 1254 for modulating the expression of osteoblast differentiation was estimated and compared with TCDD as well as two highly purified non-dioxin-like PCB congeners alone. Experiments were performed with the murine osteoblastic cell line MC3T3-E1, clone IV, which was obtained from DSMZ (DSMZ no. ACC 210), Germany. The cells were maintained in a basic medium containing αMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 100 Cells were seeded in 6-well plates (45 RNA was isolated from pelleted cells using E.Z.N.A Total RNA Kit (Omega Biotek, USA) as per the manufacturer’s protocol. cDNA was generated using High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems, USA), and used for quantitative RT-PCR analyses. The expression levels of selected genes were analyzed using Maxima SYBR Green/ROX qPCR Master Mix (Fermentas GmbH, Germany), and 7500 Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, USA). Target quantity was determined from a standard curve obtained from the primers. The expression levels were normalized against the levels of peptidylprolyl isomerase A (Ppia), which expression was not affected by the compounds used (data not shown). Negative controls were included in each run. Primer sequences were as follows: RUNX2 AGCCCTCGGAGAGGTACCA and TTTCATAACAGCGGAGGCATT, ALP GGACGGTGAACGGGAAAAT and CTTCTCCACCGTGGGTCTCA, OCN GCGGCCCTGAGTCTGACA and GCGCCGGAGTCTGTTCACTA, AhR GAGACCGGCTGAACACAGAG and AGCTCTTGGCCCTCAGGTAG, CYP1A1 GTCAGGACAGGAAGCTGGAC and GACTGTGTCAAACCCAGCTC, AhRR TCAGGGTAAAGAGCTTCTTCCA and GCTGGAGCTGACCATACACA, PPIA CGCCACTGTCGCTTTTCGCC and GCAAACAGCTCGAAGGAGACGC. Cells were seeded in 6-well plates (45 Parwise multiple comparisons of means were performed by the analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Dunnets posthoc test. Significance was considered for values of Curve fitting was performed with a nested set of exponential models ( The potency of Aroclor 1254 to produce toxic effects was estimated by the use of the toxic equivalency factor (TEF) concept ( To elucidate the time-course of TCDD-induced effects on osteoblast differentiation, the expression of the marker genes RUNX2, ALP and OCN were analyzed at days 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21 and 24 following exposure to 1 In order to determine the influence of the timing of exposure for TCDD to induce the observed modulations of ALP and OCN, cells were exposed to TCDD (1 No induction of apoptosis by TCDD could be observed for cells treated with 1 nM TCDD for 24, 48, 72 and 96 To confirm that the AhR signaling system is present in the model system, the expression of AhR, AhRR (AhR repressor) and CYP1A1, were analyzed following exposure to TCDD or Aroclor 1254. The AhR was expressed in the cells and the expression level was not affected by TCDD exposure (data not shown). The expression of both CYP1A1 and AhRR was concentration-dependently induced by Aroclor 1254 ( To examine if Aroclor 1254 affects osteoblast differentiation similar to TCDD, the expression of the marker genes RUNX2, ALP and OCN, were analyzed following exposure to Aroclor 1254 or TCDD for 20 In order to determine the dioxin-like potency of Aroclor 1254 for effects on osteoblast differentiation, Benchmark concentration-effect analyses were performed, and REP values were calculated based on IC PCB52 and PCB19 were used as examples of non-dioxin-like PCB congeners for examination of possible influences on osteoblast differentiation. The marker genes ALP and OCN, whose expressions were decreased by TCDD and Aroclor 1254, were analyzed. In contrast to TCDD, PCB52 increased the expression of ALP at the highest concentration ( Bone tissue is continuously remodeled, making it a sensitive target for exposure to compounds interfering with these processes. The formation of bone includes proliferation and differentiation of osteoprogenitor cells into bone matrix-producing and mineralizing osteoblasts ( The increased expression of ALP and OCN with time, which was seen in unexposed cells, was lowered in cells exposed to TCDD, suggesting inhibitory effects on the phases of matrix maturation and mineralization, which is consistent with previous studies, showing decrease of ALP and OCN expression following TCDD exposure ( One may speculate that the decreased expression of ALP and OCN is indicating effects of TCDD on mineralization. OCN deficient mice are reported to have increased bone formation rates ( Previous studies have suggested that TCDD-induced effects on osteoblastic cells, similar to most other dioxin-induced toxic effects, are mediated via the AhR ( In order to evaluate the dioxin-like potency of Aroclor 1254 for the altered expression of the osteoblast differentiation markers, REP-values were calculated and compared with the chemically based TEQ. The REP-value for the decrease in expression of ALP, derived from the IC These results support that the observed inhibition of osteoblast differentiation by Aroclor 1254 is mainly driven by the dioxin-like congeners as illustrated by similarity of the concentration-effect curves when the concentration of TCDD and Aroclor 1254 are expressed as TEQ ( When using In conclusion, the qualitative and quantitative similarities to TCDD-induced effects (i.e. inhibition of markers for osteoblast differentiation along with markers for AhR activation), as well as the slightly opposite effects on bone cell maturation from the two analyzed non-dioxin-like PCB congeners, suggest that the inhibitory effect of Aroclor 1254 on osteoblast differentiation is mainly associated with the dioxin-like constituents of the mixture, which overrides the effects of non-dioxin-like PCBs. The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest. The  This study was supported by funds from the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 