The objective of this work is to study the feasibility of mechanically-generated feedstock for use in directed energy deposition (DED) processing. Mechanically-generated powder was created by machining 316L stainless steel bar stock followed by comminution of the resulting chips through oscillation ball milling. This methodology's production yield and processing time for the specifications of a commercially available DED system are presented along with resulting powder morphology. Performance of the mechanically-generated feedstock was compared to gas-atomized powder and evaluated based on the following figures of merit: flowability, printed part height, printed part density, and chemical compositional stability throughout processing. Mechanically-generated feedstock was created to meet deposition system requirements. Compared with gas-atomized powder, mechanically-generated powder did not flow as well through the powder-delivery system. Parts printed from mechanically-generated feedstock were generally taller than their counterparts from gas-atomized feedstock, but their densities were less predictable. Chemical composition of prints using both feedstocks was within standard nominal compositions for 316L stainless steel.rake angle of the tool, rad computer-aided design directed energy deposition depth of cut, mm equivalent circle diameter, mm or μm process efficiency, % feed, mm frequency, Hz gas-atomized height, mm mass fill, g mechanically-generated material removal rate, m shear angle during cutting number of teeth laser power, W cutting tool radius, mm ratio of powder mass flow rate to scan speed, g/mm density, kg/m revolutions per minute, rev/min time, min or s thickness, mm width, mm width of cut, mm Metal additive manufacturing research has exploded in recent years due to its potential advantages and the complex challenges presented in realizing that potential More recently, the feedstock for metal additive manufacturing has received increased scrutiny focused on its role in the quality of printed parts Mahmood et al. directly used medium carbon steel machining chips to print walls using a DED process conveying the chips “to the melt pool from a disk powder feeder through a nozzle with an annular outlet area of 33 The work product from these groups suggests there is a path forward for mechanically-generated feedstock research for metal additive applications. However, it appears previous efforts have not employed a production method that facilitates evaluation of mechanically-generated feedstock's performance in a commercially available DED system. Previous work has also not considered the machining process as an integral part of the feedstock production process chain; the chips were only byproducts to use as is or process through comminution. Taking all this into account, the objective of this research was to analyze a methodology to mechanically generate feedstock for DED processing and to evaluate the performance of the feedstock in the printing process. This work proposes combining machining and oscillation ball milling to mechanically generate powder, and evaluates the performance of powder produced via this method in comparison to gas-atomized powder. The effects of mechanical generation process parameters on the yield of powder in the 45–150 A LENS® system (Optomec® MR7) was used as the platform to test the feasibility of mechanically-generated feedstock. The alloy selected for this study was 316L stainless steel, a common stainless steel utilized in many industrial applications. The manufacturer recommends that feedstock particles be between 45 Comminution methods such as a cutting mill and a planetary ball mill were considered as a path forward, but exploratory results suggested an oscillating ball mill (Retsch Mixer Mill MM 400) was the most promising method of those readily available to reduce the size of the 316L stainless steel machining chips at the fastest rate. Therefore, experiments were conducted to evaluate the effect of process parameters on the percent yield from the ball-milling process and the generation time of the total process chain when combined with shoulder milling. The first step in the mechanical generation process was to create machining chips from bar stock. In this study, chips were created on a vertical milling machine (HAAS TM-1) with a shoulder mill (Sandvik Coromant CoroMill® 490) that had indexable inserts designed for roughing and finishing (490R-08T304E-ML 2030) of stainless steel. The machining process parameters utilized in this study were within the manufacturer's recommendations for this tool and insert. Nitrogen shielding gas (N One goal of this work was to understand the effects of processing parameters in the mechanically-generated feedstock process. Therefore, a 3 Incorporating the machining parameters impact on chip size allowed for the total process time to generate 1 Machining chip morphology was analyzed using a white light focus variation metrology system (Alicona Infinite Focus) to determine the height and width of the chip, and digital calipers were used to determine the chip thickness. Powders were sieved after ball milling to be between 45 The morphology of mechanically-generated and gas-atomized powder, purchased from a supplier (Carpenter), was characterized by examining samples mounted to carbon tape with a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) (Zeiss LEO 1550VP and Thermo Scientific™ Quanta™ 600). Samples of each powder type were also mounted in epoxy (Allied High Tech Products, Inc. Epoxy Powder, Black Glass Filled) and polished to a 0.05 A flowability test was performed according to ASTM B213-17 (Standard Test Methods for Flow Rate of Metal Powders Using the Hall Flowmeter Funnel) on both the gas-atomized and mechanically-generated feedstock A study of the flowability of the powders in the LENS™ process was also conducted. The flow rate of the powder in the Optomec MR7 is controlled by adjusting the RPM of the powder auger shown in A design of experiments for DED processing was proposed by Sciammarella et al. that defined laser power, P, and the ratio of powder mass flow rate to scan speed, A stepwise regression of the effects the starting chip size, ECD The The estimated maximum yield of the oscillation ball-milling process studied was 60%. These results reveal generalizable opportunities to improve the yield of mechanically-generated feedstock production by expanding the range of process parameters based on their coefficient's sign, i.e., smaller machining chips, less mass in grinding jar, longer ball-milling times, and a higher frequency oscillation; although the latter would require a redesign of the ball mill currently utilized which has a maximum frequency of 30 There was a statistically significant difference between the ECDs and aspect ratios of the feedstocks with the gas-atomized powder being smaller and more spherical. The mechanically-generated feedstock exhibits a larger deviation in both metrics. The mean ECD for the mechanically-generated feedstock sample is 109 The Hall flow rate tests showed that the gas-atomized feedstock had a statistically significantly better flow rate than the mechanically-generated feedstock. Gas-atomized powder's mean hall flow rate was 18.9 The Hall flow rate test is a standardized test intended for the characterization of a wide range of powders in a wide range of applications The stepwise regression analyses of the effects of the laser power, Both stepwise regressions were statistically significant ( The differences seen between the two visualizations of Eqs. (7) and (8) in Relative densities of the cuboids printed from mechanically-generated feedstock were consistent across the range of processing parameters explored in this study, and therefore, none of the factors were determined to have statistically significant effects ( This equation for relative densities of cuboids printed with gas-atomized feedstock had a It has also been shown that interactions between powder particles are one of the driving factors of particle incorporation into the melt pool in DED Overall, the major constituents of 316L stainless steel, listed in Based on these findings, several improvements could be made to the mechanically-generated feedstock process chain to improve chemical composition stability, even if the current form is within acceptable process controls. The nitrogen shielding gas did not eliminate the oxidation during machining, and therefore other methods to control atmosphere as well as temperature should be investigated. Potential strategies could include machining in an enclosure that can reliably reduce the oxygen content, or temperature reduction through the use of cryogenic cooling methods. Similar strategies could be employed in the ball-milling process to address oxidation concerns. Future alloy selection for the grinding jars and grinding balls should also consider closer alignment with the alloy to be ball milled in order to reduce mechanical alloying. This work proves mechanically-generated feedstock can be used in commercially available DED systems: A predictable feedstock generation methodology is proposed that creates machining chips that are reduced to powder via oscillation ball milling. The mechanically-generated powder was larger and less spherical than gas-atomized powder. Mechanically-generated powder had a lower Hall flow rate and lower in-process flowability compared to gas-atomized powder in the LENS® powder deliver system. Cuboids printed from mechanically-generated powder were taller than those printed from gas-atomized powder. Densities were higher and more predictable when printing with gas-atomized feedstock, but prints from mechanically-generated feedstock did achieve relative densities between 98.6% and 99.8%. Prints of both feedstocks resulted in parts with chemical compositions within the specifications for 316L stainless steel. This alternative feedstock generation method offers many possibilities for further study. The comminution mechanics could be explored to exert more precise control over the size and shape of the powder particles and enable study of the direct effects of morphology on fundamental particle flowability or even spreadability for powder-bed fusion processes. Additionally, this methodology offers opportunities to introduce more diverse feedstocks into use for DED since users can generate their own powder from any purchasable or castable bar stock. Now that it has been determined it is feasible to use mechanically-generated feedstock in a commercially-available DED system, more work must be done to fundamentally understand the incorporation of irregular powder into the melt pool. This would help illucidate why the height of cuboids from mechanically-generated feedstock could be estimated based on the process parameters, but the density could not. Another ongoing goal of this work will be to analyze the energy consumption of a remanufacturing process chain utilizing this feedstock generation method. Environmental footprint has become a greater consideration for manufacturers; therefore, energy consumption models paired with knowledge of the regional grid will be necessary to empower widespread adoption of this remanufacturing technology in which a closed-loop manufacturing cycle could become a reality. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work is supported by the Grainger Institute of Engineering and the Graduate Engineering Research Scholars fellowship program at the Disclaimer: This report was prepared as an account of work sponsored by an agency of the United States Government. Neither the United States Government nor any agency thereof, nor any of their employees, makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights. Reference herein to any specific commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Government or any agency thereof. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the United States Government or any agency thereof.