Developing an efficient stent for treating atherosclerotic related diseases requires effective and appropriate methodology for the optimization of its design factors. Present work reports the use of a multi-parameter computer-aided-design (CAD) model for optimization of stent design. A defined aggregate objective function including mechanobiological and haemodynamical objectives which affect stent response in human blood vessel was minimized using the proposed model. FEM results indicate that the stents made of Nitinol can increase the risk of stent restenosis (ISR) and allergic contact dermatitis due to Ni2+ ions releasing. Moreover, a drug delivery simulation of Heparin and Paclitaxel, two commonly used drugs in drug-eluting stents, indicated that a conjugated Heparin–Paclitaxel drug is more favorable.Coronary stent, a cardiovascular implant used to compress the build-up intravascular cholesterol plaque, improves the blood flow. Stent therapy is more effective method for treating atherosclerotic related diseases compared to classic cardiological practices (i.e. Bypass, Angioplasty, Atherectomy, etc.) especially in complex situations. Identification of the effective optimum design in developing of a stent is a prerequisite for its successful commercial exploitation. This is especially true when this stent have to compete with over than 100 different designs of stents The geometrical complexity of the stent, limits the use of all standard tests required for a medical device. For instance, strain measurement is a problematic issue for the structures such as stent A survey of previous literature on optimal design of stent indicates that a parametric stent design is the main goal and the geometrical parameters have been studied very limited The aim of current work was to evaluate the geometrical parameters – namely as For simplification purposes, stent was placed in a straight single-wall cylindrical tube similar to an artery with the inner diameter of 4 Generally, in the design of a stent two parts can be recognized as: expandable ring elements in a zigzag pattern and connecting elements called ‘‘bridges’’. In the present work, the geometry of stent were parameterized by SolidWorks 2010 (Dassault Systems, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) with an inner diameter of 1.693 A multi-parameter geometry is considered for analyzing the stent design. The independent parameters are listed in A tetrahedral 20 node element with mean size of 80 Stent biomechanical response is conducted using a commercially FEM solver, ANSYS 13.0 (ANSYS, Inc. Canonsburg, Pennsylvania, USA). Nitinol and stainless steel 316 L are considered for biomechanical simulation. In the case of stainless steel 316 L an elasto-plastic model is employed and shape memory model is selected for Nitinol. The constitutive equations for the shape memory model are obtained from Thamburaja In order to solve Navier–Stokes equation, computational fluid dynamics analysis is employed using ANSYS 13.0 (ANSYS, Inc. Canonsburg, Pennsylvania, USA): The equation of drug delivery process can be described by Fick’s law as: In order to study biomechanical response of the stent, a cylindrical tube is assumed as a vessel. The friction coefficient between the stent and endothelial cells of artery is considered 0.045 For CFD analysis, the maximum inlet velocity (∼0.3 In drug delivery analysis, Dirichlet and Neumann boundary conditions are assumed for artery (except at vicinity with stent interface) and stent. The drug delivery boundary condition and the domains are shown in The optimization purposes for the evaluation of mechanobiological aspects of the stent include: Improving the mechanical stability by minimizing von Mises stress over the stent structure ( Reducing the risk of biological damage of artery – in-stent restenosis (ISR) – by minimizing von Mises stress over arterial wall tissue ( Reducing volume average von Mises stress over stent structure ( Volume average von Mises stress over artery ( Stent distortion after loading, namely as recoil, can be expressed as: Wall shear stress (WSS) on inner arterial wall tissue. An ideal optimization method satisfies the following conditions: Regarding the ASTM F2514 – 08 for design and manufacturing of stent, the ranges of Optimization procedure consists of two steps; Step 1: Mechanobiologically and haemodynamically Analyses of all models and Step 2: then, the regression based AOF function is determined. Euclidean compromise optimization, i.e. minimizing the AOF, is obtained through numerical analysis and subsequently, the geometrical parameters corresponding to the optimal conditions are estimated. The stent designed according to the optimal geometrical parameters is developed and FEM analysis is employed to verify the optimal stent design. The general and simplified procedure applied in this work is presented in Regarding the main objective of the optimization purpose, minimizing AOF, the values of AOF were plotted in The plots of AOF versus In It should be pointed out that although The distribution of wall shear stress in stent deployment area was shown in The non-homogeneity in the blood flow near the stent surface ( After FEM analysis for all models, the results were assessed by Euclidian compromise optimization method; The OSD stent design was obtained by comparing the results of 76 different models (both stainless steel 316 L and Nitinol). The tolerance values used in the objective function (as normalizing factor in Eq. Regarding the AOF values ( Two conventional problems of the stent implantation are ISR and thrombosis. Thrombus is a result of blood contact with a foreign surface that results in protein deposition and activation of complement system and clotting cascade Drug delivery simulation results demonstrated that Paclitaxel release rate is much less than that of Heparin ( In this study authors employed a three-parameter optimization method and discussed the effect of strut length on stent design. A Euclidian compromise solution was applied for optimization purpose, and the optimized stent designs were proposed and validated by FEM analysis. STD-SS-25 and STD-N-25 were introduced as final optimal stent designs by the Euclidian compromise solution method. The values of parameters for both optimal designs demonstrated as These optimized stent designs have the minimum value of maximum von Mises stress on their structures (∼52