Background
                  Bioflavonoids, secondary metabolites of plants, are beneficial in regulating human physiological mechanisms. Bioflavonoids majorly exist in the dietary intake of fruits, vegetables, legumes, pulses, etc. In addition to their cardio-protective and neuroprotective activities, they also possess prominent pharmacological effects including anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory, anti-proliferative and anti-thrombogenic actions. However, therapeutic efficacy of the bioflavonoids is hampered by their lipophilic nature, low solubility and variable bioavailability which catch the eyes of formulation scientists.
               
                  Purpose
                  Nanocrystal formulations were studied for many bioflavonoids, although enough attention has not been given to their commercial exploitation, unlike drug nanocrystals. Nanocrystals of bioflavonoid can be prepared by top-down technique, bottom-up technique or combination of both. This review primarily focuses on nanocrystal technology for bioflavonoids, methods of production, critical process parameters, in vitro and in vivo studies conducted to evaluate the efficiency.
               
                  Method
                  The detailed literature survey was systematically carried out using different electronic databases. It includes Scopus, Web of Science, Medline via PubMed, EMBASE, and Google Scholar. Also up-to-date patent search was conducted to understand the prior art and available intellectual properties.
               
                  Result and conclusion
                  It was observed that several formulation and process parameters have an impact on flavonoids nanocrystals and their therapeutic efficacy. Also, clinical studies of flavonoid nanocrystals are barely done so far and thus, substantial safety and efficacy data is necessary for its commercial applications. Nevertheless, nanocrystals can be explored as a promising technology platform for improving overall therapeutic performance of flavonoids in future.Flavonoids, secondary metabolites of plants, are abundantly found in edible part of plants such as roots, leaves, bark, flowers, vegetables, etc ( Flavonoids, derivatives of 2-phenyl-benzo-γ-pyrone, are divided into various classes depending on the positioning of B-ring (phenyl moiety) and the functional group attached to it. The basic parent compound is characterized by a phenyl ring that is attached to pyrone at the 2 Depending on the substituents and functional groups attached to the flavone ring, they are categorized as flavones, flavonols, flavanols, flavanone, isoflavones, anthocyanidins, etc as shown in Flavonoids are mostly crystalline compounds of low molecular weight. Due to the presence of sugar in flavonoid glycosides, they possess high degree of aqueous and alcoholic solubility as compared to aglycones. These compounds show prominent fluorescence under UV light and the intensity depends on presence of functional groups ( Due to high lipophilic nature of flavonoids and their relatively low solubility in aqueous body fluids, major hurdle in the formulations of flavonoids includes its less bioavailability and decreased therapeutic effects ( One of the emerging platforms for formulating flavonoids is nanocrystals, described for improving aforesaid physicochemical and therapeutic issues. Drug nanocrystals are submicron colloidal dispersion systems possessing active ingredient that is stabilized using polymers or surfactants ( In this manuscript few important flavonoids and their nanocrystal formulations have been discussed thoroughly. The production methods of nanocrystals affecting physicochemical characteristics, physical stability and rate of drug release are covered to understand optimization and smooth production of flavonoids nanocrystals. Anti-oxidant action of the flavonoid owes to direct scavenging of free radicals. Reactive oxygen species are produced by oxygen metabolism (oxidative phosphorylation) and respiratory cycle, prematurely reacts with oxygen to form superoxide (O The flavonoid anti-oxidant action depends on the arrangement of functional groups on the parent moiety and has linear relationship with the number of hydroxyl groups present. The impact of hydroxyl groups on B ring plays a significant role in determining its radical scavenging activity whereas the attachments on A and C-rings is of little influence. Another remarkable feature of flavonoids is its ability to scavenge reactive nitrogen species formed by an intermediate, peroxinitrite produced by nitric oxide and O Inflammation is body's mechanism against exogenous toxicants by releasing various inflammatory mediators such as leukotrienes, cytokines, prostaglandin, cyclooxygenase, lipooxygenase and other adhesion molecules. Arachidonic acid is released due to the sensitization of lipoxygenase and cyclooxygenase which further produces inflammatory mediators. Tyrosine kinase substrates seem to play key roles in the signal transduction pathway that regulates cell proliferation. Flavonoids inhibit cystolic and membrane tyrosine kinase and other integral kinase proteins involving tyrosin-3-monooxygenase kinase. These are predominantly involved in enzyme catalysis, transport across membranes, and transduction of signals that functions as receptors and growth factors, and energy transfer involved in ATP synthesis. Flavonoids inhibits secretion of these proteins which ultimately results in inhibition of uncontrolled cell growth and proliferation ( Another remarkable health promoting and disease preventing action of dietary flavonoids include its ability to reduce the plasma concentration of P-selectin, an adhesion molecule, generally secreted by activated endothelium and platelets. This decreased concentration of P-selectin reduces the adhesion between vascular endothelium and platelets, which otherwise triggers lipid peroxidation and ROS generation. Ultimately, the endothelial production of nitric oxide and prostacyclin is inhibited leading to cardio-protective effects. Thus, flavonoids directly possess the bioactivity to counteract cardiovascular risk factors including dyslipidemia, endothelial dysfunction, blood platelet aggregation, etc. Cardiovascular action are related to the anti-oxidant, hypolipidemic and anti-thrombogenic effects of flavonoids ( Hyperlipidaemia is marked by a sharp elevation of lipids in the blood stream and is responsible for a wide range of cardiovascular disorders like atherosclerosis. Evidence suggests that drugs possessing lipid lowering activity provide a helping hand to treat atherosclerosis as well as maintain optimum cholesterol concentration. It has been well documented that flavonoids, especially tea catechins interfere with luminal emulsification, micellar solubilisation of lipids and hydrolysis. Absorption of cholesterol from the bloodstream is reduced as tea catechins form insoluble co-precipitates of cholesterol, thus hampering its absorption. These catechins provide potent and selective inhibitory effect on rat squalene epoxidase, which is a rate limiting enzyme in cholesterol biosynthesis ( Over production of ROS is not the only pathogenic factor responsible for diabetic complications, but it plays a significant role in treating the disorder at molecular level. In type II diabetes mellitus, insulin secretion is impaired mainly due to insulin resistance, altered lipid metabolism or hampered β-cell secretory ability. An enzyme found in the epithelium of small intestine, α-glucosidase, catalyses the cleavage of glucose from disaccharides. Inhibition of this enzyme is a major way to treat Type II diabetes. About 21 flavonoids proclaim to diminish the action of α-glucosidase, luteolin being the strongest inhibitor of the enzyme. It suppressed 36% of α-glucosidase at a small concentration of 0.5 mg/mL ( Interestingly, wide range of flavonoids interferes with the initiation, progression and promotion by modulating various enzymes involved in cell proliferation, angiogenesis, and metastasis. Flavonoids exert potent carinoprotective action by inhibiting protein kinase, serine/threonine kinases and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. Also, flavonoids behave as topoisomerase inhibitors which bind to free topoisomerase, thereby preventing the formation of covalent enzyme-DNA complex which inhibits the conversion of the enzyme to potent cellular toxin ( Therapeutic actions of flavonoids has been summarised in In nanocrystal technology, the degree of crystallinity or amorphous nature of a drug varies based on the type of production method employed ( Top down method refers to mechanical attrition of coarse drug powder using a media miller or homogenizer where a suspension is formed which is forced through an aperture at extremely high velocity or shear force to reduce the size of end crystals ( Large aggregates of crystals can be grounded by piston-gap homogenization (Dissocubes® technology) or by using water mixtures/non-aqueous media (Nanopure® technology) microfluidizer technology (IDD-P® technology) so as to obtain nanocrystals of enhanced curvature, facilitating high dissolution rate ( Milling is a physical operation employed for size reduction wherein mechanical pressure imparts stress to particles that undergo deformation. Usage of bead/pearl mill to achieve size reduction is demonstrated by NanoCrystals® technology. Milling beads (size 0.1 nm to 20 nm) coated with ceramics (yttrium stabilized zirconium oxide), stainless steel, glass or zircon oxide coated beads are used to generate high shear forces causing movement of the milling media when a drug along with a stabilizer is charged into the milling chamber. The initial breakage of large crystals is attributed to the cracks or crystal cleavage plane and the fracture occurs along this plane. At the later stage, size reduction is slower as a plateau phase is reached, denoting that the mechanism of fracture changes at the steady state. As milling time increases, the mechanism of fracture of the crystals and its breakdown into fine particles is overtaken by shear stress and comminution ( In bottom-up technology, drug is precipitated from the solution either by addition of anti-solvent, drastic reduction in temperature or by incorporation of supercritical fluids involving high energy processes. Some of the widely used techniques are discussed below and illustrated in Here, drug molecule is dissolved in an organic solvent of highest solubility such as ethanol, methanol, isopropanol. Environmentally friendly solvents of PEG can also be well suited and preferred to establish a balance between nucleation rate and crystal growth. An anti-solvent, generally water, is added to the above admixture, taking into consideration insolubility of the drug. It causes the drug to precipitate out from the solution in the form of crystals. Selection of solvent-antisolvent and their ratios, rate of addition, temperature and mixing speed are the critical parameters that are needed to be controlled to obtain stable uniform nanocrystals. It is the simplest, inexpensive technique where non-complex machinery such as static mixer is required ( Supercritical liquids such as carbon dioxide, chloroform, ethylene, fluoroform are increasingly used in particle engineering of thermolabile compounds. Despite the shortcomings of supercritical fluids including its flammability, toxic nature, they are extensively used in pharmaceutical industry. CO Combination technique employs use of both, bottom-up as well as top-down methods for the efficient production of nanocrystals and predominantly aims at forming uniform, small-sized drug nanocrystals at reduced cycles which are easily scalable. It helps to overcome the drawbacks of aforementioned technologies such as clogging of equipment and prolonged process time period. In a nutshell, it consists of a pre-treatment step which includes bottom-up technique wherein drug solution is precipitated, followed by a secondary step of high energy mixing top-down process such as high pressure homogenization or ultrasound energy. Nanoedge™ technique was the first developed successfully which coupled solvent/anti-solvent precipitation followed by HPH. Later, it is being replaced by another combinatorial process called as SmartCrystal® technology in which a variety of pre-treatment steps are clubbed with a final HPH step to acquire uniform, nano size crystals. Pre-treatment steps that can be used involve spray-drying (H42 technique), media milling (CT method), lyophilization (H96 combinatorial process), and precipitation (H69 process). On the other hand, Nanopure® technique involves no pre-treatment. ArtCrystal technique aims at faster and proficient nanocrystal production where rotor-stator high speed stirring is combined with a later HPH step. It was initially developed by PharmaSol Ltd, but later acquired by Abbott Ltd. Thus, combination techniques is advantageous for faster production with easy scalability, improved stability and becomes choice of industry for production of nanocrystals ( In consideration with above fundamental aspects of this technology, formulating flavonoids as nanocrystals not only increases their saturation solubility and rate of dissolution but ultimately enhances bioavailability. The patents obtained for various nanocrystal formulations of flavonoids is given in These are O-glycosidic moieties with a hydroxyl group at 3-position and a ketone attachment onto the C-ring. They are extracted from black tea, grape fruit, broccoli, onion, and are widely known for exerting potent anti-oxidant action ( Quercetin is the most prominently required dietary anti-oxidant responsible for neutralising harmful negatively charged species and protecting against osteoporosis, cardiovascular problems, aging issues, etc. However bioavailability of quercetin is 17% in rats and a mere 1% in human thus limiting the absorption and bioactivity. Therefore, various quercetin formulations nanoemulsion ( To improve its dissolution into aqueous media, quercetin was fabricated into nanocrystals by HPH ( Kakran et al. compared quercetin nanocrystals produced by cavi-precipitation, HPH and bead milling. Nanocrystals produced by cavi-precipitation used ethanol and DMSO as solvents with a flow rate of 1 mL/min using Lab-Scale Microfluidiser HC-2000 (Microfluidics Inc., USA) and aqueous Tween 80 as an anti-solvent. This formulation possessed undesirable zeta potential values suggesting its instability which might be attributable to the presence of solvent residues. The variation in nanocrystals size and polydispersibility index produced by cavi-precipitation is mainly due to overlapping of two contradictory phenomena viz. growth of existing nanocrystals and its diminution, owing to homogenisation process. Nanocrystals produced by HPH were pre-milled to check effect of increasing pressures (2 cycles 300 bar and 500 bar, 1 cycle 1000 bar) using Tween 80 (1-2%w/w) as a stabilizer on formulation characteristics. Force required to break the crystals is not linear as crystals break mostly at their so-called surface imperfections, which decreases gradually as the crystals undergo diminution. Nanosuspension acquired by bead milling 5%w/w and 10%w/w quercetin with tween 80 as stabilizer was subjected to 2000 rpm for 90 min to procure fine nanocrystals. Smallest particle size was obtained by bead milling methodology, followed by HPH, and then cavi-precipitation due to its low energy process. However, the polydispersibility index of nanocrystals acquired by HPH was slightly lower than that of bead milled formulation. The dissolution study was depicted to be pH dependent as 62% quercetin nanocrystals dissolved at pH 6.8 in 60 min in contrast to 43% dissolution when the acidic media, pH 1.2 was used. Increase in release characteristics with increase in pH is attributed to phenolic hydroxyl group present in the moiety. Also, nanocrystals produced by bead milling depicted more saturation solubility due to increase in dissolution velocity owing to decreased particle size. Although cavi-precipitated product exhibited higher solubility, nanocrystals fabricated by HPH and bead milling displayed appreciable stability and uniformity ( Quercetin was formulated as nanocrystals by aforesaid methods including bead milling, HPH and cavi-precipitation, among which the product obtained by bead milling possessed smallest particle size with more uniformity, however, bead milling and HPH produced similar results without much variance. However, it is advisable to employ HPH as the main treatment owing to the disadvantages of bead milling such as product contamination due to bead erosion and possibility of microbial growth in aqueous phase when employed for long time. Considering a significant increase in dissolution rate compared to coarse drug, nanocrystal delivery would be used for making superior formulation of quercetin. The major pioneers of this category includes rutin, apigenin, luteolin and chrysin which are being consumed inadvertently in daily diet and are abundantly found in red wine, tomato skin, citrus, parsley, red pepper, tomato skin, etc. ( Dietary sources of apigenin (4’, 5, 7-trihydroxyflavone) comprises of wheat sprouts, tea, oranges, chamomile, onion, etc. ( Apigenin nanocrystals were produced using the bead milling technology where an aqueous surfactant solution of Plantacare 2000® UP, was used as stabilizer. It was subjected to HPH (Ultra-Turrax T25) at 10,000 rpm for 1 min and the acquired intermediate suspension was bead milledusing yttria stabilised zirconia as a milling media. Ultimately the nanosuspension was projected to a low pressure of 300 bars for one cycle to disperse the possibly formed aggregates. The nanocrystals formed by this smartCrystal® technology was a viscous suspension with high drug concentration compared to as that of the crystals produced by homogenisation alone. Fifth passage of the macrosuspension produced optimum formulation with 439 ± 20 nm size and 0.283 ± 0.040 polydispersibility index with good electrolytic and static stabilisation. Screening of anti-radical action was determined by DPPH assay. Lower value of EC Another attempt was made to formulate apigenin nanocrystals using supercritical anti-solvent process with CO Reported apigenin nanocrystals were fabricated by bead milling and supercritical anti-solvent technique. Both, the top down and bottom up technique has merits and demerits, affecting the formulation as a whole. Although the dissolution profile was remarkable in nanocrystals formed by bottom up method (supercritical anti-solvent recrystallization), the particle size was non-uniform when compared to the later. Nevertheless, nanocrystal formulations Bioactive baicalein isolated from the roots of Zhang J et al formulated baicalein nanocrystals by using anti-solvent recrystallization technique followed by HPH. The pharmacokinetic behaviour of baicalein nanocrystals was observed after an intravenous bolus dose of 10 mg/kg in male Sprague-Dawley rats and similar dose was administered by pulmonary route. Further, two groups of rats received gavage administration of baicalein nanocrystal and baicalein crystals at a dose of 121 mg/b.w. The oral bioavailability of baicalein nanocrystals was 1.67 folds more than that of baicalein crystals. On the other hand, nanocrystals given by pulmonary route showed fast and complete absorption, almost similar to intravenous bolus injection ( Nano-sized delivery system of baicalein received little attention. An attempt to formulate nanocrystals using a combination technique was successful wherein the product was reported to be absorbed rapidly when administered orally or by pulmonary route. Rutin is a polyphenolic flavonoid possessing a range of multi-spectral pharmacological activities and has been reported for potent anti-spasmodic ( Mauludin R et al prepared rutin nanocrystals by lyophilization using 20 cycles of high pressure homogeniser and sodium dodecyl sulphate as a stabilizer and then dry product was obtained by lyophilization at -70 °C. A mean particle diameter of 72 nm was obtained by Photon correlation spectroscopy and result of laser diffractometry depicted no aggregates or lumps in the nanosuspension. The acquired nanocrystals were directly compressed to obtain rutin nanocrystal-loaded tablets. From nanocrystal tablets, almost 100% rutin was dissolved in buffer pH 6.8 in 10 min. Moreover, the dissolution rate can be escalated by enhancing the saturation solubility which can be obtained by altering its crystalline state ( Another attempt to improve skin permeability was established by forming smartCrystal® using bead-milling followed by HPH. Formulation was incorporated in 5% hydrophilic hydroxypropyl cellulose gel. Tape stripping method was used to undergo In order to improve physicochemical properties of rutin such as kinetic solubility and dissolution rate, nanocrystals were prepared by HPH followed by lyophilization to attain free flowing particles and were compared with micronized marketed formulation. Kinetic solubility of lyophilized rutin nanocrystals in water was enhanced significantly where it completely dissolved within 15 min in contrast to 70% dissolution of rutin microcrystals in the same media. Therefore lyophilized rutin nanocrystals can be easily re-dispersed in water, improving its dissolution behaviour ( Nanocrystal of rutin were produced by lyophilization, spray drying and HPH. Lyophilized nanocrystals provided superior physicochemical properties whereas the one produced by HPH technique was reported to possess more absorption due to its increased saturation solubility. Rutin nanocrystal-loaded tablets depicted more pronounced therapeutic actions wherein the release of the drug can be adequately controlled. Lutein is a well-established antioxidant and free radical scavenger that provides a shield to the cellular metabolisms against oxidative stress. To increase solubility in physiological fluids, nanonisation was done by HPH using high shear forces, cavitation and particle collision. This nanosuspension was dried by lyophilization and then converted into pellet formulation. Flavanol is a group of polyphenolic secondary metabolites of plants associated with decreasing or eliminating life threatening cardiovascular disorders, neurologic, cerebrovascular, neuropsychological, and plays a significant role in neutralising negative oxygen and nitrogen species. Its role in plants include protection against UV radiation, toxins, pollutants, oxidative stress, signal transduction and is responsible for imparting colour and distinct aroma to flowers and fruits. ( Epicatechin, epigallocatechin and epigallocatechin gallate are predominantly found in food beverages such as tea, cocoa beans and is lipophilic in nature. About 18% of dry weight of cocoa beans possess epicatechin and the total content is in the range of 1.2-2.8 mg/g ( Flavanones are flavonoids containing ketone moiety at the para position of parent molecule. Being a lipophilic molecule, its permeability and penetration through cellular membranes is substantial; however solubility in body fluids poses a major limitation. Major components of this class include hesperetin, hesperidin, naringin and naringenin. Hesperetin,((S)-2,3-dihydro-5,7-dihydroxy-2-(3-hydroxy-4methoxy-phenyl)-4H-1-benzopyr an - 4-one), is an aglycone of hesperidin normally found in citrus fruits with potent anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory activity ( Hesperetin nanocrystals were prepared for its application onto the skin (dermal) or its administration orally or intravenously. The preliminary step in the production remains the same where nanosuspension is formed by passing the drug suspension through high pressure homogeniser. The later step wherein crystals are formed and stabilizer is added differentiates the formulation. Stabilizers of low molecular weight (surfactants) and comparatively high molecular weight (steric surfactants) were incorporated and significant formulation parameters were analysed. Stabilizers used were Tween 80, poloxamer 188, plantacare 2000, inulin lauryl carbamate for the study. After stability studies, poloxamer proved to be the most prominent stabilizer for crystal size followed by plantacare 2000, inutec and tween 80. In tween 80 formulation, agglomeration was observed which leads to the fluctuations in polydispersibility index and zeta potential ( Alzheimer's disease is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by progressive dementia affecting the cognitive capabilities in a wide range of population. Neurons are sensitive to oxidative damage due to ROS and mitochondrial dysfunction and result in hippocampal damage, hearing and speech impairment. To reduce the adverse effects of ROS and its aggravation and bring on a balance in oxidants and anti-oxidants in the brain, flavonoids are under spotlight. Hesperetin nanocrystals were fabricated by evaporation-precipitation technique using n-hexane as an anti-solvent. Passive avoidance test and novel object recognition test was performed to evaluate behavioural changes in the rat after drug administration (20 mg/kg and 30 mg/kg). It was observed that administration of hesperetin nanocrystals in Alzheimer's model has increased recognition consolidation, learning and hippocampal anti-oxidant levels considerably ( To facilitate increase release rate, penetration of hesperetin in gastric mucosa, and therapeutic action, hesperetin nanocrystals were developed by bottom up platform. An A recent article suggests activity of hesperetin in autism-induced animal model i.e. pregnant wistar rats. Comparative effect of nano-hesperetin and hesperetin on prenatal exposure of valproic acid to induce oxido-inflammatory changes and behavioural indexes was studied. Its effect in altering antioxidants such as (Glutathione peroxidase) GPx, (Glutathione reductase) GRx, (Catalase) CAT and (Superoxide dismutase) SOD and lipid peroxidation was deduced. Nano-hesperetin exerts appreciable neuroprotective actions, improved behavioural changes and reduction in oxidative stress in brain significantly ( The therapeutic uses of hesperetin in the treatment of autism, Alzheimer's or dermal disorders have been focused in abovementioned studies which demonstrated that nanocrystal formulation uplifts the bioavailability of hesperetin considerably. It is a predominant flavonoid occurring abundantly in peels and membranous parts of orange, lemon and is relatively more water soluble than hesperetin. As it is a bulky moiety (610.57 daltons) having molecular formula C Hesperidin nanocrystals were produced by homogenisation (1500 bar pressure, 20 cycles) followed by spray drying technique. The nanocrystals obtained possessed uniform size distribution with enhanced stability ( As reported by Varghese et al, a novel Nanoedge™ method was employed to form nanocrystals using HPMC E5 and poloxomer 188 as stabilizers. Here, nanocrystals were tailored with high drug loading when developed by spray drying method, possessed the capability to improve its anti-oxidant potential compared to plain hesperidin. Drug loading was more efficient in nanocrystals produced by Nanoedge™ whereas the smartCrystal formulation was more stable. The concluding summary of all flavonoid formulations is given in In view of vivid pharmacological actions of flavonoids, it becomes very important class of phytonutrients and researchers have started exploring them for clinical use. However, their lipophilic nature and low aqueous solubility becomes primary hindrance to convert them into suitable drug delivery systems. Several attempts were made to improve solubility of flavonoids by preparing their different polymeric, lipid based or conventional formulations. Recently fabrication of several formulations of flavonoids nanocrystals were studied for This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. We wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome.