The performance of a continuous flotation circuit is influenced by the flotation variables and the number of stages of a flotation circuit is dependent on flotation conditions, such that the interrelation between the flotation conditions and the number of stages must be carefully determined to obtain acceptable metallurgical performance from the circuit. The locked cycle test is a useful tool for simulation of continuous flotation circuits. However, it is a time-consuming and tedious procedure. A simulation method used to predict locked cycle test results from data from individual batch tests is available in the literature. In order to develop an optimum circuit configuration for a specific ore, several batch flotation tests for the first cycle of the locked cycle test have to be conducted to predict the metallurgical performance of various circuit types. Therefore, an integrated simulation method, which uses experimental data and the results of this simulation method has been developed to structure a neural network model for prediction of locked cycle tests results without additional experiment and calculation. In training and testing of the neural network model, results of the simulation method were used as the output data set and the flotation conditions of the batch tests were used as the input data set. Apart from the training and testing data, results of the LCT for several circuit types were predicted in order to validate the neural network model and to determine its performance on both: interpolation and extrapolation. Because the neural network model was trained using results of the simulation method, the use of the neural network model did not lead to any improvement in predictions of actual LCT results. However, the results of this study indicate that the neural network model can be used to simulate various circuit types with an error of less than 4%, instead of the simulation method. Consequently, the neural network model, as an alternative to the simulation method, can be used to determine the effects of changes in certain flotation variables on the number of cleaner and scavenger stages in a flotation circuit.A locked cycle test, LCT, which is a series of repetitive batch tests carried out at laboratory-scale, has been conducted to experimentally simulate a continuous flotation process, and its results can be used to develop a flotation circuit and determine operating conditions at steady state ( It is well known that the performance of a continuous circuit and the flotation variables are interactive. The number of stages of a circuit depends on the values of the flotation variables, so the interrelation between the flotation variables and the number of stages of the circuit must be carefully determined to obtain acceptable metallurgical performance. For instance, changing the particle size distribution of the feed material (or mineralogical composition of the ore, or the amount of feed material, etc.) leads to a change in the chemical composition of the pulp, the mineral surface area and the degree of liberation. Generally, fluctuations of these uncontrollable variables inevitably occurs and it is therefore necessary to determine the new values of the chemical/physical variables of the process to in order to obtain acceptable metallurgical performance from a flotation circuit. In addition, the performance of the circuit configuration chosen is inevitably affected by these fluctuations. In order to predict the metallurgical performance of the circuit configuration for each different value of each uncontrollable variable, either a new LCT must be performed or the A&K simulator must be run using the primary split factors. It is clear that several additional experiments must be performed to produce the continuous flotation data from the LCT or the A&K simulator. For these reasons, it is necessary to incorporate one of the new simulation approaches for accurate prediction of the LCT results without additional experiments. Neural networks have had an impact on the modelling and simulation of various processes that show highly non-linear dependence between different variables. After the training stage, the neural network model selected is capable not only of predicting the learning data pairs, but also of interpolating between points never observed before ( Neural networks are models inspired by the structure and functions of biological neurons. A neural network is composed of neurons, or nodes, which represent the neuron bodies. Neurons are interconnected, and these interconnections are quantified with connecting weights. Each neuron consists of two parts: the first part sums weighted inputs resulting in a quantity Two representative samples, containing 0.94% Cu and 1.48% Cu respectively, were taken from two different parts of a copper ore deposit. The main valuable minerals of the ore are chalcopyrite and pyrite in a gangue of quartz. The ore contains small amounts of sphalerite, pyrohotite and rutile. The liberation size of chalcopyrite from the other minerals is 0.038 mm. It is known that the metallurgical performance of a circuit depends not only on the chemical variables of flotation, variations in grinding characteristics and grade of the ore, but also on the number of scavenger and cleaner stages in the circuit. Therefore, the first cycle of the LCT was conducted under the flotation conditions given in The procedure for construction of the integrated simulation method can be divided into several steps, as shown in The next step in the integrated simulation method is preparation of a representative set of input-output data. When the logistic function was used as the activation function in a neural network, training and testing data sets were normalised into the range 0.1–0.9. The input (the flotation conditions of the batch tests) and the output (the results of the A&K simulator) data sets were normalised using the following equation: As previously mentioned, the number of neurons in the input layer is equal to the number of independent process variables and the number in the output layer is equal to the number of dependent process variables. Therefore a neural network, having an input layer of 24 neurons and an output layer of 4 neurons, was structured as shown in Results obtained from the first cycle of the LCT are given in The various neural network models, having the linear function or the logistic function, were trained and tested in the final step of the integration simulation method. In this step, the number of hidden layer units of the network, shown in Furthermore, in order to prove the validation of the integrated simulation method, two additional LCTs were performed. LCT-1 was performed under the flotation conditions given in As mentioned previously, testing of the NN3 model with a non-independent series of data, which were randomly selected from the same experimental data, gave good agreement between predictions from the A&K simulator and the NN3 model ( From these results, a neural network model, which can be used to predict the metallurgical performance of a flotation circuit with an acceptable error, was structured using the integrated simulation method. Because success of the integrated simulation method depends on the success of the A&K simulator, or constancy of the split factors, the use of the NN3 model, rather than the A&K simulator, to predict the LCT results, cannot lead to any improvement in predictions of actual LCT results, as can be seen from It is known that several batch flotation tests for the first cycle of the LCT must be conducted to predict the LCT results using the A&K simulator. As opposed to this, the use of the integrated simulation method reduces the experiments, and can provide collection of more information necessary for determining the optimum flotation circuit and operating conditions according to the desired product characteristics. An integrated simulation method combining the A&K simulator and a neural network model has been developed to predict LCT results without additional experimentation. The integrated simulation method consists of operations which are performed in sequence. In the experimental step, eight flotation tests for the first cycle of the LCT were performed to quantify the split factors of each stage in the flotation circuit. These individual batch data were used to predict the LCT results for ten different circuit types, using the A&K simulator. The predictions from the A&K simulator were used as the output data set (values of the dependent variables), and the flotation conditions of the experiments were used as the input data set (values of the independent variables) in the training and testing of various neural network models. In the final step of the integrated simulation method, a neural network model was structured, as an alternative to the A&K simulator. The examples discussed in this paper indicate that the neural network model can be used to predict the metallurgical performances of the various circuit types with a reasonable error (<4%) without additional experiments. In addition, the effects of feed grade fluctuations on the metallurgical performances of various circuit types for a copper ore were investigated using the neural network model, rather than the A&K simulator. It was shown that three cleaner stages were required to eliminate the effect of feed grade fluctuations in producing a saleable concentrate. In order to obtain more detailed data from the neural network, prior to the training phase, each stream of each circuit type can be included in the output layer of the neural network, as a dependent variable. In other words, the number of input and output variables, according to their significance level, can be changed/re-defined in a new application of this flexible method.