With the increase in the life expectancy of humans, the maintenance of bone in our bodies has become crucial. Allografts extracted from different human and bovine sources bring the problem of potential disease transmittal, particularly the transmittal of disease that are difficult to detect. Autogen grafts bring another problem in surgery because the bone harvesting procedure creates cause for an additional surgery. In this study, the hydroxyapatite (HA) material was produced from bovine bones with the calcination method prohibits the transmission of various disease like mad cow disease (bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE)). In this study, the calcinated powder was used as plasma feeding powder for the plasma spraying process in biomedical applications. In industrial applications, the use of bond-coating prevents thermal coefficient mismatching and usually results in a stronger material. However, it was seen than bovine hydroxyapatite (BHA) was so strong that it does not need any bond-coating application. Nonetheless, bond-coating can be used to prevent the formation of micro-cracks. BHA material produced with the calcination method can be a very economic biomaterial for plasma spraying purposes when compared to other commercially available biomaterials.Musculoskeletal system disease cost countries around the world a significant amount of money. In addition, the occurrence of bone fractures has increase due to an increased in the number of traffic accidents and the increase in life expectancy from age 35 to 70 (as compared with past centuries). In the next 25 years, with technological improvements, human life expectancy will increase to 90 years of age Hydroxyapatite (HA) is one of the most widely used biomaterials for reconstruction of the skeleton. HA is nontoxic and biocompatible with bony tissues The purpose of this study was to compare tensile strength of economically produced bovine HA (BHA) coated implants with bond-coated BHA coated implants in vitro conditions according to the ASTM F-633-79 standards. In this study, HA materials were produced from natural bones (from the shaft portion of the bovine femurs). Typically these kinds of materials were prepared by dissolving them with NaOH treatment. Before sintering, the deproteinization process would be done with reagent grade NaOH. Demineralized water would be used at each step of the procedure. However, Goldberg and Stevenson BHA was grinded very quickly for 30 s with a mechanical grinder. It was seen that for this BHA only the powder fraction between 150 and 200 μm was well suited for the plasma process. Coarser powder would block the feeder. Before plasma spraying, all samples were subjected to grit blasting with 55 μm diameter corundum. All samples were blasted with air in order to remove all corundum particles. Afterwards, these prepared samples were cleaned in acetone with an ultrasonic cleaner to remove excess oil, dirt or corundum particles. Some of these samples were mounted on a special screw plate and plasma-sprayed with a Type 3MB Metco Plasma Spray Gun with BHA. Coating thickness was continuously controlled with a digital coating thickness meter (Elcometer 345 FN, Elcometer Instruments, UK) after spraying. Half of the samples were plasma-sprayed first with a thin Al In order to determine the tensile bond strength, a Kemper and Klian testing device was used. The titanium samples which were used for tensile strength were 1 in. The X-ray diffraction pattern of the starting powder and sprayed samples were obtained with a Rigaku X-ray diffractometer with a cobalt radiation. SEM pictures of the coating from the top and cross sections were performed with a Jeol JSM T330 scanning electron microscope. Surface roughness tests indicate that bond-coatings make coating surfaces smoother (e.g., for BHA without bond-coating the result was found to be 16 μm and with bond-coating it was 14 μm). Tensile strength for the BHA coating without the bond-coating was measured to be 9 MPa, as shown as in The main X-ray diffraction peaks for the BHA powder were HA, HA, (OH, Cl, F, rich) and FA. Secondary main peaks were also a mixture of HA, HA (OH, Cl, F, rich) and FA again. Only a very small whitlockite peak was detected (as seen in The result of the Mann–Whitney Based on SEM pictures, as seen as in Bioceramics like HA have been tested and used as bone grafting material since the 1960s. In this study, it was seen that the bond-coating did not change the tensile strength as researched in a recent study (11.04 MPa for commercial HA (CHA) and 11.6 MPa for bond-coated CHA) All grafting materials which were used in the US were shown in the Tomin et al. studies. In that study, it was also reported that autogen bone grafting would cause pain and infection at the donor area Based on the results of this study, it was found that this material could be promoted as a very economic graft material and plasma spray powder because of the simplicity of the production method. It can also be said that this sintered BHA is safe from potentially transmitted diseases like bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) and others. The cell culture study of this material was promising with very positive results The bond-coating did not increase the tensile strength significantly, but fewer cracks were observed because of the thermostability due to the existence of fluorine traces. Even when using a larger powder fraction (BHA 200–150 μm, CHA 45–165 μm) for plasma spraying, BHA gives nearly the same results when compared to the control group (11–14% less) The authors would like to thank Yasar Celik and Turgut Halamoglu from Senkron Ceramic Coating Inc. (