The Ludowici LMPE Reflux Classifier is a new device designed for classifying and separating particles on the basis of size or density. This work presents a series of experimental results obtained from the first pilot scale study of the reflux classifier (RC). The main focus of the investigation was to assess the particle gravity separation and throughput performance of the device. In this study, the classifier was used to separate coal and mineral matter less than 2 mm in size. The experimental results were then compared with the performance data on a teetered bed separator (TBS). It was concluded that the classifier could offer an excellent gravity separation at a remarkably high solids throughput of 47
                        t/m
                        2
                        
                        h
                      more than 3 times higher than for a TBS. The separation performance of the RC was also better, with significantly less variation in the D
                     50 with particle size. A simple theoretical model providing an explanation of the separation performance is also presented.The Ludowici LMPE Reflux Classifier, developed at the University of Newcastle, is a new device for separating particles on the basis of either size or density. The device is best compared to a hindered settling column or teetered bed separator (TBS) (   A key finding of the second study ( A schematic representation of the RC is shown in In gravity separation, the objective is to cause particles of a density higher than a specified set point to report to one stream, and particles of lower density to a second stream. In coal preparation, the lower density particles form a low ash, coal product, and the higher density particles a high ash, mineral matter reject. The separation condition is controlled by the suspension media, which in turn can be formed autogenously or by adding a foreign high density particulate species of suitable size. In practice, the separation is governed by the settling rates of the particles, which depend on the particle diameter, density, and the suspension medium. Therefore, the particles of a given size within a feed will separate at a different efficiency and/or density. Here we are interested in describing the particle size dependence of the separation density in a fluidized bed system. Partition curves describe the probability of a particle of given density reporting to the product stream. A typical curve is shown in  The terminal velocities,  This paper describes the first pilot scale trial of the RC at a coal preparation plant, in which the device is used to separate coal and mineral matter less than 2 mm in size. Feed, product, and reject ash data were obtained for a campaign over a single day. The coal slurry was fed to the RC at an average pulp density of 47% solids. The feed contained approximately 1% +2 mm particles, 83% −2+0.125 mm particles, and 16% −0.125 mm particles. A series of 5 steady state sets of samples was obtained. A preliminary analysis was conducted on the −2+0.125 mm fraction of each of the sample sets. A full washability analysis was then conducted on a single steady state set of samples over the size range −2+0.250 mm. The washability of the size fraction −0.250+0.125 mm was not examined. The hydraulic loading of the feed slurry to the RC was The samples taken during the campaign were analysed to obtain the pulp density, mass percent in the size ranges +2, −2+0.125, and −0.125 mm and corresponding ash values in those size fractions. These samples were found to conform to material balance requirements, with little adjustment needed to produce a balance. The +2 mm material was neglected because this fraction was present at less than 1%. The −2+0.125 mm ash values obtained from all of the samples taken during the campaign are reported in The pulp densities of the overflow samples were remarkably high, ranging from 35% to 41%. In principle, the fluidization hydraulic loading only needs to be equivalent to that used in a TBS, given that this superficial velocity is sufficient to just fluidize the bed and in turn maintain a high bed concentration. Given that the feed solids loading was several times higher than in a typical TBS, the quantity of fluidizing water required relative to the quantity of feed was exceedingly low, at about 30% of that needed in a TBS. More recently, we have aimed to achieve a similar product pulp density to that produced by a TBS by adding additional water with the feed. Ideally, it will be possible to run the RC with low feed pulp densities, and hence overcome the need to install cyclones as a pre-concentration step, as required for the TBS. A full washability analysis was conducted on the −2+0.250 mm fractions of the feed, product, and reject streams of the fourth separation reported in The partition curves obtained from the washability analysis of the feed, product and reject streams are shown in The variation in the D In the case of the RC, however, it was more difficult to obtain a full compliment of data given this work was conducted at a much larger scale in a coal preparation plant. Hence, in this case, the suspension density and critical slip velocity values were obtained by adjusting the model to fit the D Assuming the suspension particles have a density of The slip velocities computed for particles of different size and density, based on a suspension density of It is interesting to consider the effect of increasing the fluidization rate on the separation. In a TBS an increase in the fluidization rate will generate an immediate and sustained reduction in the suspension density, thus shifting the lower density curves in When relatively fine high-density particles are present in the feed, it is essential to combine these fluidized bed systems with other unit operations. For example, a separation of the product at about The Reflux Classifier produced an excellent gravity separation of −2 mm coal at a high feed throughput of A full washability analysis provided details on the variation in the D The authors thank ACARP for its financial support of this work on the Reflux Classifier.