The mechanisms involved in hemimorphite flotation using the “Na2S-Pb(II)-xanthate” process, including pre-sulfurization using sodium sulfide, activation by lead cations and subsequent flotation using a butyl xanthate collector, were studied. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) coupled with energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS), and X-ray diffraction (XRD) characterization were conducted to identify the mechanism of interaction of Na2S and Pb(II) with hemimorphite particles. The results indicated that the “Na2S-Pb(II)-xanthate” process is an effective method for the flotation of hemimorphite, and the maximum recovery of the hemimorphite concentrate increased from 40% to 90%. Hydrosulfide ions were chemisorbed or participated on the hemimorphite ore surface, and a layer of ZnS was formed. The XRD results indicated that the ZnS layer was amorphous or poorly crystallized. PbS was generated by the interaction of Pb(II) with ZnS through an ion-exchange mechanism, which was verified by XPS, SEM-EDS and XRD. The XRD study indicated that the new PbS phase formed on the hemimorphite ore surface was well-crystallized “synthetic galena” with good floatability, which is critical for the potential application of hemimorphite flotation using the “Na2S-Pb(II)-xanthate” process.Zinc is the fourth most commonly used metal, following only iron, aluminum, and copper, with an annual production of approximately 13 Zinc oxide ores are the second largest sources of zinc mineral and normally occur as silicate or carbonate forms ( However, flotation of hemimorphite has not been achieved because it is highly hydrophilic ( In the flotation of sphalerite with short-chain xanthates as collectors, flotation can be achieved only after activation by heavy-metal ions, such as Cu(II), Pb(II), Zn(II), and Ag(I) ( The “Na High-quality hemimorphite samples (Lanping, Yunnan Province, China) were used throughout the research. The elemental composition of the hemimorphite samples is shown in Sodium sulfide (Na Flotation tests were conducted using an XFG flotation machine with a rotational speed of 1900 In the preparation of the sulfurized samples, a 5 XPS was performed using a Thermo Fisher K-Alpha1063 photoelectron spectrometer equipped with a micro-focused monochromatic Al Ka X-ray source (hν 1486.6 The hemimorphite ore samples, before and after the activation process, were identified using a scanning electron microscope (JSM 5600LV, Japan) equipped with a Noran Vantage 4105X energy dispersive X-ray detection (EDX). The sample preparation methods were the same as for the XPS tests in Section The crystalline nature of the films grown on the activated hemimorphite substrate is one of the keys to the successful separation of the zinc oxide ore by flotation. The sample phase and crystallinity were analyzed using a Bruker D8 Advanced X-ray diffractometer with a one-dimensional detector( The flotation results are presented in The chemical species at the hemimorphite surface during the reaction were investigated using XPS. After washing, the presulfurized hemimorphite was stirred in 2 To obtain greater insight into the reaction mechanism, high-resolution XPS analysis for S and Pb was conducted. As shown in In previous publications ( Another possible explanation is that S(II) entered into the hemimorphite crystal lattice and formed a new zinc sulfide phase on the hemimorphite surface. Further research should be conducted to evaluate the mechanism of ZnS formation; the properties of the new synthetic “sulfide mineral” layer will be discussed in the following sections. As the freshly generated zinc sulfide film could differ from natural sphalerite, and particularly the residual sulfur ion in solution could introduce severe depression of the sulfurized minerals when thio-compounds were used as collectors, the hemimorphite cannot be concentrated by sulfidizing flotation. To further improve the floatability of hemimorphite, lead ions were added to the system as activated ions. The high-resolution XPS scan of S and Pb for the washed presulfurized hemimorphite sample, which was subsequently activated by lead ions (labelled as sample C), was conducted to identify the newly generated surface components and to study the activation mechanism. As seen from It was difficult to clearly identify the component with the BE position at 137.86 To explore the surface changes of hemimorphite samples during the activation process, the morphology and mineralogy of the samples were examined using SEM photographs and EDS microanalyses (  The XRD pattern in The estimated value of the lattice parameter for the newly formed PbS film is approximately 5.937 Hemimorphite displays poor flotability under conventional flotation conditions, and the maximum recovery was only 33% without activation. Fortunately, adding Na The surface chemistry of the “Na The XPS and SEM-EDS results indicated the formation of ZnS on hemimorphite surfaces after conditioning in Na The formation of PbS on the sample surface was confirmed by XRD, which indicated that the newly formed PbS component was cubic “synthetic galena” with a highly crystalline structure. The case is particularly interesting because it may explain why the “Na This work was supported by the