Different objective functions have been used in the design of concentration plants. The frequently used functions correspond to the maximization of revenue or profit. However, there is no study examining the effect of the type of objective function on the design of these plants. This manuscript analyzes the effect of various objective functions, including the maximization of profits, the return on investment and the net present worth and the minimization of the payback period, among other functions. Additionally, the procedure for a flotation circuit design is presented that is based on a flexible superstructure, where the designer can choose the set of alternatives. Two cases were considered: the equipment design for a given circuit structure and the circuit structure design given the equipment. The generated models correspond to mixed integer nonlinear programming and nonlinear programming problems. The results indicate that the objective function has a significant effect on the obtained solution, as well as the concentration circuit structure.cleaner stage Re-cleaner stage mass flow rate of species k in concentrate streams of stage mass flow rate of species k in final concentrate mass flow rate of species total annual cost annual operational cost of stage equivalent annual cost annual depreciation gas factor annual cash flows, mass flow rate of species k in the stream from stage total mass flow rate of the feed stream to stage mass flow rate of species k in the concentrate stream from stage mass flow rate of species k in the tail stream from stage mass flow rate of species k in feed streams of stage mass flow rate of species k fed to the circuit Lang factor Lang factor for working capital grade number of hours per year of plant operation { { fixed capital cost working capital { {( {( {( cost of mine-crushing-grinding per ton of ore fed to the flotation plant number of flotation cells in stage concentrate kilowatt-hours cost profit before taxes fraction of metal paid maximum recovery at infinite time of stage refinery charge return on investment internal rate of return tax rate rougher stage scavenger stage scavenger-cleaner stage recovery of stage treatment charge payback time depreciation period cell volume in stage final tail mass flow rate of species net present worth binary variable indicating the choice of the destination stream maximum rate constant of the rectangular distribution function in stage pulp density cell residence time in stage grade deduction lower bound upper bound concentrate tail concentrate tail Flotation is a common technology used in industry for the separation of valuable components from the gangue minerals associated with the metal. The objectives of this process are to obtain maximum recovery of the valuable species and to maximize the concentrate grade. For various reasons, the separation stage is rarely complete, which is the reason why multiple interconnected flotation stages are used in practice. The optimization of a flotation circuit is typically justified because it processes thousands of tons of ore per year; thus, a marginal improvement can have a major economic impact ( The design of flotation circuits is based on the experience of the designer, which is supplemented by laboratory tests and simulations. There are several attempts in the literature to develop automated methods for designing such circuits. Most studies have used superstructures, which can express different alternative plant configurations. Then, a mathematical model is formulated based on the superstructure, and optimization techniques determine the optimal configuration and operating specifications of the plant. These optimization techniques can be classified as mathematical programming and genetic algorithm approaches. Mathematical programming has been applied in several studies ( The literature on optimization-based process design can be classified into those who consider economic performance as an objective function and those who consider it a function of technical performance. Based upon a review of the literature, In mineral processing, technical objective functions were used in early research, for example, to maximize recovery, grade or combinations of these functions ( An additional contribution of this work is the development of a flexible superstructure that allows a set of alternatives to be defined for the variable that is being optimized. The strategy uses a superstructure of stages that represent alternative flotation circuit configurations. The superstructure is based on the generic representation of a stage, which is used to represent all stages that are desired to be included in the design. In this work, for example, the following stages are considered: rougher stage (R), cleaner stage (C), scavenger stage (S), scavenger-cleaner stage (SC) and re-cleaner stage (CC). In the superstructure, discrete variables are used to represent the different alternatives for the circuit configuration and continuous variables are used to represent design specifications and operational conditions. Therefore, the formulation is complemented with requirements for the grade of the concentrate and tail.  To build the origin–destination matrix, the tasks to accomplish each stage should be considered. The task of the rougher (R) is both processing the circuit feed and maximum recovery. The rougher concentrate can be sent to the cleaner stage (C) or constitute the final concentrate (P), while the tail of the rougher stage can be processed at the scavenger stage (S) or become final tail (W). The task of the scavenger stage (S) is maximum recovery, sending its concentrate to another stage (R, C, CC, SC) and producing the final tail (W). The task of cleaner stage (C) is to increase the grade of the concentrate producing the final concentrate (P) or feeding it to the CC stage, and the cleaner tail can be processed in stages such as R, C, SC or S. The origin–destination matrix identifies all concentrate and tail paths. For example, in In the following section, the mathematical model is developed for the superstructure of The general mathematical model has the following form:  Each stream ( The following mass balances are considered: Mass balance in splitters:       In these restrictions, copper was assumed to be the species of value. However, there may be situations where more than one species has value and in these cases, the upper and lower bounds must be defined for each species.  Then, in each flotation stage, the following equations are used: The objective of the preliminary economic assessment is to determine if the projects are economically viable and to select the best alternative for further study. This evaluation consists of three steps: (a) capital costs estimate, (b) estimation of profits and (c) performance criteria. Capital costs involve fixed capital and working capital. Fixed capital costs are estimated with the following equation: Notably, Eq. (20) is valid for volumes between 5 These investment costs are performed one time only and can be expressed in monetary units, which have a value set in a specific period of time. The profits generated by the project are estimated using the following equation: Profits The total cost includes operating costs and the cost of mine-crushing-grinding per ton of ore fed to the flotation plant (  The evaluation of the criteria of profitability is derived from the combination of cash flows and this evaluation is used for selecting among the project/design alternatives. The commonly used criteria are shown in The total annual cost is a criterion often used in process engineering. It includes the annual operating costs, The mathematical model and superstructure were applied to the design of a copper concentrator, where the species are This considers the determination of the circuit configuration and dimensioning of the flotation equipment given the residence time in each cell and the number of cells in each stage. The residence time is 0.053 Using the data given in the previous section, the problem was solved by a computer program using GAMS with the solver BARON. The program output the results shown in    This considers the determination of the residence time in each cell and the number of cells in each stage given the flotation circuit configuration and the dimensions of the equipment. Circuit 1 (  Comparing cases 1 and 2 shows that the structure has a greater effect on the value of the objective function than the operating conditions. For example, the difference in income between objective functions is 29,210.3 kUS$ in case 1 compared with a difference of 2176 MUS$ for case 2. This confirms earlier studies showing that the structure has more influence than the operating conditions in the flotation circuit design on the objective function, whether its economic or technical ( From the results of cases 1 and 2, it is clear that the solutions are the same for the maximization of return on investment and the minimization of payback time. These results are similar to the one obtained by Sensitivity studies were performed to determine the effect of metal price, feed composition and kinetic constants on the results. The study was focused on the effect of the structure of the flotation circuit. The price of copper was reduced by 50% and its effect on the optimal solution was studied. The metal price, as expected, has a significant effect on all economic indicators. For example, revenues fell by approximately 60% and the internal rate of return by approximately 70%. The feed flow of chalcopyrite and pyrite were changed from 11 and 34 to 21 and 64 The values of the kinetic constants, This result is not surprising because the optimization-based process design using superstructures has shown that there are cases where the best structure is not very sensitive to the operational values. A process design procedure was presented that showed good convergence. The procedure is based on a superstructure and origin–destination matrix for the concentrate and tail streams. This matrix allowed for the identification of alternatives and the control of nonsense structures. Based on the method of flotation circuit design, the objective function was demonstrated to have an effect on the optimal structure, the equipment design and the operating conditions. Furthermore, the structure had a greater effect on the values of the objective functions than the operating conditions. The objective functions for the maximization of net present worth, the maximization of profit before taxes and the maximization of equivalent annual cost give the same optimal structures. These objective functions produce solutions with the highest capital cost and cash flow but with low profitability. Conversely, the functions for the maximization of return on investment and the minimization of payback time also provide the same optimal structures. These objective functions favor less expensive solutions with small cash flows and high profitability. Because the maximization of profit gives the same results as the net present worth and it is a simple function, it is the recommended criterion for the conceptual design of flotation circuits. Financial support from CONICYT (Fondecyt 1120794), CICITEM (R10C1004) and the Antofagasta Regional Government is gratefully acknowledged.