Background
                  Large fractures of the anterior glenoid rim can result in persisting instability and osteoarthritis of the glenohumeral joint When this fracture is associated with a glenohumeral dislocation and proximal humerus fracture could be a concern. The goal of this paper was to evaluate the clinical and radiological outcomes and complications of reverse shoulder arthroplasty (RSA) and glenoid bone graft in cases with a significant anterior glenoid fracture associated with a proximal humerus fracture.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  RSA and step bone graft harvested from proximal humeral head could be a viable option in the treatment of this complex injury.
               
                  Design
                  Retrospective case series.
               
                  Material and methods
                  Twenty-six patients underwent RSA and glenoid bone graft in a single stage procedure were evaluated at an average 32 months postoperatively. There were 18 women and 8 men with a mean age of 68.5 years (range 63–75 years). Reverse shoulder arthroplasty with a contoured glenoid bone graft placed underneath the baseplate using humeral head autograft was utilized in all cases. Clinical outcomes were evaluated with range of motion, Constant score and self-reported subjective outcome rated as excellent, good, fair or poor. Radiographic evaluation was performed to evaluate for baseplate displacement or loosening, bone graft union, resorption or collapse.
               
                  Results
                  At final follow-up, average active elevation was 135° (range 110°–145°), abduction 122° (range 60°–160°), and external rotation 30° (range 0 to 45°). The mean Constant score was 68.2 (range 54–83). The clinical results were rated as excellent by 15 patients, good by 9, and fair by 2. Radiographic evaluation showed the disc of cancellous bone graft healed without any signs of graft resorption or migration in all 26 cases. No reoperation was performed on any patient in this series.
               
                  Discussion/Conclusion
                  RSA with glenoid bone grafting produces satisfactory short-term outcomes with acceptable complication rates for treatment of patients greater than 60 years old with proximal humerus fractures associated with an anterior glenoid rim fracture. Further studies are necessary to determine the extended viability of this procedure.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  III.It is generally accepted that large fractures of the anterior glenoid rim can result in persisting instability and osteoarthritis of the glenohumeral joint There are two particular clinical situations in whom the treatment of an anterior glenoid fracture associated with an anterior shoulder dislocation cold be very difficult. These two situations are the association with a complex proximal humerus fracture (PHF) or with a two-part fracture in patients with a long history of degenerative rotator cuff tear. The treatment of displaced PHF, particularly in elderly patients can be very challenging. Open reduction and internal fixation series reported a higher risk of potential complications including loss of reduction/malunion, nonunion, and osteonecrosis Hemiarthroplasty (HA) has been considered the standard of care for complex PHF, particularly in patients younger than 70 years. Nevertheless, HA for fracture remains a challenging procedure with unpredictable functional outcomes; furthermore, persistent anterior instability in case of associated anterior glenoid rim fracture could be a concern. In case of patients with a history of degenerative well compensated rotator cuff tear, who presented a two part fracture (involving the greater tuberosity), an isolated treatment of glenoid rim fracture and greater tuberosity fixation, cannot restore a functional shoulder joint. Recently, reverse shoulder arthroplasty (RSA) has emerged as an alternative option for the treatment of acute, comminuted proximal humeral fractures in elderly patients The goal of this paper is to report a series of patients who underwent a primary RSA because of a significant anterior glenoid fracture associated with a proximal humerus fracture. Cancellous humeral head autograft was used to match the anterior glenoid defect. Clinical and radiographic follow-up at an average of 32 months is reported. The hypothesis is that this surgical technique could be a viable option in the treatment of this complex injury. From January 2008 and March 2012, 26 consecutive patients underwent RSA and glenoid bone graft in a single stage procedure. There were 18 women and 8 men with a mean age of 68.5 years (range 63–75 years). Patients presented with either a 3 or 4-part proximal humerus fracture, or with a two part fracture associated with a head splitting, or a two part proximal fracture involving the greater tuberosity associated with an history of painful shoulder related to a degenerative long-standing rotator cuff tear. All the patients sustained a traumatic anterior shoulder dislocation associated with an anterior glenoid rim fracture. For diagnostic evaluation, plain radiographs and non-contrast CT scan with 3D reconstructions were obtained in all the patients. Imaging revealed an anterior-inferior fracture of the glenoid comprising greater than 22% of the anteroposterior length of the glenoid as compared with controlateral unijuried side. CT scan was also useful to evaluate the fatty infiltration of the subscapularis and of the infraspinatus muscle in case of two part fracture associated with a history of painful shoulder related to degenerative rotator cuff tear. Patients underwent surgery at an average of 3 weeks following the initial injury (range 5 days–2 months). Clinical and radiographic follow-up was performed on all patients at an average of 32 months postoperatively (range 24–38 months). Clinical outcome included Constant score and range of motion in elevation in the scapular plane, abduction, external rotation and internal rotation. Patients were asked to grade their subjective outcomes as excellent, good, fair, or poor. Radiographic evaluation with an anteroposterior view in neutral rotation and Bernageau view were performed. Radiographic examination focused on the presence of baseplate displacement or loosening, bone graft union, resorption or collapse. Glenosphere and baseplate fixation was graded in a manner previously described as stable, at risk, or loose This was a retrospective study approved by the Institutional Review Board of our institute through a declaration of acknowledgment (n. 21/2014), and all subjects gave informed consent to underwent to this type of surgery and to be included in this study. All surgery was performed in a modified beach chair position on a standard operating room table with the head elevated between 20–30 degrees and the ipsilateral scapula supported. In all cases we used a either an Aequalis™ Reversed II or Ascend flex reverse shoulder arthroplasty (Tornier, Edina, MN). In particular we use the ascend flex in 4 cases. In two cases we use a long PTC stem, whether in the other two cases we use a standard short stem. These last two cases were the patients with a two part fracture where the fragment of greater tuberosity was a very small fragment. A deltopectoral approach was used. The biceps tendon was tenodesed to the upper border of the pectoralis major in all cases. In case of 3–4 parts proximal humeral fracture, after removal of the humeral head fragment, four No. 5 non-absorbable sutures were placed through the infraspinatus and teres minor at the bone-tendon junction to control the greater tuberosity fragment. The lesser tuberosity and attached subscapularis was also identified and tagged as well for later repair around the prosthesis. In cases of glenoid fracture and a two-part proximal humerus fracture associated with a degenerative long-standing rotator cuff tear, subscapularis tendon, when present, was tagged and detached prior to humeral head dislocation. In all cases, the cancellous autograft was harvested from humeral head using a dedicated instrumentation similar to one previously reported The glenoid was then prepared. The drilling of central hole for baseplate was oriented so to increase anchorage length and purchase in the native scapula as much was possible. Because of anterior glenoid fracture drilling was often done with some anteversion. This was done in a fashion to capture as more glenoid bone as possible; excessive anteversion should be avoided to reduce the stress on the anterior part of the glenoid bone graft. In all cases a 25 Once the baseplate was fixed, the glenosphere was then implanted in a standard fashion. The humerus was exposed and prepared with hand reamers until there is gentle cortical resistance. A humeral trial is then placed. Appropriate height of the humeral implant in cases of associated proximal humerus fracture was determined preoperatively based on a previously described technique Postoperatively, patients are placed in a sling for six weeks. Passive motion with flexion to 90 degrees and external rotation to 30 degrees is started after 3 weeks in the supine position. Active-assisted motion in all planes is initiated starting at week 6. In 18 of 26 cases the fracture of the glenoid was just anterior ( CT scan revealed a grade III fatty infiltration of the infraspinatus or subscapularis, or both, according to Goutallier, in patients with a two part fracture associated with a previous history of degenerative rotator cuff tear. At final follow-up, average active elevation was 135° (range 110°–145°), abduction 122° (range 60°–160°) and external rotation 30° (range 0°–45°). The mean Constant score was 68.2 (range 54–83). The clinical results were rated as excellent by 15 patients, good by 9, and fair by 2. There were no cases of postoperative dislocation. One patient had a superficial infection that was treated successfully with oral antibiotics. No case of deep infection were observed. No revisions were performed in this series. Radiographic evaluation showed the disc of cancellous bone graft healed without any signs of graft resorption or migration in all 26 cases. There were no radiolucencies at the baseplate-bone interface. No failure due to baseplate loosening and a collapse of the graft were observed. In 2 of 26 cases the glenosphere was implanted in a more anteverted position because of a large anterior glenoid defect at the time of surgery. The glenosphere remained stable and no baseplate motion was observed at final follow-up. We observe two cases of heterotopic ossification at the inferior glenoid rim. No case of glenoid notching was reported. There were no humeral stem-associated complications. In this paper, we report a series of patients who underwent a primary RSA associated with implantation of a cancellous glenoid bone autograft because of a significant anterior glenoid fracture associated with an anterior shoulder dislocation. The literature has reported a 5.4% to 32% incidence of anterior glenoid rim fractures associated with recurrent dislocation When a significant anterior glenoid fracture is associated with a PHF, the management is challenging. In case of a 3 and 4-part PHF in patients older than 65 years despite the advent of locking plate technology, ORIF is still prone to high complication rates Lahav et al. previously reported on two patients with an anterior glenoid fracture associated with proximal humerus fracture managed with ORIF of the glenoid and HA Recently, RSA has become an attractive option for treating displaced proximal humerus fractures in the elderly because it relies primarily on deltoid muscle function and may minimize the need for anatomic tuberosity healing/rotator cuff function. Several studies have demonstrated more predictable functional outcome after RSA compared with HA RSA has been shown to relieve pain and improve function in shoulder associated with degenerative long-standing rotator cuff tear Bone defects of the glenoid and reduced bone stock can represent a problem for baseplate fixation during RSA Our study has several weaknesses. This was a retrospective study with a relatively small sample size and short-term follow-up. Surgical indications were based on the individual experience of the surgeons. Surgery was done by two different surgeons who have extensive experience with RSA. This factor may predispose to subtle differences in the execution of critical components of the procedure that otherwise may have affected the final outcome. Graft and baseplate positioning were evaluated with X ray and not with a CT scan and in consequence the evaluation of partial graft resorption or pseudoarthrosis of bone graft was not precise. However, X ray imaging could be enough to evaluate that there are subsidence, displacement or loosening of the prosthetic components. In addition, in our study there was not a control group for comparison. The long-term survivorship of the glenoid bone graft remains uncertain and warrants further study. RSA with glenoid bone grafting is a viable option with satisfactory mid-term outcomes for treatment of patients greater than 60 years old with a proximal humerus fractures associated with an anterior glenoid rim fracture compromising less than 30% of the anteroposterior glenoid width. A minimum anchorage length of 10 to 15 SGK is a paid consultant for Wright medical. AC is a paid consultant for Lima. The other authors declare that they have no competing interest.