The wastewater treatment plant at a poultry slaughterhouse (Céu Azul Alimentos Ltda) comprises a dissolved-air flotation (DAF) system and two upflow anaerobic sludge blanket (UASB) reactors. Diagnosis of the primary treatment unit pointed out the saturation pressure maintained below the recommended values and the non-recycling DAF-effluent as critical points. The DAF system operation, using 24mg Al3+/l, polyaluminum chloride (PAC) associated with 1.5mg/l anionic polymer, and the full-industrial effluent pressurization at 300kPa, accomplished rather low average removal efficiencies of 43±15% suspended solids (SS) and 49±8% oil and grease (O&G). Lab-scale DAF studies showed that by implementing pressurization of 40% recycled DAF-effluent at 450kPa, using the same chemicals and dosages as in full-scale, would result in 74% SS and 99% O&G removals. By utilizing alternative organic coagulants under proper conditions, the same removal efficiencies would be observed, however, being limited by their costs. The improvement on the DAF system performance would not only avoid instability in the DAF process, but would also ensure the robustness and stability of the UASB process in response to an increase in the industrial production and, moreover, prevent sludge washout, biological activity inhibition and scum layer formation on the top of the reactors.Poultry slaughterhouses generate wastewater mainly in the industrial slaughtering process, in the washing of equipment and facilities and in the production of by-products ( The main characteristics of slaughterhouse wastewater make it suitable for biological treatment applications ( The process variables, which control the DAF system, namely the saturation pressure, recycle rate, air/solids (A/S) ratio, hydraulic surface load, depend on the influent characteristics, the pretreatment process and the effluent quality requirements ( Flotation performance can be improved by adding chemicals to raw wastewater. Removals of 38–70% SS and 63–95% fat are reported in DAF units used in pretreating wastewater from animal slaughtering ( Various coagulant and flocculant combinations have been used in an attempt to improve the removal of organic matter and suspended particles from industrial effluents. In addition to the traditional coagulants, alum, iron salts, and lime ( Despite the importance of treating poultry slaughter industry wastewater, general and specific reports on full-scale wastewater treatment plants (WWTP) showing their difficulties and problem-solving strategies are scarce, thus making the evaluation of the employed technologies difficult. The WWTP at Céu Azul Alimentos Ltda (Sorocaba, SP, Brazil) is composed of rotary and static screens, an equalization tank, a DAF system and two UASB reactors ( The monitoring parameters of the industrial effluent (equalization tank) and the reactors’ influent and effluent were evaluated monthly from January 2004 through August 2005. The industrial effluent taken from the equalization tank was used in the lab-scale flotation tests. During the tests (total) TCOD (soluble) SCOD, SS, O&G, and total phosphorus (TP) in the industrial effluent varied from 1913 to 5157, 854 to 1350, 876 to 1326, 169 to 498, and 22 to 33 Two sets of tests were carried out. First, flotation was performed in order to investigate the influence of the recycle rate on the flotation separation. The flotation tests were carried out at 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50% recycle rates, corresponding to A/S ratios 0.012, 0.028, 0.048, 0.074, and 0.111 PAC was supplied by IP, Insumos Piracicabanos Ltda. Aqua plus anionic polyacrylamide solution plus A90 was supplied by NCH Brasil Ltda. Similar full-scale plant dosages of PAC (24 Rapid mixing was carried out in a Milan JT 103 jar test apparatus at 110 Flocculation took place at 60 Flotation velocity (a term used in batch lab-scale DAF tests) means the velocity in which the flocs rise from the bottom of the column to the sampling port, as this height was fixed at 280 The monitoring parameters were analyzed according to the Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater ( The lab-scale DAF removal efficiency goals were set at 50% for TCOD and 70% for SS and O&G, which meet the DAF-effluent quality requirements. Nevertheless, it is necessary to take into account that to ensure economic feasibility, the cost of chemicals should also be observed. TCOD, SS, and O&G removal efficiencies in the DAF system were 43 The full-influent pressurization in the DAF system operating condition is commonly used when flocculation is not needed, large volumes of air bubbles are required and shearing effects of pressure pumps are not prejudicial ( For 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50% recycle rates, the TCOD removal efficiencies were of 11, 55, 63, 57, and 54%, respectively, considering 10 Comparing the DAF-effluent quality of both the full-scale unit ( The results obtained by adding a coagulation/flocculation step ( The use of 24 Considering the cationic polymer use, the SS removals were highly dependent on the dosage. By adding 30–50 When comparing the use of 150 Flotation can separate very small or light particles more completely and faster than sedimentation can. Unlike sedimentation, flotation does not require large flocs, which leads to a reduction in chemicals dosage ( In chemical treatments, chemicals may form the largest individual share of operating costs ( By implementing a chemical treatment, prior to the DAF, under a proper rapid mixing and flocculation design and by pressurizing 40% recycled DAF-effluent at 400–600 Although there is no direct correlation between the flotation velocities obtained at the batch units and the hydraulic surface load of continuous-flow flotation units, conclusions regarding the influence of the hydraulic surface loads on full-scale flotation units performance can be drawn based on the batch results ( The best A/S ratios obtained in lab-scale tests, 0.054–0.078 Wastewater composition plays an important role in the UASB reactors performance. Operating problems such as overload, sludge flotation, scum layer formation, sludge blanket channeling, biomass washout, and methanogenic activity inhibition may be caused by high SS and O&G concentrations in the wastewater; hence, affecting its stability and performance ( Although SS and O&G concentrations in the DAF-effluent did not affect the performance of both full-scale UASB reactors when removing soluble organic matter ( The O&G/COD ratio of the UASB reactors’ influent varied between 3.7 and 9.0%. The O&G/COD ratio would be lowered to 0.2% after the DAF process was improved. Improving the DAF system performance would not only avoid instability in the DAF process, but would also ensure the robustness and stability of the UASB process. The load reduction applied to UASB reactors by improving the DAF system ( The full-scale DAF system operation, using 24 Lab-scale DAF studies showed that by implementing pressurization of 40% recycled DAF-effluent at 450 SCOD and TP were not removed by the flotation process itself. Chemical pretreatment led to SCOD and TP removal efficiencies of 6–22 and 4–34%, respectively. Since phosphorous is a nutrient for biomass, such low TP removal efficiencies would not limit the posterior biological treatment. Coagulant dosages above either 30 The authors gratefully acknowledge FAPESP—Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (Brazil) for the financial support granted for this project (process # 2002/03997-1) and Céu Azul Alimentos Ltda for its operational support.