Tool forces from rock cutting tests were numerically simulated by using a discrete element method (DEM). Tribological interactions such as contact, shearing, fracturing, friction and wear were used during these cutting tests. Particle assemblies, representing Paarl granite and Sandstone-2, were created in through a material-genesis procedure. The macro-properties of the particle assemblies, namely Young's modulus, Poisson's ratio, uniaxial and triaxial compressive strength, and Brazilian tensile strength, were calibrated. The influence of particle size on the calibration was also investigated.
                  Different rock cutting tools were simulated, namely a chisel-shaped tool and a button-shaped tool. The numerical cutting tools were treated as rigid walls to simplify the simulation and the tool forces were therefore not influenced by wearing of the cutting tool. In each simulation the cutting tools advanced at a constant velocity. The tool forces, in three orthogonal directions, were recorded during the numerical simulations and the peak cutting forces were also predicted by theoretical equations. The damage to the assemblies, representing Paarl granite and Sandstone-2, was revealed as broken bonds, which merge into macroscopic fractures. The mean peak cutting forces obtained from numerical, theoretical and experimental models (from the literature) were compared. It was pointed out that the influence of cutting depth and wear plays a substantial part in the cutting process and has to be included in the numerical simulation for the results to be accurate and verifiable.There are many industries, for instance the oil, gas and mining industry, in which the mechanics of rock cutting as well as modelling of the process have very important implications. As we drill deeper into the earth, it becomes more challenging, and greater drilling problems occur. The higher temperatures and pressures as well as harder rock in deep drilling, increase the wear of the bit and shorten the bit life. It is therefore of great value to be able to simulate and optimize the cutting process of hard rock to reveal what happens during tool–rock interactions and the wear it undergoes to make the mineral extraction process more economic through this process. For the model to be credible, it should also be verifiable with data obtained from laboratory tests. To be able to optimize the cutting process, it is necessary to have knowledge about the properties of the rock to be cut, as well as the tool geometric parameters and the tool operational parameters. The tool geometric parameters include the design of the tool, its orientation and its properties, while the basic tool operational parameters include the cutting depth and the cutting velocity Various research studies have also been carried out to understand the behaviour of rock during rock cutting processes in underground conditions. The uniaxial compressive strength of the rocks, previously used to model cutting processes, ranged from about 6–174 In this paper, high strength Paarl granite and Sandstone-2 will be simulated and the calibration of these models will be discussed. Orthogonal rock cutting procedures will be investigated and simulated with the use of a numerical method, namely discrete element method (DEM) in association with PFC3D DEM is a numerical technique that was introduced by Cundall in 1971 The DEM process involves several steps to calculate the particle movement. At a given time, each particle is defined in terms of mass, radius, position, velocity and acceleration. The next step involves finding all the existing contacts between the spheres. Each contact allows the calculation of the interaction forces between spheres and then Newton's law is applied to determine the acceleration of each particle. The particle speed and position are determined by an integration algorithm at time The translational and rotational motion of the rigid particles is described by means of the standard equations of rigid body dynamics. For the In these equations, Eqs. The forces acting on the cutting tool can be divided into three orthogonal forces, namely normal, cutting and sideway forces. The normal forces are perpendicular to the direction of cutting while the cutting forces are applied parallel to the direction of cutting and the sideway forces are measured transverse to the cutting direction. From these forces, the cutting force plays the lead role in optimizing cuttability Nishimatsu In this equation, The angle of internal friction ( Evans also formulated a model for chisel-shaped picks In addition to these theoretical models, data of laboratory experiments are necessary to validate the numerical models that will be developed in this paper. After a comprehensive literature study, experimental data from Balci and Bilgin The difficulty in using DEM to simulate rock is that the input properties cannot generally be derived directly from the results of laboratory tests. These properties are unknown and a relation between the model properties and the measured material properties has to be found. This is done through a calibration process. Rectangular parallelepiped specimens representing Paarl granite and Sandstone-2 were simulated with the material-genesis procedure described in Calibration is usually performed for four tuning parameters, which are the macroscopic material properties namely Young's modulus of the particle, Poisson's ratio, as well as tensile and shear strength for particle bonds. The microscopic parameters are all the constitutive model parameters governing the interaction between a pair of particles, namely the normal and tangential stiffness, the interface strengths in the normal and tangential directions, the Coulomb friction coefficient and the contact damping coefficient. The micro-properties used throughout the simulations for Paarl granite can be found in These micro-properties are chosen to match the macroscopic material properties of Paarl granite and Sandstone-2. The micro-properties used in According to Potyondy and Cundall The grain and cement Young's moduli are chosen to match the material Young's moduli and the ratio of normal to shear stiffness of the grain and cement are chosen to match the Poisson's ratio. The only reason why the moduli and ratio of normal to shear stiffness of the grain and cement are chosen to be equal is to reduce the number of free parameters during the simulation. It is not clear to what the friction coefficient should be calibrated, therefore 0.5 was specified as a reasonably non-zero value. The tensile and shear strength of the cement are set equal to each other so that both tensile and shear micro failures may be possible and also to reduce variables during calibration. The values of the tensile and shear strengths are chosen to match the unconfined compressive strength. With an increase in the tensile and shear strength, the unconfined compressive strength also increases. The micro-properties in The uniaxial and triaxial tests were performed using both a rectangular parallelepiped specimen with all six walls, as well as a cylindrical specimen cut out of the original specimen with a lateral cylindrical wall around it, as well as a top and bottom plate. The Brazilian test was performed with a cylinder surrounded by the six walls and just before the actual test begins, the In It should be noted that the bond breakages during these tests were tracked as cracks which is displayed as black or red cylinders in the figures. The thickness of these cylinders equals the gap between the initially bonded particles. The black cylinders depict tension-induced parallel-bond failure and the red cylinders depict shear-induced parallel-bond failure. Therefore if the bond tensile strength was exceeded, black cylinders were used and if the bond shear strength was exceeded, red cylinders were used to represent the cracks. For the calibration of Paarl granite, the rectangular parallelepiped and cylindrical specimens were simulated with different values of Each specimen, in the different particle size ranges, was subjected to a uniaxial and triaxial compressive strength test as well as a Brazilian test. The results are displayed in From There is also a noteworthy difference in the results obtained from rectangular parallelepiped specimens and those obtained from cylindrical specimens. The macro-properties from the rectangular parallelepiped specimens are higher than those of the cylindrical specimens. The reason is that the packing arrangements changed when the cylinder was cut out of the rectangular parallelepiped specimen and bonds may also have broken during this process. The rectangular parallelepiped specimens are thus stronger than the cylindrical specimens. In The calibration for Sandstone-2 was done in the same way with average particle sizes of 0.401 Balci and Bilgin A laboratory cutting test was performed at Element Six in Johannesburg with a vertical bore machine. The rock sample to be tested was Paarl granite and a chamfered button-shaped cutter was used with a rake angle of −20° and a neutral approach angle. The rock sample had an octagonal shape and was turned at 30 In the numerical simulation two linear overlapping cuts were made, which only represented a very small piece of the real octagonal shaped block and therefore the rotation of the block was ignored during this simulation. The cutting tool consisted out of three cylindrical walls, as seen in Rock cutting tests were carried out on Paarl granite and Sandstone-2 numerical samples and factors that affect the simulated forces were considered. These factors included the size of the particles, as well as the depth of cut. The forces found by means of numerical simulation were also compared to the forces obtained during experimental cutting tests and those calculated theoretically. During the PFC3D Since 20 The graphs of the cutting and normal forces for the chisel-shaped picks at 5 When cutting a sample with 0.401 The Sandstone-2 specimen and the sharp chisel-shaped pick at 5 Although the stiffness of the walls around the specimen was decreased to a fraction of 0.001 of the average particle normal stiffness to simulate a soft confinement, it can be seen in The numerically simulated forces were compared to experimental and theoretical data. The experimental rock cutting test was previously performed and the experimental data was published in The results of the numerical, theoretical and experimental data for the chisel-shaped pick at 5 The reasons for this difference in values are the conditions of the cutting process for instance temperature and the distribution of locked-in stresses in the particle assembly. A cutting distance was not specified in Another argument that has to be kept in mind is that a perfectly sharp chisel-shaped pick was used during the numerical simulation with high stiffness, rigid walls and therefore there could not be any wear on the pick itself, which would increase the forces. During the experimental studies, on the other hand, there is damaged to the pick and the wear increases over the cutting distance. Therefore the experimental forces should in fact be higher than the numerical forces over a longer cutting distance. As can be seen from the rock cutting test data presented in  Another observation that can be made from this figure is that the cutting forces are larger when cutting a sample with 0.401 Since the experimental data available only gave the variation of tool forces for relieved cutting with an increasing wear flat, as seen in Another problem with the verification of the results was that the cutting tool was simulated out of rigid walls and therefore no wear could be detected on the tool during the simulation. The only solution was to simulate a cutting tool with a chamfered area to represent the wear for the second cut. The wear flat during the vertical bore test was defined as in The first cut was simulated with a sharp button-shaped cutter, in other words the edge of the cutter was not chamfered and therefore it had a cylindrical shape. This was done to represent a sharp cutting tool without any wear. The tool forces that were recorded during this simulation, after 20 The average value of the normal force is higher than the average value of the cutting force. The reason it is higher is because of the large back rake angle of 20° and therefore the contact area between the particles and the cutting tool is larger in the vertical direction. The average value of the sideways force is very close to zero and it shows that there is almost no interaction between the particles and the cutting tool in the When the first cut was simulated with a 0.4×45° chamfered button-shaped cutter, in other words with wear on the cutting tool, the tool forces after 20 The second cut was simulated with a 0.4×45° chamfered button-shaped cutter. The feed rate was specified as 3–8 The overlap of the second cut with the first was calculated with the following method. Since the rake angle of the numerical simulation was −20°, the cut had an elliptical shape, as seen in The width of the cut (c) could then be calculated by substituting The width of the cut was therefore 6.18 Using Eq. The tool forces that were recorded during this simulation, after 20 Since the diameter of the cutting tool during the vertical bore test was 20 When looking back at There is a greater agreement between the numerically simulated and experimental tool forces at 0 After these observations, it is evident that the overlap of cuts has to be considered during the simulation of a vertical bore test, a numerically sharp button-shaped cutter should already be chamfered and wear flat plays a significant role in the cutting process and has to be included in the simulation. In this paper three dimensional numerical modelling of rock cutting tests with different cutting tools were conducted and tool forces acting on the cutting tools were recorded at different cutting conditions. Paarl granite and Sandstone-2 were simulated in PFC3D The failure planes and distribution of cracks during the calibration tests were very similar to those conducted in the laboratory and the results suggested that the DEM is capable to reproduce the damage formation during calibration tests successfully. From the results obtained, it was also concluded that particle size is not a free parameter but influences the macro-properties to a great extent. There was not a strong correlation between the numerical and the experimental models as well as the theoretical and experimental models of the cutting tests with chisel-shaped picks. It was concluded that using perfectly sharp picks during the simulations, as well as the cutting conditions, such as temperature and stress distribution in the specimen led to the significant difference between the numerical and the experimental forces. For the chisel-shaped picks, Evan's equation predicted mean peak cutting forces the closest to the real values. Overall there was an increase in normal and cutting forces with an increase in depth of cut, since a greater area of the pick was exposed to the rock sample. When cutting with button-shaped cutters, only a small amount of wear on the cutter already influenced the cutting process to a great extent, making cutting more difficult. Overall this study concludes that DEM and PFC3D The authors would like to thank the