Surface dissolution was proved as a fundamental phenomenon in the flotation of spodumene. This study presents an improved understanding of surface dissolution behavior and the corresponding surface states involving consideration of topography, chemical species distribution, as well as oleate adsorption at spodumene surface treated by sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and hydrochloric acid (HCl). Micro-flotation results showed that spodumene flotation was activated with NaOH treatment but was depressed with HCl treatment when sodium oleate was used as a collector. AFM imaging revealed variations in surface topography, indicative of different dissolution behaviors. Water rinsing treatment increased flotation response of NaOH-treated spodumene but had no effect in the case of HCl treatment. Colloidal substances precipitated at surface conditioned in NaOH solution as evidenced from in-situ AFM, and appeared to be unfavorable for oleate adsorption. Chemical states of elements at surface were influenced by treatments, and larger relative contents of Al and unsaturated Al at surface with NaOH treatment were revealed by XPS as compared with that treated by HCl. Density functional theory calculations indicated that unsaturated Al was favorable for oleate adsorption. It seems the relative content of unsaturated Al at surface influenced by acid and alkali treatments dominates the extent of oleate adsorption.Spodumene is the main lithium bearing silicate mineral. It is commonly found in pegmatite deposits in association with other silicate minerals such as feldspar, mica and quartz Alkali treatment is commonly used in the flotation of spodumene ores In regard to the interpretation of the effects of alkali treatment on spodumene, a theory that is widely accepted is that alkali treatment eliminates contaminations such as impurities and slimes at spodumene surfaces Generally, it is widely recognized that acid or alkali treatment modifies mineral surface properties through surface dissolution. Surface dissolution influences mineral surfaces primarily in a manner that changing the quantity, state, and location of elements on the mineral surface Furthermore, researchers in the fields including geoscience, environmental science, and extractive metallurgy have made great efforts to understand the behaviors and fundamental features of mineral surface dissolution. It is found that not only the distribution of elements on mineral surface but also the tomography of minerals are affected by surface dissolution In short, even though the effects of surface dissolution on spodumene flotation are quite clear, the dissolution features and the explanation of the phenomena involved are still lacking. With advanced tools, including atomic force microscopy (AFM) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), spodumene surface features as influenced by surface dissolution can be considered in great detail. To obtain an improved understanding of the dissolution features of spodumene, the acid and alkali treatments on spodumene were carried out, and their surface features after dissolution were described and contrasted. The acid and alkali solutions after spodumene treatment were analyzed by inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) to confirm the dissolved species. Furthermore, the interaction of sodium oleate (NaOL) with elements in different chemical states at spodumene surfaces was studied using the density functional theory (DFT) calculation. A spodumene crystal was obtained from Koktokay Rare Metal Mine, Xinjiang, China. The crystal was crushed and screened to obtain a particle size of −1.6 mm. Then a high intensity magnetic separator was used to remove iron contaminants from samples. Sodium oleate (NaOL) (>97.0%, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd) was used as a collector in the micro-flotation tests. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) (>98%, Xilong Scientific) and hydrochloric acid (HCl) (>36%, Xilong Scientific) were used as received. The deionized water (DI water) with a resistivity of 18.3 MΩ·cm was used for the experiments. The spodumene sample with a particle size of −1.6 mm was used for the grinding and acid/alkali treatment experiments performed in a nylon ball mill with a size of 105 mm × 140 mm. The grinding media were zirconia balls with various diameters (25, 20, 15, and 10 mm). 5 g of spodumene samples, 15 ml of DI water and a desired amount of sodium hydroxide or hydrochloric acid were placed in the mill, and then ground for 7 min at a rotation speed of 230 rpm to obtain a particle size of −0.074 mm occupying 75% of the total weight of particles. After the grinding process, the ground samples were subjected to rinsing treatment prior to micro-flotation tests. The rinsing treatment was carried out to wash off the residues on surfaces of ground samples. Regarding the rinsing treatment procedure, after grinding, the sample was filtered and transferred to a 100 ml beaker filled with DI water, and stirred manually for 5 min. After standing for 2 min, the supernatant was decanted, and the beaker with ground samples was again filled with DI water for next rinsing treatment. The rinsing treatment process was repeated 4 times so the pH of supernatant is neutral. After rinsing treatment, the sample was filtered for subsequent experiments. The rinsed water was planned to be dealt with the flotation waste water and reused for flotation after waste water treatment. In order to identify the influence of the times of rinsing treatment on the flotation response of spodumene with alkali and acid treatment (ground in 37.5 mmol/L NaOH or 20 mmol/L HCl solution), the ground spodumene samples were rinsed with DI water based on the above rinsing treatment procedure individually for 2–6 times, and their flotation response was studied by micro-flotation tests. For each micro-flotation tests, 5 g of ground samples with or without rinsing treatment were placed in a laboratory flotation apparatus with a 20 ml cell, and then the cell was filled with 20 ml of DI water. The system was conditioned for 3 min at the desired pH adjusted by NaOH solution at an impeller speed of 2200 rpm. Then NaOL with a concentration of 6.5 × 10 A Nano ZS 90 was used for zeta potential measurements of ground samples. The ground samples of 20 mg from different conditions were put in the beaker filled with 40 ml DI water. Then the system pH was adjusted by NaOH or HCl solutions, after which the system was stirred for 5 min and stood for 3 min. Finally, the supernatant was injected into the cell for zeta potential tests. Each test condition was independently repeated 3 times and the average value was reported as the final result. The maximum experimental variation in zeta potential values was less than 1 mV. Contact angles at the spodumene crystal surface were measured with a Tension meter 3S (GBX, French) using the sessile drop technique. In the case of contact angles at the surface without acid or alkali treatment, the natural contact angles were measured at the clean crystal surface in the absence of collector. In terms of contact angles at the crystal surface with acid or alkali treatment, the spodumene crystal was conditioned in NaOH (37.5 mmol/L) or HCl (20 mmol/L) solutions for 20 min, cleaned using copious amount of DI water, and then dried with high-purity nitrogen gas. The treated crystal surface without collector was used for the natural contact angle measurements. In the presence of collector, the crystal with or without acid/alkali treatments was transferred to a beaker filled with 6.5 × 10 In order to study the effects of surface dissolution and/or grinding on the surface topography of spodumene, the AFM imaging was performed in a Multimode SPMAFM (Veeco Instruments Inc., USA). Silicon nitride (Si A Phenom proX (Phenom World) SEM was used to perform semi-quantitative EDS elemental analysis for spodumene surfaces before and after dissolution treatment. Samples were coated with Au and mounted on the sample holder with double sided carbon tape. XPS measurements were carried out for quantitative elemental analysis of the surface of the ground samples. Ground samples from different conditions were wet screened to obtain a particle size of-74 μm, then filtered, and dried in an oven at a temperature of 60 °C. The samples were fixed onto the sample holder using double sided adhesive tapes for the XPS (ESCALAB 250Xi, Thermo Fisher Scientific) measurements. A pass energy of 30 eV and a step size of 1 eV were adopted for the survey scan of a wide spectrum (1350–0 eV) collection, while a pass energy of 100 eV was used for high resolution scans of Al2p, Si2p and Li1s. Raw data obtained from the XPS measurements were processed in the CasaXPS software package to to fit all spectra The inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS), ICAP Qc (Thermo Fisher Scientific), was used to determine the dissolved species from spodumene in solutions. After each grinding, the ground samples with grinding solutions were filtered, and the filtrate was kept for the ICP-MS measurements. Prior to each test, the filtrate was centrifuged at 9000 rpm for 10 min. Then the supernatant of about 15 ml was transferred to a beaker, and diluted to obtain a neutral to weakly acidic solution for the ICP-MS measurements. The molecular structures of oleic acid ion, and species of Al, Li, as well as initial configuration models of the interaction of the oleic acid ion and Al or Li species were built in the GaussView 5 program, and optimized using the geometry optimization model in the Gaussian 09 program. The B3LYP level of theory with the standard 6-31G valence double-zeta basis set was adopted. The interaction energy ( Micro-flotation experiments were performed for spodumene with acid or alkali treatment (ground in NaOH solution or HCl solution) using 6.5 × 10 It was found in the experiments that the times of rinsing treatment on spodumene with NaOH treatment affected the flotation response of spodumene, as shown in Hydrophobicity is a fundamental property of minerals and accounts for mineral flotation behaviors. Hydrophobicity of a mineral surface can be measured by contact angle measurements. The contact angle results for water-treated spodumene (ground in DI water), and spodumene treated with37.5 mmol/L NaOH solution, 20 mmol/L HCl solution, in the presence and absence of NaOL, are shown in In the presence of NaOL, however, the results are considerably different. It is noteworthy that NaOL has very good adsorption at the spodumene surface treated by NaOH as indicated by its large contact angle value of 92°, while a very small value of 38° is obtained for the spodumene surface treated by HCl, indicating poor oleate adsorption. These results imply that the hydrophobicity of spodumene surfaces has been changed as a consequence of acid and alkali treatments. The zeta potentials of spodumene particles ground in DI water (water-treated spodumene), 37.5 mmol/L NaOH solution, and 20 mmol/L HCl solution, in the presence and absence of NaOL, as a function of pH, are shown in NaOH and HCl treatment may cause differences in spodumene surface features such as surface topography, surface roughness and surface chemical composition, which may have corresponding responsibility towards their flotation response. Therefore, the AFM imaging was carried out to contrast the surface topography of spodumene ground in different solutions. We found that the sample surfaces were heterogeneous, with some area rough while some other area smooth. Therefore, two representative AFM images of each treatment for smooth surface (as shown in The bearing area analysis provides additional information regarding the surface roughness, which reveals the distribution of surface height over a sample. The bearing area is the percentage of the surface above the bearing depth of the reference plane. The bearing area curves for spodumene with different treatments are shown in Based on the analysis in topography features, it seems that surface roughness has no significant correlation with the flotation response and its associated behaviors such as contact angle and zeta potentials, and it is difficult to identify the relationship between the topography and flotation response of spodumene. On the other hand, as mentioned previously, the water rinsing times and conditioning time of spodumene in NaOH solution have significant influence on its flotation response. Therefore, the in-situ AFM imaging was carried out to observe changes in surface topography of spodumene conditioned in NaOH solution (pH = 9) as a function of time, and the results are shown in It has been demonstrated that NaOH and HCl has adverse effects in the flotation response of spodumene. In this regard, the characterization of spodumene surface treated with NaOH and HCl is of interest. First of all, as NaOH has activation effect in the flotation response of spodumene. The surface chemical composition features of spodumene before and after being ground in NaOH solution are of special interest, and thus were examined by SEM images with EDS analysis. As shown in The surface compositions of spodumene ground in DI water, 37.5 mmol/L NaOH solution, 20 mmol/L HCl solution, and 37.5 mmol/L NaOH solution without rinsing treatment, were analyzed with XPS. The atomic concentrations of Al, Li, and Si are listed in The chemical state of elements at the surface plays a significant role in the flotation response and hydrophobicity of spodumene, and therefore the high resolution spectra of Al, Si, and Li elements are analyzed to provide in-depth understanding of the chemical states and chemical bonding associations of these surface elements and their influences on spodumene flotation behavior. As depicted in For the spectra of Li 1s illustrated in With respect to Si 2p, as shown in It can be concluded from the XPS results that the chemical states of surface elements for spodumene with different treatments are different. Since the surface elements in different chemical states may have different extent of interaction with oleate, the affinity of oleate with surface elements especially for metallic cations Al and Li, in different chemical states needs to be further studied, which will be discussed in the DFT calculation section. To further study the dissolution features of spodumene treated in different solutions, the concentrations of dissolved species (Li, Al, and Si) in the aqueous phase were determined using ICP-MS, and the results are shown in It is concluded that the states of element at spodumene surface with different treatments are different, and this may be the reason for distinction in spodumene flotation response. Therefore, in order to study the interaction features of oleate with surface elements, the affinity of anionic oleate with surface elements especially for metallic cations Al and Li, in different chemical states was studied in terms of interaction energies, results of which are listed in HCl plays a depression role while NaOH plays an activation role in the flotation of spodumene. But long time alkali treatment without rinsing has negative effect on the flotation of spodumene. The acid and alkali treatments have little effect on natural hydrophobicity of spodumene. NaOH treatment favors for oleate adsorption and gives a hydrophobic spodumene surface, while HCl treatment is detrimental to oleate adsorption and gives a hydrophilic spodumene surface. AFM imaging results show that spodumene surface before grinding appears to be very rough, ravined and hill-shaped. Water-treated spodumene surface is smoother, while NaOH-treated spodumene has less smooth surface with many corrosion pits. HCl-treated spodumene has a more ravined surface. In-situ AFM imaging reveals that colloidal substances are generated and cover surfaces after long time alakali treatment. The colloidal substances may be unfavorable for oleate adsorption and thus weakens the flotation response of spodumene. A relatively higher atomic percentage of Al and unsaturated Al for NaOH-treated spodumene, and a relatively lower atomic percentage of Al and unsaturated Al for HCl-treated spodumene are revealed by XPS analysis, and this contributes to their different flotation response. DFT calculation indicates that Al  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors are thankful for the support of the