In this study, a novel thiourea grafted porous sodium alginate-based adsorbent was synthesized by combining ion-imprinting and direct templating method. Due to ion-imprinting, the prepared adsorbent has demonstrated outstanding selectivity towards Pd (II) from bi-metallic solution at different pH values. Langmuir and both pseudo-first and pseudo-second kinetic equations were used to describe the adsorption isotherm and kinetics, respectively. FT-IR, XPS, and SEM-EDX analyses suggested that selective adsorption of Pd (II) was dominated by electrostatic interactions at pH 1.0 and chelation on imprinted sorption sites at pH 3.0. Density functional theory (DFT) calculation further explained the effect of ion-imprinting and provided two binding configurations, which is consistent with characterization analyses. The pregnant adsorbent can be regenerated and reused by thiourea solution in dilute hydrochloric acid. Therefore, the synthesized adsorbent would be useful as a selective adsorbent for the enrichment of Pd (II) from effluents.Palladium is a precious metal extensively used in the industry for the synthesis of catalysts, aeronautics, electronics, and jewelry due to its specific physical and chemical properties [ Adsorption mechanisms, including electrostatic interaction, chelation, and cation exchange have been raised to control the metal adsorption from aqueous solutions [ Various attempts have been made to prepare porous polymers, including direct templating, direct synthesis, block copolymer self-assembly, and high internal phase emulsion polymerization methodologies [ In this study, we hypotheses that ion-imprinting of targeted metal ions can significantly enhance the selectivity of adsorbent, especially at relatively higher pH values, while porous structure would fasten the adsorption rate. A novel alginate-based adsorbent was prepared by combining direct templating and ion-imprinting method. The selectivity of synthesized adsorbent was compared with non-imprinted adsorbent, which revealed that the selectivity towards Pd (II) was significantly enhanced, especially under pH 3.0. The interaction of Pd (II) with functional groups under different pH conditions were investigated by FT-IR and XPS analyses. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were also conducted to study the binding energy and electron migration of the complexes formed after Pd (II) adsorption. Adsorption kinetics, isotherm, thermodynamics, and reusability were performed and analyzed for the evaluation of the overall adsorption performance. Low viscosity alginic acid sodium salt (40–90 mPa·S in 1% aqueous solution) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. The molecular weight was calculated by an empirical correlation provided by Ciocoiua et al. [ The average molecular weight calculated is 16–34 kDa. The M/G ratio was calculated from the Thiourea, epicholorohydrin, sodium hydroxide, hydrochloric acid, ethanol, urea, calcium chloride, and metal chloride salts were purchased from Adamas-beta® (Shanghai Titan Scientific Co.). The ultrapure water was generated from Water Purifier system. Four major steps, including preparation of modified calcium alginate beads, palladium imprinting, urea decomposition, and regeneration of the imprinted beads were involved in synthesizing the novel IPET-CA beads ( The modified calcium alginate beads were synthesized following our previous research [ In order to enhance the selectivity towards Pd (II) at higher pH value, the synthesized modified calcium alginate beads were added into 250 mL of 2.0 mmol/L palladium chloride solution with a designated pH value, stirring for 24 h at 150 rpm. The beads were filtered and rinsed with deionized water to remove the excess palladium ions on the surface. The imprinted beads were immersed into 4% urea ethanol solution, shaking for 12 h at 150 rpm. Ethanol was used as the solvent instead of water due to its smaller molecule size, which would contribute to the dispersion of urea in the synthesized beads. The beads were then transferred into 0.1 mol/L hydrochloric acid solution, heating to 70 °C for 6 h for the urea hydrolysis. Porous structure was generated by the decomposition of urea. 0.1 M hydrochloric acid solution with 1% thiourea was used to desorb the templated Pd (II) from the prepared beads. The beads were then washed by deionized water and ethanol to remove the residue chemicals in the synthetic process. Ion-imprinted porous epicholorohydrin/thiourea modified calcium alginate (IPET-CA) beads were acquired after drying at room temperature. The point of zero charge (PZC) is generally described as the pH at which the net charge of the adsorbent's surface is equal to zero, which has been introduced in the mechanistic study of surface interactions caused by electrostatic interactions. PZC of IPET-CA is determined by pH drift method in this study. To a series of 25.0 mL of 0.1 mol/L KCl solutions with pH varying from 1.0–7.0, 25.0 mg of IPET-CA beads were added and stabilized for 24 h under constant shaking. The suspensions were filtered and the final equilibrium pH values were measured. The intersection point of the initial and final pH curves corresponds to the PZC value. To examine the pH effect on the selective adsorption of Pd (II) by the synthesized IPET-CA adsorbent, 20.0 mL bimetallic solutions containing 1.0 mmol/L PdCl The separation factor for two metal ions A and B, Adsorption kinetics experiment was conducted batchwise at 25 °C for 48 h. 150.0 mL bimetallic solution containing 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 mmol/L of Pd (II) and Cu (II) were mixed with 150.0 mg IPET-CA or IET-CA, and the mixtures were shaken at 150 rpm. Samples of 5 mL solution were taken at scheduled time interval and the metal concentrations were determined by ICP-OES. Adsorption isotherms were carried out at temperatures of 303, 313, and 323 K, respectively. The initial metal concentration ranges from 0.25 to 4.0 mmol/L of Pd (II). 20 mL of bimetallic solutions were mixed with 20 mg IPET-CA under constant shaking at 150 rpm. The equilibrium concentrations were measured by ICP-OES after 48 h. Reusability study was conducted to evaluate the regeneration and re-use potential of IPET-CA adsorbent. The elution was carried out by using thiourea (1%w/v) in 0.1 mol/L hydrochloric acid to desorb the metal ions on the pregnant IPET-CA adsorbent. The regenerated IPET-CA adsorbent was used in the next cycle of adsorption experiments. All calculation was conducted with DMol3 program module in Materials Studio software [ The concentrations of metal ions were determined by Shimadzu ICP-7510 inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) (Shimadzu, Japan). Fourier transform infrared spectra were recorded by Nicolet 6700 FT-IR spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, USA). The FEI Nova NanoSEM 430 scanning electron microscope (SEM) system (Thermo Fisher, USA) with energy dispersive x-ray spectrometry (EDX) was used to examine the surface of IPET-CA beads before and after Pd (II) adsorption. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed by Thermo ESCALAB 250XI XPS system (Thermo Fisher, USA). Adsorptions of Pd (II) and Cu (II) on adsorbents prepared under different synthetic conditions are summarized in Two different mole ratios of hydroxyl: ECH: thiourea are discussed as two structures were proposed for the surface grafting of thiourea on alginate matrix [ Sorbents prepared with Pd (II) imprinting have better selectivity towards Pd (II) in bi-metallic solutions, especially for those imprinted at pH = 3 conditions. PZC value of IPET-CA beads was indicated in Imprinted Pd (II) can form Pd(OH) Separation factors of IPET-CA and PET-CA adsorbents in bi-metallic solutions were calculated by Eq. The chemical modification of alginate can be confirmed from FT-IR spectra as well as the interactions between Pd (II) with the functional groups of the IPET-CA adsorbent ( SEM images of IPET-CA adsorbent with corresponding Energy dispersive x-ray spectrometry (EDX) of N, S, Pd, and Cl were recorded in SEM images of IPET-CA adsorbent after Pd (II) adsorption at pH 1.0 and 3.0 were illustrated in The adsorption mechanism of Pd (II) by IPET-CA adsorbent was studied from the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis of the adsorbent before and after Pd (II) adsorption at pH 1.0 and 3.0, respectively. High resolution XPS spectra of N1s, O1s, S2p, and Pd3d as well as their deconvoluted fitting curves are demonstrated in The binding configuration of [PdCl The partial density of states (PDOS) results of interactions between Pd and SA were shown in Combing the characterization results with DFT calculation, the selective adsorption of Pd (II) by IPET-CA adsorbent at different pH values can be explained as follows: At pH 1.0, both electrostatic interaction and chelation were involved in the adsorption of Pd (II). Palladium exists in the form of PdCl At pH 3.0, both Pd (II) and Cu (II) exist in the form of metal divalent ions, where electrostatic interaction cannot separate these two metal ions. However, thiourea elution has removed palladium ions from the configuration of Some other polysaccharide-based adsorbents were studied for the selective adsorption of Pd (II), which were listed in Results of Pd (II) and Cu (II) uptake by the IPET-CA beads at different initial pH are illustrated in The effect of pH on the selectivity of IPET-CA and PET-CA adsorbents were illustrated in The effect of contact time on the adsorption of Pd (II) and Cu (II) is demonstrated in Fast adsorption kinetics of IPET-CA beads is attributed to its porous structure. Pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order rate equations were used to describe the adsorption kinetics, which integral forms are listed below: The uptake of Cu (II) in the bi-metallic solution is negligible; therefore the effect of temperature on the adsorption equilibrium of Pd (II) on the IPET-CA adsorbent was conducted in single metal solution and the results were demonstrated in Both Langmuir and Freundlich isotherm models were used to present the uptake capacity and its equilibrium concentrations of Pd (II) in aqueous solution. The Langmuir and Freundlich equations are given in Eqs. Van't Hoff equation can be applied to calculate the enthalpy, Thermodynamic parameters were recorded in The reusability of IPET-CA on the adsorption of Pd (II) and Cu (II) was illustrated in The selective adsorption of Pd (II) from bi-metallic solution was investigated by a novel synthesized IPET-CA adsorbent. Results indicated that the adsorbent has shown outstanding selectivity towards Pd (II) under experimental conditions. IPET-CA adsorbent has fast adsorption kinetics compared to non-porous adsorbent with an equilibrium time of 3 h. IPET-CA adsorbent, compared with non-imprinted and non-porous adsorbent, has shown significantly enhanced selectivity and adsorption kinetics due to the ion-imprinting and direct templating method. The adsorption mechanism was examined by FT-IR, XPS, and SEM-EDX analyses which indicated that N, O, and S containing functional groups were involved in the adsorption process. DFT calculation has further elucidated the binding configurations generated by ion-imprinting and binding energies of Pd (II) with synthesized adsorbent. The IPET-CA adsorbent has shown good reusability, which provides potential industrial applications to selectively recover Pd (II) from effluents.  This work was support by