The effects of phosphatidylcholine (PC) on the growth of magnetite superparamagnetic particles have been investigated. These coated particles give stable suspension in solvents like chloroform and were used for magnetoliposome preparation. The superparamagnetic particles and magnetoliposomes were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), FTIR, Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and SQUID measurements. The result shows that PC acts as capping agent to restrict the growth of the particles.In the field of biotechnology, the use of magnetic nanoparticles is gradually gaining importance Among the different soft chemical methods of synthesis of magnetic nanoparticles, the easiest and most common method is co-precipitation. But the rapid kinetics of this process leads to broad distribution of particle size and uncontrolled morphology. Due to a large ratio of surface area to volume, there is a tendency to agglomerate so as to reduce their surface energy by strong magnetic dipole–dipole attraction between particles. This can be controlled by precipitation of metal ions in the presence of long-chain capping molecules. The effect of several organic anions such as carboxylate and hydroxyl carboxylate ions on the formation of magnetic oxides has been studied extensively in the context of magnetic oxides PC coated magnetite was prepared by co-precipitation method which was carried out in N Mixtures of phospholipid and cholesterol were employed for the liposome preparation. Here, to optimize the preparation of magnetoliposome, required amounts of PC and cholesterol (in a 2:1 ratio) were added into CHCl Thermo gravimetric analysis (TGA) was done on the air-dried precursors using Thermowage L 81 (Germany) TGA units. Determination of phase purity and their identification were done by X-ray diffraction (XRD) studies using Philips powder diffractometer PW1710 with CuK  The FTIR spectra of the pure magnetite, PC coated magnetite and pure PC samples were recorded between 4000–400  The magnetization loops of magnetite nanoparticles prepared in the absence of PC and in the presence of 3.06 The blocking temperature (  The Cryo-TEM photos of magnetoliposome are shown in The presence of PC molecules controls the particle morphology and size of magnetite particles and their distribution by inhibiting growth. The presence of increasing concentration of PC during precipitation decreases the particle size as well as narrows down the particle size distribution. Higher mol% of PC helps in obtaining smaller and narrow size distribution of particles. Magnetic behavior is characteristic of superparamagnetic nature. These PC-stabilized magnetite particles are easily dispersed in chloroform and can be used to make encapsulated liposome. All these properties suggest that these surface-modified-magnetite nanoparticles within the liposomes may be suitable for hyperthermia applications. Thanks are due to the Department of Science and Technology (DST) and the Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Govt. of India for financial support.