In this study, gold was recovered by using an electrogenerative process employing a batch cell. This system is based on Galvanic cell which it does not require any external power supply but it produces an electrical energy by a spontaneous chemical reaction in which gold is reduced at cathode and zinc is oxidized at anode. The performances of three-dimensional electrodes, reticulated vitreous carbon (RVC) and porous graphite sheet (PG) were used as cathodes and investigated based on the time and percentage of gold recovery. In batch cell system, RVC served as the best cathode material, having the highest recovery rate with >99% of gold being recovered in 1 h operation for gold concentration of 100 mg L−1. Cyclic voltammetry and mass transfer studies were conducted to study the characteristics of these cathodes for gold deposition. Based on the cyclic voltammograms, RVC and PG undergoes redox reaction within range 1200 mV to −600 mV. Finally, based on the cyclic voltammograms, it was found that gold reduction was observed at 0.2–0.1 V of potential range while oxidation peak was occurred at a potential range between 0.8 and 1.0 V.It is important to evolve efficient industrial processes which provide a cost-effective treatment to recover and remove heavy metal ions from waste streams. Gold symbolize a compelling case due to its cost. Furthermore, in metal finishing and processing industry, a close-loop system was preferred and some have been developed ( Electrode is the most important component in an electrochemical reactor. The movement of electrode contributes to high mass transfer rates while the use of porous, three-dimensional electrode contributes to high surface area. Even at low metal ion concentration, three-dimensional electrodes are more superior compared to the two-dimensional electrodes ( RVC electrode has a honeycomb structure and open pore foam material composed solely of vitreous carbon. The structure of RVC is attained by polymerization of resin combined with foaming agents, followed by carbonization. A pore size of RVC is usually described as number of pores per inch (ppi). RVC is suitable to be used as an electrode material especially in flow reactor because it is a high voids volume, highly porous surface area, low electrical and fluid flow resistance ( In the other hand, PG is one of the allotropes carbons and it is composed of layers of carbon atoms that are arranged in six-membered, hexagonal rings. These rings are attached to one another on their edges. Layers of fused rings can be modeled as an infinite series of fused benzene rings (without the hydrogen atoms). Carbon atoms in these ring arrays are in the sp In this study, the influence of two different types of cathodes towards the performance of an electrogenerative process is explored. The electrochemical cell utilized in this study is a batch cell. In addition, the morphology and composition of the gold (Au(III)) deposits are also investigated. Gold(III) chloride trihydrate, HAuCl Cyclic voltammetry analysis was performed using Potentiostat (eDAQ EA161) connected to an E-corder 410 (4 channel recorder) with Echem and EChart software respectively. The potentiostat is supplied with an electrode cable comprising of three leads with terminated by an alligator clip. The electrodes used were working, reference and counter electrodes. For working electrode, RVC and PG electrodes used were obtained from the best electrodes produced in the batch cell experiment, which are detailed in Section A 30 mL of Pyrex cell vial was used to fill a sample solution. 500 mg L Batch cell consists of two electrolyte compartments of dimensions 4.7 cm × 5.3 cm × 9.3 cm separated by an anion exchange membrane Neosepta AM-1 (Tokuyama Corp.). Two types of cathodes were used; RVC 80 ppi, and PG. Zinc foil was used as an anode. The distance between anode and cathode is fixed to 4.00 cm while the membrane-electrodes gap is set at 2.00 cm. Stirring bar used in this study is Brand® magnetic stirring flattened sides bar (PTFE coated, cylindrical shape) with 10.0 mm length and 3.0 mm diameter (Merck Malaysia). The speed of the stirring bar is fixed at 400 rpm and it is placed in the middle of the catholyte compartment. Later, the electrodes were attached to copper plates (using parafilm) which were used as current collectors. The current collectors were then connected by wires to complete the circuit as shown in The present study focused on recovering Au(III) from chloride ion media by using an electrogenerative process and monitoring the morphological changes of Au(III) deposited on RVC as the best cathode materials. The following equations show the reactions occurred in the reactor:  Eqs. In cyclic voltammetry studies, the electrolyte solution is not stir and it is important that the system is at rest (steady-state) during the cyclic voltammetry experiment ( In addition, 500 mg L A galvanic cell transforms the energy released by a spontaneous redox reaction into electrical energy that can be used to perform work. The oxidative and reductive-half reactions usually occur in separate compartments that are connected by an external electrical circuit. Here, the anode is negative and cathode is the positive electrode. The reaction at the anode is oxidation and that at the cathode is reduction. The electrons are supplied by the species getting oxidized. They move from anode to the cathode in the external circuit. This reaction opposed to the electrolytic cell ( A model of concentration-time relationship for three-dimensional electrodes can be expressed by Eq.  Based on the surface area changes that involved during the recovery process, the ‘volumetric’ mass transport coefficient value will lead to a clear understanding of the comparative performance of the different cathode system as the effective electrode area is quite difficult to be determined ( In the batch cell studies, the effect of cathodes materials on the recovery of Au(III) from chloride media was investigated. Two types of cathode materials were used.   As observed, the deposited Au(III) on RVC can be seen clearly in which is spherical, granular and homogeneous and smaller in size ( The present work shown that the recovery of Au(III) through electrogenerative process can be carried out successfully. In a batch cell system, it was verified that with RVC as the cathode material, higher Au(III) recoveries was achieved compared to PG. This system also demonstrated that the recovery of Au(III) was faster and higher in the absence of oxygen. More than 99% of Au(III) was recovered from 100 mg L This research was fully supported by