This paper presents the results from the investigation of arsenopyrite oxidation via mechano-chemical activation, using a stirred mill. Water and hydrogen peroxide were chosen as the lixiviant and oxidant, respectively, and maintained at a relatively low temperature (50 °C). The milling media size, mill speed, slurry percent solids and amount of H2O2 added were all kept constant throughoust these experiments. The only operational variable for this investigation was the milling time, which results in increasing levels of specific energy provided by the mill. The products of activated arsenopyrite are characterised in terms of phase composition, particulate and structural characteristics, along with reactivity.
                  Mechano-chemical activation of arsenopyrite under oxidizing conditions shows a maximum dissolution of around 9 wt% for iron and 7 wt% for arsenic after 2 h of milling. After 3 h of milling, the main phase present is found to be amorphous in nature.From the perspective of mineral processing, gold ores are classified as free-milling (those that yield over 90 per cent of gold by cyanide leaching) or refractory (those that do not give high gold recoveries in conventional cyanide leaching circuits). One cause of low recoveries is the presence of ‘preg-robbing’ material in gold ores. This can occur due to various forms of carbonaceous matter and some clay minerals providing absorption sites for the dissolved gold cyanide species. This leads to a portion of the gold being bound to carbonaceous and/or clay particles and subsequently lost to the tailings. Another cause of low gold recovery is when gold is physically or chemically ‘locked’ in silicate, oxide and sulphide minerals. A significant proportion of gold ores are classified refractory because the gold is contained in sulphides. In these ores, gold is very fine-grained or in solid solution. Each refractory gold ore has distinctive mineralogical characteristics and presents unique problems during metallurgical processing. The most abundant of these ores are arsenical, with arsenopyrite being an important host of gold in refractory ores. The gold concentration in arsenopyrite ranges from below one part per million (ppm) up to 15200 ppm ( Most refractory gold ores require a suitable pre-treatment process such as pressure oxidation, bio-oxidation or roasting to allow some level of oxidation of the sulphides to liberate locked gold. The amount of oxidation required to expose gold for subsequent recovery, by a leaching agent varies for different ores and concentrates. In an effort to improve the efficiency of gold recovery from refractory ores, a new process of “mechano-chemical” pre-treatment is being successfully applied in research as well as in plant operations. In the more traditional process referred to as “mechanical activation” minerals are subjected to intensive milling prior to leaching. This milling results in particle disintegration and physical transformations, which significantly enhance the subsequent mineral processing operations. Mechano-chemical activation integrates milling and leaching operations into a single step. It has been found that the mechano-chemical activation of ore phases leads to a positive influence on hydrometallurgical operations ( Mechano-chemical activation occurs through the creation of new surfaces, structural disorder and subsequent oxidation of minerals. It has been shown to accelerate the hydrometallurgical processing of arsenopyrite with the aim of extracting the “invisible” gold contained in this type of refractory ore ( Whilst much work has been reported on arsenopyrite solubility in acid solutions due to mechanical activation ( The aim of this work was to test the possibility of arsenopyrite oxidation using a stirred mill in a water medium with the presence of excess oxygen at an initial near-neutral pH and at a relatively low temperature (50 °C). Mechano-chemical activation was performed in a laboratory designed pin stirred mill (fluidised), with a 500 ml milling chamber ( Upon completion of each test, the milled products were screened to separate the grinding media from the slurry. The slurry was centrifuged to produce a clear leachate for analysis of its elemental arsenic and iron content by atomic emission spectrometry (AES). The solid fractions were washed with water from the remaining liquor for subsequent analysis by X-ray powder diffractometer (XRD), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and X-ray fluorescence (XRF). The starting material consisted of coarse crystalline arsenopyrite concentrate from the Ballarat Gold Mine, Australia. This non-gold bearing arsenopyrite has been chosen as representative of a major component of a more complex refractory ore under further study. Therefore, successful activation is expected to provide a sound basis for the application of this technique to actual gold bearing ores. The original arsenopyrite sample used in this study has a particle size between 2 and 10 mm. In this case, the particle size distribution was too large for the stirred mill application. The sample was ground in a laboratory ring mill to reduce the particle size. The concentrate was characterised by bulk and surface analytical techniques. The bulk analysis of the arsenopyrite was carried out by XRD to provide insights into its crystalline structure and by ESM EDS to identify the content of the main elements (As, Fe and S). The chemical state of the main elements at the surface of the arsenopyrite concentrate was investigated by XPS. XRD traces were obtained using a Panalytical X’Pert Pro diffractometer equipped with an incident beam BBHD CoKα monochromator and an X’Celerator linear detector, operated at 40 kV and 25 mA over 5–80° 2θ with a step size of 0.017° 2θ at a rate of 0.08°2θ per second. Phase identification has been made by search-match of the ICDD PDF4 sub-file and using Panalytical HighScore Plus and quantitation carried out using SiroQuant ver 4.0 software. The amorphous content of the solid residue has been determined by modelling the characteristic broad peak or swell on the traces ( XPS surface analyses were performed using Krotos AXIS Ultra DLD spectrometer equipped with monochromated Al K Scanning electron microscopy and analysis were carried out on a Zeiss neon 40EsB FIBSEM and the x-ray data was collected using an Oxford Instruments Inca x-act SDD x-ray detector and Aztec software. Samples were prepared on carbon tape and coated with platinum. All spectra were collected at 20 kV. Particle size distributions were determined with a Malvern Mastersizer 2000 laser particle sizer and Malvern’s software used to calculate particle surface areas. The soluble products (liquor) were analysed by atomic emission spectrometry (4100 MP-AES), in addition to XRD analysis of the precipitate remaining from the evaporated liquor. The arsenopyrite sample was ground in a laboratory ring mill for one minute to reduce the particle size to 182 µm (80% passing,  This is reinforced by the fact that the P80 decreased from 182 µm for the feed to 1.3 µm for the product obtained in the laboratory stirred mill batch test-work performed using 3 h mechano-chemical activation. The P10 was also reduced from 3.8 to 0.4 µm between the feed and the 3 h product respectively. The feed sample has only 10% of particles with diameter less than 3.8 μm however, for the mechano-chemically activated samples the particles reached 100% abundance less than 3.8 µm after 1.5 h residence time ( The sharpness of the particle size distribution is characterised by the PSD width, which can be described by ratios (P90-P10)/P50 ( The mechano-chemical activation of arsenopyrite is characterised by an increase in specific surface area. The magnitudes of the effect are shown in Milling results in a higher breakage rate in the initial stage ( The signature plot, specific energy vs product size, for the experiment is presented in XRD analysis of the bulk arsenopyrite feed shows small amounts of impurity in the form of 1.2 wt% pyrite and 0.7 wt% quartz ( An insight into the bulk behaviour of the activated arsenopyrite is illustrated by the XRD patterns in As shown in the XRD scans ( Energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) analysis of mechano-activated solids show a single peak corresponding to the OK peak of elemental oxygen ( XPS analyses were conducted to examine the surface composition of the ground samples. As expected, the survey of the feed reveals the presence of arsenic, iron and sulphur which is consistent with XRD measurements. Carbon is also present at the surface, however this is attributed to adventitious carbon. Interestingly, the survey also reveals a higher than expected proportion of oxygen which suggests the presence of an enriched oxygen-containing species at the surface of the ground particles ( The high-resolution As 3d, Fe 2p and S 2p spectra of the concentrate are presented in Binding energies of the main peaks recorded in high-resolution spectra are summarised in The deconvoluted As 3d spectrum ( The XPS survey spectrum of the oxidised solid product displays the presence of the same arsenic, iron, sulphur and oxygen predominant species as the arsenopyrite concentrate. The deconvoluted As 3d spectrum ( The effect of mechano-chemical treatment time on the arsenic and iron dissolution process was investigated by varying the activation time between 0.5 hr and 3 hr. In the stirred mill liquor, dissolved arsenic and iron were determined with AES. Results show that iron and arsenic dissolution increased from 2.5% and 1.5% after 30 min to 9.5% and 7.7% respectively after 2 h of milling in a water medium with an excess of oxygen ( In these experiments, soluble iron production increases whilst dissolution of arsenic reached a maximum after 2 h of milling. These differences in leaching might come from arsenolite (As The experimental data confirms that milling time has an influence on the physico-chemical changes of arsenopyrite as is evident in the water medium leaching with an excess of oxygen. Previous research suggests this may be due to the fact that mechano-chemical activation makes the crystalline structure of FeAsS unstable. For example, Balaz shows that in all probability, the bonds between As and Fe are broken. These defects are more reactive and therefore, the oxidation process usually starts at defective sites, this in turn promotes their transfer to the leachate ( In the case of Fe, In the case of the dissolution of As the situation is more complex. Dissolution appears to increase linearly with time up to 2 h and then reduces linearly beyond this point. The mechanism by which this occurs is not fully understood, hence making accurate modelling difficult. Nevertheless, it is possible to say that for t > 2 hrs, the precipitation of arsenic combined with the continued dissolution of iron suggests this is an effective method for the separation of the two elements. The XRD patterns of leached products after 1 h of milling are presented in Our experimental results show a decrease of pH from near neutral to pH 3.0–2.5. This decrease of the system’s pH by 4–5 units is the result of arsenopyrite’s reaction with excess oxygen. We conclude that the physicochemical changes of arsenopyrite substantially increases the acidity of the solution due to the release of sulphurous acid. This is consistent with our observation of strong sulphur dioxide odour following addition of H The results presented here indicate that mechano-chemical activation of arsenopyrite can cause chemical processes which differ to those observed when mechanical activation alone is used. These processes occurring under ambient conditions and at a relatively low temperature (50 °C) lead to rapid oxidation of arsenopyrite, which has not been observed through earlier mechanical activation methods. Separation of iron and arsenic from arsenopyrite is possible by milling in a water/oxygen system, due to the difference in leachability of iron and arsenic with activation time. Our experiments also show that the chemical and physical changes in the arsenopyrite crystal structure produce an amorphous solid oxide product. This is significant as this amorphous material is expected to be more susceptible to leaching and therefore amenable to alkaline cyanidation. Since arsenopyrite is an important host of gold in refractory ores, these changes may allow refractory ores to then be readily treatable by conventional means. The authors are grateful to Keramos, Mining and Processing Supplies, for providing the grinding media for the project. The authors acknowledge the facilities, and the scientific and technical assistance of the WA Microscopy and Microanalysis Facility and the X-Ray Surface Analysis Facility, funded by an We are also grateful to two reviewers and the editor for critical constructive comments which have significantly improved this manuscript.