Virtual crystal approximation is adapted to address peculiarities of propagation of acoustic waves through a 1D ‘sandwich’ superstructure consisting of alternating layers of two types randomly substituted by foreign layers of the third type. Same-parity layers are of the same width and constitute a sublattice. Dependence of the lowest forbidden acoustic zone width of the described structure on concentrations of impurity layers in the two sublattices is numerically evaluated for longitudinal and transverse excitations. Values of substitute concentrations making the structure completely transparent prove to be independent of the relative widths of the 1st and 2nd type layers.Practical objectives of acoustic sciences may somewhat conventionally be divided into two big tasks, namely reduction of unwanted noises and enhancement of useful acoustic signals. Numerous examples can be cited from the fields of medicine, material science, mining engineering, warfare, etc. Hence the necessity of fabricating metamaterials with predictable acoustic spectra and development of adequate theoretical models. Apart from immediate technical applications following the propagation of sound excitations is a widespread and very often indispensable method for examining solids. Acoustic techniques are being constantly improved, primarily in the direction of extension of frequency range. Today there are substantial number of works devoted to calculation of electromagnetic and acoustic excitation spectra in superlattice systems In our previous papers we adapted the approach used for ideal superlattices The present work concerns with extending the approach of Refs. Consider a discretely-inhomogeneous acoustic medium constituted by a set of alternating homogeneous plane-parallel layers of two types, randomly substituted by impurity layers of the third type ( In the general case of inhomogeneous medium, whose matter density From Eq. (1) it follows that if we restrict ourselves to the case of monochromatic elastic excitations For a translation invariant system of period In view of condition (4), the solutions of Eq. Combining Eqs. Here Consider propagation of a monochromatic acoustic wave with the Bloch vector In Eqs. (8) and (9) For isotropic layers of 1D phonon crystal tensor Due to validity of Eq. (12), system (10) splits into two independent subsystems. One of them contains only The laws of dispersion of the corresponding acoustic excitations are defined by the infinite system of Eq. Consider acoustic excitations in a non-ideal 1D phonon crystal — a topologically ordered system, which unlike an ideal superlattice includes chaotically distributed impurity layers of differing compositions. The simplest approximation permitting to elucidate the peculiarities of transformation of elementary excitation spectra caused by variation of defect concentration is VCA. It allows to “recover” the system's translation symmetry and to obtain the required spectrum of acoustic excitations. For this purpose let us express the configuration dependent tensor Here Replacement The roots Quantities To fix our ideas let us examine in more detail the band-gap width behavior Δ To summarize, we adapt the virtual crystal approximation to study propagation of acoustic excitations through a spatially periodic multilayered system with randomly included impurity layers. The lowest forbidden zone width is evaluated as a function of foreign layers concentrations. A certain analogy can be drawn to the case of electromagnetic excitations in photonic crystals. Isotropy of the constituting layers allows for uncoupling of longitudinal and transverse excitation modes. Generally speaking, in crystals with anisotropic layers the two modes are coupled, thus even a pure-mode incident wave would lead to development of mixed transverse–longitudinal vibrations (unlike with photonic crystals). The work was carried out in the frame of joint Ukrainian–Russian project no.06-02-12 (U).