In the present study, effect of CaF2–CaO–Al2O3–MgO–TiO2 slag with various TiO2 contents on the desulfurization of Inconel 718 alloy was investigated at 1773K to provide the fundamental information for the establishment of desulfurization procedure during electroslag remelting (ESR) process. The melt-quenching method did not accurately determine the change in content of sulfur and oxygen in the nickel-based alloy with time for the present study, which uses a novel experimental apparatus. The results indicated that the final sulfur content in the nickel-based alloy increased from 7 to 9ppm when the TiO2 content in slag of CaF2–CaO–Al2O3–MgO–TiO2 system increased from 2.17 to 10% without addition of deoxidizer. In order to further expound the desulfurization mechanism, meanwhile, the relationship between the oxygen activity at slag–metal interface and reaction time under conditions of various TiO2 in the slag was studied by coupling with the developed mass transfer model. The calculated oxygen content in bulk metal has a good corresponding relationship with the measured oxygen content in the nickel-based alloy. The oxygen activity at slag–metal interface increased up to 9.6ppm when TiO2 content was 10% in the slag, giving rise to the decrease in desulfurization ratio in high TiO2 content. The optimal condition for simultaneously ensuring low sulfur content and maintaining oxidative elements, such as Al and Ti, uniformly from bottom to top of the ESR ingot is also discussed.Inconel 718, a precipitation strengthened nickel-based superalloy, currently containing approximately 5.3% niobium exhibits adequate strength, ductility, and fatigue resistance up to 923 In order to meet the increasing demand on the quality and performance of nickel-based alloy, therefore, many efforts have been made to reduce the sulfur content below the critical values during the production of superalloy since 1970s The melt-quenching method is widely used to investigate slag–metal kinetics To begin the experiment, Inconel 718 alloy samples were produced in a MgO crucible in a vacuum-induction melting (VIM) furnace under a high-purity argon atmosphere, and the chemical composition is listed in The slag–metal equilibrium reaction between CaF Pre-melted slag (12 The DL crucible with reactants was placed in a graphite tray, which was then positioned in the constant-temperature zone of a resistance furnace after the furnace temperature reached the pre-set temperature of 1773 Prior to the experiment, the time required for the slag and metal to melt completely was estimated; these estimates indicated that the samples had fully melted after the graphite crucible was placed into the resistance furnace for 10 The moment the carbon stopper was removed ( According to the classic metallurgical physicochemistry Given that the reactions Apparent equilibrium constant According to the fundamental equation of heterogeneous reaction kinetics based on the concept of the effective boundary layer proposed by Wagner The modified mass transfer coefficients as shown in Eqs. The oxygen activity Then, the concentrations of each element in the metal and slag phase as the function of reaction time can be calculated from Eqs. Shown in With initial alloy content, such as [Al], [Ti] and [O] in Inconel 718 alloy, and slag content listed in Actually, the total oxygen consists of soluble oxygen and the oxygen as a form of oxide inclusions at the elevated temperature. In order to acquire the optimal TiO It can be deduced by combining The fluctuation of temperature is usually occurred in ESR process, particularly in the first temperature-rising period. Yang et al. In the current study, effect of slag composition with different TiO The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The authors would like to express their sincere thanks to senior engineer Li-hui Han of National Experimental Teaching Demonstration Center for Metallurgical Engineering at University of Science and Technology Beijing (USTB) for helping to do experiments, Ph.D. Candidates Bin Li and Shao-ying Li of School of Metallurgical and Ecological Engineering as well as Prof. Cheng-bin Shi of State Key Laboratory of Advanced Metallurgy (SKL) at University of Science and Technology Beijing (USTB) contributed to the discussion of the results. The authors are also thankful for the support from the