Consumers' preferences of food products are dependent on a variety of factors, many of which are related to the sensory experience and perceptions during food oral processing. This chapter focuses on the interactions between saliva and ingested food, and how the structure of food affects the food sensory evaluation process. In addition, how the oral physiology affects food perception and how all these variables could be altered and predicted are discussed.It has been long considered that the study of food, Food Science, ranges from raw material production and processing through to digestion and absorption inside the human body. For oral consumption of any type of food, ingestion is the very first step. The sensory experience and/or perception is one of the most important factors influencing consumers' preference of a food product and their intention of purchase. There is no record of when the earliest study of food texture took place, however, it is generally accepted that systematic study of food texture began in the second half of the last century and became an important discipline in the study of food science. Attributes related to food texture, including the elasticity, viscosity, adhesion and many others, for solid, semi-solid and liquid foods were objectively studied using empirical and fundamental techniques and instrumental measurements, then correlated with consumers' sensory perception ( Sensory perception of consumed food does not only depend on the properties of the food, but also on how food is deformed and the distinct structural changes that happen in the mouth ( Saliva is a bio-fluid secreted mainly from parotid glands, sublingual glands, submandibular glands and other major glands, which makes up to 90% of the total secretion, along with other small salivary glands. Saliva is generally described as ‘tasteless and colorless’, consisting of about 99% water, with the rest being electrolytes, proteins, enzymes, carbohydrates etc. ‘Colorless’ is an objective description; ‘tasteless’ on the other hand, is not. As a matter of fact, saliva must have a taste otherwise one won't be able to taste or detect real tasteless substances such as water. The reason that saliva is perceived as tasteless is because that saliva is continuously tasted by oneself all the time and functions as the base or the reference for one's sensory perception of any food. Saliva secretion is affected by factors such as medications, neurobiological activities, environmental changes including weather, temperature, humidity etc. Age, mood and diet also influence saliva secretion. Saliva secretion and composition is also affected by if and how secretion is stimulated (stimulated vs. non-stimulated; different stimulation methods). It is now generally accepted that when stimulation is triggered, either physical stimulations (mastication) or chemical/biological stimulations (smell or eat lemon for example), saliva secretion increases in total amount, as compared to resting saliva secretion.  The physical properties of saliva have also attracted a lot of research interest. It is now well accepted that saliva secreted from different glands has distinct rheological properties; parotid saliva contains very little mucins and behaves like Newtonian fluid, while sublingual and submandibular saliva have a shear thinning non-Newtonian behavior ( The structure and microstructure of food is clearly a crucial parameter affecting the sensory perception. The structural change of food during oral processing is also effected by the saliva in mouth. Food gets instantly wetted and coated with saliva once ingested into the mouth ( There is no doubt that the sensory perception and eating experience of a food product has an indivisible relationship with saliva secretion, which is largely dominated by our neural system. The physiological aspects of food oral consumption also include how food is manipulated in the mouth by the actions of the tongue and other jaw and oral muscles ( The large oral variations of physiological and habitual behavior amongst individuals, together with the difficulties to obtain objective data from panelists during sensory evaluation, have inspired engineers to work on developing artificial or simulated mouth models with controlled parameters and conditions to mimic an eating process. From the mechanical mastication process (focusing on the clenching and grinding of the jaw during oral processing) ( There is indeed much more research to be done to reveal the underpinning mechanisms of food oral processing and sensory perception. Saliva, as a complex and individual-dependent bio-fluid needs to be further studied from different perspectives, including its cross-interactions with solid, semi-solid and liquid foods and the corresponding sensory and aromatic perceptions (