The term “sensor-based (ore) sorting” (SBS) is introduced as an umbrella term for all applications where particles are singularly detected by a sensor technique and ejected by an amplified mechanical, hydraulic, or pneumatic process. Analogous terms include ore sorting, electronic sorting or automated sorting. A variety of sensor types are available and see use in the minerals, recycling, and food industries. Pre-concentration Pre-concentration is defined as a physical separation stage in mineral beneficiation, where a fraction of high grade coarse particles can be separated from the run-of-mine material to produce a final concentrate, prior to downstream processing of particles below ca. 5 Waste rejection Waste rejection is defined as a beneficiation stage where coarse non-valuable waste particles are separated from the run-of-mine ore. Concentration Concentration using SBS is the creation of a final marketable product. Ore-type diversion Separation of one or more ore types that are fed alternately as batches into the same plant or parallel into multiple plant lines for specialized treatment. Note that SBS is almost always used in diamond processing flowsheets where the terminology differs slightly: waste rejection is referred to as “concentration” and concentration is referred to as “recovery.” SBS refers to a concentration stage which identifies certain physical or chemical characteristics of individual rock particles and separates them from the process stream via a physical mechanism ( SBS is the automation of hand sorting, which is now extended by the use of additional sensing/detection technologies (i.e., techniques are not limited to optical sensors). Hand sorting is the original mineral concentration process, having been used by the earliest workers several thousand years ago. The practice was recorded by Hand sorting involves the visual assessment of individual ore particles and the rejection of those particles that do not warrant further treatment. Hand sorting has declined in importance due to the need to treat large quantities of low-grade ore which can require extremely fine grinding. Hand sorting of some kind, however, is still practiced (e.g., the removal of large pieces of timber or tramp iron from the run-of-mine ore). It is also still applied in countries with low labor pay rates. Early workers identified ore sorting as a key variable which affected the economics of a mine. SBS is reviewed here, but several other waste elimination methods exist, which are primarily gravity-based processes ( SBS was first introduced in the late 1940s, and although its application is fairly limited, it is an important technique for the processing of certain minerals (e.g., diamonds, uranium, limestone, magnesite, gemstones) ( Many mineral properties have been used as the basis of sensor-based sorting, including reflectance and color in visible light (magnesite, limestone, base metal and gold ores, phosphates, talc, coal), ultraviolet (scheelite), natural gamma radiation (uranium ore), magnetism (iron ore), conductivity (sulfides), X-ray fluorescence (base metals), and X-ray luminescence (diamonds). Infrared, Raman, microwave attenuation, and other properties have also been tested. SBS systems inspect particles to determine the value of some property using contactless and real-time measurements that obtain both location and material properties. The data are processed and the information (e.g., visible light reflectance) creates a basis for ejection (or retention) of those particles which meet some criterion (e.g., light vs. dark particles). Therefore, a distinct difference in the required physical property must exist between the valuable minerals and the gangue. Either valuables or waste may be selected for ejection. Automated sorters consist of Particle presentation Sensing (particle examination/detection) Electronic processing (data analysis) Separation  Particle presentation can be achieved via two system types: chute or belt-type systems (shown in Various sensing technologies that are available and common industrial sensors are listed in First patents for SBS technology originated in the 1920s ( Rocks having white or gray quartz pebbles in a darker matrix were accepted, while quartzite ranging from light green through olive green to black, were rejected. Most of the gold occurred in rocks which reported to the “accept” category. Uniform distribution of the ore entering the sorter was achieved by the use of tandem vibrating feeders and the ore was washed on a second feeder to remove slimes which could affect light-reflecting qualities. The successful implementation of the Model 13 sorter led to the development of the RTZ Ore Sorters Model 16 photometric sorter, which has been used since 1976 on a wide range of ore types (e.g., magnesite, wolframite, gold) ( A subsequent development to the RTZ Ore Sorters Model 16 is the Ultrasort UFS120 photometric sorter, which is used in the processing of magnesite, feldspar, limestone, and talc. Ore passes from a vibrating feeder to high pressure water sprays and counterweight feeder where water is removed and the rocks are accelerated to form a monolayer. They drop onto a short conveyor moving at 2 SBS has been employed in diamond recovery since the 1960s, initially using simple optical sorters and more recently machines based on the fact that diamonds luminesce when irradiated by X-rays (  The “Lapointe picker” was probably the earliest radiometric sorter, developed in Canada and used in the 1940s ( Several other physical properties of ores and minerals have been exploited in a range of sorting machines. Neutron absorption (or activation) separation has been used for the sorting of boron minerals ( Near infra-red (NIR), which has seen wide use in recycling applications, has recently been investigated for use in the mining industry. It has been successfully implemented for waste elimination from boron minerals (colemanite, ulexite) ( Photoneutron separation (gamma activation) is recommended for the sorting of beryllium ores. When a beryllium isotope in the mineral is exposed to gamma radiation of a certain energy, a photoneutron is released and this may be detected by scintillation or by a gas counter. The RTZ Ore Sorters Model 19 sorter measured conductivity and magnetic properties and had application to a wide variety of ores including sulfides, oxides, and native metals ( Outokumpu developed the “Precon” sorter which was installed at the Hammaslahti copper mine (now closed) ( RADOS XRF sorting technology has been used (primarily in Russia) over the past two decades at 49 operational sites for over 20 commodities ( Microwave attenuation has been used to sort diamond-bearing kimberlite from waste rock ( A machine was installed at King Island Scheelite in Tasmania, where the scheelite was sensed by its fluorescence under ultraviolet radiation. XRT (X-ray transmission) has proven to be superior to UV fluorescence. Mittersill Mine currently operates XRT sorters for waste elimination where ca. 25% of the 130 Rapid developments in sensing and computing technology have increased the capabilities of today’s SBS machines significantly. In addition, industrial food processing and recycling industries have openly adopted the technology and tens of thousands of sorters are installed for numerous separation tasks. The mining industry is now benefiting from those developments, with proven detection and data processing being available for application on mining proof machines. SBS installations typically consist of: crusher, screen, sorter, and compressor. Because of the often large particle sizes and low concentrations of valuables, it is advised to install mechanical sampling, size reduction and splitting equipment to enable determination of plant performance.  Capital and operating costs are typically roughly half the costs of dense-media systems. Since SBS is a single particle technology, the throughput is inversely proportional to the average particle size fed to the machine. Both types of specific costs are thus inversely dependent upon the average particle size. The upper particle size is determined by the liberation characteristics of the ore and the lower particle size limit by the economically viable specific costs per ton of product. Typically, the highest economic benefit is obtained when eliminating deleterious waste that hinders downstream processes. In such cases, the overall recovery In summary, SBS is a relatively low cost and versatile technology that has the potential for wide applicability in the minerals industry, if liberation of either waste or product is sufficient in coarse particle sizes. The currently available suite of detection technologies allows for discrimination of single particles based on a pre-determined discrimination criteria (e.g., NIR spectrum, color, conductivity, atomic density). Today’s mining machines integrate state of the art technology into mechanical designs. Increased pressure to decrease processing costs and environmental impact will undoubtedly further the use of SBS in the mining industry.