In order to design a flotation circuit to remove ink and contaminants from slushed old corrugated container (OCC) pulp suspension, a model based on mass balance was developed. The model is a five fractional model, which handles mass flow rate of ink, fiber, fines, filler and dichloromethane (DCM) extractives. A detailed method of calculating the deinking selectivity of a material from experimental data, described in terms of reject ratio, is presented. Three flotation deinking systems were simulated. In a single stage flotation system, increasing the number of flotation cells improved cleanness of the accept pulp suspension while it decreased yield at the same time. Yield can be increased by adding a second stage and by introducing the accept flow of the second stage into the feed flow of the first stage. However, the cleanness of the accept pulp was deteriorated. It was shown that yield can be increased without compensating the cleanness of the accept pulp by utilizing the accept pulp from the second stage for another paper machine line instead of sending back to the feed flow of the first stage.mass flow rate of a material mass flow rate of a material mass flow rate of a material reject ratio of a material estimated value of reject ratio of a material estimated fraction of component The froth flotation technique has been widely used in the mineral processing for more than a century Design factors for a flotation deinking system such as the unit number of flotation cells, retention time at the flotation cells, the number and the arrangement of stage mainly depend on the type of the recovered paper to be deinked and the required quality of the deinked pulp. Also deinking selectivity or removal efficiency of ink and other contaminants is a key factor of a froth flotation cell. Deinking selectivity is influenced by several factors such as the type of flotation cells, operating conditions of the flotation cells, the type and the dosage of deinking chemicals and other colloid chemical factors The objective of this study was to present a simple approach to simulate a flotation deinking system based on experimental data. A flotation deinking system was modeled based on mass balances on a flotation cell and used them to design a flotation deinking system to recycle OCC (old corrugated container). Usually OCC is recycled to produce the base paper of corrugated containers without deinking treatment. However froth flotation deinking was tried in this study in order to remove contaminants from the unsorted OCC and improve the quality of the produced pulp. In order to find an optimum arrangement of flotation cells, three flotation systems shown in Froth flotation deinking system was modeled by performing mass balances on flotation cells. The model handles fiber, fines, filler, ink and DCM extractives. Focusing on a flotation cell, mass balances for each material are: The mass flow rate of material It was assumed that the reject ratio values for each cell are the same. Then, for system 1 in When several flotation cells are connected in a row, the mass flow rates of each component The mass flow of each material rejected from each flotation cell is the sum of each components consisting of the material, which have different values of reject ratio: Calculation procedures for If the calculated value of the mass flow of each material in the reject flow from each cell After deciding System 2 is a classic layout of two-stage flotation system, in which a series of five flotation cells are connected in a row for the first stage and a series of two flotation cells are used for the second stage. The accept flow from the fifth flotation cell of the first stage is considered as the accept of the deinking system. All rejects from the first stage is gathered and introduced into the feed of the first cell of the second stage: i.e. The arrangement of flotation cells of system 3 is quite similar to that of system 2 except that the accept flow from the second stage is sent to the stock preparation line of another paper machine, which produces lower quality paper, instead of introducing them into the feed of the first stage. Hence, Old corrugated container (OCC) was slushed with a laboratory low consistency pulper at 4% concentration for 30 Fiber, filler, ink and DCM extractives in reject were quantitively analyzed. In order to measure the filler content, samples from the feed stock and the reject were burned in a muffle furnace at 400 Results of the feed stock and foam reject analysis are shown in The reject ratios for each material were calculated with the data shown in  In order to investigate the effect of the unit cell number on flotation removal efficiency, single stage flotation deinking system was simulated using the values of fraction and reject ratio shown in Three froth flotation deinking system shown in Yield can be increased without compensating the cleanness of the accept pulp by utilizing the accept pulp from the second stage for another paper machine line instead of sending back to the feed of the first stage (system 3). If another paper machine produces a lower grade of paper with poorer appearance, the accept stock from the second stage can be directly fed into the stock preparation line of that paper machine. Then the overall yield becomes higher and the amount of reject becomes minimized (system 3 in In order to determine the optimum number of flotation unit cells and stages, and the optimum arrangement of flotation cells, a froth flotation deinking system was modeled and simulated. Deinking selectivity of a material, described in terms of reject ratio, can be calculated by selecting optimum values of fraction and reject ratio of a material to satisfy the following condition: This study was supported by the cleaner production technology development projects of Korean Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Energy.