The enzyme amino acid arylamidase [EC 3.4.11.2] catalyzes the hydrolysis of an N-terminal amino acid from arylamides. Recently, this enzyme was detected in soils, and a method was developed for its assay. This method involves colorimetric determination of the β-naphthylamine produced when soil is incubated with L-leucine β-naphthylamide in 0.1M THAM [tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane] buffer (pH 8.0) at 37°C for 1h. Because this enzyme may be involved in N mineralization and because of the presence of a number of amino acids in soils, information on the substrate specificity of arylamidase in soils is needed for a better understanding of the reactions involved in organic N mineralization in soils. In this work eight compounds containing individual amino acid moieties linked to naphthylamine were studied as substrates for arylamidase activity in six surface soils. Results showed that the optimal pH of activity varied with the amino acid moiety, ranging from 7.0 to 9.0; most of the optimal pH values, however, were at 8.0. Among the amino acid moieties studied, the means of activity in six soils decreased with the following order: alanine>leucine>serine>lysine>glycine>arginine>histidine, and proline was not hydrolyzed in soils. The chromophore linked to the amino acids L-asparagine, L-tyrosine, L-glutamic acid, and L-aspartic acid did not dissolve. Calculated from arylamidase activity at the optimal pH values, the K
                     m, 
                     V
                     max, 
                     E
                     a, and ΔH
                     a values varied markedly among the soils and the amino acid moieties of the substrates studied. The means of the Q
                     10 values ranged from 1.04 to 1.66. Results suggest that there are more than two isoforms of this enzyme in soils, and that amino acid moieties of ring compounds in soils significantly affect the rate of N mineralization in soils.The term neutral amino acid arylamidase [EC 3.4.11.2] is used for the group of enzymes that is capable of readily splitting the neutral amino acid-β-naphthylamides or This enzyme is widely distributed in nature. It has been detected in tissues and body fluids of all animals ( Evaluation of the specificity of this enzyme, purified from four organs of rats and in the livers of five animal species, for seven chromogenic substrates showed differences in the cleavage of various substrates tested relative to the amino acid moiety linked to β-naphthylamine ( The soils used were surface soils (0–15 The substrates were obtained from Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO. The amino acid moieties of the substrates used are shown in The procedure for assay of arylamidase activity in soils was that described by Subsets of soil samples were used to study the factors affecting the activity of this enzyme. These were selected to give ranges in the activity values and to avoid overlapping of the curves obtained. To study the effect of pH, the buffer pH was varied from 5 to 10. To evaluate the effect of substrate concentration on the reaction rate, the concentration varied from 0.25 to 2.0 All results reported are averages of duplicate assays with one control performed on field-moist soils, and are reported on a moisture-free basis. Moisture was determined after drying at 105°C for 48 To ascertain the effect of the amino acid moiety of the substrate on the optimal pH of arylamidase activity, the activity was assayed at 2.0 To evaluate the effect of the amino acid moiety of the substrate on the reaction rate of arylamidase in soils, we assayed the activity of this enzyme in the six surface soils studied by using the substrate concentration ranging from 0.25 to 2.0 By using 2.0 Three transformations of the Michaelis-Menten equation applied to arylamidase activity values obtained, as a function of substrate concentration and as affected by the amino acid moiety of the substrate, for the Webster soil are shown in Temperature dependence of enzyme-catalyzed reactions is well documented. The dependence of the rate constant on temperature (below the inactivation temperature) of an enzyme-catalyzed reaction can be expressed by the Arrhenius equation: The activation energy ( The enthalpy of activation (Δ With the exception of the optimal pH of arylamidase activity of the Clinton soil ( The specificity of arylamidase toward different amino acid moieties ( Generally, the calculation of the The Although the amino acid moiety significantly affected the reaction rate ( The chemical structure of amino acid moiety of the substrate affected the rate of hydrolysis of the C–N bond in arylamides. This was demonstrated in the optimal pH values, reaction rates, and kinetic and thermodynamic parameters of the arylamidase activity in soils. The reaction rates of hydrolysis of L-alanine and L-leucine linked to β-naphthylamine were greater than those of the other amino acids-β-naphthylamide studied. The affinity, as expressed by the Journal Paper no. J-18879 of the Iowa Agric. and Home Econ. Exp. Stn., Ames. Projects 3264, 3338, and 3391. This work was supported, in part, by the Biotechnology By-products Consortium of Iowa. A.M. Garcı́a Manzanedo thanks the Ministry of Science in Spain for the financial support during her work at Iowa State University.