Coke as a fuel has a critical role for steel making industries. Since coke is a product of blended coals, it is essential to study relationships between parental coal components with quality of their coke products. Free swelling index (FSI) and maximum fluidity (MF) are standard coking indexes that widely used for blending coals and measuring quality of products. This study has been explored interdependencies between measured coal components by mutual information (MI) method and evaluated their importance in the prediction of coking indexes for a wide range of Illinois coal samples. MI results indicated that the set of moisture-organic sulfur and moisture-nitrogen-sulfate sulfur were the best variables for predictions of log(MF) and FSI, respectively. Adaptive Boosting method based on support vector regression (SVR), called Boosted-SVR, was used the selected variable sets for predictions of coking indexes. In testing stage of models, correlation of determination (R2) between actual and predicted values for the log(MF) and FSI were 0.89 and 0.90, respectively. These results indicated that Boosted-SVR model could quite satisfactory predict coking indexes. In general, outcomes of this investigation demonstrated an appropriate potential of coking quality prediction with limited numbers of input variables and suggested that a combination of MI with Boosted-SVR model as a new powerful tool which can be used for the computation of other complex fuel and processing problems based on measurement of conventional properties.For steel-making in the blast furnaces, coke has an essential role it acts as a fuel, a reductant agent and a permeable support; thus, approximately no other metallurgical substitutions can meet these demanding properties The FSI unit is classified from 1 to 9 (interval of 0.5 units); FSI 0–2 is assigned for non-coking coals, 2–4 is defined for medium, and from 4 to 9 gradually coke-ability increase to strongly caking coals Since coal is a heterogeneous mineral (physically and chemically), there are several complex inter-dependencies among its components Although applications of MI for VS and Boosted-SVR models for prediction of complicated problems are growing in various fields, limited studies have been performed to explore their abilities in fuel and energy sector. This investigation is going to introduce MI as a powerful VS method for fuel industries via assessment of interdependencies between coal proximate and ultimate analyses and used the selected variables as inputs of Boosted-SVR modeling for prediction of FSI and log(MF) (coke quality parameters) through a wide range of coal samples derived from Illinois. In general, the outcomes of this study potentially can be an appropriate method to better understand interactions between components of various coal samples, their relationships with coking index parameters, and propose a robust approach for measurement of variable importance and modeling of complex problems in fuel and energy processing. To generate an accurate model for perdition of coking indexes (FSI and log(MF)) a comprehensive high dimensional database requires to cover variations within the heterogeneous structure of parental coal samples. In this work, a total of more than 100 coal samples from Illinois were used to explore inter-correlations among coal characters and develop robust models for FSI and MF prediction ( Variable selection (VS) as a preprocessing step for generation of AI models is a key to avoid the curse of irrelevant features and to minimize the mean square error of predictions. Mutual information (MI) as a powerful variable importance measurements (VIMs) method can rank features based on their interactions with outputs, improves interpretability of a model and decreases the risk of overfitting by selecting the best and compact subset  Creating expert models and adding diversity to them are very important issues in ensemble models. Experts in an ensemble model can be “homogenous models” (like support vector regression (SVR)) In RM methods several subsets are created by using sub-sampling with replacement from the original training data and used to train experts. One of the most widely used ensemble learning model that applied RM is boosting method Initialize: Threshold t = 1 Distribution Error rate While (t Sampling with replacement from data with distribution Training Calculate error rate of Set Update Set t = t + 1  To generate the Boosted-SVR models for the prediction of log(MF) and FSI, from the entire database, approximately 80% of samples are randomly used for training step and 20% for the testing (82 records for training and 20 samples for testing). After training the Boosted-SVR models with 5 experts, results of testing step indicate that models can satisfactory estimate the log(MF) and FSI, with the significant correlation of determination values (R For predicting metallurgical properties of coking coal, it is essential to know relationships between components of blended samples and coking indexes. Free swelling index (FSI) and maximum fluidity (log(MF)) are key parameters for understanding coking-ability of coal samples. This study is explored relationships between coking indexes (FSI and log(MF)) with component (proximate and ultimate analyses) of parental coals by using mutual information (MI) method through a wide range of Illinois coal samples. Results indicated there is a high correlation between FSI and log(MF) where by increasing FSI, in average, log(MF) is gradually increased (FSI 1–4: log(MF) ∼1, FSI 4–7: log(MF) ∼2.65 and FSI 7–9: log(MF) ∼4). MI method is evaluated the interdependency among coal characters for prediction of coking indexes, and released the highest interactions between them via variable importance measurements (VIMs). VIM outcomes indicated that for modeling, the set of moisture-organic sulfur and moisture-nitrogen-sulfate sulfur are the best subsets for log(MF) and FSI predictions, respectively. Boosted-SVR model as a unique artificial intelligent method was used to generate models for log(MF) and FSI predictions. Testing the generated models indicated that variable selection by MI and modeling by Boosted-SVR can predict log(MF) and FSI with a high accuracy (R Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: