This work presents the documentation and characterization of an ancient underground concrete tunnel using the ground-penetrating radar (GPR) method. Three-dimensional imaging methodologies were applied to create an accurate volumetric reconstruction of the underground tunneling space and the whole framework of galleries composing the main structure, which enabled for the dimensioning of the structure. Problems of moisture were also detected in a particular sector of the tunnel. In addition, FDTD modeling was used to improve the understanding of the GPR signal propagation and to assist the interpretation of the field GPR data. Both field and synthetic data have shown the capabilities of the method for the evaluation and characterization of this ancient construction.Tunneling detection becomes relevant based on a civil engineering point of view, due to the momentous importance of knowing the underground space distribution. In addition to the interest with regard to their influence in the settlement and disposition of the subsoil structure This work presents the evaluation and characterization of an existing tunnel located within the premises of the Spanish Naval Academy of Marín, Galicia, in the northwest of Spain ( The ground-penetrating radar (GPR) is a geophysical commonly used technique, with a wide range of applications. There have been published numerous studies on different fields, such as military (mine detection Therefore, GPR is proposed in this paper as a solution for the documentation of an underground tunnel because of its rapidity and suitability as non-destructive technique. So that, it is the ideal solution in comparison to other more invasive methods, such as excavation or underground tasting, that may deteriorate the structure of the tunnel and/or its content The GPR method has proven its suitability for providing high image quality results and is a well-recognized prospecting technique by the scientific community Numerical simulation was additionally used in this work to assist in the interpretation of the field GPR data. Specifically, Finite-Difference Time-Domain (FDTD) modeling was considered, since the method has demonstrated its capabilities to improve the understanding of the electromagnetic waves propagation through the media It consists of an underground tunnel with symmetrical geometry composed by a central corridor and lateral branches ( Moisture and condensation problems were observed in certain areas of the ancient concrete construction ( Three-dimensional (3D) GPR methodologies were performed in this work ( GPR-Slice software Next, the 3D horizontal slices were generated by spatially averaging the squared wave amplitudes of the recorded radar reflections over the time window. The squared amplitude interpolation process creates interpolated time-slices, which are normalized to 8 bit following the color changes between different levels and not actual reflection values In this particular case, instead of generating a large set of depth slices, they are grouped together and its data combined, every 44 Simulations were performed in this work to evaluate the hypothesis of probable moisture content in concrete, which has been achieved from the interpretation of the field GPR data. It allows for a better understanding of the observed electromagnetic signal propagation phenomena and for the characterization of the radar-wave responses under different conditions of humidity. The synthetic models ( Different 3D visualization techniques were applied to extract information that helps in the reconstruction and characterization of the evaluated tunnel. After creating the 3D cube, for which all the processed radargrams were assembled, the resulted cube was sliced in different directions or planes ( However, one single time-slice did not represent the entire tunneling structure since the different galleries and branches are placed at different levels. To overcome this adversity, overlay analysis was applied ( The single time-slice in Although the tunnel is symmetric with respect to its central corridor ( Thus, FDTD simulations were built to analyze the effect of moisture on the propagation of the GPR signal and its attenuation. As seen in However, the lack of information observed in the GPR data might be also informing of corrosion in reinforcement and subsequent high signal attenuation. Additional simulations were created to evaluate the influence of chloride content, in conjunction with moisture, on the propagation of the GPR signal ( The knowledge of the underground distribution and its dimensioning implies special interest from an engineering point of view. In  However, the dimensioning from the 2D data is a difficult task that requires analyzing every single radargram and cross section produced, which involves a considerable amount of time and dedication. To take advantage of all the available 3D techniques, the extraction of a 3D volume representing the entire tunneling space was possible by using the isosurface rendering technique ( The volumetric reconstruction ( The volume created was exported to a 3D CAD format. This facilitates the geometrical dimensioning of the tunnel. The results obtained have confirmed that GPR is an effective NDT method for tunneling and underground space investigation. GPR data allowed for the identification of some of the galleries composing the structure, as well for the detection of reinforcement elements over these galleries. Otherwise, moisture problems were appreciated from GPR data and corroborated during a later visual inspection. FDTD simulations were built for a better understanding of the radar-wave propagation phenomenon under different levels of moisture. Based on the synthetic data provided, it was concluded that the signal loss could be caused by those severe moisture conditions. In addition, the lack of information would be increased because of the higher depth of the sector involved, as it implies longer propagation time of the signal through the attenuating medium. Furthermore, the attenuation could be also due to the corrosion of the pipework through the tunnel walls. It would be explained by a problem in the sealing glands of the pipe circuit, that lead high-chloride-content water from the pool, and the subsequent corrosion in reinforcement. This information might be useful for civil engineers to verify the preservation state of the tunnel and design future conservation plans. This way, maintenance tasks could be focused on the affected areas, avoiding the use of more destructive techniques, as excavation or underground tastings. The 3D GPR strategies proposed have shown its potential as a supporting tool for data interpretation. These techniques provided great detailed information from different depths and facilitated the volumetric reconstruction of the underground tunnel and its galleries framework. Moreover, using 3D methodologies resulted in a significant improvement in terms of processing time, compared with 2D ones. Finally, different views of the construction were obtained, which allowed for its geometrical dimensioning. This information becomes interesting as it provides an intuitive and easily understanding layout of the underground space distribution. The Military Naval Academy of Spain is acknowledged for the given facilities during this work performance. The authors also want to thank the Applied Geotechnologies Research Group of the University of Vigo for all the human and material support. Additionally, this study is a contribution to the EU funded COST Action TU-1208 “Civil Engineering Applications of Ground Penetrating Radar”.