A Population Balance model for the continuous leaching of a roasted zinc concentrate was developed. The Maximum Mixedness and the Segregated Flow approaches were chosen to model the flow patterns and mixing conditions in the reactors. In order to compare these approaches and validate the proposed model, leaching experiments were carried out in a pilot plant. For that, it was also determined the residence time distributions in this plant reactors. As a result, it was observed that the Segregated Flow did not represent the actual pilot plant operation, since the conditions in which the Segregated Flow is recommended (i.e. segregation in the micromixing of the slurry phase, low diffusivity, and high slurry viscosity) were not present. On the other hand, using the Maximum Mixedness resulted in an excellent agreement between the experimental and modeled data (mean absolute error of 0.5% for the zincite conversion). This indicates that the complex particulate phenomena that occur during the leaching, as well as the flow patterns in the continuous reactors were adequately accounted in the model. Therefore, a robust tool for the design and control of leaching plants is delivered, since it is able to predict the effect of operational parameters (e.g. particle size distribution, solid/liquid ratio, feed flow rate) on the reactors performance. This can lead to better decision-making and costs reduction, contributing also to the prediction of problems faced in the operation of these plants. In a direct application of the developed model, it was predicted that the pilot plant could operate with the doubled capacity.Leaching can contribute up to 30% of the total capital expenditure in a hydrometallurgy plant ( In order to overcome these limitations, several mathematical models have been proposed for leaching systems. The Population Balance (PB) has proved to be the most appropriate approach to model polydisperse systems ( Nevertheless, in order to model continuous reactors, the flow patterns and the mixing conditions in the reactors should be accounted in the equations. To achieve this, several approaches are available, such as the Maximum Mixedness and the Segregated Flow ( A theoretically comparison of these approaches has been done by In this context, the purpose of this paper is to apply the Population Balance to model the continuous leaching of a roasted zinc concentrate in sulfuric acid solutions, using the kinetic data and parameters determined for this system in the latter work ( In order to model the continuous leaching of the roasted zinc concentrate (RZC), it was used a population balance (PB) for solid particles and one mass balance for the leaching agent (sulfuric acid). The kinetic parameters were determined in a previous work ( Therefore, it is considered, initially, the general Population Balance for particles in a continuous system, according to Eq. In this equation,  The particle size distribution in the inlet stream, Then, according to Eq. Concerning the leaching intrinsic kinetics, In this equation, Since the adjustable parameter ( Therefore, the mass balance for the leaching agent (sulfuric acid) can be given as a function of the zincite conversion ( In Eq. Only zincite (ZnO) was accounted for the calculations, but part of zinc ferrite (ZnFe In order to solve the model and determine the conversion achieved in the reactors (Eq. In this approach, molecules of different ages are completely mixed as they enter the reactor, so all the particles leaving the reactor have the same age distribution. This means that all particles stayed inside the reactor for the same period, which is called residence time (τ For the cases in which In the Segregated Flow approach, it is assumed that all molecules of the same age remain together as they travel through the reactor and are not mixed with molecules of other ages ( The Segregated flow approach is usually given in terms of the conversion ( The conversion considering a batch reactor ( The roasted zinc concentrate (RZC) was provided by a metallurgical plant located in the state of Minas Gerais, Brazil. In this plant, a zinc sphalerite concentrate is roasted and then leached for metallic zinc production by electrowinning. A detailed characterization of this material was done previously ( The size analysis of the RZC, presented in The leaching solution was an aqueous solution of sulfuric acid (98% w/w - Vetec) and anhydrous lithium sulfate (99% w/w - Sigma-Aldrich). Li Positive step experiments were performed in the reactors of the pilot plant in order to determine the residence time distributions in an attempt to elucidate the flow patterns inside these reactors. The operational parameters investigated (feed volumetric flow rate ( For the RTD measurements, the injected tracer was hydrochloric acid and the fluid was pre-acidified water (in order to remove dissolved carbonates, as pointed by Next, the residence time distribution function ( In a perfectly mixed tank, upon entering the reactor, the fluid mixes instantaneously and uniformly with the contents of the reactor, so that the composition of the effluent stream is identical to the composition of the entire reactor ( For a series of N-perfectly mixed tanks of equal volume and mean residence times, the RTD function is given by the Tanks-in-series model (TIS), as shown in Eq. A series of continuous leaching experiments were carried out in a pilot plant, in order to verify if the proposed Population Balance model was able to describe the RZC continuous leaching. It was also intended to compare the Segregated Flow and the Maximum Mixedness approaches for the flow patterns and mixing conditions in the reactors. Initially, using one reactor of the pilot plant, batch-leaching experiments were done in order to determine the minimum speed sufficient to homogenize completely the pulp and to reduce the effects of the mass transfer during the reaction. For these tests, several stirring speeds (250, 500, and 750 rpm) were tested for an initial acid concentration of 1.0 mol.L The parameters used in the continuous RZC leaching experiments ( The experimental procedure started with the preparation of the leaching solution and calibration of the RZC feeding mass flow rate. Then, with the empty reactors, the feedings of leaching solution and RZC to the first reactor were started, as well as the reactors stirring systems. At this moment the timer was started. When the slurry started flowing out of the last reactor, samples of slurry were collected at specific times and filtered under vacuum for the solid/liquid separation. The resulting liquid samples were diluted and stored for Zn, Li, and Fe analysis by AAS. Each experiment was done in triplicate and a Student's t-distribution with a confidence level of 95% was used to calculate confidence intervals. The residence time distribution curves obtained for one single reactor of the pilot plant, for the feeding flow rate ( From It is worth emphasizing that all the values obtained for the mean residence time ( From In the same table, it can also be seen that increasing the stirring speed there is a reduction of the mean residence time ( In It should be noticed that the residence time distribution was determined for the liquid phase. In order to obtain RTDs of the solid particles in the reactors, more complex methods such as the use of radiotracers ( In In the PB model developed in this work, the flow patterns and mixing conditions in the reactors were accounted in the model by two different approaches, the Maximum Mixedness and the Segregated Flow. In order to compare these approaches and validate the model, simulations were done for the continuous RZC leaching under the operational conditions used in the pilot plant experiments ( The experimental and simulated values for the zincite conversion ( From On the other hand, as it can be seen in In order to validate statistically the proposed PB model and to verify it with one of the two approaches for the flow pattern and mixing conditions is the most suitable, it was calculated the sum of squared residuals (SSR According to the values obtained for the sum of squared residuals and mean percentage error ( Furthermore, although the residence time distributions (RTD) obtained for the pilot plant reactors ( As stated by  In a direct application of the developed model, it can be predicted that the pilot plant could operate with the doubled capacity. Considering a slurry flow rate of 0.41 L.min In the present work, the Population Balance was applied to develop a model for the continuous leaching of a roasted zinc concentrate. The flow patterns and mixing conditions in the reactors were incorporated in the model using the Maximum Mixedness and the Segregated Flow approaches. Experiments using a tracer in the liquid phase demonstrated that the flow patterns in the pilot plant reactors are similar to the ones observed in ideal continuous stirred-tank reactors (CSTR). Therefore, the Tanks-in-Series model was adequate to describe the residence time distributions in the pilot plant reactors. Since it was not observed signs of slurry segregation, it was considered that the solid and the leaching fluid have the same residence time distributions. For the experimental leaching data of this work, the model results considering the Segregated Flow did not provide a good representation of the pilot plant data, resulting in higher conversion values than the experimental ones. This indicates that the conditions in which the Segregated Flow model is recommended ( On the other hand, excellent agreement between the experimental data and the PB model was obtained when the Maximum Mixedness approach was considered. This approach resulted in small mean absolute errors, 0.5 and 6.2% for the zincite conversion and acid concentration in the liquor, respectively. Therefore, it can be said that the developed model adequately accounts for the complex particulate phenomena that occur during leaching, the flow patterns, and the mixing conditions. In this perspective, the proposed model has potential applications, such as predicting the effect of operational parameters ( In conclusion, the present findings enlighten the incorporation of the flow patterns in real reactors into Population Balance models, with important implications in the modeling of continuous leaching process. In addition, a robust method is delivered for the design and control of leaching plants, contributing also to the prediction of problems faced in the operation of these plants.  fraction of the inlet flow is exchanged with the stagnant zone (TISEx model) atomic absorption spectroscopy average rate of particles birth tracer concentration in the outlet stream tracer concentration in the inlet stream molar concentration of the leaching agent (sulfuric acid) in the feed stream molar concentration of the leaching agent (sulfuric acid) in the outlet stream (liquor) molar concentration of iron in the outlet stream (liquor) molar concentration of zinc in the outlet stream (liquor) particle diameter average rate of particles death aperture of a sieve in with 63.2% of the material would not be retained residence time distribution function particle size distribution in a mass basis reaction rate constant RRB model parameter mass flow rate of solids in the reactor mass flow of RZC fed the reactor zincite molar mass molar flow of leaching agent (sulfuric acid) fed to the reactor molar flow of zincite fed to the reactor molar flow of zincite that was solubilized in the liquor molar flow of zinc from the zinc ferrite solubilized in the liquor molar flow of zinc in the liquor Population Balance inlet volumetric flow rate outlet volumetric flow rate Rosin-Rammler-Bennett model for size distribution roasted zinc concentrate sum of squared residuals time percentage of zincite (ZnO) in the RZC reactor volume volumetric flow rate of leaching solution fed to the reactor conversion of zinc or iron conversion achieved in a batch reactor X-ray diffraction spectroscopy  adjustable parameter molar ratio between the acid and the zincite in the RZC added to the reactor dimensionless time time rate of change in particle diameter solid molar density covariance theoretical residence time mean residence time residence time in the active zone (TISEx model) residence time in the stagnant zone (TISEx model) population density function population density function in a batch reactor in a given reaction time The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study was financed in part by the Tanks-in-Series with Exchange Model (TISEx). In the Tanks-in-Series with Exchange model (or mixing cells with exchange), each stirred tank is composed of two zone, as shown in A fraction Therefore, with tracer injection experiments, knowing the concentration of the tracer in the inlet stream (