The recovery of H2 from H2S is an economical alternative to the Claus process in petroleum and minerals processing industries. Previous studies [React. Kinet. Catal. Lett. 62 (1997) 55; Catal. Lett. 37 (1996) 167] have demonstrated that catalytic decomposition of H2S over bimetallic sulfide can proceed at relatively higher rates than over mono-metallic systems due to chemical synergism although conversions are still thermodynamically limited. In the present study, the performance of a catalytic membrane reactor containing a packed bed of Ru–Mo sulfide catalyst has been investigated with a view to improving H2 yield beyond the equilibrium ceiling. A system of differential equations describing the non-isothermal reactor model has been solved to examine the effect of important hydrodynamic and transport properties on conversion. The results were obtained using a Pt-coated Nb membrane tube as the catalytic reactor enclosed in a quartz shell cylinder. Reynolds number for shell and tube side (Re
                     s and Re
                     t) as well as the modified wall Peclet number, Pe
                     m, dramatically affect H2S conversions. Membrane reactor conversion rose monotonically with axial distance exceeding the equilibrium conversion by as much as eight times under some conditions.reactor cross-sectional area heat capacity of gas thickness of membrane volumetric flow rate overall heat transfer coefficient heat of the H flux across the membrane reaction rate constant equilibrium constant for H reactor length molecular weight partial pressure permeability modified Peclet number rate of reaction Reynolds number surface area per unit length temperature dimensionless reactor length coordinate viscosity of gas argon gas hydrogen gas hydrogen sulfide gas membrane gas mixture total component furnace inlet shell side tube side Large quantities of H Several investigators have examined the catalytic splitting of H Buxbaum and Kinney In view of the endothermic nature of the reaction, the catalytic packed bed membrane reactor (CPBMR) is deemed to operate non-isothermally. The present work is therefore focused on a parametric study of the reactor system to provide a basis for experimental optimization. A schematic diagram of the shell-and-tube membrane reactor is shown in plug flow conditions exist in both shell and tube sides; negligible axial pressure drop prevails in both packed bed and annular space; constant sweep gas flow rate since permeated H H membrane is catalytically inactive; reactant and sweep gas flow co-currently. Tube side balances: The system of ordinary differential equations (  Inlet temperature  The relatively poor conversions recorded at Axial conversion profiles within the inner packed bed are shown in  This work has demonstrated that catalytic H The authors are grateful to the Australian Research Council for financial support.