Modeling of some parameters of wet ball milling system of copper sulphide ore was performed in this study. A three level Box–Bhenken design combining a response surface methodology (RSM) with quadratic model was employed for modeling of key operating parameters of ball mills. Grinding experiments were designed and executed by a laboratory ball mill, considering ball size, ball charge and solid content as variables. Grinding tests were performed changing these three variables (ball size, ball charge and solid content) in the range of 20–40mm, 20–40% and 65–80% respectively. Product 80% passing size (d80) was defined as process response. A quadratic model was developed to demonstrate the effect of each parameter and its interaction with d80 of product. Predicted values of response obtained using model equation were in good agreement with the experimental values (R2 value of 0.994 for d80). Finer d80 was achieved using greater ball charges with smaller ball sizes. More favorable results were also obtained at the center of solid content level. Results suggest that RSM could be efficiently applied for modeling of ball milling system of some copper sulphide ores.In today's global markets suffering from the world crisis, mining groups strive to optimize mill performances mainly by reducing production costs. Successful grinding with ball mills depends on selecting suitable operating conditions. Therefore it is of great importance to determine the operating parameters at which the response reaches its optimum. Different variables have been studied to improve ball mill performance The pulp density of the feed should be as high as possible, consistent with ease of flow through the mill. It is essential that the balls are coated with a layer of ore; too dilute a pulp increases metal-to-metal contact, giving increased steel consumption and reduced efficiency. Also slurry density certainly influences the distribution of the energy of impacts applied to the particles in a grinding mill As an essential approach it is very economical to adopt an experimental design methodology for extracting the maximum amount of complex information while saving significant experimental time, material used for analysis and personnel costs A large number of studies have been conducted trying to apply different types of modelling methods to a relatively wide range of process optimization Experimental design methods and response surface methodologies have been specifically applied for modeling of process parameters in mineral processing systems To optimize the milling process, influencing factors such as reduction ratio or d80 of product were considered to be closely monitored. In current study, grinding efficiency improvement is investigated by making key changes to milling system as follows: Using correct ball size, operating the mill in an appropriate mode (ball charge and solid content) and controlling milling circuit in a modified mode. Reduction ratio is a determining factor in mill efficiency evaluation which can show how efficiently the energy is consumed. A higher reduction ratio can signal a more efficient milling in progress. In this study RSM was used in conjunction with Box–Bhenken design, which requires fewer tests than a full factorial design, to establish the functional relationship between the three operating variables of grinding (ball size, ball charge and solid content) and d RSM is a collection of statistical and mathematical techniques useful for the modeling and analysis of problems in which a response of interest is influenced by several variables and the objective is to optimize this response The design procedure of RSM is as follows Designing of a series of experiments for adequate and reliable measurement of the response of interest. Developing a mathematical model of the second-order response surface with the best fittings. Finding the optimal set of experimental parameters that produce a maximum or minimum value of response. Representing the direct and interactive effects of process parameters through two and three-dimensional (3D) plots. If all variables are assumed to be measurable, the response surface can be expressed as follows: Where y is the answer of the system, x It is assumed that the independent variables are continuous and controllable by experiments with negligible errors. It is required to find a suitable approximation for the true functional relationship between independent variables and the response surface. These variables were changed during the tests with respect to the Box–Bhenken experimental design, whereas the other operational parameters of grinding were kept constant (feed amount, feed size, grinding time and mill speed). Usually a second-order model is utilized in RSM (Eq. Where x Where Y is defined to be a matrix of measured values, X to be a matrix of independent variables. The matrixes b and ε consist of coefficients and errors, respectively. The solution of Eq. Where X′ is the transpose of the matrix X and (X′X) For this study, materials (copper sulphide ore) were sampled from the SAG mill feed in Sungun copper concentrator plant. The density of ore was 2.8 The size distribution of ore prepared for ball mill feed was shown in Batch grinding tests were carried out using a 25.8*20.8 The maximum ball size calculated from Bond formula for plant ball mill (Eq. Where F To apply an average size of 30 The amount and the residence time of feed was set at 1175 g and 20 Seventeen grinding experiments were designed using Box–Bhenken design methodology to provide data to determine the relationship between the response (i.e. d80 of product) and the 3 process parameters. The experimental conditions and their responses are shown in From the experimental parameters in In this model all variables are in coded values as A is ball size, B is ball charge and C is solid content. Also AB, AC, BC are interaction of main parameters. The responses at any regime in the interval of our experiment design could be calculated from Eq. The observed and the predicted values obtained using model equation (Eq. The main effects of variables on response are presented in In order to gain a better understanding of the interaction effects of these grinding variables on d80, the predicted model is illustrated in The effect of ball size and ball charge on d80 of product is shown in This study demonstrates that the RSM can be successfully used for the determination of ball mill parameters on grinding of a copper sulphide ore. Also it is an economical way of obtaining the maximum amount of information in a short period of time and with the fewest number of experiments. The comparison of this research with other papers that used RSM method In this research, modeling of wet ball mill grinding process, using RSM and Box–Bhenken design was investigated. Ball size, ball charge and solid content were the process control variables while the d80 of product was considered as response. Experiments were conducted on copper sulphide ore samples collected from SAG mill feed in Sungun copper concentrator plant. A quadratic model for d80 of product was developed. The 3D response surface plots for variables were drawn to determine the interaction effect of variables on d80 of product. Predicted values of response obtained using model equation were in good agreement with the experimental values (R The authors would like to thank the National Iranian Copper Industries Company (N.I.C.I.Co.) for supporting this research and permission to publish this article. Special thanks is also extended to the Sungun metallurgy and R&D personnel for their continued assistance.