Froth structure and stability are known to play important roles in determining mineral flotation recovery and selectivity. However, measuring froth stability in a consistent manner remains a significant challenge, especially at an industrial scale. Following preliminary tests on a copper concentration plant, a quantitative dynamic stability measure is investigated in this study in order to extend the results over a wider range of conditions and on a different ore body. The technique is based on the Bikerman foam test and uses a non-overflowing froth column to quantify froth stability.
                  Experiments were carried out using an automated version of the froth stability column under different operating conditions. Air flowrate was the key operating variable. Tests were reproduced on a single flotation cell of a Platinum Group Metals concentrator. The froth stability factor, β, was measured for each operating condition, and compared with the air recovery in the cell, α, which was measured using image analysis. The froth stability column results gave the same trends as image analysis. In particular the froth stability factor was found to be linearly related to the actual fraction of air overflowing the cell.
                  The metallurgical results clearly indicated that changes in air flowrate result in variations in flotation performance that can be attributed to changes in froth stability. The results showed that high froth stability conditions occur at intermediate air flowrates, and result in improved flotation performance. It is found that the froth stability column is a simple, cost-effective and reliable method for quantifying froth stability, and for indicating changes in flotation performance.Froth structure and froth stability are known to play a significant role in determining the grade and recovery achieved from a flotation operation. Previous studies (for example A multiplicity of dynamic and static methods have been proposed to measure the stability of foams. These were reviewed and evaluated by  The froth height in the froth stability column was recorded visually as a function of time and was fitted by an exponential model of the form  The experimental set-up allowed them to measure the froth rise rate and ultimate height, while confirming the importance of air flowrate on froth stability previously observed at laboratory scale ( This work presents the application of a newly automated version of the froth stability column to an industrial scale. The aim of the study is to test the technique over a wider range of operating conditions, and to confirm the relationship between operational variables and flotation performance as a result of changes in froth measured stability. Experiments were carried out on a Platinum Group Metal (PGM) ore in the rougher cells of the primary flotation circuit at BRPM, South Africa. The rougher cells are Outokumpu cells with twin crowders and a donut launder in the middle. One froth crowder is from the impeller outwards and the second one is from a position half way to the outer wall outwards. The cell dimensions are given in The froth stability column was used for measuring froth stability in the second cell of the bank. Measurements were carried out using a cylindrical (0.3 A digital video camera was set-up near the lip of the outer crowder and above the froth surface of the second cell. Under steady state conditions and in each experiment the top surface of the froth was video recorded and subsequently processed. Images were grabbed and analysed to estimate bubble size distribution, average bubble size and froth velocity of the overflowing froth. The image processing was performed using The key operational variable manipulated during the study was the air flowrate   The corresponding fraction of air overflowing the weir, or air recovery In the previous tests in Northparkes (  Similarly to the results obtained in Northparkes, the reason why Flotation performance is described by the PGM grade in the concentrate and the PGM recovery in the second cell of the primary rougher bank. Both grade and recovery are given relative to the grade and recovery obtained for the lowest air flowrate investigated (6 The grade/recovery data are plotted in The performance results are consistent with the changes in froth stability measured under the different air rates studied. Note that the lowest air flowrate represents the origin in However if the aeration is increased further, the froth becomes unstable—as indicated by image analysis and froth stability column measurements ( The automated froth stability column was tested on a new ore body and over a wide range of operating conditions. The stability factor The metallurgical results indicated that changes in air flowrate result in variations in flotation performance that can be attributed to changes in froth stability. The study showed that high froth stability conditions occur at medium air flowrates, and result in improved flotation performance. These findings indicate that the froth stability factor can be used to assess the stability of flotation froths at industrial scale and appears to be an essential parameter in linking froth stability and flotation performance. The results suggest that further work is required to build a complete model that incorporates the froth stability factor. Once such a descriptive model is developed, it will be possible to manipulate the flotation variables to produce the optimal froth stability and flotation performance.