Antimony-based materials with high theoretical capacity are known as promising anodes for potassium-ion batteries (PIBs). However, they still face challenges from the large ionic radius of the K ion, which has sluggish kinetics. Much effort is needed to exploit high-performance electrode materials to satisfy the reversible capacity of PIBs. In this paper, nano Sb confined in N-doped carbon fibers (Sb@CN nanofibers) were successfully prepared through an electrospinning method, which was designed to improve potassium storage performances. Sb@CN nanofibers benefit from the fact that the synergy between the porous nanofiber frame structure and the uniformly distributed Sb nano-components in the carbon matrix can effectively accelerate the ion migration rate and reduce the mechanical stress caused by K+ insertion/extraction, Sb@CN nanofiber electrodes thus exhibited excellent potassium storage performance, especially long cycle stability, as expected. When utilized as a PIB anode, they delivered high reversible capacity of 360.2 mAh g−1 after 200 cycles at 50 mA g−1, and a particularly stable capacity of 212.7 mAh g−1 was also obtained after 1000 cycles even at 5000 mA g−1. Given such outstanding electrochemical performances, this work is expected to provide insight into the development and exploration of advanced alloy-type electrodes for PIBs.Considering the increasing depletion of traditional non-renewable energy, it is very urgent to develop other energy storage devices with low cost and long lifespan Compared to intercalation-type electrode materials, high capacity electrodes produced through conversion or alloying reactions have drawn increased attention As a result, diverse strategies have been devoted to addressing this issue, such as nanostructured Sb-based electrodes Herein, Sb@CN nanofibers with Sb uniformly inlaid in N-doped carbon were fabricated using the electrospinning technique with the raw materials of antimony trichloride and polyacrylonitrile, followed by processes of calcination. When used as the anode materials for PIBs, the Sb@CN nanofibers exhibited a high reversible capacity of 360.2 mAh g Firstly, 2.281 g SbCl The obtained solution was placed in a plastic syringe, and the needle of the syringe was attached to a syringe pump for operation. The flow rate was 10 μL min The preparation process of Sb@CN nanofibers is shown in The crystal structure, elementary composition and microstructure of the obtained material were confirmed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) via a RIGAKU Ultima IV instrument with Cu Kα radiation (20 kV, 20 mA), an FT-IR spectrometer (Nicolet-6700, Thermo Scientific), a Raman spectrometer (InVia Confocal), thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), an X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS, EscaLab 250Xi), a scanning electron microscope (SEM, FEI Quanta 200) and a transmission electron microscope (TEM, JEM-2100F). The working electrode was obtained by uniformly mixing 70 wt% of the obtained product, 15 wt% of super P, and the same proportion of carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) binder. After stirring, a uniform slurry was obtained, and it was evenly pasted on the copper foil. The final electrode material was obtained after vacuum drying at 80 °C for 12 h, which was cut into small discs with an average mass of 0.8 mg. The discs were then assembled into button cells in an Ar-filled MBraun glove box using a CR2016 type half-cell. The button cells included a working anode, a polypropylene membrane separator (Celgard 2500), and a metallic sodium/potassium cathode. Furthermore, the electrolyte solution was 1 mol L The crystal structure of the material was investigated by XRD. As shown in  Furthermore, the surface chemical states of Sb@CN nanofibers were further carried out by XPS, which showed that this material was made up of C, N, and Sb elements ( The cyclic voltammograms (CVs) of Sb@CN nanofibers and commercialized Sb were acquired with a scan rate of 0.1 mV s Galvanostatic discharge/charge tests were performed to estimate the electrochemical Moreover, the rate capability measurement of the two materials at 30–1000 mA g In order to probe further into the electrochemical behaviors of Sb@CN nanofibers and commercialized Sb, the K If the electrochemical process is completely controlled by a diffusion process, then the The optimized electrochemical performance of Sb@CN nanofibers was closely related to the ameliorative conductivity of the unique nanofiber with the N-doped carbon, and it was estimated by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) testing. As shown in For the commercialized Sb, the large interface resistance and capacity fading were attributed to the intrinsic electronic structure of Sb, with volume expansion during the K In summary, N-doped carbon nanofibers embedded with nano Sb (Sb@CN nanofibers) were successfully obtained via an electrospinning strategy and subsequent carbothermal treatment. Benefiting from the uniform nanofiber structure and abundant active sites, the as-prepared Sb@CN electrode material exhibited remarkable cyclic stability with a reversible specific capacity of 360.2 mAh g The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. This work was supported by the Danyang Liu contributed significantly to analysis and wrote the manuscript; Li Yang performed the experiments and manuscript preparation; Zanyu Chen and Guoqiang Zou contributed to the materials tools and the analysis of the data; Hongshuai Hou and Jiugang Hu contributed to the conception of the study; Xiaobo Ji helped perform the analysis with constructive discussions. Supplementary materials to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: