A series of phosphonate-functionalized task-specific ionic liquids (TSILs) have been synthesized and studied for selective extraction of tantalum from a sulfuric acid medium. The results described here show that high distribution coefficient values can be achieved for the selective separation of tantalum (Ta). Such a system can be used as an alternative to TBP for the separation and purification of tantalum by solvent extraction.The unique properties of tantalum (Ta) have contributed to its importance for use in the steel, electronics and other high-tech industries ( New supply sources may be strategically developed, such as diversification of geographic supply location or efforts to recycle this element from manufacturing scrap ( In mineral deposits, tantalum is almost always associated with niobium ( Globally, MIBK is the most popular and commonly used extractant due to its extraction efficiency. However, MIBK is fire- and explosion-hazardous, which are major disadvantages for such a process. Similar to an extraction with MIBK, the TBP extraction method from a mixture of hydrofluoric and sulfuric acids ( Room-temperature ionic liquids (ILs), can be used as alternative diluents or extractants of volatile organic compounds in these extraction processes due to their nonflammability and nonvolatility ( Recently, we synthesized a novel family of ketone-functionalized task-specific ionic liquids for the selective extraction of tantalum from sulfuric acid medium ( In the present work, we studied a method for liquid-liquid extraction of Ta(V) that applies functionalized hydrophobic ionic liquids based on ammonium, piperidium, imidazolium, pyrrolidinium or pyridinium cations bearing a phosphonate moiety similar to the functional group of TBP. It was assumed that the functional group introduced to the ionic liquid as a phosphonate R In the literature, there are only a few examples of TSILs bearing phosphoryl groups, and in all cases, the studies are dedicated to the extraction of actinides ( All chemicals and reagents used in this study were of analytical grade and purchased from Sigma-Aldrich or Alfa Aesar. They were each purified by distillation prior to use. Anhydrous solvents were purchased from Acros (AcroSeal®). ICP calibration and verification standards were purchased from SCP Sciences. Density measurements were performed with a DSA 5000 thermoregulated digital densimeter (Anton Paar). The apparatus measures densities using an oscillating U-tube with an accuracy of 0.00001 g/cm An RM 200 Lamy rheometer with a CP-400 cone plate system was used to measure viscosity. A plate-plate geometry (PP25, diameter 24.981) was chosen to measure shear viscosities under thermostatic control (25 °C) from shear rates of 0.1 to 300 1/s. Shear rates were increased by 10 points per decade. The measurement duration per point was set to 6 s. Pre- and postextraction acid concentration in the aqueous and TSIL phases was analyzed using a Metrohm 809 Titrando by titration with either 0.1 or 0.01 M NaOH (Fluka Analytical). Solubility of the TSIL in the aqueous phase was determined by quantifying cation concentration in aqueous solution via Total Organic Content (TOC) measurements using a Shimadzu TOCVCSH analyzer based on a 680 °C combustion catalytic oxidation/NDIR method. The solubility of water in the TSILs was determined via Karl Fischer coulometric titration with Hydranal® Composite 2 using a Metrohm 831 KF Coulometer or a Metrohm 809 Titrando. The TSIL was in contact with the aqueous phase for 1 h; then, the two-phase system was centrifuged, and the TSIL water content was measured. NMR analyses were performed on a Bruker 400 ultrashield VS spectrometer. Displacements are reported in ppm using the solvent (CDCl Metal concentrations were measured before and after extraction by inductively coupled plasma/atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP/AES) using a SPECTRO ARCOS spectrometer. Powder X-ray diffraction patterns were recorded on a Bruker D8 advance diffractometer using CuKα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å). The data were collected in Bragg-Brentano geometry over 2θ range of 10°–80° with a step size of 0.015°. The crystallite size (L) was estimated from the line broadening of the XRD peaks using the Scherrer formula: SEM analyses were obtained with a TESCAN VEGA3 scanning electron microscope coupled with an EDX Bruker QUANTAX microanalyzer. The functionalized hydrophobic ionic liquids based on ammonium, piperidinium, imidazolium, pyridinium or pyrrolidinium cations bearing phosphonate moieties have been synthesized according to Dibromobutane and tributyl phosphite were heated for 45 min under microwave irradiation leading to dibutyl (4-bromobutyl)phosphonate. The synthesized dibutyl (4-bromobutyl)phosphonate was reacted with tributylamine (N The general procedures for synthesis of TSILs and their characterization are reported in the supporting information. Ta(V) stock solutions (1–10 g/L) were prepared at the desired acidity (H Extractions were performed by shaking defined volumes of TSIL and aqueous phases using a temperature-controlled shaker (Infor-ht® ecotron) at 25 °C and 400 rpm for 1 h. Various aqueous to TSIL phase (V After the extraction, separation of the phases was assisted by centrifugation (4000 rpm for 5 min), and the aqueous phase was analyzed by ICP/AES. The organic phase was subjected to stripping using ultrapure water (MilliQ, Millipore, 18 MΩ/cm). Stripping experiments were performed at 25 °C by contacting the loaded IL phase with water for 1 h (aqueous to IL phase volumetric ratio V The efficiency of TSIL to selectively extract Ta towards competitive metals was evaluated using the following parameters. The distribution ratio (D) was determined using the following equation: The extraction efficiency (%E) was determined using the following equation: The stripping percentage (%S) was calculated as follows for V The separation factor (SF All synthesized TSILs are liquid at room temperature and present a sufficiently low viscosity to be directly employed as pure extracting phase/extracting agents in liquid-liquid extraction experiments. The distribution ratios of Ta remain almost constant after 15 min at 25 °C, which is the amount of time presumed necessary for Ta to reach an equilibrium state with the TSIL. To illustrate this result, a kinetic study for Pip As described in the literature, tantalum extraction efficiency is low at low acidity ( The metal ion distribution ratios (D High distribution coefficients were obtained for all tested TSILs. The extraction efficiency was determined to be similar among ammonium, piperidium, pyrrolidinium, imidazolium and pyridinium cations. Indeed, Ta is almost quantitatively extracted by TSILs with a performance close to that of TBP. The stripping of Ta from loaded TSILs is an important parameter in selective recovery of Ta and recycling of TSILs, which will be then engaged for the next extraction-stripping cycles. The behavior of the N The use of deionized water as a stripping solution resulted in recovery of Ta with high yields, with the exception of the TSIL bearing an ammonium cation (N Based on the extraction and stripping efficiencies, we selected [Pip The TSIL was combined with an equal volume of feed solution, 6 M H To determine the amount of Ta that can be extracted by [Pip In fact, To investigate the selectivity of [Pip The extraction behavior for each metal ion as a function of sulfuric acid concentration is plotted in The TSIL [Pip Stripping tantalum from the IL phase into an aqueous medium is an important step in recovering this metal. We showed that water can be effective at stripping Ta from [Pip The stripping efficiency from the loaded [Pip Finally, the percent recovery of Ta from the aqueous stripping medium was determined by precipitation using an ammonium hydroxide (NH  It appears that the extraction mechanism of an IL is very different compared to that of a conventional organic solvent ( To estimate the extraction mechanism, These results indicate that no degradation of TSIL occurs and that this secondary peak is related to the presence of Ta. This suggests that an ion pair complex is formed between Ta and the IL in the ionic liquid medium. The solubility of the ionic liquid in various aqueous solutions was first studied by NMR analysis of the aqueous phase, tracking the Various amounts of TSIL transferred into the aqueous phase when the initial feed changed from water to acidic solution in the presence or absence of Tantalum, suggesting that this value is not exclusively correlated to solubilization of the TSIL in the aqueous phase. This result supports an intrinsic solubilization and loss due to ion exchange. The amount of TSIL transferred into the aqueous phase was estimated by TOC analysis with approximately 15 g/L of organic content in the pure water compared to 210 g/L when the initial aqueous phase is acidified and contains Ta. This amount corresponds to 16.4% of the initial TSIL quantity ( Surprisingly, it has been observed that TSIL loss decreases progressively during the extraction cycles. As illustrated in Fig. SI-3 (see supporting information), after the first cycle, the amount of TSIL loss in the aqueous phase is <2%. Water and acid transferred into the TSIL phase during extraction (see below) can possibly explain this behavior. Once loaded with water and acid, the solubilization of TSIL is much less pronounced. Additionally, the TSIL may contain some sulfate as the counteranion which can play a role in this phenomenon. However, it is difficult to definitively conclude the presence of sulfate since it was not possible to discriminate sulfur from sulfate from that of the NTf The [Pip After contact of the acidic aqueous phase (6 M H The role of the extracted acid in regard to the amount of water extracted during the extraction step should be further studied. Investigations such as SAXS, EXAFS or computational procedures could help to identify the role of water and acid in this process ( Based on the behaviors observed when investigating the mechanism of TSIL exchange, it appears that the combination of ion pair complex formation and ion-exchange mechanisms could be the driving force of the extraction. No concrete evidence allows the discrimination between these two mechanisms. The possibility of a mixed partitioning mode has been described in the literature ( A novel family of phosphonate-functionalized task-specific ionic liquids (TSILs) were synthesized to study their ability to extract Ta from a sulfuric acid solution. Among the various TSILs that were synthesized, the potential of bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide N-(4-(dibutoxyphosphoryl) butyl)-N-ethylpiperidinium, [Pip These various findings suggest that Ta can be extracted via a combination of the ion pair complex formation and ion-exchange mechanisms. Considering the different observations, it is difficult to eliminate the possibility of either mechanism. Further analyses are under investigation to improve the mechanistic aspect of the extraction. The authors acknowledge B. Baus-Lagarde, T. Chave, V. Haquin and H. Arena for technical support. The authors thank the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at