Electrokinetic remediation has become a usual process for the removal of contaminants from soils. Various materials and products are used in the electrokinetic treatment to improve the efficiency of this technique. Ion exchange membranes have been tested resulting in an enhancement of the metal removal selectivity and permits good control of the pH. On the other hand, the use of membranes permits the contaminants to be isolated and concentrated in a separate compartment. In this work, other materials different than membranes have been tested through electroremediation of a kaolinite specimen contaminated with lead and zinc. Ion exchange fibers have been tested playing similar role of membranes. However, fibers are based on a cellulosic structure which gives to the fibers hydrophilic properties. Thus, fibers have shown a good mechanical structure and have enhanced the electro-osmotic flux with a better selectivity against ions less hydrated as lead. Removal yields were increased for lead and zinc while the latter is more retained inside the cation exchange fibers.Soil contamination became a concerned problem giving rise to many laboratory studies in recent years. It is due to the fact that various phenomena and numerous factors can intervene as pollutants provoking serious dangers to the human health. Heavy metals are generated from the factors which are the most difficult to eliminate. Electrokinetic soil remediation is one of the in situ process that has been recently developed for the metal removing. Depending on the nature and the extent of a studied pollution, particular scheme have been adapted to improve electrokinetic processing. The disposal of cationic and anionic exchange membranes allows the transport of contaminants present in the sample under investigation Electrokinetic tests were carried out in a cylindrical glass cell which is presented in A commercial homogenous cation-exchange membrane furnished from Tokuyama Soda co ltd, CMX, is used. It consists in a polysulfonated group with an ion exchange capacity of 1.62 All chemicals were analytical grade reagent (Fluka or Prolabo) dissolved in ultra-pure water. Cation solutions were prepared from nitrate salts. We have also studied the electric conductivity of both, the ion exchange membranes and fibers as a function of the equilibrating solution and the nature of heavy metals. The experimental system used for this measurement is composed by: one pincers used for measuring the conductivity with a fixed distance between the two electrodes made of platinum which compose the pincers; a conductivimeter Tacussell; a thermoregulator bath which maintains the system at 298 The behavior of both lead and zinc has been studied in electroremediation tests with kaolinite using an ion exchange barrier between both anolyte and catholyte and the central compartment which contains the kaolinite specimen. Before using ion exchange fibers, ion exchange membranes were tested. The current density effect was studied and it is shown that the best yield of removing lead from kaolinite is obtained for 15 So, according to literature The use of ion exchange fibers in the electroremediation can optimize the yield extraction because their hydrophilic properties which enhance the electro-osmosis transport. On the other hand they can give rise to better results than those obtained by ion exchange membranes through the selectivity and the mechanical resistance. Lead is better removed regarding the low hydration of its ion. More hydrated ions can be retained by the ion exchange fiber giving rise to a lower kinetic of remediation. Expected good yields can be obtained in real soil samples according to the results obtained in kaolinite. We want to thank Dr. Innocent Christophe from the European Institute of Membranes (Montpellier, France) for the fibers furnishing.