A novel differential form of the integrated constitutive description earlier advanced by Jonas et al., for modeling the flow stress of austenite, is developed. The temperature and strain rate dependencies are introduced in the formalism through the temperature-dependent shear modulus of the material, the yield, saturation and steady-state stresses, as well as the time to achieve 50% dynamic recrystallization. The correlation between each of the above stresses and the Zener-Hollomon parameter is carried out by means of the Sellars-Tegart-Garofalo model employing the activation energy for the self-diffusion of Fe in austenite (Q=284kJmol−1). The proposed formalism involves the determination of the flow stress of the material by means of the numerical integration of three differential equations. In this way, it is possible to compute the flow stress both during the work-hardening and dynamic recovery stage, as well as from the onset of dynamic recrystallization up to the work softening transient and final achievement of the steady-state stress. Therefore, it is possible to predict the flow stress curves of austenite under both sharp and ramped transient loading conditions leading to the occurrence of dynamic recrystallization, a novel feature that cannot be accomplished by means of the early advanced model.material parameters material parameters in the STG model, s initial austenitic grain size, μm athermal dislocation storage rate, m material parameters in the STG model Avrami exponent dynamic recovery rate universal gas constant, J time, s time for 50% recrystallization, s material parameter activation energy for hot-working, kJ apparent activation energy for dynamic recrystallization, kJ Absolute temperature, K volume fraction recrystallized material parameter Zener-Hollomon parameter, s material parameter in the STG model, MPa material parameters in the STG model, MPa work-hardening or work-softening rate of the material, MPa total effective strain critical strain for the onset of DRX effective strain rate, s temperature-dependent shear modulus, MPa dislocation density, m flow stress of the material, MPa yield stress in Jonas et al. model, MPa flow stress corresponding to the work-hardening and DRV curve, MPa athermal stress, MPa critical stress for the onset of DRX, MPa peak stress, MPa yield stress, MPa saturation stress, MPa steady-state flow stress, MPa work-hardening rate, MPa difference between σ In the past few years, numerical modeling has been extensively employed for the analysis and optimization of metalworking processes. Particularly, for those forming operations conducted under hot-working conditions, such numerical tools have become very useful given the complex changes in temperature, strain rate and microstructure experienced by the material under processing. In this way, it has been possible to analyze in detail not only the geometrical changes of the stock during the different deformation steps, but also the dynamic and static microstructural evolution undergone by the material. The latter aspect is of utmost importance given the close relationship that exists between microstructure and the final mechanical properties of the material. However, an essential aspect of different numerical tools employed for this purpose is the appropriate description of the flow stress of the material as a function of its microstructure, chemical composition and deformation conditions through appropriate constitutive descriptions. Thus, the capability of such numerical methods for conducting a precise analysis depends critically of the accuracy of such constitutive equations, which explains the interest that exists in their development and improvement under rational basis. If the numerical models aim at analyzing hot-working processes carried out under transient loading conditions, it is essential that the formulated constitutive equation is based on valid state parameters, that is to say, parameters able to represent the microstructure of the material, which excludes the total strain applied In the case of ferrous materials, the development of their constitutive description encompasses a large variety of alloys and types of formulations. In the past few years, one approach that has been widely employed for this purpose is the use of an Arrhenius-type model based on the hyperbolic sine relationship (referred to as the Sellars-Tegart-Garofalo model, in the forthcoming), but assuming the strain dependence of the different parameters involved in the equation. This approach has been applied to different steels including 316L Another approach commonly employed is that of the use of the Johnson–Cook An alternative methodology for analyzing the deformation of austenite under hot-working conditions is based on the description of the temperature and strain rate dependence of different stress parameters of the flow stress curve, including the critical stress for the onset of DRX, as well as and the peak stress, by means of the Sellars-Tegart-Garofalo (STG) model. This approach has been applied to vanadium microalloyed More recently, Dong et al., On the contrary, the unified approach advanced by Orend et al. In the different research works quoted above, the flow stress of the material being deformed is expressed by means of an integrated equation of the form: Clearly, this type of formulations would just be limited to the computation of the flow stress when plastic deformation occurs under constant conditions of temperature and strain rate. However, these could not be employed for computing the flow stress under transient deformation conditions, that is to say, when the deformation temperature and/or strain rate vary throughout the course of deformation, since under these conditions, Eqs. Therefore, given the above account, it can be clearly understood that a need for the development of rational constitutive models in which the flow stress of the material is independent of the total strain applied, as well as being able to describe the changes in flow stress and the work-hardening or work-softening rate of austenite during deformation under transient deformation conditions, arises. Thus, in the present communication, a novel approach aimed at contributing to fill in this gap is proposed. The developed formulation is based on the model earlier advanced by Jonas et al. The ultimate aim of the present work is to allow an extension of this formulation for its use under deformation conditions in which both temperature and strain rate could vary throughout the deformation step. In order to accomplish this purpose, the extended formulation of this particular model should be developed in differential form, which is a fundamental issue that has not been addressed in any of the previous research works cited above. These features represent the main contribution of the present work to new knowledge in this field and constitute the novelty of the investigation that has been conducted. As will be shown in the forthcoming, the new extension of the model here proposed implies the numerical integration of three different differential equations, which involve the work-hardening (WH) and dynamic recovery (DRV) transient of the material, its Avrami kinetics and the associated work-softening transient due to DRX. The constitutive description put forward is subsequently validated employing the experimental flow stress data that has been reported for an ultra-low carbon steel deformed under hot-working conditions. According to the model advanced by Jonas et al. Here, ρ represents the dislocation density, ε the plastic strain, h the athermal dislocation storage rate and r the dynamic recovery rate. By assuming that the flow stress, σ, is directly proportional to the ρ In the above equation, σ Here: In Eqs. On the other hand, the peak stress is determined as a function of deformation temperature and strain rate by means of the hyperbolic sine relationship In the above equation, B, α and m represent material parameters. Thus, Eqs. In order to extent this model to transient deformation conditions at least two important features should be addressed: firstly, Eqs. Accordingly, the work-hardening curve of the material can be determined by the numerical integration of Eq. Taking into consideration that the characteristic work-hardening rate, θ As derived from the data is given by Kocks In the above equations, σ In order to illustrate the use of the extended general constitutive model, the flow stress data published by Kowalski et al. As can be observed in these Figures, the flow stress curves of the material exhibit the typical characteristics of steel when this material is deformed under hot-working conditions. Namely, the presence of an initial work-hardening transient until the achievement of a peak stress, followed by the typical work-softening transient due to DRX and the achievement of a steady-state condition. However, the work-softening transient is less pronounced in those curves determined at a strain rate of 49  As suggested by Luton and Sellars  Thus, The experimental values of the volume fraction recrystallized can be determined from the experimental flow stress curves, particularly from the work-softening transient induced by DRX, as well as the hypothetical curve, which describes the evolution of the DRV curve above the critical stress for the onset of DRX. In this way, according to Eq. On the other hand,  However, despite these deviations, it can be concluded that, overall, the new proposed formulation allowed the development of a sound constitutive description for the hot-deformation of the material under investigation. The different stress parameters involved in the constitutive description are determined in a rational manner employing a model with a clear physical significance, based on the thermally activated nature of plastic deformation and the role that the stress applied plays on assisting dislocations to surmount the different thermal barriers, which oppose dislocation motion. Moreover, the fact that it constitutes a differential formulation, absolutely independent on the strain applied, makes it an appropriate approach for modeling the change in the flow stress of the material when it is deformed under transient deformation conditions, which involve the occurrence of DRX. The plastic deformation of the material is treated in an incremental manner and therefore, any change in temperature and strain rate can be updated during the numerical integration of Eqs. The potentialities of the advanced formulation for predicting changes in the flow stress when hypothetical either sharp or ramped changes of any kind both in deformation temperature and strain rate occur, will be presented and analyzed in the next section. As can be clearly observed from Eqs. The capability of the new proposed formulation for modeling the changes in flow stress when a sharp change in deformation conditions, involving a decrease in temperature and an increase in strain rate takes place, can be observed in If the same change in deformation conditions occurred in a ramped manner, assuming a linear decrease in temperature and an exponential increase in strain rate, where the final deformation conditions are achieved at a strain of 0.7, the resulting flow stress curve would be determined entirely by σ A similar analysis can be conducted assuming a reverse change in deformation conditions, as shown in If the same transient is considered to occur in a ramped manner, assuming a linear increase in temperature from 1223 to 1323 A very interesting feature of the analysis of some hypothetical sharp transient tests is the occurrence of the overshooting of the upper stress-strain curve, as shown in  Therefore, it could be concluded that, according to the differential formulation here advanced, whenever multiple onsets of DRX occur throughout the deformation process, leading to the presence of multiple Avrami curves as shown in Finally, if the same deformation schedule is analyzed in a reverse manner, that is to say, starting from the deformation of the material at a strain rate of 49 In summary, given its explicit dependence on the total strain, the original integrated model advanced by Jonas et al. A novel differential formulation of the original constitutive description earlier advanced by Jonas et al., for modeling the stress-strain curves of austenite during deformation under constant conditions of temperature and strain rate, has been developed. The proposed formulation could be considered as an extension or generalization of Jonas et al. original integrated model, since it readily allows the computation of the flow stress curves of austenite both under constant and transient loading conditions. The determination of the flow stress is achieved by means of the numerical integration of three differential equations, which enables the computation of the flow stress both in the work-hardening and DRV stage, as well as in the stage at which DRX becomes operative, continuing through the work-softening transient up to the achievement of steady-state. The formalism has been validated employing flow stress curves reported in the literature for an ultra-low carbon steel, deformed under plane strain compression and constant deformation conditions. The differential nature of the advanced formalism has allowed the examination of the expected flow stress behavior of the material under both hypothetical sharp and ramped transient deformation conditions. Also, it has allowed the comparison of the previous results with the predictions of the original integrated model, which highlights the limitation of the latter to deal with deformation under transient loading conditions, which involve the occurrence of DRX. The advanced differential formulation can be readily implemented in finite element computer codes for a more accurate analysis of hot-working process that take place under transient deformation conditions. Professor Puchi-Cabrera gratefully acknowledges the financial support provided by the Laboratory LAMIH,