In this study, the effect of Pb(NO3)2 on the flotation behavior of scheelite using sodium oleate (NaOL) as a collector in the presence and absence of Ca2+ ions was investigated through the micro-flotation tests, solution chemistry calculation, zeta potential measurements, and FT-IR analysis. The micro-flotation results indicated that the addition of Pb(NO3)2 or Pb-OL complex obviously improved the scheelite recovery, and eliminated the adverse effect of Ca2+ ions on the scheelite flotation. The mechanism studies indicated that the addition of Pb(NO3)2 improved the amount of adsorbed NaOL onto the scheelite surface, or react with NaOL in the solution to form the complexes of Pb(II) and NaOL, thus improved the scheelite recovery. The chemical reaction between Pb(NO3)2 and NaOL was stronger than those of calcium ions and NaOL at pH 6–9.3, therefore, the addition of Pb(NO3)2 could eliminate the adverse effect of calcium ions on the scheelite flotation. However, at pH > 9.8, Pb(OH)2 and Pb(OH)3
                     − were the main lead species. The chemical reaction between Pb(OH)2 or Pb(OH)3
                     − and NaOL was weaker than those of calcium ions and NaOL, hence cannot eliminate the adverse effect of calcium ions on the scheelite flotation.Scheelite (CaWO In industrial flotation, the existence of calcium ions significantly influence the flotation performance of scheelite ( As one of the most important collectors, however, the effect of lead ions on collecting ability of sodium oleate for scheelite flotation has been rarely reported. In addition, the sodium oleate or other fatty acid collectors is often combined, and used with benzohydroxamic acid in scheelite flotation ( Scheelite sample used for all experiments was obtained from Yunnan Province, China. The XRD results given in The sample was ground and then sieved to collect the −106 μm fraction for the micro-flotation tests. Hydrochloric acid (HCl) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) were used as pH regulators. Sodium oleate (NaOL), calcium chloride and lead Flotation tests were carried out in a XFG flotation machine with a 40 mL plexiglass cell, at an impeller speed of 2000 rpm. The mineral suspension was prepared by adding 2.0 g of minerals to 40 mL of distilled water. The pH of the mineral suspensions was first adjusted by adding NaOH or HCl. Once the desired reagent was added, the suspension was agitated for 2 min, and the pH was measured before the flotation. The flotation was performed according to the following procedure ( The FT-IR spectra of scheelite and sodium oleate were obtained by a spectrum One FT-IR spectrometer. Approximately 1% (mass fraction) of the solid sample was mixed with spectroscopic grade KBr. The wave number of the spectra ranged from 400 to 4000 cm Zeta potential measurements were performed using a Coulter Delsa440sx Zeta analyzer instrument. The suspensions (0.01% mass fraction) with small amount of −2 μm minerals in a 1 × 10 The effects of reagents concentration and pulp pH on the flotation recovery of scheelite are shown as The flotation recoveries of scheelite in the presence and absence of Pb(NO  The effects of lead and calcium ions on the flotation recovery of scheelite as a function of pH were investigated, and the results are shown in In order to further investigate the effect of Pb(NO The zeta potential-pH profile of scheelite in the absence and presence of chemicals is shown in  Lead ion species that adsorbed onto the scheelite surface would act as reactive sites for NaOL and could enhance the adsorption of NaOL. The residual lead species in the solution reacted with NaOL, forming Pb-OL complex that can then be adsorbed onto the scheelite surface and increase the hydrophobicity of scheelite; therefore, the addition of Pb(NO  The FT-IR spectra of scheelite treated with NaOL in presence and absence of lead ions are shown in The standard Gibbs free energy change ( The protonation reactions of HOL in water: The hydrolysis reaction of Pb The reaction between NaOL and the metal ions: As in reactions Because the reactions have side reactions, the coefficient of the side reaction is considered: After substituting the relative parameters into the corresponding equations, the relative curve between the pH and ΔG can be drawn. As shown in Based on the flotation tests, zeta potential measurements, FT-IR studies, and the thermodynamic analysis, the effect of Ca As shown in In this study, the effect and mechanism of Pb(NO The authors acknowledge the support of