Platinum group metals find extensive use in automobile catalysts, space materials and cancer therapy. Their natural resources are limited thus their recovery from the secondary sector has assumed a great significance. Liquid–liquid extraction provides an effective methodology for the said purpose. The present paper discusses the extraction behavior of platinum(IV), rhodium(III) and palladium(II) from HCl, H2SO4 and HNO3 (0.10–6.0molL−1) media by toluene solution of Cyanex 923. Detailed studies have been conducted by varying the equilibration time, temperature, diluent and concentration of extractant. An assessment of the loading capacity, regeneration power and stability of extractant has been made. The extraction behavior of associated metals namely gold, silver, iron, nickel, cobalt, chromium, copper and aluminum has been investigated and the conditions for the binary separations involving platinum metals have been optimized. The stoichiometric ratio of the extracting species for platinum and palladium has been worked out. Based on the extraction data platinum, palladium and rhodium have been recovered from some spent commercial materials.Demand for PGMs, particularly palladium, platinum and rhodium, has increased because of their wide range of applications, such as in vehicle catalytic converter systems and electronic industries, vessels for laboratory and valuable equipments including thermocouple elements. Despite their limited availability the demand for these metals is increasing. Therefore efficient extraction and separation procedures for PGMs are essential for the recycling of these metals from secondary sources or postconsumer scrap. The consumption of platinum and palladium by the autocatalyst sector is rising by 5% each year. As a consequence spent automobile catalysts have emerged as a major secondary source of platinum and palladium. The conventional method for the separation of PGMs is chemical precipitation. Precipitation process has inherent disadvantages, such as high chemical consumption and high labor requirements involved in the repeated process, slow kinetics and solid–liquid-separation. The chemical precipitation process increases environmental pollution due to the use of toxic chemicals. In view of the complexity of materials to be processed and the purity of metals desired solvent extraction offers an effective technology to recover the metals as it offers high selectivity and metal purity. A variety of extractants, such as Alamine 304 ( In the last three decades alkylphosphines of the Cyanex series have come up on the forefront as useful extractants for various metal ions including PGMs. Cyanex 925 and Cyanex 921 have been employed for the extraction of Pt(IV), Rh(III) and Pd(II) from aqueous chloride medium in the absence and presence of tin(II) chloride. The order of extraction of Pt, Rh and Pd was found to be different in the presence and absence of tin(II) chloride ( The paper embodies distribution studies on platinum, palladium and rhodium along with some commonly associated metal ions namely gold, silver, iron, nickel, cobalt, chromium, copper and aluminum. The effect of various aqueous phase and organic phase variables on the extraction of Pt(IV) and Pd(II) has been investigated. The loading capacity of the extractant has been determined. The recycling capacity of Cyanex 923 has been checked and its stability towards the long-term acid contact has been investigated. Based on the partition data the conditions for the binary separation of Pt(IV) or Pd(II) from associated metal ions have been achieved. The separation conditions, thus, developed were validated by applying the scheme to a catalyst standard (NIST SRM-2556). The developed method has been extended for the recovery of platinum, palladium and rhodium from spent Pt–Rh thermocouple wire, coated ceramic honeycomb and palladium coated alumina catalyst. All the chemicals and solvents were analytical reagent grade materials from Merck/Fluka. The stock solutions of the metal ions were prepared by dissolving their suitable salts (Sigma-Aldrich) in double distilled water containing a minimum amount of the corresponding mineral acid. Cyanex 923 (mol. wt. 348, 93% purity) was received from Cytec Canada. It was used without further purification. Kerosene used as a diluent was 160–200 The distribution studies for metal ions and analysis of matrix were carried out using atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAnalyst 800, Perkin Elmer, Germany) or ICP-OES (Perkin Elmer, Germany). Calibration of this instrument was performed by sequential on peak measurement of the corresponding absorption signal and background. The effect of equilibration time on the metal ions was investigated by mechanically (Riviera, Bombay, India) shaking the aqueous and organic phases for different time intervals. A temperature controlled (± In all the partition studies aqueous (metal ion in appropriate concentration of acid) and organic (an appropriate concentration of Cyanex 923 in toluene) phases in a ratio of 1:1 (v/v) were shaken at room temperature (25  The extraction of Pd(II) in chloride medium is negligible (< Rh(III) shows negligible extraction from chloride and sulfate media. However, from nitrate medium Rh(III) shows a maximum extraction of ~ The effect of temperature (10–50 The metal to extractant ratio in the extracted platinum/palladium species was observed by varying Cyanex 923 concentration from 0.03 to 0.5 The loading capacity of Cyanex 923 in toluene was studied by equilibrating Pt(IV)/Pd(II) solution in 6 The stability and recycling capacity of an extractant needs to be evaluated to assess its utility as an extractant for commercial purposes. The aforesaid characteristics of Cyanex 923 have been investigated for Pt(IV) and Pd(II) in terms of change in percent extraction. The hydrolytic stability of the extractant towards HCl and H For determining the regeneration capacity of the extractant successive extraction/stripping cycles for Pt(IV)/Pd(II) were carried out. Pt(IV)/Pd(II) was extracted using 0.10 To discern the effect of nature of various aromatic and aliphatic diluents on the extraction of Pt(IV) and Pd(II), the organic diluents namely, nitrobenzene, cyclohexanone, chloroform, toluene, xylene, kerosene and n-hexane were employed. For both the metal ions no correlation was observed between the extent of extraction and the dielectric constant or chemical nature of the diluents ( Various stripping reagents were tried for the stripping of Pt(IV), Rh(III) and Pd(II) from the loaded Cyanex 923. The results indicating the efficiency of the different stripping reagents are given in The extraction behavior of associated metal ions, namely Au(III), Cr(III), Fe(III), Fe(II), Co(II), Ni(II) and Cu(II) from HCl and H The partition data obtained for the metal ions provide conditions for the separation of Pt(IV), Rh(III) and Pd(II) from each other and from the associated metal ions by either selective extraction or selective stripping. The results indicating the conditions for the separations and the percentage recovery of the metal ions are tabulated in The extraction behavior of Pt(IV) from HCl medium is quite different from most of the associated metal ions, therefore the separation of Pt(IV) from other associated metal ions was carried out from HCl medium. Pt(IV) is selectively extracted from an aqueous solution containing Cr(III)/Rh(III)/Co(II)/Cu(II)/Ni(II) at 5.0 The separation of Pd(II) from the associated metal ions has been achieved at 5.0 The separation of Rh(III)–Al(III) was attained at 0.10 Based on the extraction data a flow sheet ( 50 The developed scheme was applied to a catalyst standard (NIST SRM-2556). About 1 About 0.5 Coated ceramic honeycomb containing Pd and Rh was crushed to fine powder. About 1 About 0.25 The present investigations highlight that Cyanex 923 is a useful extractant not only for mutual separation of Pt(IV), Pd(II) and Rh(III) but also for their separation from most of the commonly associated metal ions. The separations do not require the addition of any modifier or synergist and can be accomplished at room temperature. The stripping agents used for separations are simple and convenient for further processing of solutions. The developed conditions of separations have been successfully extended to recover PGMs from synthetic mixture, catalyst standard (NIST SRM-2556), spent Pt–Rh thermocouple wire, coated ceramic honeycomb and palladium coated alumina catalyst. The hydrolytic stability and the recycling capacity of the extractant are good and the phase separation is fast. Thanks are due to Cytec Inc., Canada, for gifting the Cyanex 923 sample. The financial support to one of the authors by the