Macroreticular chelating resins containing amidoxime groups were synthesized by aqueous suspension copolymerization of acrylonitrile (AN) and divinylbenzene (DVB) and subsequent chemical modification of cyano groups by reaction with hydroxylamine. In the copolymerization, the effects of divinylbenzene proportion and dilution degree on the copolymer pore structure were investigated. Gelatin and calcium carbonate were used as suspension stabilizers and sodium sulphate was added in order to reduce acrylonitrile solubility in water, by salting out effect. The copolymers (AN/DVB) and amidoxime resins (RNH/DVB) obtained were characterized by apparent density, surface area, pore volume, optical appearance, surface morphology and by nitrogen content. The amidoxime resins were finally evaluated in relation to the complexation capacity of copper ion.The development of efficient separation technologies is important to the environmental and economic health of society Organic ion exchangers have been used for many years in laboratory and industry plants. These materials consist of a network or matrix carrying functional groups, which are responsible for their ion exchange properties. Those functional groups may be immobilized in a polymeric matrix by chemical reaction or may be introduced by physical adsorption, in this case they are denominated impregnated resins Resins containing selective functional groups were developed for application in hydrometallurgy processes, where conventional ionic exchangers were less selective. The sorption of metal ions in chelating resins leads to the complex formation. This is the main difference between the action of simple ionic exchangers and chelating resins The interest in polymer complexing agents has largely grown in the last two decades because of the specific use of such polymers. These materials have been used for selective separation of metal ions from aqueous solutions. Colella et al. Vernon Egawa et al. Spherical particles of macroreticular chelating resins containing specific chelating groups can be prepared through suspension copolymerization The mechanism of the morphological structure formation of the resins is deeply influenced by the polymerization conditions such as: type and amount porogenic agent or diluent, dilution degree of the monomers, crosslinking degree, reaction temperature, etc The main influencing factor of the resin morphological structure is the monomer diluent (solvating or non-solvating) used in copolymer syntheses. These agents are inert substances that when removed from the resin structure after polymerization liberate the pores. The thermodynamic affinity of the diluent for the polymer structure determines the porous structure and swelling properties of the produced resins. When the diluent is a solvating one, in the stage of the phase separation, the polymer chains and polymer nuclei become less entangled and consequently the microspheres, more solvated, are less compact, producing a higher number of small pores. As the solvating power of diluent is reduced, it occurs the contraction of the polymer chains, the nuclei and their agglomerates are formed in a more compact way, increasing thus the space among the agglomerates of microspheres (macropores) and the microspheres size The reduction of the solvating power of the diluent produces beads with a more heterogeneous polymer structure. The light passage through these beads provokes intense light reflection that is the cause of the opaque appearance of these beads The proportion of crosslinking agent is an important variable in the resins synthesis, besides of being responsible for their insolubilization it determines the resins swelling capacity. A macroporous resin is made up of a pore phase and a continuous gel phase. These resins have the necessary structural feature of interconnecting pores for rate enhancement and for greater accessibility of the active exchanging or chelating sites within the polymer particle. In the macroporous resins, the pores are invariant with time in opposition to the microporosity that arises from the swelling of the gel phase by a solvating liquid The other characteristic of macroporous resins is their high mechanical resistance. The friction between the polymer beads during the exchange process and the expansion and contraction of the polymeric matrix caused by solvents with inverse polarities, do not destroy or modify the beads pore structure Although chelating resins prepared with DVB as crosslinking agent possess effective porous structure and high physical stability, an increase in DVB proportion, and as a consequence a decrease in the polar monomer proportion, decreases the complex capacity in relation to aqueous solutions of metal ions, because of the decrease in the resins hydrophilicity The objective of this work was the synthesis and the morphological study of chelating resins containing amidoxime groups The AN/DVB and amidoxime chelating resins (RNH/DVB) were characterized by apparent density, surface area, pore volume (by mercury porosimetry and water uptake), optical appearance, surface morphology and by the content of nitrogen. The chelating capacity of the amidoxime resins was evaluated in relation to copper ion complexation. Commercial acrylonitrile (AN) and divinylbenzene (DVB) (both monomers donated by Nitriflex Indústria e Comércio) were used as received. The purity of the supplied DVB was 55%. The initiator, benzoyl peroxide (BPO, Vetec Quı́mica Fina Ltda), and the diluent, toluene (Tol, Reagen-Quimibrás Indústrias Quı́micas S.A.), both P.A. grade, were used as received. The components of the aqueous phase: gelatin (Theoberg Importação e Exportação), sodium sulfate (Na Hydroxylamine hydrochloride (NH Surface area of the AN/DVB copolymers and RNH/DVB resins were measured on an ASAP-2010, Micromeritics (BET method). Pore volume and pore size distribution were determined on a Quanta Chrome-Auto Scan mercury porosimeter (Model SP33D). The beads visual appearance was observed with an optical microscope Olympus fitted with a photographic camera (Model SZ10). The beads were coated with a thin layer of gold and the surface morphological aspects were observed with a Digital Scanning Electron Microscope (Model DSM 960 ZEISS). Macroreticular acrylonitrile–divinylbenzene copolymer (AN/DVB) beads were synthesized by aqueous suspension polymerization technique in the presence of toluene (Tol) as diluent and benzoyl peroxide (1 mol% in relation to the monomers) as polymerization initiator. The commercial monomers, AN and DVB (55%), were used without further purification. The polymerizations were carried out in a flask fitted with a mechanical stirrer, mercury seal and a condenser. A toluene solution constituted of monomers and initiator was added to the polymerization flask and suspended by stirring (400 rpm) in the aqueous medium containing gelatin (0.06 w/v% in relation to water) and CaCO One part by weight of copolymer was suspended in a solution of 1.5 parts by weight of hydroxylamine hydrochloride, 0.84 part by weight of sodium hydroxide and 212 parts by weight of deionized water. It is necessary to neutralize the hydroxylamine salt to utilize the free base, since only the free base reacts with cyano groups An aqueous sodium hydroxide solution was added dropwise to a stirred aqueous solution of hydroxylamine hydrochloride to liberate the hydroxylamine. The insertion of amidoxime groups into the polymeric matrix was carried out by reacting the (AN/DVB) beads (25–45 mesh) with the alkaline hydroxylamine solution at 70°C for 7 h. The product (amidoxime resin–RNH/DVB) was filtered off, washed with water to eliminate the excess of hydroxylamine and finally dried at 50°C for 48 h The synthesis of the macroreticular chelating resin (RNH/DVB) is represented in The apparent density ( The pore volume ( The specific surface area ( The cylindrical model was assumed for the pore shape. The beads visual appearance was observed with the aid of an optical microscope fitted with a photographic camera. The beads were coated with a thin layer of gold and observed in a scanning electron microscope. Cyano and amidoxime groups content of the copolymers (AN/DVB) and resins (RNH/DVB) were obtained from nitrogen content determined by Kjeldahl’s microanalysis method The metal ion complexation capacity of the resins (RNH/DVB) was determined using an ammoniacal Cu Approximately 1 ml (0.5 part by weight) of resin (RNH/DVB) was put in water (conditioning) for 2 h and after this period filtered off. In a glass-stoppered erlenmeyer flask were placed the resin (RNH/DVB) and a determined volume of an ammoniacal copper solution (0.1 M). The volume of the copper solution was calculated through the values of nitrogen content determined experimentally by Kjeldahl’s method. The mixture remained 1 h under shaking in a shaker bath, at room temperature (about 25°C). Afterwards the mixture was filtered and the concentration of Cu During the development of chelating resins for application in hydrometallurgy it was noted that variations in the matrix structure significantly affected ion diffusion rates and ion selectivity. However, the relationship between the chelating capacity and the matrix structure is not well understood. Egawa and collaborators focused their attention in the variations of the resins synthesis conditions and verified the influence in the performance of the resultant resins It was verified that the morphological structure of the AN/DVB employed as reactants for producing amidoxime resins (RNH/DVB) by reacting with hydroxylamine is the most important characteristic for the application of those resins in the complexation of metal ions. Therefore in this work the results discussion will be focused on the morphological characteristics of the AN/DVB (amidoxime resins precursors) and RNH/DVB produced from them.  The interaction between polymer and solvent represented by Hildebrand solubility parameter ( The formation of the morphological structure during of the polymerization is controlled by the addition to the reaction medium of a porogenic agent and by the proportion of crosslinking agent. In this work the porogen is toluene, a bad solvent for acrylonitrile rich copolymers and the crosslinking agent is DVB. The monomers dilution degree influences the pore volume ( The apparent density is a characteristic very useful to evaluate the porosity of spherical polymer beads and it is very easily determined.  The effect of DVB proportion on the apparent density was not so straight, as DVB proportion increases two effects may occur, the increase of phase separation provoked by the increase of insolubility (  The values of pore volume obtained by water uptake [fixed pore volume (  In general, the surface area ( Copolymers with high proportion of acrylonitrile present morphological structures with high porosity. Those structures being heterogeneous provoke an accentuated light scattering during the light passage through polymer beads resulting in an opaque appearance unlike the homogeneous structures (gel-type) that are transparent. In a general way, the amount of functional groups introduced into AN/DVB beads decreases and the physical stability increases as the degree of crosslinking increases. The influence of DVB proportion and dilution degree on the nitrogen content of AN/DVB and RNH/DVB beads determined by Kjeldahl’s method is shown in The complexation capacity of the resins is a useful parameter that determines the amount of resin that will be necessary to remove a determined amount of a metal ion from a solution. The complexation capacity of the crosslinked resins is influenced by two main factors: the pore structure and the content of accessible active sites (active sites=amidoxime groups). The different morphological structures of the RNH/DVB are related to their nitrogen content and their performance in complexing Cu The total complexation capacity of the RNH/DVB was determined using an excess of Cu Besides the excess of copper ion in relation to the content of amidoxime groups, the pH of the medium is another important factor that contributes to displace the equilibrium of the complexation reaction. The decrease of the pH medium provokes a decrease on the complexation reaction, causing a decrease on the complexation capacity of RNH/DVB.  Independent of the system used, the percentual relation between theoretical and experimental complexation capacity presented the same tendency, i.e. decreased with reduction of macroporosity and acrylonitrile content used in the AN/DVB synthesis. Due to the low porosity of RNH/DVB synthesized with 60% of acrylonitrile, the copper aqueous solution was not able to access the amidoxime groups located in the bulk of the beads. However, during the mineralization of RNH/DVB with H  Considering now the resins TS-05 and TS-08 that possess the same nitrogen content, and present different values of capacities. That difference in the capacity values may be attributed to higher value of pore diameter of TS-05 resin (425 Å) in comparison with TS-08 (282 Å) ( Among the RNH/DVB resins synthesized in this work, TS-07 was the one that presented the highest value of Cu The macroporous characteristics of AN/DVB increased as the dilution degree increased, this behavior was observed by the decrease of apparent density. The increase of DVB proportion resulted in copolymers with the smallest values of pore volume and the highest values of apparent density and as a consequence with the highest values of surface area. The resins complexation capacity decreased as the crosslinking degree increased, i.e. as the macroporosity decreased. The low porosity of the resins hindered the access of the copper ions to amidoxime groups located in the bulk of the beads. Resins with high complexation capacity were obtained when an adequate porous structure with a high concentration of active accessible groups were produced. The TS-07 RNH/DVB (with the highest proportion of active sites, i.e. synthesized with the highest proportion of acrylonitrile) was the one that presented the best result of complexation capacity. That resin presented the highest value of nitrogen content, pore volume and pore diameter. Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientı́fico e Tecnológico (CNPq), Programa de Apoio ao Desenvolvimento Cientı́fico e Tecnológico (PADCT/CNPq), Nitriflex S.A. Indústria e Comércio, Departamento de Ciência dos Materiais e Metalurgia da PUC-Rio and Instituto Nacional de Tecnologia (INT) for their support of this work.