Amino acids are major nitrogen sources in soils and they harbour a central position in the nitrogen metabolism of cells. We determined whether Hebeloma spp. and Laccaria bicolor expressed the enzyme l-amino acid oxidase (LAO), which catalyses the oxidative deamination of the α-amino group of l-amino acids. We measured LAO activities from the mycelial extracts of seven laboratory-grown fungal strains with three methods, and we measured how LAO activities were expressed in one Hebeloma sp. strain grown on four nitrogen sources. Hebeloma spp. and L. bicolor converted l-phenylalanine, but not d-phenylalanine, to hydrogen peroxide, 2-oxoacid, and ammonia, suggesting that they expressed LAO enzymes. The enzymes utilized five out of seven tested l-amino acids as substrates. LAO activities were maximal at pH 8, where Michaelis constant (K
                     m) values were 2–5mm. The LAO of Hebeloma sp. was expressed on every nitrogen source analysed, and the activities were the highest in mycelia grown in nitrogen-rich conditions. We suggest that LAO is a mechanism for cellular amino acid catabolism in Hebeloma spp. and L. bicolor. Many soil bacteria and fungi also express LAO enzymes that have broad substrate specificities. Therefore, LAO is a potential candidate for a mechanism that catalyses nitrogen mineralization from amino acids at the ecosystem level.Basidiomycete and ascomycete fungi, including those that form ectomycorrhizal (ECM) symbioses with tree roots, are major inhabitants in soils of boreal and temperate forests ( The aim of this study was to characterize novel mechanisms of amino acid catabolism from ECM fungi. We hypothesized that ECM fungi expressed the enzyme  The fungi were grown for 18–45 DNA from fungal mycelia of all six Reference sequences of Mycelia from one to seven agar plates grown in parallel were harvested and combined. The mycelia were freshly ground in mortars in extraction buffer (EB), modified from In the case of Proteins in the fungal extracts were precipitated by adding 100 Extracts (0.4–8 Hydrogen peroxide (H Spectrophotometric measurements of H The production of 2-oxoacid was measured spectrophotometrically by hydrazine assay, modified from The production of NH Agar plugs (4–6 LAO activities for determination of For determination of pH optima of LAO, the assay buffers were modified from To resolve relatedness of the All strains of The major LAO isoform (R The LAO isoform profiles of the All analysed fungal strains and the snake venom LAO deaminated In accordance with the results presented above, all fungal strains and the snake venom LAO mineralized NH The LAO enzyme forms reaction products in equimolar ratios ( Five out of the seven tested The LAO isoforms of The LAO enzymes of We found very little or no extracellular LAO activities from pieces of growth medium cut just outside the growing hyphal front of  As the cultures aged to 45 We have shown that the mycelial extracts of However, the basidiomycete fungi may be very heterogeneous in their nitrogen metabolism. Within ascomycetes, LAO is also widely distributed in other organisms, as it has been described in, for example, algae ( The LAO enzymes of The The pH ranges of the activity of In native PAGE analyses, all  When grown as pure cultures in the laboratory, most ECM fungi use as nitrogen sources proteins ( We hypothesize that the LAO enzymes of ECM may act as intracellular nitrogen recycling mechanisms, which mineralize nitrogen from certain amino acids into NH Interestingly, in laboratory conditions Mycorrhizal fungi ameliorate the nitrogen acquisition of both annual and perennial plants ( In conclusion, the results presented here suggest that the basidiomycete ECM fungi, We thank Taina Pennanen (Finnish Forest Research Institute) and Jean Garbaye (INRA-Nancy, France) for some of the fungal strains used in this study. We are indebted to Jari Valkonen for his support and encouragement during the study. Helsinki University Environmental Research Unit (HERC) grant and University of Helsinki three-year research grant provided the financial resources for this study.