The current study investigated gold dissolution in cupric chloride solution, which is one of the most promising alternatives to replace cyanide, although not yet in operation on industrial scale. In this paper, the gold dissolution reaction rate and mechanism were studied by varying the process variables of temperature (28–95 °C), cupric concentration (0.02–1.0 M), chloride concentration (1–5 M), rotational speed (100–2500 RPM), and pH (0.5–2.0). The parameters affecting either the anodic or cathodic reaction, or both, were identified for the first time to the best of the authors’ knowledge in this wide range and with these parameter intervals. Tafel and linear polarization methods as well as cyclic voltammetry were used for pure gold with both rotating disk and stationary gold electrodes. An increase in the gold dissolution rate was observed with an increase in temperature, chloride concentration, and rotational speed. Additionally, an increase in cupric concentration ([Cu2+] = 0.02–0.75 M) promoted the gold dissolution rate, whereas the gold dissolution rate decreased with [Cu2+] from 0.75 to 1.0 M. The conditions for maximizing the gold dissolution rate in cupric chloride solution were concluded to be T > 55 °C, [Cu2+] = 0.5–0.75 M, [Cl−] = 5 M, and pH = 1.0 and the highest gold dissolution rate (2.9 · 10−4 mol m−2 s−1) was achieved at 95 °C with [Cu2+] = 0.5 M, [Cl−] = 5 M, pH = 1.0, and ωcyc
                      = 2500 RPM. The pH was shown not to affect the gold dissolution rate at all, but only to affect the solubility of the oxidant. It was suggested that gold dissolved as aurous species in the conditions of this study, although the increase in chloride concentration promoted the dissolution of gold as both, auric and aurous, species.
                  The reaction mechanism was interpreted using mixed potential theory. An increase in temperature was shown to promote only the cathodic reduction of cupric ion to cuprous at lower temperatures (28–55 °C); however, both the anodic gold dissolution reaction and cathodic cupric reduction reaction were enhanced at higher temperatures (65–95 °C). The cathodic reaction was also enhanced with an increase in cupric concentration (0.02–0.5 M), whereas the anodic reaction was promoted when the cupric concentration was increased from 0.5 to 0.75 M. When the cupric concentration was increased from 0.75 to 1.0 M, the cathodic reaction rate decreased. However, the reason for the decrease in the cathodic reaction rate was not clear. An increase in chloride concentration enhanced the cathodic reaction in the investigated range (1–5 M), whereas an increase in rotational speed (i.e., improved mass transfer) increased the anodic gold dissolution rate, specifically at low rotational speeds.Nowadays, cyanide leaching is the predominant process in gold production from primary raw materials ( Gold can be present in aqueous chloride solution either in monovalent aurous Au However, it should be noted that the equations above are simplifications, as cuprous and cupric copper prevails commonly in chloride solutions in a complex form. The prevailing complex depends on temperature ( The formation of auric species can occur through the disproportionation of aurous species. In previous research, this reaction has often been described as a reaction of gold cations. The dissolution of gold can be affected by process variables, such as temperature, oxidant (e.g., cupric and iron) and chloride concentration, rotational speed/solution flow as well as pH. Several authors have investigated the effect of process variables on the gold dissolution rate in cupric chloride media ( Many authors have reported that temperature has a positive effect on gold dissolution ( Cupric concentration has been reported to have a positive effect on the gold dissolution rate ( Chloride concentration is known to have a positive effect on gold dissolution ( In the study of The main role of pH is to keep oxidants (i.e., cupric) soluble during leaching ( The effect of process variables on gold dissolution in cupric chloride leaching is not yet fully understood. This paper continues the research of RDE measurements were performed in a water-jacketed three-electrode cell ( The parameters were investigated by varying one parameter at a time, while the other parameters were fixed to RDE measurements were performed with an ACM Instruments Gill AC potentiostat using an LPR sweep with Gill AC Sequencer software (from −10 to 10 mV vs. OCP with a sweep rate of 10 mV min The dissolution rate can be calculated according to Eq. Cyclic voltammetry measurements were performed in order to determine the effect of chloride concentration and pH on gold dissolution. Additionally, the ratio of auric and aurous reaction products can be defined from cyclic voltammetry measurements. An Ivium 24-bit CompactStat potentiostat was used with a scan rate of 20 mV s Temperature as well as rotational speed (i.e., improved mass transfer) were shown to promote the dissolution rate of gold, see  The logarithm of gold dissolution rate was shown to increase linearly when the OCP increased as a function of cupric concentration, see  Additionally, CV measurements were performed in order to investigate the effect of chloride concentration on current density (i.e., gold dissolution rate). The maximum potential was 0.85 V vs. SCE and no copper as oxidant or rotation was used in these tests. As presented in the results of Since the anodic peaks overlapped, the cathodic peaks of gold should be considered when investigating the occurrence of aurous and auric dissolution. The reduction of aurous gold was observed at potentials of 0.3–0.58 V vs. SCE as well as peak maxima at 0.48–0.52 V vs. SCE, see The effect of pH on the gold dissolution rate and OCP was investigated and the results suggested that the gold dissolution rate was not affected by the pH in the range tested, see Additionally, CV measurements were performed in a potential range between −0.5 and 1.0 V vs. SCE, when In this study, the effect of the process variables of temperature (28–95 °C), cupric concentration (0.02–1.0 M), chloride concentration (1–5 M), rotational speed (100–2500 RPM), and pH (0.5–2.0) were investigated to determine their effect on the gold dissolution rate as well as the behavior of gold dissolution. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this was done for the first time over such a wide range and with these parameter intervals. The electrochemical methods used were linear polarization and Tafel methods as well as cyclic voltammetry using pure gold as a rotating disk electrode and stationary wire electrodes. An increase in the gold dissolution rate was observed with an increase in temperature, chloride concentration, and rotational speed. Further, the dissolution of both auric and aurous gold was promoted by increasing the chloride concentration. Gold was shown to dissolve mainly as aurous gold according to the gold reduction peaks at maximum potentials of 0.85 and 1.0 V vs. SCE regardless of the chloride concentration. Additionally, an increase in cupric concentration promoted the gold dissolution rate when The reaction mechanism was discussed according to the mixed potential theory. In the system, the dissolution of aurous gold represents an anodic reaction, while the reduction of cupric ion represents a cathodic reaction. An increase in temperature promoted the cathodic reaction rate at lower temperatures (28–55 °C); however, the anodic reaction rate was enhanced notably at higher temperatures (i.e., 65–95 °C). The cathodic reaction rate was enhanced with an increasing cupric concentration (0.02–0.5 M). When the cupric concentration was increased from 0.5 to 0.75 M, the anodic reaction was promoted. When the cupric concentration was increased from 0.75 to 1.0 M, the cathodic reaction rate decreased. However, the reason for this reduced gold dissolution rate is not clear. An increase in chloride concentration enhanced the cathodic reaction in the investigated range (1–5 M), since the OCP as well as the gold dissolution rate increased. Additionally, cupric ions form cupric chloride complexes at higher chloride concentrations with increased reduction potentials, which results in higher dissolution rates of gold. An increase in rotational speed (i.e., improved mass transfer) promoted the gold dissolution rate; however, the increase was the most significant at low rotational speeds. pH is the only parameter that did not affect the dissolution rate of gold directly, however, it has an inverse effect on oxidant concentrations. The conditions for maximizing the gold dissolution rate in cupric solution can be concluded to be This work was funded by the School of Chemical Engineering,