Caustic calcined magnesia (main component is MgO) can be used to produce Mg(OH)2 by ammonium-circulation method (reaction steps: (1) MgO+2NH4
                     +
                     
                     
                        
                           →
                           Δ
                        
                     
                     Mg2+
                     +2NH3↑+H2O and (2) Mg2+
                     +2NH3↑+2H2O→Mg(OH)2↓+2NH4
                     +; Overall: MgO+H2O→Mg(OH)2↓). NH4Cl, NH4NO3 and (NH4)2SO4 have exhibited the ability to be used as a circulation medium. In this work, ammonium acetate (NH4Ac) was investigated as a circulation medium. The purity of the used caustic calcined magnesia (i.e., MgO content) is 85wt.%. The results show that NH4Ac is a much more efficient circulation medium than NH4Cl, NH4NO3 or (NH4)2SO4 is. Step (1) in the ammonium-circulation method can be significantly accelerated if NH4Ac is used as the circulation medium. The reason for the high efficiency of NH4Ac was also analyzed. By using NH4Ac as the circulation medium, rose petal-like Mg(OH)2 precipitate can be prepared in the presence of polyethylene glycol. The purity of the prepared Mg(OH)2 is more than 99wt.%.Magnesite (MgCO Industrially, In view of the above problems, we developed It should be noted that the ammonia gas produced in the first unit is actually ammonia gas/water vapor mixture. The partial pressure of ammonia gas is usually less than 20% due to the existence of water vapor (both units are performed at normal pressure). Subsequently, the produced ammonia/water mixture is separated by distillation, and the obtained pure ammonia gas is used for the second unit. This means that the partial pressure of the ammonia gas in the second unit is near 100%, that is, the partial pressure of ammonia gas is larger in the second unit than it in the first unit. Thus, the first unit is favored by a lower partial pressure of ammonia gas because it's a desorption process of ammonia from solution, while the second unit is favored by a higher partial pressure of ammonia gas because it's an adsorption process of ammonia by solution. The overall reaction of the two units is also the hydration of MgO. No external base, such as NaOH or Ca(OH) For The composition of CCM used as the raw material for preparing MH is reported in In this unit, MgO in the CCM reacts with NH The reaction occurring in this unit is as follows: For comparison, NH In this unit, Mg(Ac) The reaction occurring in this unit is as follows: During the reaction in both ammonia-evaporation unit and MH-precipitation (ammonia-adsorption), ammonia–ammonium buffer solution formed and the pH value maintains between about 7.5 and about 9.5. In the ammonia-evaporation unit, the pH value decreases from about 9.5 at the beginning of the reaction to about 7.5 at the end of the reaction. In the MH-precipitation unit, the pH value returns from about 7.5 at the beginning of the reaction to about 9.5 at the end of the reaction. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained on a LEO 1530 FEG field-emission scanning electron microscope (Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany). X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained with a D8 diffractometer (Bruker, Karlsruhe, Germany) with Cu Kα radiation (wavelength: 1.5406 The concentrations or percentage contents of Cl Measurement of the Cl The concentration of Cl Measurement of the SO The concentration of SO Measurement of the Mg The concentration of Mg Measurement of the MH purity The MH product with a known weight was first wetted with deionized water and then was dissolved by HCl solution. Water was added until the volume reached 250 Measurement of the Fe The concentration of Fe Measurement of the Ca The procedure was as follows: (1) V Measurement of the NH The NH  In the While for the The influences of reaction temperature and NH  In the practical industrial production, improving the concentration of the refined Mg Then, the above obtained refined Mg(Ac) Base on the above relation between reaction temperature and conversion of Mg  In conclusion, ammonium acetate (NH Financial support from the