This study reports the results of open reduction and internal fixation of 26 unstable, intraarticular, dorsally displaced fractures of the distal radius using a bio-absorbable dorsal distal radius (Reunite) plate and calcium phosphate (Biobon) bone substitute. The bio-absorbable plate has the advantage of being low profile, easily contourable and angularly stable. In the majority of cases, this plate produces functional results comparable with metal plates. The Gartland and Werley score was excellent or good in 21 patients. The theoretical advantage over metal plates is in eliminating the need to remove the plate and hence the need for a second operation if implant-related extensor tenosynovitis occurs. Inflammatory tissue reaction to the degradation products of the plate is a potential concern, although the co-polymer ratio used in this plate appears to have reduced the severity of this reaction, which was seen in two patients in this series. The reduction was lost in five patients with severe dorsal comminution. Following this experience, we do not recommend this plating system for fractures with a metaphyseal gap of greater than 7mm following reduction.Many studies have shown that dorsal plating is an effective method of fixation of unstable distal radius fractures ( Difficulty in contouring and trimming of the plate and adapting it to the pathological anatomy of the fractured distal radius is another problem. The ideal plate should have a low profile, be easily contourable to the pathological and, often, variable anatomy of the fracture, be easily cut to the required length without leaving sharp edges and provide angular stability, when required. The contourable, titanium, Pi plate addresses this issue, but tendon ruptures on the cut edge of these plates have been reported ( This paper reports the results of treatment of unstable distal radius fractures using a bio absorbable, dorsal distal radius plate (Reunite; Biomet Inc., Warsaw, IN) ( Twenty-eight consecutive patients with isolated, unilateral, dorsally displaced or angulated, unstable distal radius fractures were treated by open reduction and internal fixation using the Reunite bio absorbable distal radius plating system and calcium phosphate bone substitute between March 2001 and May 2003. Two patients were lost to follow-up and a total of 26 patients were available for review. The mean age at injury was 53 (range 17–87) years. This series included ten men and 16 women. Fourteen were right-hand dominant. Twenty-two fell on their outstretched hands, two fell from a height and two were injured playing football. All fractures were dorsally displaced, dorsally angulated or both ( The bio absorbable dorsal distal radius plate is a copolymer of Following general, or regional, anaesthesia and application of a tourniquet, the arm was placed on a radiolucent arm table. The skin was incised using a dorsal “T” incision ( The dorsal comminution of the fracture was explored and the fracture reduced by a combination of traction and leverage. K-wires were used to maintain the reduced position, which was checked using the image intensifier ( Postoperatively, the arm was elevated and supervised physiotherapy commenced on the first postoperative day. No restrictions were imposed on the intensity of physiotherapy and range of movement exercises were commenced immediately. A removable wrist splint was worn intermittently between periods of mobilization for the first 2 weeks. The splint was discontinued once the soft tissues had healed. The patients were assessed through personal interview by two assessors other than the surgeon. Residual pain was assessed using the visual analogue scale. The subjective and objective results were assessed using the modification of Radiographs taken at the time of injury were used to obtain the Frykman classification of each fracture ( A total of 26 patients were available for review. The length of follow-up was 17 (range 7–31) months. Thirteen patients had a pain score of zero ( The Gartland and Werley score was excellent or good in 21 patients, fair in three and poor in two. Two patients with fair results and one with a poor result had lost the reduction achieved at the time of surgery by 12 weeks. One patient with a fair result had persistent pain without any clinical complications or radiological evidence of malunion. The remaining patient with a poor result had persistent dorsal angulation at the end of the initial operation and sustained a rupture of the extensor digitorum communis tendon to the middle finger at 20 weeks. The range of movements of the injured and normal wrists are shown in Based on the radiological criteria defined above, satisfactory reduction was achieved at surgery in 22 of the 26 patients. Two patients had articular steps greater than 1 Five patients had lost the reduction achieved at surgery. In one, the reduction was lost at 6 weeks and, in the remaining four, between 6 and 12 weeks. All these patients had severe dorsal comminution resulting in a substantial metaphyseal gap following restoration of length and inclination. The metaphyseal gap measured on the intraoperative radiograph was 8 There was one plate failure with complete loss of reduction evident at 6 weeks. The bio-absorbable plate was found to be broken at the time of revision with a stainless-steel, low-profile plate and iliac crest bone graft. In this patient, the eventual functional result was good. Two patients with radial shortening required ulnar matching procedures to restore pain free forearm rotation. The eventual functional score was good. One patient developed a wound infection, which was superficial and resolved with oral antibiotics. Extensor tenosynovitis occurred between 4 and 12 weeks following surgery in two patients and responded within 2 weeks to antiinflammatory medication and temporary splintage. There was one ruptured EPL tendon, which was repaired directly, and one middle finger extensor digitorum communis tendon rupture, which was treated by extensor indices transfer. There were two cases of inflammatory reaction associated with plate resorption, which occurred between 8 and 11 weeks after surgery. One presented with painful swelling and erythema overlying the plate. This was treated by aspiration and the reaction resolved gradually over the next 6 weeks. The final result was excellent. The other, more severe, reaction started as a papule with surrounding erythema. The papule spontaneously ruptured to produce a sinus tract with discharge of fragments of the plate. This patient was taken to theatre for formal debridement. There was florid synovitis with fragments of plate interposed within the soft tissues. The histology reported a non-specific granulomatous reaction. Following debridement, the inflammatory reaction settled over the next 4 weeks and the eventual functional result at final review was excellent. The Reunite, bio-absorbable, dorsal distal radius plate is composed of 82% polymerized All the fractures treated in this series were potentially unstable and, therefore, had metaphyseal defects as a result of dorsal comminution. It is our practice to address metaphyseal defects using either bone graft or bone substitute, irrespective of the method of internal fixation, and, as such, we have no experience of using the plate alone without bone substitute. Autologous bone graft is most commonly used for filling voids in fracture surgery and it remains the gold standard among graft materials. It has the advantage of being osteoinductive and osteoconductive. It stimulates healing and is incorporated into the host bone. However, there is significant morbidity associated with autologous grafting ( The range of movement, grip strength and Gartland and Werley scores achieved in this series are comparable with that of similar studies involving dorsal plating of intraarticular distal radius fractures using low-profile metal plates and autologous bone graft where necessary ( Extensor tenosynovitis and tendon ruptures are well documented complications following dorsal plating of distal radius fractures ( Five patients lost the reduction achieved at surgery. As the loss of reduction occurred between 6 and 12 weeks postoperatively and as the plate retains its strength for 8 weeks, it appears logical that for wrists with severe dorsal comminution, the bio-absorbable plate did not retain its strength for long enough to allow adequate fracture healing for load transfer. Indeed, in a similar series of fractures, with similar follow-up, treated with low-profile titanium plates, 36% of the fractures united at 3 months and all united at 6 months ( Following this experience, we continue to use the bio-absorbable plate with calcium phosphate bone substitute for unstable intraarticular distal radius fractures that are not suitable for non-operative management ( The reported complications of bio-absorbable implants include painful erythema, sterile sinus track formation, hypertrophic fibrous encapsulation and, in severe cases, osteolysis ( Hopefully, further development of the bio-absorbable plates will make them more universally applicable for treating a greater part of the spectrum of unstable distal radius fractures, by increase of the length of time for which they retain their strength, while maintaining the current low incidence of inflammatory complications.