Measuring the physical properties of powders and their impact on physical operations is the cornerstone of powder technology. The most common particle properties include density, shape, diameter, particle size distribution as well as surface area. Many unit operations of chemical engineering deal with particles including transport (pneumatic conveying, slurries, dense phase flow, bin flow, and cyclonic flow), flow through packed beds (reactors, absorption columns), and filtration. Intimate mixing of powders in the pharmaceutical industry is necessary to ensure that the active compound is in the right proportions in every pill. Other unit operations include decantation, spray drying, sieving, and crystallization. The diameter of a sphere is a standard geometrical parameter for many correlations to predict performance (pressure drop, terminal velocity). However, seldom are particles spherical and so shape factors/sphericity accounts for the variations in performance rather than a sphere. Sieves, laser diffraction, sedimentation, volume sensors and optical techniques measured particle size. Laser diffraction is the most versatile technique that measures particles between 38 nm and several millimeters.Particles and powders are a fixture of our daily lives and a cornerstone of chemical engineering and industry—pharmaceuticals, agriculture, chemicals, construction, cosmetics, and food technology, to name a few. The granulometry of flour changes the texture of bread and pastry and is distinct from sugar, salt, pepper, spices, and Cheerios. The activity of pharmaceuticals ingredients depends on their shape and size: Farmers spread less herbicides in their fields with nano-sized particles. The particle size of cement, concrete, and asphalt vary from micron-size to centimeters. Coal combustion, petroleum, and cement manufacture are the greatest contributors to greenhouse gases. Cement is third accounting for as much as 5 % of the global Cement manufacture is an industry that relies on multiple particle technology unit operations: mined limestone passes through a jaw crusher (comminution—particle size reduction); sieves separate the particles into distinct sizes (separation); belt conveyors move particles from one operation to another (transport); calcium carbonate (limestone) micron powders ( Besides comminution, sieving, and belt conveying, there are other particle technology unit operations: filtration, cyclonic separation, decantation (sedimentation), coating (polymer coatings of metals, for example), pneumatic conveying (of flour, grain, coal, alumina), crystallization (manufacture of catalysts and foodstuffs), mixing (pharmaceuticals—ensuring the active ingredient is uniformly distributed before making pills), and drying ( Thermodynamic relationships relate gas density to temperature, pressure, and composition. Liquid densities are easy to measure and estimate with thermodynamics, too. Powder densities are dynamic and vary with particle size, particle size distribution, and shape. Powders and material densities range from below 100 kg m Bulk density, The void fraction of compacted powders can reach 0.38 but more typically it is closer to 0.42. Irregular shaped particles (non-spherical), cohesive powders approach 0.5. Powders settle with time and so the void fraction decreases and the bulk density increases. That is why bags of chips and breakfast cereal have a large space at the top of the sack. The Hausner ratio characterizes the extent at which powders compact with time and it is equal to the ratio of the poured density—the lowest level of compaction as measured by pouring the powder into a graduated cylinder (or cube)—to the tapped density—the highest level of compaction when the graduated cylinder is tapped until the solids level no longer drops, The Hausner ratio correlates with how well it flows—flowability. Powders with  Three students measure the mass of sand, fluid catalytic cracking catalyst (FCC), and  First calculate the mean mass, standard deviation, and the uncertainty, The second student did a poorer job measuring the sample mass since for all powders the sample standard deviation was highest ( From Chapter The particle density, The hydrodynamic envelope of a spherical particle is equal to the volume of the sphere but most particles are non-spherical so we approximate the shape or measure the density with pycnometry or mercury porosimetry.  Mercury porosimetry measures pore size, pore volume (macro- and meso-pores), and distribution, bulk density, and particle density. It estimates skeletal density if the micro-pore volume is negligible. Unlike other fluids, it only fills pores when pressure is applied. The size of the pores that it enters is inversely proportional to the pressure: larger pores require less pressure compared to smaller pores. Furthermore, it is non-wetting and has a high surface tension. Capillary forces between liquids and tube walls draw the liquid in a tube. The height it rises, When the applied force, The applied force to overcome the resistance from the surface tension equals the pressure acting over the surface area of the pore: The diameter of the pore at which mercury begins to penetrate is: At low pressure, mercury first fills the void space between the particles—inter-particle void (points After filling the inter-particle void ( The skeletal density is the ratio of the mass of particle minus all voids, the difference between the total volume The bulk density equals the product of the skeletal density and the solids fraction of the bulk solids and the solids fraction of the particles: Mercury intrusion porosimetry is suited for pores as low as 4 nm and greater than 350 μm. N Macropores: Mesopores: Micropores:  A volume of  Hg intrudes A particle is a solid, liquid (droplet), or gas (bubble) whose diameter is less than 1 cm in diameter. Particle shape impacts the physical properties of a collection of particles, which we classify as a powder: flow properties, agglomeration, activity, and reactivity (in catalysis), pharmaceutical activity (drug dissolution), gas absorption (chromatography), and bulk density. In the paint industry, the particle size affects the opacity (light scattering behavior) of white pigments—the light scattered increases with decreasing particle size. Thixotropic nano-sized The characteristic dimension of a sphere is its diameter; it is the length of the side for a cube; the radius or height is the characteristic dimension of a cylinder or cone. But what is the characteristic dimension of a collection of spheres whose diameters vary by an order of magnitude, or a mixture of spheres and cubes, or particles that have irregular shapes ( Acicular particles ( Asbestos is a fibrous mineral that causes cancer (mesothelioma and asbestosis) if inhaled over extended periods of time. Actinolite, like acicular particles, consists of a large mass and fine fibers ( Snowflakes are dendritic particles that contain branches or crystal structures emanating from a central point (   Sieve analysis and sedimentation are techniques that derive a characteristic dimension based on physical phenomena. Sieves with various mesh sizes are stacked on top of each other starting from the small mesh size, which has the largest opening to the largest mesh size. The sieves are shaken and the particles pass through the openings that are larger than their diameter and are retained by the sieve that has a smaller opening. The equivalent diameter of a sieve analysis is the mean size through which particles pass and on which the particles are retained. The characteristic diameter for sedimentation is the diameter of a sphere that has the same settling velocity. Sphericity,  Calculate the sphericity of a cylinder whose diameter equals its length.  The characteristic dimension of the cylinder is its diameter. If the length were different than the diameter, then choose the characteristic length dimension based on the application: for sedimentation or reaction, the diameter is the appropriate dimension, but if it were for bin flow or filtration, the length dimension is better. The denominator is the surface area of the cylinder:  Besides the Hausner ratio correlation, sphericity is a parameter in models for particle terminal velocity and pressure drop across reactors and vessels packed with solids. The Stokes flow regime applies to spheres at particle Reynolds number  Calculate the velocity of a 10-cm diameter water balloon dropped from the top of St. Paul's cathedral.  Galileo studied how fast objects fall from heights from the Leaning Tower of Pisa and his heart beat was his timer. Newton dropped hog bladders from St. Paul's cathedral. In this example, we assume the balloon is a sphere. Air density is Multiphase reactors—gas–solids, liquid–solids (slurry), gas–liquid–solids—are the heart of chemical plants. Their design and operation determine the profitability of any process. Commercial fixed bed reactors that partially oxidize methanol to formaldehyde have 10 000 tubes 22 mm in diameter that operators fill with cylindrical pellets with a hole ( Although the pressure drop increases when cylinders substituted spheres, the whole in the cylinder increased the void fraction of the bed that more than compensates for the lower sphericity. Catalysts shapes and sizes have evolved over many decades ( Pressure drop decreases with increasing particle diameter but the diffusion rate of gas species in and out of the catalyst decreases and so productivity is poorer. Catalyst design balances the pressure drop constraints with the heat and mass transfer from within the particle to the exterior. The Thiele Modulus, A plant produces formaldehyde from methanol in a multitubular reactor. The reactor contains 10 000 tubes. Each tube is 1.2 m long with an inside diameter of 25 mm. The catalyst particles are spherical 3 mm in diameter and the inter-particle void fraction is 0.45. The reactor operates with a mole fraction of 0.06 MeOH in air at Calculate the pressure drop (assuming the volume change with reaction is negligible). Calculate the effectiveness factor for a rate constant of What would the pressure drop and effectiveness factor be for a particle 2 mm in diameter?  The gas density,  The Thiele Modulus is: The effectiveness factor equals:  For particles with a diameter of 2 mm, the pressure drop is 32 kPa and the effectiveness factor is 0.92. While the particle diameter of fixed bed reactors is on the order of 1–5 mm, powders with an average diameter of 70 μm are necessary for fluidized bed reactors. These small diameters translate to effectiveness factor equal to 1. The Ergun equation characterizes the pressure drop across beds of solids and to achieve high gas velocities the flow comes from the top and flows downwards through the bed. In upflow, when the drag force of the fluid exceeds the weight of the particles, the gas lifts the bed and they begin to move up and down and the solids bed itself behaves like a fluid: Objects that are denser than the bed will fall through the bed while objects that are less dense will remain at the top. Based on a force balance, the pressure drop across the bed, Considering that the mass of solids charged to the bed, For small particles, when the viscous forces dominate When inertial forces dominate and viscous forces are negligible (  When neither viscous nor inertial forces dominate, the equation relating the operating conditions to particle properties is: When For a large number of particles,  Group A powders are considered aeratable, i.e. easily fluidizable. Typically, these particles have a diameter between 50 and 200 μm with a high fraction of fines (as much as 30 %)—particles with a diameter between 20 and 40 μm. Group B powders have a higher density and/or particle size compared to Group A powders. Sand is a typical example of a Group B powder. Group C powders are cohesive and fluidize poorly. They generally have a lower particle density and/or particle size compared to Group A powders. Group D powders are difficult to fluidize—gas will channel through the bed and so shallow beds are common to minimize flow maldistribution. The minimum fluidization velocity characterizes powders and indicates their properties. However, commercial reactors operate at gas superficial velocities orders of magnitude greater than The behavior of an ensemble of particles depends on their shape, size, and their size distribution. In the food industry, the particle size varies within a narrow range (let's say a factor of two) like Cheerios, Basmati rice, sugar, salt, and seeds. When the average particle size of the powder is lower than 300 μm, size distribution varies over several orders of magnitude. Fluidized bed catalysts size range is from 20 to 200 μm while fixed bed catalysts are mono-dispersed—they all have the same diameter unless they break when they were manufactured or loaded to the reactor. As with shape factors and equivalent diameters, selecting the average particle diameter for a polydispersed powders depends on the application. Consider space junk that orbits the planet ( The arithmetic mean, median, and harmonic mean represent the characteristic diameters of a population of particles ( In the case of the three particles, it equals 2 mm. The first value in the expression The number surface mean diameter averages the population based on their surface area and equals the square root of the ratio of the sum of the surface area of the entire population and the total number of particles: The surface mean diameter of the three particles is: The volume mean diameter averages the population with respect to the total volume of each particle. It equals the cube root of the ratio of the sum of the volume of each particle and the number of particles: Mining applications rely on the number distribution and they pay attention to the large particle fractions; they report In the case of the sand,  Vanadium pyrophosphate catalyses the partial oxidation of  Like the sand sample, the VPP particle distribution is asymmetric with a prominent tail: a higher mass fraction of larger particles compared to smaller particles ( The physical and chemical characteristics of several tons of material are often assumed based on a sample that may be no more than a couple of grams. The probability of withdrawing a representative sample is remote even when standardized procedures are followed with the same equipment and the same operator. Atmospheric monitoring of particulates is mandated by government legislation to monitor health hazards. The EPA in the USA stipulates that the particulate matter should be inferior to  Sample a moving stream; Sample increments of the entire population instead of taking a single sample at one point.   Approximately 40 % of the oil produced in the world is cracked catalytically to small hydrocarbon molecules with zeolite catalysts (fluid catalytic cracking catalyst—FCC). FCC  The arithmetic mean of the coarsest fraction is: Secondary sampling refers to transferring material from the field to analytical instruments in the laboratory. Dispersing solids in liquids introduces errors. To minimize these errors, methods recommend pre-dispersing powders in beakers and then pipetting the sample into the analyzer. Preparing a concentrated paste in a beaker minimizes sampling bias. When this is impractical, then stir the pre-dispersion in the beaker continuously and then extract liquid from halfway between the center of the beaker and the wall and also halfway between the liquid surface and the bottom. Whenever possible, sample the continuous phase of the original suspension or emulsion. Otherwise choose a solvent according to the following criteria: Negligible reactivity with powder; Does not swell or shrink particles by more than 5 % in diameter; Solubility must be less than 5 g powder in 1 kg liquid; Have a refractive index (RI) different than the sample; Be free from bubbles and particles; Have suitable viscosity to enable recirculation; and Be chemically compatible with materials in the analyzer. The Sample the solution at least three times over several minutes. A particle size distribution which steadily shifts to a finer particle size together with an increase in light transmission indicates particles are dissolving. An increase in particle size indicates particles are agglomerating or swelling. An increase in transmission alongside the disappearance of the coarsest particles indicates the particles are settling. Random variations are more difficult to interpret but could arise from thermal fluctuations or poor mixing.       Analytical techniques report particle diameters that represent a specific characteristic dimension ( Sieve analysis is best for 10 to 1000 μm while microscopy is suited for particle ranging from below 1 μm to as much as 1000 μm (  Screening is a simple and economic technique that classifies particles according to their size. Ancient civilizations including the Egyptians separated foodstuffs with sieves. They made them from woven fabric or punching holes through plates. Agricola illustrated woven wire sieves in 1556. In 1867, Rittinger suggested a standardized progression of aperture size Sieving separates powders solely based on their size—it is independent of density or surface properties (although the sieving time may be a function of density). The standard 4 US mesh has an opening 4760 μm, while the opening of the 500 mesh is 31 μm ( To separate a powder into particle fractions, a series of sieves are stacked one on top of the other starting with a collection pan (receiver) followed by the screen with the smallest aperture. The powder is weighed then poured on to the top screen. A lid is placed on the top sieve and the stack is then shaken by hand (very inefficient) or vibrated with a machine. National standards The result of a sieve analysis is a tabulation of the mass of powder (or mass fraction) of each screen increment. Two numbers are required to specify the particle size: the screen through which the particles pass and the screen on which they are retained. The data is reported as 120/170—the particles were retained on the 170 mesh screen and passed through the 120 mess screen. This would mean that the particles on the 170 mesh screen lie between 88 μm and 125 μm, which is known as differential analysis. In a cumulative analysis, the particles retained on each screen are summed sequentially starting from either the receiver or the screen with the largest aperture. Since the particles must pass through an opening between wires forming a square mesh, the most appropriate diameter to represent the size distribution would be To minimize potential errors while sieving: Error on the side of sieving more time rather than less time; Replace sieves that appear worn or have broken metal wires; Extract samples while the powder moves (riffle sampling); Load enough sample to maximize the accuracy (<100 g);  Choose the vibration model to minimize breaking friable powders; and, Examine the particle shape and size under a microscope to verify particles are not breaking and the sieving is complete.  Laser diffraction is the most popular, widespread modern sizing technology that is applied across many industries. The measurement range of the most recent instruments is from 10 nm to 3 mm, and they measure the PSD of suspensions, emulsions, and dry powders in seconds, with full push-button automation. The instrument consists of at least one source of high intensity, monochromatic light, a sample handling system to control the interaction of particles and incident light, and an array of photodiodes to detect the scattered light over a wide range of angles. The signals from the photodiodes are input into an algorithm that converts the scattered light data to a particle size distribution. Once an incident beam strikes a particle, the light diffracts, refracts, reflects, absorbs, and reradiates ( How light scatters depends on the particle size. For large particles ( Assigning the correct Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS) can estimate surface area. The primary result from DLS is light intensity distribution and the polydispersity index, which describes the number based width of the particle population. Assuming that the particles are spherical, DLS converts the number distribution to a volume or surface area distribution. Particle surface texture influences the accuracy of the results. If the particle surface reflects light, is transparent or scobinate, it will change the reflective index of material,  In practice magnification of an object to better see its morphology pushes researchers to develop more refined instruments to increase the resolution. The optical microscope is the first instrument that responded to this need and has become so famous that its logo represents science and research today. However, when the optical microscope magnification reached 1000×, a physics constraint, diffraction, ended its development. This phenomenon occurs when we try to visualize objects so small that their characteristic dimensions are comparable with the visible light electromagnetic wavelength (380 to 750 nm). This diffracts one beam into multiple ones, creating interference and blurring the image. Microscopy produces images of individual particles and clusters to assess shape, size, distribution, number, and composition. The resolution of optical microscopes is 200 nm and they are best for particles greater than 5 μm. Particles below 5 μm are blurry because of diffraction. Microscopes with digital cameras automatically analyze the images and report Martin's equivalent diameter of Martin, Scanning electron microscopes (SEM) image particle greater than a few nanometers with an electron beam that scans the surface and detects secondary electron emission, backscattered electrons, light, and X-rays. The resolution of transmission electron microscopes (TEM) is better ( Electrical sensing instruments measure electrical conductivity as particles in a conductive fluid pass through an orifice. The powder is suspended in a conductive fluid and a pump circulates it through an orifice. A voltage is applied across the orifice and the capacitance changes each time a particle passes through it. The magnitude of the change in capacitance represents the particle size and the number of pulses equals the number of particles passing the aperture. The limitations include:  The method is slow relative to laser diffraction (but substantially faster than sieving); Dense or large particles circulate poorly. The scanning electron microscope adopts the same principle of the optical microscope, substituting photons with electrons. The sample is placed in a vacuum chamber, where air does not interfere with the analysis. Then, like for the incandescence light-bulb, a filament (1 to 20 kV) generates an electron beam. A series of magnets adjust the position of the beam hitting the sample; at each position (pixel) the instrument records a response that it detects thereby generating an image. There are four typical response signals generated by the sample hit by the electron beam, and for each signal there is a specific detector. Secondary electrons are generated when the beam excites and ejects the electrons in the innermost electron shell of the atom. They correspond to low energy ionization electrons <50 eV and are emitted by the first layers of atoms on the surface of the sample. The detector (SEI or LEI) counts the number of emitted secondary electrons for each pixel and compares them: as the morphology varies across the sample, bright spots correspond to plain, accessible zones where more secondary electrons directly cross the chamber to the detector; while darker pixels are deeper holes, where most of the secondary electrons are lost as the interact with the sample (  X-rays are emitted when a higher shell electron replaces the vacancy left by the ejected secondary electron. The interactions between incoming and emitting energy are more complex, however each element possesses its own characteristic X-ray energy (ranging from 0 to 10 keV). Therefore the detector can either acquire a spectrum over a selected sample area, for qualitative superficial elemental analysis, or flag each pixel area with the dominant element, creating an elemental map of the sample's surface ( Transmitted electrons are the beam's electrons that pass through a sample a few-atoms. The detector (TEM, Transmission electron microscopy) placed below the sample counts the number of electrons that passed through. The instrument maximum resolution depends on the wavelength of the accelerated electrons, making possible to even see the atoms lined up in their crystal structure as bright spots. Measuring the distance between the atoms allows to calculate the lattice spacing parameters of the crystal matrix. The contrast in the image illustrates mass-thickness, diffraction pattern, and crystal phases. The contrast consists of both amplitude and phase (  Diffraction contrast is another mechanism that results from the electron intensity difference in transmission and diffraction. The sample must fulfill Bragg's law. Diffraction contrast can identify a coke layer on a particle. Phase contrast only affects the high resolution transmission electron microscopy. With recent developments in standard TEM developing, the difference between High Resolution TEM (HRTEM) and TEM is vanishing. EDS identifies the chemical elements of a sample and approximates the mass fraction. When an electron beam interacts with the sample, excited X-rays which are characteristic of an element's atomic structure are detected by the instrument. EDS provides elemental point analysis or line scan analysis, elemental mapping, and spectrum imaging. TEM coupled with EDS achieves a higher quality analysis compared to SEM because electrons interact with a smaller volume. With a field emission electron gun (FEG), the resolution of the probing beam reaches 1 nm (  The relationship is linear in the range The sample is pre-treated at high temperature in vacuum to remove water, volatile organics and other contaminants. The sample cools to the boiling point of the adsorbing gas (usually nitrogen). The test ends when the adsorbed gas reaches equilibrium with the gas phase concentration, which is close to the mass required to cover the surface with a monolayer of molecules (  An  The first step is to plot Nitrogen is considered an ideal gas. Based on a linear regression,  Calculate the total void fraction of bulk solids if both the inter- and intra-void fractions equal 0.4. To estimate particle density with a 100-mL graduated cylinder, we first calibrated it with water. The bottom of the meniscus reached 98.3 mL with 100.0 g of Initial mass of water: 50.3, 50.9, 48.7, 50.2, and 49.5. Mass of catalyst added: 23.9, 25.2, 27.3, 24.8, and 26.3. Mass of water added to 98.3 mL: 37.0, 37.8, 36.9, 38.0, and 37.5. Determine the Hausner ratio and its uncertainty for a 100.0-g powder sample into a 100-ml graduated cylinder. Based on the Zou and Yu correlation, what is the sphericity of the catalyst particles: Poured height: 87.3, 86.9, 88.5, 87.0, and 85.8. Tapped height: 80.2, 80.9, 81.3, 80.3, and 79.8. Peregrine falcons dive at Calculate the sphericity of a pyramid whose base equals the height. Calculate the sphericity of a hollow cylinder 4 mm in diameter, 6 mm in length with a 2-mm hole. What is the sphericity of a sphere with a cylindrical hole passing through it with a diameter equal one fourth the particle diameter? What is the sphericity of a hexahedron (cube)? What is the surface area of coal with a sphericity of 0.75 and a volume of The particle size of crushed sandstone was measured with a Coulter counter, a sedigraph, and by permeability, and the diameters for each were Ceramic is produced from powders including oxides, ferrites, and silicates. Using a transmission electron microscope (TEM) calibration standard of Determine the mode diameters of the size distribution in μm. Calculate the average diameter in numbers. Calculate the Sauter mean diameter The Sauter mean diameter from a Coulter counter analysis that was reported to be 23 μm. Are the powders in the form of platelets? A pump charges Hg to a 40-mL vial containing a 250-g powder sample. Calculate the skeletal density, the particle density, and the bulk density when What is the By controlling the precipitation conditions, zinc oxide particles form an octahedral shape with a narrow particle size distribution ( Calculate the sphericity of an octahedral particle. Based on What is the average particle diameter? The measured diameters of a group of powders are: 0.12, 0.13, 0.14, 0.14, 0.15, 0.13, 0.12, 0.12, 0.11, 0.14, 0.15, 0.15, 0.13, 0.11, 0.20, and 0.13. Calculate Derive the expression for the minimum fluidization velocity for the case where viscous forces dominate. What is the particle terminal velocity of 150 μm sand particles in air? 60 μm in diameter? 30 μm in diameter? Calculate the Archimedes number and the terminal velocity of a grain of sand 250 μm in diameter in water. A new process to convert glycerol to acrolein uses a catalytic fluidized bed reactor: Calculate the hydraulic diameter and the Sauter mean diameter. Of the four particle types given below, which has the greatest surface area? Which particle has the smallest surface area? Is the charge loss in a tubular reactor greater for particle (i) or (ii)? Is the charge loss in a tubular reactor greater for particle (ii) or (iii)? What is the equivalent diameter and the sphericity of particle (iv)? Particles: Sphere of diameter Cylinder of diameter and height Hollow cylinder of inner diameter Sphere of diameter Demonstrate the equivalence of the two expressions of the Sauter mean diameter: Cu–Zr–Zn catalyst produces methanol in a tubular fixed bed reactor. The particle size distribution is in What definition of average particle is the most appropriate to characterize these particles? What characteristic diameter represents the flow rate of a tubular reactor? What is the average diameter and the charge loss across the bed? The charge loss across the bed is greater than predicted according to the calculations in (b). Identify three possible reasons for this. Calculate the uncertainty in the charge loss taking into account the uncertainties.