In this study, new theoretical and experimental stress-strain-damage correlation procedures for hard rock constitutive models are proposed. The damage-plasticity modelling framework is first supplied with the unified yield-failure criterion to describe the failure behaviour of granite under triaxial compression. This unified criterion allows the initial yield surface to evolve to a final failure surface through the utilisation of an appropriate damage evolution law. This evolution automatically captures the quasi-brittle behaviour of rocks under shearing at low confining pressure and ductile response under high confining pressure, as well as the transition from quasi-brittle to ductile reactions. In this theoretical sense, damage and plasticity are tightly coupled to govern the behaviour of rocks under different confining pressures without requiring any separate formulations for softening or hardening. Next, an innovative experimental correlation procedure is proposed to better link the experimental damage measure to stress states throughout triaxial loading. By obtaining full stress, strain and acoustic emission damage results from testing it was possible to construct a series of evolving yield surfaces from experiment. These surfaces, coupled with experimental damage evolution with respect to accumulated plastic strain, provide a comprehensive data set to a constitutive model for calibration. The results of numerical simulation show that this new method to incorporate coupled stress-strain-damage evolution characteristics directly from experiment removes the need for trial and error curve fitting. Also, by maintaining a closer link to detailed experimental results, the model is easier to calibrate and can be relied upon to predict the damage and stress states for compressive stress regimes. Finally, it is shown that the theoretical and experimental procedures can capture the key behaviours of granite under a range of confining pressures.Recent research on the mechanical behaviour of hard rocks has become progressively more important due to the increasing number of underground excavations under high mountains or at increased depths where the rock mass is subjected to high stresses. Various studies such as those conducted by Wong, Phenomenological damage-plasticity models usually provide a satisfactory description of the macroscopic behaviour of rock and are often utilised due to their simplicity and ease of application for engineering purposes. This type of model was first developed for granular material by researchers such as Lubliner et al. Regardless of the theoretical aspects, it is evident from all past studies that the calibration of constitutive models relies on the quality and nature of the data used for validation. It is commonly observed that damage-plasticity models are almost exclusively calibrated using just stress-strain responses from conventional testing. Therefore, this research first focuses on the development of a unified yield-failure function which can be implemented into the damage-plasticity framework. This study assumed that compressive stresses are positive and tensile are negative. This is common amongst most rock mechanics models.  The framework selected for modelling in this research was based on the theories of continuum damage mechanics and plasticity. The complete discussion of these theories can be found in works such as Chen and Han, The integral parts of any continuum damage-plasticity model are the definition of yield and failure of a material, together with the evolution of internal variables, which are damage, The yield function in a damage-plasticity model determines whether or not the material is undergoing elastic or plastic/damage deformation. This allows the calculation of the inelastic and elastic strains and to correctly determine the stresses. The mechanical behaviour of a rock mass can exhibit plastic deformations caused by mechanisms such as frictional sliding of cracks/discontinuities or grain crushing as well as stiffness reductions due to the accumulated damage as a result of microcracks. Another fundamental consideration for the failure process of a rock is when damage increases, the ability for the material to hold tensile stress will decrease. Therefore, there must be zero tensile strength when The resulting derivation comprises of a single surface with a single, simple damage evolution law which can describe the yield and failure behaviours of hard rock.  It has been observed in many studies that the dilation of a rock specimen cannot be accurately predicted by an associated flow rule in a plasticity or damage-plasticity framework. Therefore, when Hardening and softening of hard rock are mainly consequences of the closure and reopening of microcracks, and frictional sliding respectively at the micro scale. Other mechanisms do exist but are omitted from this study as the above are considered more dominant in hard rock behaviour. Given the existence of flaws in ‘intact’ rock, frictional sliding and microcracking can take place at the same time during compressive loading. At the macro scale, this leads to the combined effects of strength and stiffness reduction. As these effects are represented by plastic strain and damage in the coupled approach, a dependence of one on another is needed in the model to characterise the coupling effects. This is a common and widely accepted assumption in the modelling of geomaterials. Functions that capture this behaviour utilise a diminishing exponential relationship dependent on increasing accumulated plastic strain increment, which can be given in terms of volumetric and shear plastic strains by: With such a generic definition of damage, complete calibration of the yield-failure evolution is usually not possible. However, by incorporating variables or changing the definition, the damage evolution law can be used to fit the model to experimental results. As mentioned previously, this is normally done by iteratively selecting values for damage evolution variables and dilation, The most important factor which determines the effectiveness of a constitutive model is the data with which the functions are calibrated. To this end, it is important that the calibration data set contains all the information which is relevant to the engineering problems to be investigated by the model. Despite this, most researchers validate constitutive models using only the mechanical response of conventional tests, such as uniaxial and triaxial compression. This is also true for many damage-plasticity models, where the damage evolution is governed by generic equations and parameters to provide a good fit to stress-strain response. Therefore, this study proposes a new, simple method of calibrating a damage-plasticity model directly to experimental results without trial and error or complex formulations. Results obtained during a recent study provided a full data set for granite ranging in confinement from 10 to 60 MPa. For full description of the test method and physical and mechanical properties of the rocks please refer to Bruning et al. Therefore, by investigating certain damage levels, it was possible to determine the corresponding triaxial response of the material for each confinement. The average response for each confinement was then used to determine the stress state for damage levels between 0 and 1 in intervals of 0.1. The results for each damage increment are displayed in Although the intervals used describe the general trend of damage evolution, higher resolution of the damage increment was also analysed to depict the pre-peak hardening evolution with increasing confinement. It can be seen from These surfaces combined with the initial yield and final residual failure surfaces now provide a complete picture of the damage evolution under triaxial loading. As can be seen in To enable calibration using the experimental damage surface, a series of modifications were made to the model. The first enhancement to the unified yield-failure model was undertaken to include a more flexible definition of pre-peak hardening function, Using this updated function, the process of calibration the slopes of initial and final yield were determined for the unified yield-failure surface using the damage surfaces shown in Next the material parameter, It was observed in The material parameters The damage evolution of a material is normally given a generic form then calibrated using trial and error, so the stress-strain response of the material is consistent with experimental results. The drawback of this method is that the concept of damage conveys no physical meaning. Essentially, damage evolution becomes analogous to the hardening/softening variables used in general plasticity formulations. As mentioned previously, some studies do attempt to provide a model with experimentally derived damage evolution. However, most of the time the direct link between experiments and modelling is lost due to complex functions and coupling procedures. Also, it is rare that the effects of confinement are studied and damage is normally based only on uniaxial test results. To address these shortcomings in existing research, this section proposes a simple method to incorporate experimentally sourced damage evolution into a constitutive model. It is clear in Bruning et al. Using the accumulated plastic strain, a new damage evolution function was developed to capture the bi-exponential damage behaviour. The function took the form of Eq. Using this new form, it was possible to recreate the damage evolution from tests in the constitutive model. The calibrated material parameters and plotted functions for each confinement, From this calibration procedure, it was clear that there existed simple laws to describe the relationship between the function parameters and confinement. The model implemented in this study only requires five equations not including flow rules to describe hard rock behaviour (equation numbers relevant to first appearance): Stress-strain-damage relationship: Yield-failure criterion: Plastic potential and flow rules: Damage evolution law: In addition, the calibration of the material parameters is straightforward and only requires conventional triaxial test data. As can be seen, the model description is much simpler than many others existing in the literature, thanks to the implicit hardening/softening rules already embedded in the evolution of the unified yield-failure criterion. The implementation of the model in this case just follows standard algorithms in plasticity theory To determine the stress at each strain increment in the model, the stress is expressed in terms of the relationship: The trial stress state is therefore: Using this trial stress, the yield function, The semi-implicit stress return algorithm provides a stable and simple method to evaluate the stress increment when a model is being controlled by strain. The complete theory and implementation of the algorithm is given in the publication by Crisfield The expression for the full derivative of the damage variable, Through substitution into Eq. Once a value for the scalar damage-plastic multiplier, Finally the stress state can be updated for the strain increment using Eq. Finally, the model was run using the fully calibrated enhanced unified-yield failure criterion. Although the damage evolution changes over confinement, a single set of variables was used for the validation procedure. As previously mentioned, this was to keep the process consistent and to avoid the use of stress states as constants for each test. The variables used in the modelling process were A new procedure to experimentally tie the stress, strain and damage states of rock under triaxial compression was proposed in this study. The description and enhancement of a unified yield-failure damage-plasticity model to represent intact hard rock behaviour facilitated the calibration procedure. The function, outlined in Eq. This research then displayed the ability to experimentally obtain evolving yield surfaces in stress space which can be used along with the traditional initial and final yield surfaces to better calibrate the evolution of the failure function. This is important as a change in load path can be taken into account by the model and the correct damage and stress states should be maintained using this new calibration measure. Then by developing a general, bi-exponential damage evolution law the full stress-strain-damage response of a material could be incorporated into the constitutive model providing simple but robust physical links to the behaviour of rock under triaxial compression. This ensured the close coupling of damage to the loading responses and removed the need for complex formulation. Finally, it was shown that using this new procedure, trial and error curve fitting procedures or complex formulations were not needed to capture the key hard rock behaviour under triaxial loading. It is important to point out that although the model performed adequately, there was some difference between the experimental and model responses. This was due to the snap-back behaviour of granite under low confinement pressures causing a mismatch between the axial strain states. As accumulated plastic strain is always increasing, the damage evolves throughout constant application of axial strain. However, it is evident in the experimental results in Bruning et al. The research team would like to gratefully acknowledge the This appendix presents the pseudo code for the constitutive driver used during model validation for this study:  Input constants Set Evaluate  Save previous Calculate Determine trial stress state, Eq. Evaluate yield condition, Eq.  Adopt elastic solution and  Calculate the derivatives of yield and plastic-damage functions. Find Update stress, damage and plastic strain.  Check tolerance  