The effect of liquid additive on the dry ultrafine grinding of calcite powder (CaCO3) was investigated by using a stirred bead mill. The experiments were carried out by a batch operation, and the change in particle size distribution (PSD) and volumetric surface area (Sv) (m2/cm3) of calcite. The results show that the chemical additive promotes the fine grinding of calcite and that the maximum volumetric surface area of calcite obtained with additives 0.2%.The need for fine particles has increased in the field of preparing raw powders and high value added products in many industries such as mineral, ceramic, pigments, paint and pharmaceutical. Therefore, the research in fine grinding has gained more importance, especially, in submicron grinding. Stirred bead mills have been used in recent years for grinding particles to submicron sizes due to their easy operation, simpler construction, higher grinding rate and lower energy consumption compared with other fine grinding machines In most of the studies on grinding aids, the effect of grinding aids have been discussed to get the fine powders, but there are only a few reports The aim of this study is to investigate the effect of chemical additive on dry ultrafine grinding. The grinding tests were performed in a laboratory stirred media mill. A powder sample used in this study was calcite (CaCO On the other hand, grinding tests were carried out in a vertical type stirred media mill Standard-01 Model manufactured by Union Process (U.S.A.) (   On the other hand, as a mechanism of action of grinding aids, the following positive effects are mainly considered from various effect of grinding aids [   The surface area at the addition amount of 0.2% was about 1.3 times as large as the area without an additive, and about 3.5 times larger than that before grinding. Experimental studies on grinding performance using calcite powder in a stirred bead mill have been carried out. The effects of grinding aid on the particle size distribution and surface area were examined. The followings were found out. The surface area (S The median diameter (X The use of 0.2% weight of grinding aid in the mill indicated enough beneficial effect on product size distribution and volumetric surface area. The observed beneficial effect is due to the adsorption of grinding aid on fine calcite particles by influencing the mass transport. It can be concluded that the increase in surface area is possible even with the use of small dosage of additive concentration by weight (0.2%) to the feed. The author would like to thank the