A personal account is given of interactions in the 1950s and 1960s with Christian Klixbüll Jørgensen (CKJ). These cover his analysis of the absorption spectra of several rare-earth ions, in which he was the first to use Racah’s 1949 tables, and his construction with two colleagues of the angular overlap model. Its role in the later extension to two-electron operators in the crystal-field Hamiltonian is described. Recollections of Jørgensen the man and of his vision of chemistry are included.In 1954, Christian Klixbüll Jørgensen (CKJ) and I were independently working on the energy levels of f-electron configurations, he with the intent of making multiplet identifications in the lanthanide and actinide series, I from a need to find the crystal-field Hamiltonian for related analyses of electron paramagnetic-resonance data. Unbeknown to the other, we had both realized that the experiments of Hellwege and Hellwege Shortly after the publication of my results, I received a reprint from CKJ in which the energies of many rare-earth and actinide levels were calculated and discussed What had gone wrong? With hindsight, and with the help of the complete list of Coulomb energies provided later by Nielson and Koster CKJ’s strength lay more in the broad range of his imagination than in the careful attention to mathematical details. His article gives lengthy discussions of the absorption spectra of many f-electron systems, and there are many careful assessments of various multiplet identifications. Yet, when he gets his erroneous value for the energy of the lowest This disregard for detail is also evident in CKJ’s choice of Slater integrals. After recognizing that CKJ’s chemical vision is more apparent in his approach to crystal-field theory. In the 1950s, the effect of the crystal lattice on the 4f electrons of a rare-earth ion was commonly represented by the ionic model. In this scheme, the neighboring ions to the rare earth are visualized as point charges at distances ( However, the vast number of observed splittings quickly made it apparent that a crystal-field Hamiltonian comprising one-electron operators is not adequate for treating configurations of two or more electrons. The extension of the theory to two-electron crystal-field operators enormously increases the number of required parameters, to such an extent that some limitations are essential. In mulling over ways to achieve this, I pondered CKJ’s observation, made some years previously, concerning delta-function interactions. It occurred to me that a double delta-function interaction of the type From 1961 through 1968, CKJ was the Director of the Theoretical Inorganic Chemistry (TIC) group at the Cyanamid European Research Institute (CERI) located in Cologny, Switzerland. This was a period of enormous productivity. The article on the angular overlap model mentioned above It was at the time of our collaboration in 1963 In the somber final report 