The unique configuration of periprosthetic femoral fractures (PFFs) is a major determinant of the subsequent management. The aim of this preliminary study was to investigate potential relationships between fracture angle (FA), fracture level (FL) and bone quality of Vancouver type B PFF. The FA, FL and the canal thickness ratio (CTR) were quantified for 27 patient X-rays. The CTR is an indicator of the underlying bone quality. Relationships between these factors were studied for the whole X-ray set, for a subgroup involving fracture above the tip of the stem and for subgroups with stable and unstable implants. When considering all cases, no significant correlation was found between the FA and any other measurement. Considering only cases with unstable implants, a statistically significant correlation was found between the FA and the FL (R
                     2
                     =0.489, p
                     =0.002). No correlation was found between FA and any other measurement for stable implants suggesting that FA could be considered as an independent factor when classifying B1 fractures. Considering all cases, a weak correlation was found between CTR and FL (R
                     2
                     =0.152, p
                     =0.044) suggesting that fractures below the tip of the stem may indicate a lower bone quality. This preliminary study suggests that the effect of FA on the optimal management of Vancouver type B1 fractures could be considered, independent of the quality of the bone or fracture position. Furthermore, fractures around or below the tip of the stem may suggest a poor bone quality. Larger number of patients is required to confirm these initial findings.Total hip arthroplasty (THA) is frequently complicated by periprosthetic femoral fractures (PFFs) The Vancouver classification has been widely accepted for the classification of PFFs Fracture location and configuration, concurrently called ‘topography’, and bone quality are not clearly defined in the Vancouver classification. The aims of this study were twofold. The first was to examine if there was any correlation between the fracture angle (FA) and the fracture level (FL), the bone quality or the implant stability (i.e., the three existing factors in the Vancouver classification). No statistically significant correlation could potentially highlight that the FA should be considered as an independent factor in the classification. The second was to examine if there was any correlation between bone quality and FA, FL or stability of the implant. Here, any correlation would suggest that perhaps the aforementioned factors could provide an indication of the bone quality. The results of this preliminary study could potentially enlighten the relationship between the components of PFF characteristics and provide additional information for the classification and treatment of different PFF configurations. The radiographic images of 27 patients with Vancouver type B PFF were studied. These were antero–posterior pelvic radiographs taken during admission prior to surgery with the patient lying supine. No standardised position protocol was applied for these radiographs due to the nature of the injury and discomfort the patient experienced prior to surgery. The radiographs were analysed using an image editing software package CorelDRAW X4 (Corel Corporation, 2008, Ottawa, ON, USA). Data included FA and FL indicating fracture topography and canal thickness ratio (CTR) indicating bone quality as defined in mathematical terms below. All radiographs were rated by two individuals, blind to each other, at two different time points 2 weeks apart. The mean value of all measurements was finally accepted for the analysis. An inter-observer and intra-observer agreement of ≥95% was considered acceptable for the mean value calculation. When close agreement (≥95%) was not achieved, a third rater acted as referee for the final assessment and the closest two ratings were taken into account for the final scoring. To standardise the Vancouver classification, measurement criteria were introduced. Only fractures occurring between two femoral diameters, measured at the level of the ipsilateral femoral isthmus on either side of the tip of the prosthesis, were classified as type B and were included in the study. The stem was considered unstable when, in more than 25% of Gruen zone interfaces, namely stem/bone for uncemented implants or stem/cement and cement/bone for cemented implants, a radiolucent line of >2 Bone quality was evaluated by the senior author on the basis of fracture comminution and the ratio of cortical thickness to femoral canal external diameter as described in the section titled ‘Canal Thickness Ratio’. To calculate FA a reference line was drawn perpendicular to the long axis of the bone, intersecting the most distal fracture line. Subsequently, the angle of the fracture was calculated from this reference line in relation to the medial side of the femur, as shown in In most of the X-ray images, the magnification and the exact stem sizes were not known. In order to address this issue, the relative distance from the tip of the stem to the fracture was used to describe the position of the fracture independently of the size of the femur. The percentage distance from the tip of the stem was calculated by dividing the distance from the tip of the stem to the most proximal part of the fracture by the length of the stem covered by bone as shown in the X-ray in The CTR was used as an indicator of the underlying bone quality. A previous study by Dorr et al. found that a higher CTR was related to better bone quality when the index was compared to results from biopsy and biochemical analysis The relationships between the parameters of interest were investigated using the linear regression analysis using a statistical software tool (SPSS v. 17, IBM SPSS, Armonk, NY, USA). The significance level was set at 0.05. When the intra-observer error was calculated, the FL as well as the CTR both varied by up to 5%. The angle of the fracture varied by up to 5°. Out of the 27 type B cases analysed, 11 were classified as B1, eight as B2 and eight as B3. A full set of the measurements is presented in The correlation between the measurement parameters and the relevant A weak but statistically significant correlation was found between the FL and CTR across all 27 cases. More specifically, lower bone quality correlated with fractures near the tip of the stem ( The management of PFFs and particularly that of the Vancouver B1 subtype has been shown to be both debatable and controversial, with varying clinical and biomechanical results The wide range of FA and FL (fracture topography) that was found within the Vancouver type B1 cases illustrates the variation that can occur within this classification subgroup. The fact that no correlation was found between the FA and FL, neither the FA and bone quality considering all cases is suggesting that the FA may need to be considered as an independent parameter when classifying these fractures. This lack of correlation remained when considering only the stable implants (B1 fractures), providing an even stronger case for consideration of FA for classifying B1 fractures. However, considering the unstable implants (B2 and B3 fractures) a statistically significant correlation ( On the other hand, considering the fractures within the stem length (positive FL) a weak correlation was found between the FA and FL. This suggests that unstable fractures (transverse and short oblique) tend to occur around the tip of the stem. This correlation became stronger, considering only loose stems, which further suggests that, in the loose stems, the fractures around the tip of the stem become more transverse and hence unstable. The importance of each of the parameters that constitute the fracture topography has also been described in the literature. Parvizi et al. advised that short oblique and transverse fractures are unstable and require stronger and more secure fixation in all planes A weak correlation ( The current study is to the authors’ knowledge the first to investigate the variation and the potential correlation between the fracture topography and bone quality in PFFs. There are a number of limitations in this preliminary study. The key limitation is the small number of cases that were studied. This could be of even more concern when all cases were subgrouped according to stem stability and FL ( In conclusion, this preliminary study suggests that the effect of FA on the optimal management of Vancouver type B1 fractures could be considered, independent of the quality of the bone or exact position of the fracture. Furthermore, fractures around or below the tip of the stem may suggest a poor bone quality. Therefore, the surgeon could be alerted by the fracture topography and consider adding more stability to the construct during the operative management of this injury. Larger patient data are required in order to confirm the aforementioned findings and elicit stronger statistical correlations which can subsequently provide improved information for the classification and treatment of different PFF configurations. We herein confirm that the authors do not have any financial and personal relationships with other people or organisations that could inappropriately influence (bias) their work.