Adsorption is considered to be one of the more promising technologies for capturing CO2 from flue gases. For post-combustion capture, the success of such an approach is however dependent on the development of an adsorbent that can operate competitively at relatively high temperatures. In this work, low cost carbon materials derived from fly ash, are presented as effective CO2 sorbents through impregnation these with organic bases, for example, polyethylenimine aided by polyethylene glycol. The results show that for samples derived from a fly ash carbon concentrate, the CO2 adsorption capacities were relatively high (up to 4.5wt%) especially at high temperatures (75°C), where commercial active carbons relying on physi-sorption have low capacities. The addition of PEG improves the adsorption capacity and reduces the time taken for the sample to reach the equilibrium. No CO2 seems to remain after desorption, suggesting that the process is fully reversible.The rise in the global surface temperature is widely attributed to an increase in atmospheric levels of CO To date, all commercial CO Adsorption is considered to be one of the more promising technologies for capturing CO The use of PFA unburned carbon as CO Elsewhere in the literature, examples of impregnations designed to raise the CO The carbon materials obtained were characterised with the aim of relating the structure and nitrogen content to the CO The raw carbon material selected was a concentrated carbon derived from fly ash obtained by dry-sieving PFA sourced from High Marnham power station to obtain the >75 The commercial carbon used as a reference in this work, CC, presents negligible ash, nitrogen and sulphur contents. These differences in ash and heteroatoms content between the raw samples studied can impact upon not only the acidic/basic character of the carbons but also the electrochemical and catalytical properties of the matrix A series of adsorbents were synthesised from the raw material described above (F) by loading them with polyethylenimine (PEI). PEI was incorporated into the materials through the deployment of the wet impregnation method devised by Xu et al. The effect that the mass of methanol (i.e. 1, 2 or 4 It has been reported that the presence of hydroxyl groups enhances the chemical adsorption of CO The chemical characterisation of the adsorbents studied in this work is presented in Textural characterisation was carried out by N The CO In the isothermal tests, approximately 10 In the temperature-programmed adsorption test approximately 10 From the N With regard to the evaluation of the adsorption capacity of the modified adsorbents, it is interesting to look at the thermal stability of the PEI, and the possible interactions between the polymers used (i.e. PEI and PEG) and the raw adsorbent.   The impregnation of sample F leads to an increase of one order of magnitude in its CO These adsorption capacity values clearly improve on other results already reported in the literature Nevertheless, it seems that the determinant factor is to have a good dispersion of the active sites suitable for CO The results obtained from the impregnation with different polymers showed that TEPAN seemed to provide the best CO The effect of the addition of PEG is to enhance the stability of the overall material through intermolecular interaction with the PEI. Satyapal et al.  Bicarbonate  In order to ascertain if the presence of oxygen surface groups could improve in some way the CO Some adsorption profiles have been included for comparative proposes in In The behaviour of the sample F60-PEG is remarkable (see In this work the impregnation of a low cost carbon material, fly-ash derived carbon, with the amine PEI has been shown to be effective in the generation of CO Support for this work provided by the Research Fund for Caol and Steel (Contract RFC-CR-0300) and the British Coal Utilisation Research Association (BCURA) and AA grant from Secretaría de Estado de Educación y Universidades and Fondo Social Europeo are gratefully acknowledged.