In many industrial and aerospace systems, multiple and non-overlapping phases of operations must be performed consecutively, and each phase is performed by a different component. The mission succeeds only when each component successfully accomplishes the subtask assigned to its phase. Such systems are referred to as series phased-mission systems (SPMSs). To enhance the reliability of each phase and thus the entire mission, 1-out-of-N warm standby configuration is implemented for each phase component, with one element working and online when the phase is active and the rest of elements waiting in the standby mode. Different elements may have different failure behaviors and performances. An event transition-based method is proposed to evaluate the mission success probability (MSP) of the considered SPMS with heterogeneous warm standby components. The optimal element loading problem is then solved, which finds the load level of each element to maximize the MSP. The element sensitivity analysis is also performed to rank importance of each element by its impact on the MSP. Interactions between sensitivity analysis results and element activation sequences within each component are further studied through examples.number of mission phases (system components) amount of work to be performed in number of elements in component system element belonging to component performance of element time-to-failure acceleration factor for element load level with which element minimum performance of elements in component maximum performance of elements in component  random activation time of element random amount of completed work when element random amount of work remaining in phase random time of phase random time of phase  random duration of phase maximum possible realization of minimum possible realization of maximum possible realization of minimum possible realization of joint conditional   probability of phase overall probability of phase MSP without mission time deadline MSP given deadline number of time intervals considered in the discrete numerical evaluation Series phased-mission systems (SPMSs) are systems performing multiple consecutive phases/subtasks to accomplish a mission task. The subtask of each phase is performed by a specific component, which waits in the standby mode during execution of the previous phases. After completing its subtask, the component is not in use anymore and its failure does not affect the mission status. To complete the entire mission, each component must survive until completion of its specific mission phase. The system components constitute a series structure in the sense that the entire mission fails if any component fails to complete its phase. Examples of SPMSs abound in aerospace and industrial applications. For instance, a Mars space probe first gets the soil samples using its drilling system, then makes chemical analysis, processes the obtained data and translates it to Earth. Another example is a manufacturing system in which a batch of parts is transferred from machine to machine to perform a sequence of operations. Each machine starts processing when it gets the completed batch from the previous machine. Despite the practical use of SPMSs in real-world applications, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, only little work has been performed in the reliability modeling and analysis of SPMSs. Particularly, the reliability of an SPMS was evaluated in In practice, due to the safety-critical or mission-critical nature of the SPMS, the component performing each phase task is often designed with certain redundancy to enhance the phase reliability and thus reliability of the entire mission. In this paper, we make contributions by evaluating a new SPMS model where each component consists of multiple non-identical elements composing a 1-out-of- The remainder of this paper is arranged as follows. Rich literature exists on reliability modeling and analysis of general phased-mission systems (PMSs) ( state-space based approaches, e.g., Markov models ( combinatorial models, e.g., binary decision diagrams ( modular approaches that integrate the former two types, e.g., UGF + Markov ( recursive methods ( A review of the most recent developments on PMS reliability analysis methods can be found in Most of the exiting PMS reliability models assume fixed phase durations, while the proposed SPMS model considers random phase durations that depend on failure rates and performances of elements activated to execute the phase operation. There exists limited literature on addressing dynamic durations, see, e.g., Some optimization problems have also been formulated and solved for PMSs, maximizing MSP or balancing MSP and other design factors like cost. Examples of the optimization problems solved include, but not limited to the optimal element separation problem ( Different from these existing optimization works, this paper considers a new type of optimization problems for the considered SPMS - the optimal element loading problem. As shown through studies of this optimization problem for other types of systems ( A system is aimed at performing a mission consisting of Each component consists of The following assumptions are made: The fault detection and replacement processes are fully reliable and take negligible time as compared to the mission time. No common cause failures take place during the mission. More specifically the proposed model assumes no external shocks or internal causes that can affect multiple elements or components at the same time. In this section an event transition-based method is presented to evaluate the success probability of a mission performed by the considered series phased mission system with heterogeneous warm standby components. Each element in the considered system may assume two possible modes during the mission time: standby and operation. To consider effects of the two different modes on the element’s failure behavior, the equivalent age-based cumulative exposure model (CEM) is applied to compute a cumulative exposure time Consider element Define Define 〈 If element If element The probability that element Given the occurrence of event 〈 The conditional probability that the phase is completed by element Phase completions by different elements are mutually exclusive events. Therefore, the conditional probability that phase and the overall conditional probability of successful phase completion given Having the distribution of phase Having The entire mission is completed when the last Observe that To obtain the MSP numerically, we discretize the maximum possible mission time The probability that element We can approximate the joint conditional Instead of using the backward derivations presented in the previous section, we use a much simpler forward procedure. For any number of intervals The forward iterative procedure cannot be represented in equations. Hence, we represent it using the following pseudo code, from which it can be seen that the algorithm complexity is Consider an ore dressing process, which comprises four steps (phases): preparation of the ore (crushing, grinding), leaching valuable substance, separation of the substance-bearing solution from the leached pulp, and precipitation. Each step is performed by specific equipment upon completion of the previous step (the transportation time between equipment units is negligible compared to the time required for the technological steps). The component performing each step is equipped by electric engines (driving the pumps, centrifuges, mixers etc.) composing a standby system with a different number of elements To demonstrate the convergence of the obtained values of the MSP Observe that whereas MSP for To solve the optimal element loading problem, we implement the genetic algorithm that finds vector of elements’ loads As for For For In all the cases the optimal element loading provides greater MSP than any uniform loading.  When the possibility to change the elements’ loading does not exist, the suggested model can be used for evaluating the MSP sensitivity to reliability enhancement of specific system elements. This sensitivity can be useful when planning system upgrade/maintenance actions. The reliability of elements having the greatest influence on the overall MSP should be enhanced first. The elements’ importance can be ranked according to sensitivity of MSP to their reliability improvement.  From From The existence of negative influence of an element reliability enhancement on the MSP reveals weakness of system arrangement. To meet the desired deadline the activation order of the elements should be changed. For the fast-first arrangement the MSP cannot decrease when reliability of any element increases as it can be seen in The analysis of the presented examples allows making the following recommendations for system design and operation managers. The complex interaction among the mission and element parameters makes intuition ineffective in developing the optimal system operation program and planning improvement actions. Therefore the suggested algorithm should be applied to achieve the greatest MSP. The optimal loading of elements depends on the allowed mission time. Therefore it should be changed for missions with different durations (see As it was shown in When different element activation schedules can be chosen, the MSP sensitivity to elements reliability improvement should be ranked after the optimal activation ordering in each component as the ordering makes great impact on the MSP and improvement of element reliability can even decrease the MSP if the ordering is not optimal (see This paper considers a special class of PMSs, an SPMS with heterogeneous warm standby components. Under a certain load level, different elements within each component are characterized by different time-to-failure distribution parameters, acceleration factors and performances. An event transition-based method has been suggested to evaluate the MSP of the considered SPMS under no deadline or a predefined mission completion deadline. Applying the genetic algorithm, the optimal element loading problem is solved to maximize the MSP and optimization solutions are demonstrated through examples. The sensitivity of MSP to element reliability enhancement is also investigated through examples. The sensitivity analysis results are useful in effective planning of system upgrade activities. Further example analyses demonstrate that under different element activation sequences, the importance ranking of system elements can be dramatically different. In the future we are interested in extending the proposed method to consider external random shocks that may affect multiple elements simultaneously. We are also interested in relaxing the assumption of the perfect and instantaneous replacement process by considering switching failures and random replacement time. 