Ground condition and construction (excavation and support) time and costs are the key factors in decision-making during planning and design phases of a tunnel project. An innovative methodology for probabilistic estimation of ground condition and construction time and costs is proposed, which is an integration of the ground prediction approach based on Markov process, and the time and cost variance analysis based on Monte-Carlo (MC) simulation. The former provides the probabilistic description of ground classification along tunnel alignment according to the geological information revealed from geological profile and boreholes. The latter provides the probabilistic description of the expected construction time and costs for each operation according to the survey feedbacks from experts. Then an engineering application to Hamro tunnel is presented to demonstrate how the ground condition and the construction time and costs are estimated in a probabilistic way. In most items, in order to estimate the data needed for this methodology, a number of questionnaires are distributed among the tunneling experts and finally the mean values of the respondents are applied. These facilitate both the owners and the contractors to be aware of the risk that they should carry before construction, and are useful for both tendering and bidding.Minimizing uncertainties is one of the important issues during project design and planning. Ground condition and construction time and costs can be considered as the most important uncertainties. The construction time and costs are directly connected with the description of ground condition. Accordingly, in subsurface projects, the actual ground condition and construction time and costs are not ascertainable, and hence the probability methods should be used to assess such factors. At present, construction time and costs are commonly assessed on a deterministic basis. The deterministic approach, however, does not appropriately reflect the uncertain reality. Systematic under-estimation of construction costs related to infrastructure projects has been documented (e.g. The uncertainty in estimations of construction time and costs results from the common variability of construction performance and occurrence of extraordinary events (also denoted here as failure of construction process) such as tunnel collapses ( Full probabilistic estimates of tunnel construction time or costs, taking into account both the common variability and the risk of extraordinary events, were presented in  The present study was undertaken at Hamro road tunnel with the length of 1310 m and cross-sectional area of 97 m In the following stage, a profile was obtained by combining parameter profiles which could determine the probability of each ground class inside each cell, nominated as the “ground class”. Because each ground class has different construction time and costs, there is a possibility for the occurrence of different construction time and costs within each section. In the next stage, the construction time and costs of all the cells were added up using MC simulation method in the Primavera risk analysis program. Finally, with the aid of cumulative graph, column graph and scatter diagram, different construction time and costs with specific occurrence probability (uncertainties) were obtained. Ground condition is considered as one of the main factors in selecting excavation method and support system. Since very few or no data on geological conditions of the tunnel alignment are available, the predictions shall be based on the uncertainty. The PEGC predicts the expected ground condition along the tunnel alignment using primary data including geological maps, geophysical studies, geotechnical studies, etc. Usually the expected conditions along the tunnel cannot be deterministically expressed and thus the statistical methods should be used for probabilistic description of such conditions ( Different stages of PEGC have been briefly introduced as follows: Estimations of transition probability from the state Calculation of transition intensity matrix of parameter Calculation of the interval probability matrix. Based on the Markov process, the occurrence probability of a certain state of geological parameter In order to calculate the occurrence probability of parameter ( Calculating the occurrence probability of parameter states in a situation where the parameter state is not known deterministically but only a probability mass function (PMF) has been given for it in the location Using the results of all calculated occurrence probabilities related to all the desired parameter states along the tunnel length, it would be possible to obtain each parameter profile and ultimately the ground class profile from the combination of the obtained profiles. The goal of geological model is the formation of ground class profile so that it would be possible to use it in the model established to estimate the construction time and costs of each class in any location of the tunnel alignment. The PECTC simulates the construction process through each of the ground class profiles. This involves relating geological/geotechnical conditions (ground classes) to construction classes or “tunneling methods”, which define tunnel cross-sections and initial and permanent supports, as well as the excavation method best suited for a particular ground class. Each method is associated with construction cost and time, which are usually given in the form of cost and advance-rate distribution expressing cost and time uncertainties for each tunneling method. In the PECTC, probabilistic input and also construction cost or time for a particular ground class are usually defined by a triangular probability density function (PDF, see Design and construction decisions in tunneling depend on geological parameters such as rock type, joint density, faulting, joint appearance, degree of weathering and groundwater characteristics ( Rock type parameter with four states: limestone (Li), shale (Sh), sand shales and shale limestones sequence (ShL), and limestone and shale sequence (LSh), which are numbered states 1–4, respectively. RQD parameter with three states: <5, 5–25, and 25–50, which are numbered states 1–3, respectively. Groundwater parameter with three states: low, moderate, and high, which are numbered states 1–3, respectively. According to For the purpose of this study, in order to obtain more accurate data, the views from 10 experts have been used. All the experts were university graduate and postgraduate people from civil engineering, rock mechanics engineering and geology engineering fields with at least 5 years of experience in road tunneling. The expert views were collected and used to obtain the data. Afterwards, using the above-mentioned transition intensity matrix (Eq. For rock type parameter: For RQD parameter: For groundwater parameter: In order to estimate the geological condition along the Hamro road tunnel alignment using the Markov process, first the total tunnel alignment was divided into several equal parts (cells), each with the length of 10 m. Six cells related to the locations of 4 boreholes (BH1–BH4) and 2 portals (entry and exit), called as “observational cells”, were used to specify the occurrence probability of different parameters (rock type, RQD and groundwater) states considered in this study ( To obtain the parameter profile, since the occurrence probability of the states in the observational cells locations was expressed as non-deterministic, the following equation can be used ( According to Eq. Eq. After determining the occurrence probability of each parameter state in the unknown cell In order to determine the occurrence probability of each parameter state, coding was made for Eq. For the parameters and states considered in this study, a total of 3 × 3 × 4 = 36 different geological conditions could occur along the tunnel alignment. Obviously, it would not be possible to consider a separate excavation method and support system for each geological condition; however, five different excavation methods and support system suitable for a number of these geological conditions were considered. Such geological conditions were identified in 5 classes ( For the formation of ground class profile, the geological conditions related to each parameter ( To describe the methodology to obtain the occurrence probability of each ground class in each cell, the ground class 3 (GC 3) is taken for example which includes 8 geological conditions as shown in In this study, if each geological condition is considered as ( In the following section, considering the above discussion, the procedure for obtaining the ground class 3 inside the cell Similar procedure is performed for the other ground classes, and ultimately using the results gained for each ground class, a profile can be obtained, as shown in The PECTC determines the construction time and costs of each cell of the individual ground classes. In order to estimate the construction time and costs for each cell (10 m) in Hamro tunnel, a specific questionnaire was designed and distributed among the experts. The experts should consider an activity network for each of the ground classes in a way that the considered activity network could complete a construction cycle (excavation and support system) of the related ground class. Afterwards, the required construction time and costs (for the year 2015) related to each activity as well as those required between the end of each activity and the start of new activity, delays, machinery malfunction, etc. could be approximated using the experience from the previously accomplished projects in the similar geological conditions. Ultimately the experts were supposed to add up such time and costs to obtain the total time and costs required for each construction cycle of the ground classes. Afterwards, by averaging the presented views of various experts for each ground class, the time and costs for each cell were obtained ( It is notable that the construction time and costs relate to the state where the tunnel is excavated from only one end (entry or exit). In the case of tunneling from both ends, the total construction time is reduced by half compared to that in the case of excavation from one end, and the construction costs are also reduced. Also in estimating the construction time and costs, the tunnel benching was not considered. After determining the construction time and costs of each cell (10 m) for a ground class, the total construction time and costs of the whole tunnel can be approximated by adding up the construction time and costs of all 131 cells. As each ground class occurs with a certain probability (the ground class profile) within each cell, to estimate the total construction time and costs, the MC simulation method was used. Primavera risk analysis (PRA) program was used to perform MC simulations. After data input and during simulation, the prepared program was repeated for specified times. In each repetition, the non-deterministic values of construction time and costs were determined randomly based on the distributions and the input data. The PRA software stores the estimated total construction time and costs at the end of each repetition. After all the repetitions were finished, the stored values were used for plotting the desired graphs and preparing the probabilistic function related to the implementation of the above items. In order to illustrate the final time and costs of project on the graphs obtained from PRA software, various levels of assurances from 0 to 100% can be used. For example, the graph with 50% level of assurance gives the maximum time and costs that could happen with 50% probability. It must be noted that the maximum time and costs obtained for the project are equal to the calculated ones considering the assigned level of assurance. Meanwhile, the minimum time and costs for the project are the same as those obtained at zero level of assurance. Therefore, if suitable ranges for time and costs are to be determined in the scatter diagram, it would be the same dots between the maximum and minimum time and costs (a range of dots with the probability between zero and the considered one (50% here)). In the following section, the graphs obtained from PRA software will be explained.   To show the relationship between the total construction time and costs, the scatter diagram is also used. For a specified level of assurance, the construction time and costs for a given project can be determined using this diagram.  The red dots indicate the reversal state so that with the increase in the level of assurance value specified by the horizontal and vertical lines, the number of red dots decreases, meaning that the uncertainty is decreased. When the level of assurance specified by the horizontal and vertical lines is higher, there will be a less number of black dots, and hence a lower uncertainty ( Sometimes the conditions dictate that the uncertainty of one of the variables (construction time and cost) can be lower or higher than that of the other one. For example, when a lower uncertainty for the construction time is required (i.e. the construction time is more important), the level of assurance value considered by the vertical line (for time) should be greater than that determined by the horizontal line (for cost), in other words, the number of green dots for the vertical line should be more than the horizontal line ( Therefore, depending on the economic conditions, the project type and other factors, different uncertainties can be considered during the initial planning concerning the total construction time and costs of tunneling. In the scatter diagrams, the percentage of the black dots will vary only when the levels of assurance for both the time and cost are changed. For example, in Since the construction of Hamro road tunnel was completed during this study, and due to the accessibility to more accurate data after construction, the authors decided to validate the results obtained from the innovative method against the post-construction data, so that the method proposed in this paper could be employed for the estimation of construction time and costs in the future projects with lower uncertainty. The construction time and costs of Hamro road tunnel obtained using the post-construction data and the views of the experts responsible for the tunneling project were equal to 2256 days and US $25,520,293, respectively. It must be mentioned that the Hamro tunneling project was considered to start in 2015 in this study, accordingly the actual costs were updated in accordance with the building code of the mentioned year; also considering the actual time of tunnel construction, the estimated costs have been increased by 25% in accordance with the annual increase in expenses, so that the estimated total costs of the project could be calculated with the highest accuracy possibly. Since the time and costs in the scatter diagram obtained from the innovative method occur with 27% and 72% levels of assurance, respectively, it can be concluded that the 50% level of assurance in this paper could be the optimum state, because 50% level of assurance lies almost in the middle of 27% and 72% levels of assurance. Accordingly, if we consider 50% level of assurance as an optimal state, it means that about 15 days more for the time and US $86,000 less for the costs have been allocated compared to those for the actual state, and this would prove the lower uncertainties with respect to employing the innovative method. This is true that the closer the level of assurance to 100% is, the lower the uncertainty about the maximum time and costs will be. In this case, however, they may be greatly different from the actual time and costs. Hence, the main aim of the simulations is to decrease the uncertainties related to construction time and costs obtained by the simulations in comparison to the actual time and costs. The 100% level of assurance therefore is not indicative of the actual time and cost obtained by simulations. As a result, 27% and 72% levels of assurance are not measured against 100%, whereas they must be measured against the optimal state considered. Hence, it can be said that the pre-construction innovative method can be used in estimating the construction time and costs of future tunneling projects to considerably reduce the uncertainties and thereby decrease the decision-making risks concerning construction time and costs estimation in initial planning stages. Minimizing uncertainties related to project design and planning is a significant issue. Usually the uncertainties in subsurface projects arise from the unknown ground conditions which may cause the designer to fail to consider all the potential issues prone to occur during the construction process. Construction time and cost uncertainties can be considered as the most important uncertainties, for they are directly connected with thorough recognition of the subsurface conditions. Accordingly, in subsurface projects, the actual time and costs are not ascertainable, and hence the probability methods should be used to assess such factors. In this study, an innovative method for the probabilistic estimation of ground condition and construction time and costs for Hamro road tunnel was proposed. As an optimum state, it would be possible to assume the occurrence probability of either construction time or costs to be equal to 50%. However, depending on the economic conditions and the type of project, the level of assurance could be above or lower than 50%. In the present study, if a level of assurance of 50% is assumed, the project can be accomplished with the total construction cost of about US $25,423,334 and the total construction time of 2271 days. It is notable that these total construction time and costs are related to the state where the tunnel is excavated from only one end (entry or exit). In the case of tunneling from both sides, the total construction time is reduced by half compared to that in the case of excavation from one end, and the construction costs are also reduced. In the following study, the findings for construction time and costs of tunnel were compared with the actual ones. Finally, considering the proximity of the results obtained by the innovative methodology and the actual data, it was concluded that the pre-construction innovative method could be used for estimating the required construction time and costs of tunnels for the future projects to considerably reduce the uncertainties and decision-making risks on construction time and costs estimations during the initial planning stages. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. The authors are grateful to M. Mohammadi, H. Nikoogoftar and F. Rezaei for their assistance and guidance.