Nanorods/nanoparticles TiO2 with mesoporous structure were synthesized by hydrothermal method at 150°C for 20h. The samples characterized by XRD, SEM, TEM, SAED, HRTEM, and BET surface area. The nanorods had diameter about 10–20nm and the lengths of 100–200nm, the nanoparticles had diameter about 5–10nm. The prepared material had average pore diameter about 7–12nm. The BET surface area and pore volume of the sample are about 203m2/g and 0.655cm3/g, respectively. The nanorods/nanoparticles TiO2 with mesoporous structure showed higher photocatalytic activity (I3
                     − concentration) than the nanorods TiO2, nanofibers TiO2, mesoporous TiO2, and commercial TiO2 (ST-01, P-25, JRC-01, and JRC-03). The solar energy conversion efficiency (η) of the cell using nanorods/nanoparticles TiO2 with mesoporous structure was about 7.12% with J
                     sc of 13.97mA/cm2, V
                     oc of 0.73V, and f
                     f of 0.70; while η of the cell using P-25 reached 5.82% with J
                     sc of 12.74mA/cm2, V
                     oc of 0.704V, and f
                     f of 0.649.The synthesis and characterization of one-dimensional (1D) nanostructured materials (nanotubes, nanorods, and nanowires) have received considerable attention due to their unique properties and novel applications In this study, nanorods/nanoparticles TiO Titanium(IV) butoxide (Aldrich) was mixed with the same mole of acetyacetone (ACA, Nacalai Tesque, Inc., Japan) to slowdown the hydrolysis and the condensation reactions The nanorods TiO The nanofibers TiO The mesoporous TiO The crystalline structure of the samples was evaluated by X-ray diffraction (XRD, RIGAKU RINT 2100). The microstructure of the prepared materials was analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JEOL JSM-6500FE), transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL JEM-200CX), and selected-area electron diffraction (SAED). The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) specific surface area was determined by the nitrogen adsorption (BEL Japan, BELSORP-18 Plus). The photocatalytic activity was measured through the formation rate of I TiO The thickness of the TiO The amount of adsorbed dye was determined by desorbing the dye from the titania surface into a mixed solution of 0.1     The BET surface area of the nanorods TiO The I  The nanorods/nanoparticles TiO The results presented here demonstrated that the nanorods/nanoparticles TiO The authors would like to express gratitude to Prof. S. Isoda and Prof. H. Kurata, Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University for the use of TEM apparatus Prof. T. Yoko, Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University for the use of XRD equipment. Prof. Mochizuki at AIST for the kind supply of Pt counter electrode. We are also grateful to the Geomatec Co. Ltd. for providing a part of conducting glass. This work was supported by grant-in-aids from the Ministry of Education, Science Sports, and Culture of Japan under the 21 COE program, the Nanotechnology Support Project, and from NEDO under high-performance dye-sensitized solar cell project, and from JSPS research fellow. We acknowledge the anonymous reviewers for the helpful discussion to improve the manuscript.