Silicon nitride is considered a promising candidate to replace thermal oxide dielectrics, as the latter is reaching its scaling limits due to the excessive increase in the gate tunneling leakage current. The novel hot wire chemical vapor deposition (HWCVD) technique shows promise for gate quality silicon nitride film yields at 250 °C while maintaining their primary advantage of a higher dielectric constant of 7.1. In this paper we report the results of our efforts towards developing ultra-thin HWCVD silicon nitride as an advanced gate dielectric for the replacement of thermal gate oxides in future generations of ultra large scale integration (ULSI) devices.The semiconductor industry has maintained its aggressive pace of growth by improving performance and reducing the cost per function of integrated circuits. Shrinking of device dimensions is the primary cause for this improvement as it can offer both an increase in speed as well as density of devices on the chip One major problem with the scaling of the oxide thickness (1.5–2.0 nm) is the excessive increase in the leakage current due to direct tunneling Silicon nitride, among other high- In this paper we report MOS capacitors made with ultra-thin [<4 nm EOT (effective oxide thickness)] silicon nitride by HWCVD as the gate dielectric. Detailed electrical characterization has been carried out and reliability issues such as high breakdown strength and very little trap generation by these devices have also been addressed. a-SiN:H films were deposited by HWCVD using Matheson grade SiH The film thickness was measured using a dektak II surface profilometer by creating a step by masking a small area of the substrate during deposition. The thickness was verified by comparison with the thickness obtained from A schematic of the hot wire chemical vapor deposition setup is shown in The presence of a parasitic series resistance can significantly affect the HFCV plot. We have demonstrated that silicon nitride films deposited using the HWCVD process can offer good electronic properties with an expected high dielectric constant of 7.1. Silicon nitride films show significantly less hydrogen content compared with those obtained using plasma techniques. Reliability evaluation of the ultra-thin HWCVD nitride gate devices (2.0 nm EOT) showed a high breakdown strength, very little increase in the stress-induced leakage current under constant field stressing and very little trap generation. The silicon nitride film shows negligible border traps. Taking into account its much lower gate leakage current density, we believe that the HWCVD silicon nitride is a potential candidate for replacing thermal silicon oxide when the latter outlives its usefulness.