Objective
                  The Risk Assessment Profile (RAP) score is used as a tool of risk prediction in post-traumatic venous thromboembolism (VTE), but this scoring system is complicated to use in clinical settings due to its many variables. The objective of this study was to validate the utility of the RAP model and to develop a simpler risk prediction model for post-traumatic VTE.
               
                  Methods
                  We conducted an observational study at two emergency and critical care centres in Japan between 2013 and 2016. Consecutive adult trauma patients who survived for 24 h or more after admission to the hospital were enroled. One prediction model (quick RAP model) was created with 6 variables based on clinical utility, experience, and thrombogenic mechanism from 17 variables in the conventional RAP model. We calculated diagnostic performance with 95% confidence interval (95% CI) by exact method.
               
                  Results
                  We identified and analysed 859 patients. Twenty-six patients (3.0%) had VTE (17 with deep venous thrombosis alone, 2 with pulmonary embolism alone, and 7 with both). In the external validation, the RAP model had a sensitivity of 100% (95% CI, 86.8–100%) and specificity of 37.9% (95% CI, 34.6–41.3%). In contrast, the qRAP model had a sensitivity of 96.2% (95% CI, 80.4–99.9%) and specificity of 56.2% (95% CI, 52.7–59.6%). In the internal validation, receiver-operating characteristic curve analysis showed that the two models had similar area under the curve values that were not significantly different (0.832 and 0.800, respectively; RAP vs qRAP, p = 0.477).
               
                  Conclusions
                  We developed a practical, modified predictive model for VTE, the qRAP model, which appeared only slightly less accurate than the conventional RAP model and had the advantage of being simpler to use to predict VTE. In our dataset, the conventional RAP model was also evaluated as useful for the prediction of post-traumatic VTE.Since it was reported that trauma patients are at risk for the development of venous thromboembolism (VTE) because of hypercoagulability, immobilisation, and venous injury, many researchers have studied the prevention of VTE [ A number of independent risk factors have been reported [ However, this scoring system is complicated to use in clinical settings due to its many variables. The objective of the present study was to validate the utility of the RAP model and to develop a simpler risk prediction model for post-traumatic VTE. This study was conducted at two emergency and critical care centres (Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine and the National Center for Global Health and Medicine) in Japan. Each year, approximately 250 and 350 trauma patients are admitted to each critical care centre, respectively. The data of the trauma patients were collected retrospectively between January 2013 and March 2014 and prospectively between April 2014 and March 2016. Consecutive adult patients defined as those 18 years or older who survived for 24 h or more after admission to the hospital were enroled. Patients were excluded if they had a known hypercoagulable state (anti-thrombin III deficiency, protein C or S deficiency, or anti-phospholipid-protein antibodies), if they were pregnant, or if they had previously undergone therapy with heparin, warfarin, or low-molecular-weight heparin. Information on the patients’ age, sex, past medical history, body mass index, diagnosis, Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), transfusions, Injury Severity Score (ISS) [ Summary statistics are presented as the mean (with standard deviation [SD]) and median (with interquartile range [IQR]) as appropriate. The clinical variables were assessed by univariate analysis, including the χ We did not use a variable selection technique because traditional methods used for selecting variables, such as forward and backward selection or stepwise regression, tend to lack reproducibilities of clinical findings, resulting in models that predict outcomes in the current dataset well but become unreliable in other datasets. Therefore, in the new prediction model reported here, all variables were selected on the basis of clinical utility, experience, and thrombogenic mechanism. We compared two models: the conventional RAP model with 17 variables and the quick RAP (qRAP) model, with only 6 variables ( The models were validated by analysis of sensitivity and specificity, and 95% confidence interval (95% CI) for the percentages were calculated by using exact methods (primary outcome). The performance of each model was assessed with receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis as a secondary analysis. The comparison of the area under the curves (AUCs) was tested with the bootstrap method in consideration of the fact that both AUCs were calculated from the same data [ Statistical analysis was conducted with JMP statistical software (version 11.1.1 for Windows; SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC) and R software (version 3.3.1; R Development Core Team, Vienna, Austria). This study was approved by the ethics committees of Osaka University and the National Center for Global Health and Medicine. There were 1020 trauma patients who required hospitalisation during the study periods. Of these patients, 859 (median ISS: 9, IQR: 4–16) were included in the analysis ( There was no significant difference in age and sex between the VTE and non-VTE groups. However, the VTE group had a tendency for higher ISS and longer length of stay (LOS) than the non-VTE group ( The distribution of items in the RAP and qRAP models in the VTE/non-VTE groups is shown in Statistical analysis showed that the sensitivity of the RAP score (≥ 5) was 100% (95% CI, 86.8–100%), the specificity was 37.9% (95% CI, 34.6–41.3%), and the VTE group had a significantly higher RAP score than the non-VTE group (9.0 vs 6.3, p < 0.001). In contrast, the sensitivity of the qRAP was 96.2% (95% CI, 80.4–99.9%), and the specificity was 56.2% (95% CI, 52.7–59.6%) ( The ROC curves for the outcome of VTE in the two models showed that the RAP model had an AUC value of 0.832 (95% CI, 0.755 to 0.898) whereas that of the qRAP model was 0.800 (95% CI, 0.729 to 0.863) ( This study validated the conventional RAP model through the use of our dataset and showed that this model had high sensitivity and predictive performance for the development of VTE (sensitivity: 100%, specificity: 37.9%). We compiled the qRAP model as a new prediction model that was reduced to 6 variables: central femoral line, transfusion, GCS score, complex lower extremity fracture, pelvic fracture, and spinal cord injury. We then found that ROC analysis indicated no significant difference by removing variables from the conventional model. The conventional RAP model was compiled by using the modified Delphi technique and included a number of variables related to trauma. In the validation of the RAP model, Gearhart et al. reported a sensitivity of 100% and specificity of 39% at the cut-off point of 5 [ The RAP model has clinical limitations because it includes the AIS codes. The model was designed with the intent to stratify patients shortly after admission to guide in subsequent VTE surveillance and prophylaxis. Ideally, this would be completed within the first 24–48 hours as encouraged by the surgical care improvement project [ Another clinical limitation of the RAP model is its many variables, so we compiled the qRAP model with only 6 variables. All variables in the qRAP model were selected on the basis of clinical utility, experience, and thrombogenic mechanism. VTE has traditionally been attributed to venous stasis, endothelial injury, and hypercoagulability, as defined by Virchow’s triad [ Interestingly, univariable analysis showed patients with a chest AIS score > 2 to have a tendency for VTE in the present study. Knudson et al. reported that the patients with severe chest injury had a 42% increased likelihood of pulmonary embolism (odds ratio [OR], 1.42; CI, 1.30–1.55) with little risk of DVT (OR, 1.07; CI, 1.01–1.12) [ Moreover, including trauma severity in the model may also improve its performance; for example, unstable pelvic fracture and stable pelvic fracture have the same risk in the conventional RAP model and the qRAP model. In future research, we will evaluate whether distinguishing trauma severity improves prediction performance. Limitations of our study include the retrospective period and the usual limitations inherent to this type of analysis. The number of events in this study was small. The absence of a statistically significant difference does not directly indicate that using qRAP is no different from using the conventional RAP model. The small number of events may be the reason for the lack of a statistically significant difference. Another potential limitation of our new prediction model is the lack of external validation. In addition, routine surveillance by LEDU was insufficient in the prospective period, and therefore, the incidence of asymptomatic DVT may be underestimated. In conclusion, we developed a practical, modified predictive model for VTE, the qRAP model (with the number of variables reduced to 6), which appeared to be only slightly less accurate than the conventional RAP model and had the advantage of being simpler to use in the prediction of VTE. Furthermore, we confirmed that the conventional RAP model was useful for the prediction of post-traumatic VTE. Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: