Cork is a natural raw materials used in numerous traditional and innovative applications among which the most famous are cork stoppers, insulation boards, and wall and floor covering. Cork exhibits a relatively homogeneous honeycomb structure composed of polyhedron cells filled with gas, which gives its specific properties such as elasticity or hydrophobic behavior. Mechanical properties of cork have been studied from a long time. However, in many industrial applications cork is increasingly used as granulate (>200μm) or powder (<200μm) obtained by milling processes. By generating failure in the raw material, the comminution of cork could damage cells and induce modifications in the mechanical behavior of cork particles but the relation between the size of the particles and the mechanical properties of the packaging is still little known. In this study, we investigate the effect of cork particles size reduction on the mechanical properties of the packing. To this end, eighteen discrete size fractions of cork from 0 to 25μm to 2.5–3mm, generated by impact milling were characterized in term of shape, loaded density, and elastic recovery. Experiments show that impact milling mainly affects the elastic properties of particles less than 200μm. The mechanical behavior of cork particles was also described by model based on a mixing law taking in account the size and the shape of particles and the amount of damaged cells in the particles. The fitting of the model to the experimental data suggests that the elastic properties of the packing of cork particles have to be related to the content of damage cells more than to their size.Specific dimensions of the particle shape Aspect ratio (shape factor) Circularity (shape factor) Diameter of a sphere in which a cork cell is embedded Diameter of the circumscribe sphere of the particle. Direct sieving protocol Elastic recovery of the powder bed Prism height of the cell Height of the packing bed under confining stress and after unloading Base edge of the cell Milling and sieving protocol Number total of cells in a particle, in the bulk and the surface of a particle Number of damaged cells in a cork particle Solidity (shape factor) Scanning electron microscope Volume of the cell Volume of the circumscribe sphere to a particle Volume total, volume of the bulk and volume of the outer layer of cork particle Mechanical properties of a particle bed. Mechanical properties of a bed constituted of damaged and undamaged particles. Individual weight of the particles Content of damaged cell in and at the surface of a particle Loaded density at 380 Bulk density of cork particle Cork is a wonderful natural raw material known from ancient time for its low density, hydrophobic behavior, high elastic recovery, sound and electrical insulation. Cork is particularly abundant in the bark of a specific species of oak: For the formulation of cork enriched materials, several authors have studied the influence of cork particles size distribution on the strength and failure of composites ( Cork particles used in this study are industrial samples used for the production of agglomerated cork stoppers coming from a same industrial batch. In this industrial process, after harvesting, the cork from reproduction plank, was boiled, ground by an impact mill and sieved to eliminate the finest fraction (<300 Cork cells can be assimilated to right hexagonal prisms ( Two separation protocols were used to produce fractions at different particle size: direct sieving of raw material (DS) and an additional milling before the sieving step (MS). Eleven coarse fractions were obtained with the DS protocols and referenced as DS followed by the opening of the two consecutive sieves (DS315-450, DS450-560, DS560-710, DS710-800, DS800-900, DS900-1000, DS1000-1250, DS1250-1400, DS1400-2000, DS2000-2500 and DS 2500–3000). For the MS protocol, a 100 UPZ Hosokawa-alpine The median size of fractions <450 Digital image analysis was performed on the coarser fractions (size >450 Circularity C which is a function of the perimeter P and the area A of the shape: Aspect ratio, Solidity, The individual volume of a particle can be calculated from its mass and density. For DS fractions (>450 For all fractions, the packing density was measured in triplicate using a standard tapped density analyzer (Autotap, Quantachrome instrument Oedometric compression tests were performed in triplicate to determine the bed compressibility and elasticity recovery. For these experiments, a cylindrical mold (Ø In this study the particle size fractions are assimilated to the mean value of the mesh appertures of pairs of consecutive sieves.  The optical measurements of the median particle size are plotted with black squares and the correspondent linear regression is drawn by the finer dotted line. The line y when sieving, some elongated particles pass through the mesh screen even if one of their length is greater, image analysis tends to overestimate the particle size as the particle are deposited on a surface and presents their two largest dimensions, In addition, it is worth noting that the laser diffraction measurement does not take directly into account the particle shape and could also leads to a bias.   The loaded density ( Preliminary tests have shown that submitting the packing to a confining stress of 15 kPa leads to a density closed to that obtained using standard tapped density analysis ( Cork exhibits an anisotropic behavior at the compression. Under a confining stress, the cork cells tend to flat without fracture, thanks to the ability of the cell walls to undulate allowing a large deformation ( On the contrary for damaged cells, the origin of packing deformability is not only due to layer mechanical properties but also to the complex shape of cell fragments that tends to interlock. In  As cork particles seems to have a similar shape whatever their size, we explored the possibility to assimilate their shape to a specific geometry by comparing their volume and their aspect ratios to four particle geometries: sphere, ellipsoid, cube and parallelepiped rectangle ( Logically, for the same Since cork has a regular cell structure, it is possible to evaluate the number of cells ( From a mechanical point of view, the fracture toughness of the different tissues, the input energy and the local failure modes control the crack patterns and the way failures cross or bypath the cells. Even if it would be difficult to assess the internal pressure of one cell filled with air, we will consider in this study two specific cases deflated (damaged) or intact (undamaged) cells (  and With AR and The number of cork cells in the bulk Depending on the crack pattern, the number of damaged cells Both parameters vary from 0 to 100% and are related by equation 10. As macroscopic elastic properties of the granular packing strongly depend on the integrity of cork cells, At first approximation, we assume in this study no failure in the bulk of the particles and only cells located at the outer layer can be potentially damaged. Describing the mechanical behavior of granular packing is a difficult task even in the case of rigid particles. Indeed granular materials are well known for their complex rheology, which depends on the local granular texture and the applied strain history ( In this study, our aim was more to clarify how the amount of damaged cells influence specific properties such as elastic recovery and loaded density (denoted X), which are important for the process and the manufacture of cork-based materials. For this reason at a first approximation, we assumed that these properties for a particle with For particles with diameter less than 25 The experimental data have been fitted by the mixing law (Eq. In The results obtained suggest that the mechanical properties of cork particles (particle >200 In this work the elastic properties (packing loaded density and elastic recovery) have been studied for different size of particles obtained by the milling and sieving of cork. Experiments suggested that the impact milling mainly affect the properties of cork particle less than 200