Alkaline pretreatment of a refractory gold–silver ore containing antimony minerals such as stibnite, andorite (Sb3PbAgS6) and zinkenite (Pb9Sb22S42) was tested using sodium hydroxide in order to determine its effectiveness in improving the recovery of gold and silver. Mineralogical investigations show that silver was present as andorite and Au/Ag alloy. Gold particles have been observed as associated with quartz and inclusions within the antimony minerals. Increasing the sodium hydroxide concentrations from 0.5 to 5mol/L, increasing the temperature from 20 to 80°C, and reducing the particle size from 50 to 5μm enhanced the removal of antimony from the ore. Up to about 75.5% Sb removal was achieved by alkaline pretreatment, which in turn remarkably improved the extraction of silver from levels of less than 18.7% to 90% and gold from less than 49.3% to 85.4% during subsequent cyanidation. These findings, consistent with mineralogical results, suggest that alkaline leaching can effectively be used as chemical pretreatment method as an alternate to the alkaline sulfide leaching in the processing of refractory antimonial gold–silver ores.The Akoluk ore deposit, hosted by volcanic–sedimentary rocks of the Eastern Pontides, is situated near Ordu in northeastern Turkey. The ore deposit contains a variety of sulfide and oxide minerals, as well as native gold ( Refractory gold ores do not respond to direct cyanidation; therefore, such ores have to be pretreated prior to cyanidation to liberate the contained gold and silver so that they are readily amenable to extraction ( Recent studies ( The ore used in this study is an antimony-rich refractory gold–silver ore from Akoluk (Ordu-Turkey). The ore samples were reduced in size by crushing and grinding. A laboratory-scale stirred media mill was used for fine grinding (80% passing size, d Mineralogical analysis of the ore sample was performed to determine gold and silver bearing phases. Characterization studies were carried out using a FEI Quanta 400MK2 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) equipped with EDAX Genesis 4XMI at the Mineral Research and Exploration Institute of Turkey and a HITACHI variable-pressure SEM with a Link microanalysis system at CANMET. Microanalysis of the mineral grains was performed by a JEOL JXA 8900 electron probe X-ray microanalyzer (EPMA) at CANMET utilizing five wavelength dispersive spectrometers (WDS) operated at 20 Tests were designed to evaluate the effects of sodium hydroxide concentrations, temperature and particle size (d Cyanide leaching of the residues was then carried out to determine the effects of alkaline leaching pretreatment on the extraction of gold and silver. Glass reactors (1 Alkaline leaching has a significant advantage over the alkaline sulfide leaching due to lower reagent costs. In addition, a small amount of gold can be dissolved in alkaline sulfide solutions ( Alkali pretreatment of the ore at 15 Although alkaline leaching using alkali metal hydroxides is potentially applicable to elements that form anionic complexes such as Al, Sb, As, Cu, Fe and Pb, the higher metal extractions would require high pressure or temperatures under oxidizing conditions ( The effect of leaching time on antimony removal from the ore was investigated at different reagent concentrations (0.5–5  The influence of temperature (20–80 The effect of particle size of the ore (d It appears that not all the antimony is responding to alkaline leaching. Approximately ~ The influence of the sodium hydroxide alkaline pretreatment prior to cyanidation was shown to be effective for the decomposition of the most of antimony minerals. All cyanidation tests indicated that silver and gold recoveries improved after antimony removal by alkaline leach. While less than 18.7% Ag was extracted from the untreated ore, 90% of the silver was recovered following 75.5% antimony removal by alkaline leaching ( The occurrence and association of gold and silver are illustrated in The consumption of cyanide was determined to be 4.8–5 Sodium hydroxide pretreatment of the refractory gold–silver ore from the Akoluk deposit showed that up to 75.5% of the antimony can be removed by adjusting the molar concentration of the leaching solution. Temperature, particle size and NaOH concentrations were identified to be the most important factors affecting the extraction of antimony and subsequent cyanide extraction of silver and gold. Whereas the direct cyanidation resulted in gold recoveries of about 49.3%, the alkaline pretreatment process significantly improved the gold recovery to 85.4%. With the removal of about 75.5% Sb during pretreatment, Ag recoveries reached 90% from very low levels of 5–10%. A significant increment in gold and silver extractions corresponded to the removal of antimony from the ore during the alkaline pretreatment. Based on mineralogical investigation, silver was present as andorite and Au/Ag alloy. Gold particles containing silver have been observed as associated with quartz and inclusions within the antimony minerals such as andorite. These findings were consistent with the alkali pretreatment results. Experimental results demonstrated that sodium hydroxide pretreatment is a viable extractive metallurgy technique for the processing of refractory antimonial gold and silver ores. Mineralogical characterization of materials resulting from alkaline pre-treatments could shed further light on mechanisms of Au and Ag liberation and will be discussed in details at another paper. Sincere thanks and appreciation go to the General Directorate of the Mineral Research and Exploration of Turkey (MTA) for SEM-EDX analysis and to Anatolia Minerals Development Ltd. for kindly providing the ore samples.