Background
                  Utilization of total elbow arthroplasty (TEA) has reportedly increased in recent years. Since the introduction of disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs, there has been a reported decline in its use among rheumatoid patients; yet, the shift in indications for TEA remains unclear. This study evaluated trends in TEA utilization from 2005 to 2012 by analyzing the most common indications within the population of Medicare patients.
               
                  Methods
                  We performed a retrospective review of a comprehensive Medicare patient population database using the PearlDiver supercomputer (Warsaw, IN, USA) for TEA utilization in rheumatoid arthritis (RA), osteoarthritis (OA), distal humerus fracture (DHF), post-traumatic arthritis (PTA), and distal humerus nonunion (DHNU). Total reported incidence of office visits and TEA utilization for each indication was reviewed.
               
                  Results
                  Utilization of TEA remained unchanged (P = .9530) despite a growing Medicare population (P = .0201). There was a significant decline in annual TEA utilization for RA (P = .002) and DHNU (P = .003). No significant change was found in TEA use for DHF, OA, and PTA. A significant increase was noted in total visits coded for OA, RA, and DHNU (P < .001). A significant, strong negative correlation was found for office visit coding and TEA use in RA (r = −0.850; P = .008) and DHNU (r = −0.902; P = .002).
               
                  Conclusion
                  From 2005 to 2012, utilization rates of TEA in the Medicare population remained constant. Despite increases in office visits, TEA use for RA and DHNU has declined, likely secondary to improved medical management with disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs and the surgeon's comfort with improved fracture fixation options.Total elbow arthroplasty (TEA) has been used to treat several pathologic processes about the elbow, including acute distal humerus fracture (DHF), osteoarthritis (OA), post-traumatic arthritis (PTA), and distal humerus nonunion (DHNU); for salvage procedures, such as large post-traumatic bone defects and reconstruction after tumor resection; and for hemophilic arthropathy and inflammatory arthropathy, such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Trends in upper extremity arthroplasty in the United States from 1993 to 2007 have been reported and demonstrate a nearly 3-fold increase in primary and 5-fold increase in revision TEA procedures during this time, corresponding to an annual growth in the procedure rate of 7.6%. It is believed that TEA utilization for noninflammatory arthropathy is becoming increasingly more popularized. We conducted a retrospective review of a large comprehensive Medicare database within the PearlDiver supercomputer application (Warsaw, IN, USA) of the index procedure TEA. This software is a publicly available Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act-compliant database that compiles the entire Medicare files into a server. This software provides access to the Medicare registry with the use of A query of the database was performed for patients who underwent TEA, identified by Statistical analysis was mainly descriptive to define the incidence of each procedure throughout the study period. Annual trends in the use of TEA collectively and for each individual indication were analyzed with linear regression models. Two-tailed correlational analysis was also performed to compare the annual incidence of coding for RA and its indication for TEA. A There was a significant increase in the Medicare population from 2005 to 2012 ( Analysis of office visits for each TEA indication ( A significantly strong, negative correlation was found between visits coded and TEA performed for RA ( Results of our analysis show that there has been a shift in TEA utilization among the Medicare population between 2005 and 2012. Despite an overall increase in total visits coded and a growing Medicare population, the annual incidence of TEA utilization did not vary during this time. As hypothesized, a significant decline in TEA use for RA was found. Surprisingly, there was also a decline in TEA use for DHNU. We believe that these findings may be explained secondary to the prevalence of DMARDs for RA and the greater comfort of surgeons with improved fracture fixation options in managing DHFs. The stable annual occurrence of TEA utilization is likely to be explained by significant growth in the U.S. Medicare population during this period ( RA-related orthopedic surgeries at large have shown a continual decline in recent decades, Overall success rates after TEA have been best for inflammatory arthritis and DHFs in the elderly and worse for post-traumatic OA, Interestingly, TEA use for DHFs did not show a significant increase in prevalence in recent years, despite being a proven treatment option for this indication. The same theoretical advancement in surgical technique and plating systems may have also influenced both the incidence and treatments of DHNU. However, we believe that lack of comfort with and technical demand of performing a TEA are likely to be the most influential in these findings. A strong negative correlation ( TEA has been shown to be efficacious for patients with post-traumatic arthrosis. This study is not without limitations. First, retrospective bias may exist despite that the data were collected prospectively. In addition, the accuracy of the data is contingent on proper coding practices. More than 1 indication for TEA use may have been coded (ie, RA and DHF). This likely explains why the sum of TEA use among all indications was greater than the total TEA utilization. In an effort to avoid selecting the indication to which TEA should be applied for statistical purposes, we elected to allow this disparity to exist to minimize bias. Also, selection bias may have been introduced when patients entered or exited the Medicare database during the study period. Last, given the demographic of patients in the Medicare database, these trends may likely not reflect the general population at large. The major strength of this study relates to the completeness of the data. The PearlDiver database represents complete data for the entire Medicare population. Given that TEAs are most commonly seen in this population, use of a complete set of Medicare data to analyze trends in surgical treatment of this cohort is ideal. Overall, TEA use has remained constant among the Medicare population in recent years. However, there has been a shift in its indicated uses. TEA use for RA and DHNU continues to decline despite increasing office presentation. Improved medical management with DMARDs, claims of better fixation systems and surgical techniques, and familiarity with alternative treatment options are likely to be responsible. Jonathan C. Levy is a paid consultant for DJO Orthopaedics and receives royalties from DJO Orthopaedics and Innomed. Timothy Niedzielak is a paid consultant for Providence Medical Technology. The other authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.