The study relates to the liquid phase mixing in dual-impeller agitated contactors of internal diameter 0.32m in presence of floating solid particles. High-density polyethylene particles and tap water were used as the solid and liquid phase in all experiments. Mechanically agitated tank was provided with two down-pumping pitched blade turbines (PTD). The mixing time has been measured by conductivity measurements using a pulse technique, whereas the minimum impeller speed for the complete drawdown of floating solid particles, N
                     JS, was determined using Joosten visual method. The effects of a number of variables such as floating solids concentrations, the impeller diameter, the off-bottom impeller clearance as well as the spacing between impellers on the critical impeller speed, mixing time and power consumption values were studied in detail. Previous investigations on this subject have been limited to single-impeller configuration only. The dual-impeller reactor behaviour has been found to be very complex and their design must be considered with a great care. Obtained results show that the presence of floating solids in the liquid significantly affects the mixing time of the liquid phase. The analysed parameters are a strong function of the flow patterns structure created by dual-impeller configuration applied. Using experimental data dimensionless correlation is proposed to predict mixing time beyond complete suspension regime.Mechanically agitated solid–liquid contactors are frequently encountered in industrial production processes. In many cases solids are incorporated into the continuous liquid phase and their successful suspension may have a significant influence on the quality and/or quantity of the final product. Generally, the solid particles require to be suspended completely in order to avoid the accumulation of solids at any position of the apparatus and to attain the maximum interfacial area between the solids and liquid phase, that is to intensify the mass and heat transfer in the system The time required to achieve a certain degree of uniformity after a material is added to a tank, that is the mixing time is one of the most important parameter for reactor design. It can be compared with mass transfer rate or reaction time in order to evaluate the controlling mechanism of the process In general, up to now the suspension of floating particles in the multiple impellers vessel has not been systematically studied. All works have been almost focused on the use of a single impeller to produce suspension Experiments were performed in cylindrical flat bottom vessel with internal diameter of 0.32 The suspensions of different concentrations of polyethylene particles (PEHD; The critical impeller speed for the complete suspension of floating solid particles, Mixing time values, The power consumption was determined using torque meters produced by S. Himmelstein and Company. In fact, the power input of the impeller was calculated from the torque and the impeller speed. In this work the power consumption is expressed in terms of power consumption per unit mass. Because of the difficulty in establishing the real density of the agitated suspension, the liquid density, Streak photography based on the earlier work of Ibrahim and Nienow was used to visualization of the flow patterns in the mixing tank In the first set of experiments the mixing time has been measured as a function of mean floating solids concentration. The solids concentration in the mixing tank was increased at regular intervals from 0 to 20 For comparison and analysis purpose, the The second peak on the Very good agreement was observed between values of For dual PTD impellers configuration the dependences of the critical Froude number obtained by two different methods on solid concentration are given from this figure as: The similarity between values of exponents in Eqs. It should be mentioned here that Joosten et al. The comparison of impeller diameter with regard to their efficiency in floating solid suspension is shown in In general, the particle suspension in the liquid depends on interaction between the particles and the fluid. It is well known that the turbulent fluid flow in mixing tank contains large primary eddies which give rise to smaller isotropic eddies by energy transfer. The primary eddies have large velocity fluctuations of low frequency and are of a size comparable with the physical dimension of the impeller diameter. They are anisotropic and contain the bulk of the kinetic energy. The main convective flow and large anisotropic eddies are most important, i.e. responsible for the complete drawdown of floating solids in full baffled mixing tank. However, the turbulence intensity decays along the length of the flow path. With an increase in the impeller diameter, less decay in the turbulence will occur because of a reduction in path length. Moreover, the liquid velocity also increases with an increase in the impeller diameter. The overall effect of increased liquid velocity and the lesser decay in turbulence makes the dependence on impeller diameter very pronounced. These are the main reasons because with an increase of impeller diameter the values of From The dimensionless mixing time decreases with a decrease in the off-bottom clearance of the lower impeller in whole range of impeller speeds examined. The lowest values of The dependence of From results obtained it is so evident that the separation between impellers strongly affects the values of Vessel flow structure, generated by dual-impeller configurations, is determined predominantly by the flow characteristics of the impeller combinations employed, and by the degree of interaction that occurs between the impeller streams. The distance between the impellers determines the degree of interaction between the impeller discharge streams. When a small separation is used ( If the spacing between impellers is such that the active volumes of two impellers are interacting with each other ( However, when a large separation is employed ( Then, the impeller spacing must be adjusted in such a way that there is some “positive” interaction between the impellers and one gets the beneficial results from the system to suspending the floating particles. In general, the time required to achieve a certain degree of uniformity of such a system is one of the most frequently specified process requirements In this paper the time required to achieve 98% homogeneity was observed, and in that case mixing time can be expressed as: The experimental data can then be used to determine Analysing the results obtained in this paper with two PTD impellers used for floating solids suspension the dependence of mentioned parameters is as Eq. Finally, in The objectives of this work were to study the impact of floating particles on the homogenisation of the liquid phase in agitated tank provided with two down-pumping pitched blade turbines (PTD). On the basis of the experimental results and observations, the main phenomenological conclusions may be draught: The presence of floating solids in the liquid significantly affects the mixing time. The liquid phase mixing time substantially increases with floating solid loading. This indicates that the liquid circulation velocity decreases with an increase in solid loading. This result is supported by the observation that the critical impeller speed for floating solid suspension increases with solid loading. Determinations of the mixing time versus impeller speed may be suggested as method for the measurement of critical impeller speed ( The impeller's diameter in the dual-impeller reactor as well as off-bottom clearance of the lower impeller were found to have pronounced effect on dimensionless values of mixing time as well as on the minimum impeller speed for the complete drawdown of floating solid particles. Obtained results show that the mentioned parameter is the function of the distance between impellers as well. This impact is very significant within the range of Analysing the results of mixing time obtained at floating solids suspension in baffled mixing tank with two PTD impellers, the Eq.  constant in mixing rate equation (Eq. exponent in Eq. clearance from tank bottom of lower impeller (m) solids concentration (kg particle diameter (m) agitator diameter (m) height of liquid from bottom of vessel (m) mixing-rate constant (s number of impellers impeller speed (s Froude number at just suspended conditions impeller speed at just suspended conditions (s dimensionless mixing time Reynolds number (= impeller power draw (W) power consumption per unit mass at just suspended conditions (W horizontal location of injection point (m) radius of tank (m) spacing between impellers (m) mixing time (s) vessel diameter (m) volume of tracer (m volume of the liquid in the mixing tank (m vertical location of conductivity probe (m) viscosity of liquid (kg density of liquid (kg density of particle (kg