This study estimates the geomechanical properties of coal of varied ply lithotypes and mudstone by using the experimental Short Impact Load Cell (SILC) test. SILC is an alternative laboratory test for measuring tensile strength, stiffness, and specific fracture energy (fracture toughness). Available coal data is rare for low rank sub-bituminous coals that are the target for coal seam gas stimulation and extraction in the Surat Basin, Australia. Tested specimens include mini-core and irregular particles. The results demonstrate geomechanical properties can be derived and used in the reservoir numerical modelling investigation.In coal seam gas (CSG) reservoirs, gas is mainly contained under pressure in isolated submicroscopic pores and released by reservoir pressure depletion (i.e. unloading or dewatering of the coal seam). Following desorption and diffusion, this causes an oriented system of natural fractures to form an interconnected system of flow paths allowing for gas extraction. It is anticipated that coal undergoes tensile failure to promote the flow of desorbed gas through an interconnected system of natural fractures, whereas the stability of a borehole is controlled by shear and compression. It is important to know coal strength (i.e. both tensile and compression) and fracture toughness to predict coal reservoir behaviour, especially if fractures are stimulated. Incorrect estimation of coal strength could lead to formation damage from drilling fluid invasion or complete wellbore collapse ( The coal strength is conditioned by a combination of lithotypes and microlithotypes with variable natural fractures, cleat spacing, and bedding thickness as per rank class. Strength and fracture toughness increase with decreasing coal rank (thermal maturity) and banding. This can be observed on the boundary from low to medium volatile bituminous up until the high volatile bituminous ( Because coal banding is complex, the number of specimens required at laboratory tests to estimate the range in values across the lithotypes may be prohibitive. Also, it could be argued that coal core specimens are not intact (see Looking for alternative laboratory experiments, the Short Impact Load Cell (SILC) test provides a measurement of force and energy ( Although distinct applied strain rates (static, quasi-static, and dynamic) can be associated with different types of loading and equipment. The effect of applied strain rate appears to be insignificant for brittle material ( While the SILC test is meant to be used for brittle material, the Basin of interest comprises extremely heterogeneous rock contrast between coal and mudstone (brittleness/ductility) varying from meter to centimetre scale. Mudstones and shales are both made of clay and silt, and the strength properties of the rocks are dependent on the water content, perhaps making it more or less ductile. Therefore, whether the SILC test could be used to characterise geomechanical properties of mudstone is questionable, but an observation of any contrast coal/mudstone could be useful. In this study, the sampling approach tested impact breakage signatures for different lithotypes and mudstone partings in sub-bituminous coal from the Surat-Clarence-Moreton Basin in Australia. As target seams for CSG become deeper, hydraulic stimulation may be required. The primary aim of the laboratory testing is to demonstrate the feasibility and applicability of the SILC test ( The impact load cell device is based on a hybrid concept between The coal samples were collected from freshly-exposed blocks in a mine from the Surat-Clarence-Moreton Basin in Australia. Reported rank of the coal at the sample location is sub-bituminous (maximum vitrinite reflectance, In this study, the specimen preparation for SILC takes into consideration mini-core specimens and irregular single-particles described as follows: For a regular cylinder-shape or mini-core specimens ( For irregular single-particles, specimens with a shape that best approximates a spherical geometry were selected. For that, small to large blocks from the same rock type (or ply if coal) were reduced into smaller irregular-particles using the DWT (JK Drop Weight Test) and then sieved using round-mesh precision. Classified irregular-particles were packed by size, type/ply, and initial size and drop energy used into the DWT.  Same procedure was applied to coal and mudstone. It is relevant to highlight that there is no current technique to determine the comminution characteristics of mudstone (e.g. crushing, grinding). This is essentially due to the ductile characteristic of this material, as observed during the attempt to fragment mudstone using the DWT. Commonly, mudstone bends or flows in response to energy applied. Therefore, only fragments sustained some ‘round’ shape (i.e. non-squashed/non-flat) after fragmentation and sieving were selected as irregular-particles for the SILC test ( A total of 142 drilled mini-core specimens of coal belonging to PC6-D, PC8-B, and PC8-WB were tested on SILC. Additionally, 1250 irregular-particles of coal belonging to PC6-D and PD8-BLA, and 580 irregular-particles of mudstone were also tested on SILC. A summary of the size, shape, breakage direction and lithology tested during this study is shown in Ideally, SILC testing should be performed on brittle materials which deform elastically until failure. During breakage of brittle material, such as coal, it is anticipated that the crack initiation and propagation occurs as follows: a) the crack generated by the striker starts at the top loading point (upon contact between striker and specimen); b) then the crack rapidly grows and tends to propagate along a vertical plane towards the centre of the specimen; c) until it encounters natural fractures (cleats, discontinuities) or a contrast between weaker and stronger materials including mineral grains, perhaps change on microlithotype/band which might change the fracture path; and d) then the specimen splits into various fragments. There is a mechanism of shear along the plane formed by jointing the loadings (striker and rod) followed by tensile failure. The tortuosity observed on the fracture surface of fragments from mini-core specimens ( The irregular-particles of sub-bituminous coal tested showed a more abrupt and powerful energy release, including few re-breakages, and splitting into more fragments compared with mini-core specimens. Due to the fine-grained characteristics of the mudstone tested (comprising of clays or muds), it is assumed that the crack initiation and propagation on irregular single-particles also started at the top loading point, and the crack propagated within the particle towards the anvil/rod vertically growing in tension. The particles of mudstone allowed for some ductile deformation to occur during the breakage process. For ductile material, energy associated with plastic deformation needs to be taken into consideration. The ductile behaviour of mudstone did not seem to invalidate the results for the particles tested on SILC. Perhaps, the fine layers of clay/mud present in the particle surface are permanently deformed to assume a flattened format, where fragments tend either to break gently into pieces or to stick together rather than ejected. It could be assumed that the kinetic energy from the striker (applied stress) is completely absorbed by single-particles of mudstone. Few secondary fractures occur associated with cracks or fissures on mudstone. Despite having some ductile behaviour, the SILC test gave consistent results for the mudstone. Fundamentally, SILC measures fracture force and gives information about actual fracture energy consumed by each specimen during breakage and estimates the deformation of fracture. The fracture force (force required to generate the first fracture) of each specimen being impacted is estimated from the force-time profile of the fracture event by a direct reading of the peak force on the graphic. Comparison of the force-time profile of an impact directly on the anvil is predicted under Hertzian impact ( Data processing consists of the analyses of the signal results from SILC test, in addition to recorded information from impact energy (mass, diameter, and drop height of the striker) together with the specimen geometrical mean size (i.e. mass, diameter, and length of the specimen). SILC results are strongly dependent on shape, size, ratio, fabric orientation relative to loading direction, and impact energy. Once each specimen of a selected lot is evaluated separately, then it is included in the statistical analysis. Subsequently, the data can be effectively described using the log-normal distribution ( The distribution characteristics of an estimated geomechanical properties (for instance, fracture energy) ( Lastly, two lots might be compared and interpreted on a statistical basis to decide whether the independent distributions are equal or not following The mini-core specimens tested on SILC are 11.7 mm in diameter and their length-to-diameter ratio varies between 0.8 and 1.2. During the analysis it was observed that the difference of fitted median is considered significant when the specimens with 0.8:1 and 1.2:1 ratios were compared. However, if the aspect ratio is narrowed down, and the cumulative distributions for the aspect ratios of 0.9:1 and 1.1:1 are compared instead, then the hypothesis that the distributions are identical cannot be rejected. Also, it does not reject the hypothesis that the means are equal. Those interpretations were supported by statistics ( Next in this paper, each series of test results on mini-core specimens was organised and analysed based on the influence of the drop mass/height combinations; the lithotype; and the orientation of banding relative to impact loading energy affecting the mechanical properties of interest. In the graphics, the legend displays the lithotype, followed by the specimen orientation, and aspect ratio (e.g. PC8-B perp 0.9:1). Symbols denote individual mini-core specimens testedi.e. data points and solid lines denote the fitted experimental log-normal distribution. The selected impact conditions should be enough to promote the breakage of the material without over breaking or failing to fracture it. The influence of drop mass and height combinations was observed for 49 mini-core specimens of PC8-B (banded), drilled perpendicular to the band and tested on SILC. The mini-core specimens were sourced from two single blocks, which provided multiple specimens of very similar characteristics. Results are plotted to compare 22 data points from block 1, where specimens were fractured by a 535.25 g striker released from 45.5 mm height, against 27 data points from block 2 using the same striker but released from 63.1 mm height.  However, other parameters such as the fracture force, the fracture energy, the tensile strength and the corrected specific fracture energy were not affected by an increase or decrease in the drop height of the striker when performing the SILC test. The influence of lithotype was observed on SILC testing of mini-core specimens of PC8-B (banded) and PC6-D (dull), all of which were drilled perpendicular to banding. In order to compare groups of similar number of data points, PC8-B with aspect ratio of 0.9:1 (24 data points) and PC6-D (dull) with aspect ratio of 0.9:1 to 1.1:1 (14 data points) were used.  The experimental cumulative distribution of tensile strength is also observed. It shows that the fitted median values were 4.5 MPa for PC8-B and 5.1 MPa for PC6-D. The hypothesis that the means are statistically equal and the null hypothesis of two distributions being identical was accepted. Similar hypothesis was supported for the experimental cumulative distribution of apparent stiffness (same impact conditions) which showed that the fitted median values were 2.7 GPa for PC8-B and 3.0 GPa for PC6-D. Next, the influence of lithotype was then observed during SILC testing of mini-core specimens for PC8-B (banded) and PC8-WB (banded with white marks/clay lenses), all of which were drilled parallel to banding. The lithotype effect was demonstrated with 13 data points of PC8-B and 24 data points of PC8-WB, both with an aspect ratio from 0.9:1 to 1.1:1. While one or two tests rejected the null hypothesis showing the distributions are marginally equal, it is quite clear from the overall results that the means are different. Then, using the experimental cumulative distribution of tensile strength, it is observed that the fitted median values were 2.9 MPa for PC8-B and 4.7 MPa for PC8-WB. Also different is the experimental cumulative distribution of stiffness (same impact conditions), where the fitted median values were 2.3 GPa for PC8-B and 3.2 GPa for PC8-WB. The fabric orientation relative to impact loading during SILC testing was investigated for mini-core specimens of PC8-B (banded) drilled perpendicular and parallel to bands. The influence of fabric orientation was demonstrated for 24 data points with aspect ratio of 0.9:1 drilled perpendicular to band and 13 data points with an aspect ratio from 0.9:1 to 1.1:1 drilled parallel to the band.  The cumulative distributions of tensile strength for lithotype PC8-B shows that mini-core specimens drilled parallel to banding are weaker (or fail more easily) than those mini-core specimens drilled perpendicular to banding. The fitted median values for tensile strength are 2.9 MPa for specimens drilled parallel to bands and 4.5 MPa for those drilled perpendicular to bands (i.e. a 35% difference based on the coal banding orientation) when comparing mini-core specimens of 11.7 mm in diameter. The low values of the tensile strength for specimens drilled parallel to bands may be due to the low cohesion existing between the coal bands and/or and the generation of micro-cracks aligned parallel to the preferential failure plan when the tensile failure mode dominates. And the fitted median values for stiffness are 2.3 GPa for specimens drilled parallel to bands and 2.7 GPa for those drilled perpendicular to bands (same impact conditions). The irregular-particles tested on the SILC were made up of the specimens retained at mesh sized 3.35, 4.75, 6.7 and 9.5 mm ( Initially each series of test results on irregular-particles was organised following the lithotype, mesh size, and energy distribution/size combination from the DWT (e.g. PD8-BLA 9.5 mm_63 × 53_E = 0.25). However, it was not possible to distinguish between the presence of flaws in the irregular-particles or cumulative damage arising from the DWT. This was concluded after the results for each series were processed, and no relationship about the potential of existing flaws were explicitly observed. Therefore, it is assumed irrelevant to plot the original names into the graphic analysis below, although each data point can be back correlated/verified in the Appendix. In the graphics, the symbols correspond to the fitted median value from the log-normal distribution for each series tested. The results were represented by lithology/lithotype name (e.g. PD8-BLA) for analysis and display as per the chart legend. The graphics show the irregular-particles analysed to test the influence of size and lithology/lithotype. The influence of size and lithology/lithotype was observed on SILC test of irregular-particles for PC6-D (dull coal), PD8-BLA (low ash banded coal) and mudstone (mud). However, PC6D is not available at the 6.7 mm mesh size; and smaller irregular-particles (mesh sized 3.35 mm) might present issues associated with the particle size/grain diameter. Each lithology/lithotype belonged to a distinct pit location ( The contrast between distinct rock and size is described for the tensile strength of irregular-particles. Coal's innate tendency to reduce in strength (compressive or tensile) with increased specimen size is well known ( The fracture energy, which is also size dependent ( The influence on the shape-dependent properties was observed for irregular-particles and mini-core specimens. This time, in order to reduce the variability of distinct series of irregular-particles tested, each specimen result was grouped by size (i.e. disregarding the initial series) but considering the lithotype. The fitted median value from log-normal distribution was then obtained for each size tested, which became hundreds of particles instead of groups of 35 particles on average. For example, irregular-particles with 3.35 mm mesh size where grouped, then PC6-D includes 146 data points and PD8-BLA comprise 118 data points. After getting the fitted median values per size, the size sequence was correlated using the method of least squares regression and a trend line was assigned for irregular-particles belonging to a ply.  In brittle material such as coal, the fracture energy is expected to be low. As demonstrated before (  Based on SILC testing of mineral ores, the geomechanical properties of rocks can be influenced by the specimen shape, size, impact orientation, type of material, and impact conditions, which contributes to highlight similarities with standard geotechnical tests (e.g. Brazilian tensile strength). This work focused on testing and analysing data for irregular-particles of mudstone and both mini-core specimens and irregular-particles of sub-bituminous coal. The inherent material contrast between brittle coal containing natural defects including differences for plies and ductile mudstone rock was demonstrated when specimens collected from the Surat-Clarence-Moreton Basin in Australia, were tested using the SILC. The key findings are listed: Measurements of apparent stiffness, deformation, and contact areas post-impact are conditioned by the SILC test impact conditions while fracture force, tensile strength, and specific fracture energy appeared not to be influenced. Caution is required when interpreting results from different impact combinations and/or incorporating data from other studies. Moreover, further investigation about the apparent stiffness calculation for mini-core specimens is required. The coal anisotropy was observed for mini-core specimens (11.7 mm in diameter), where specimens drilled parallel to bands require considerably lower fracture energy (at least 44% less) than those drilled perpendicular to the band for the same coal lithotype. For geomechanical purposes, the controlled specimen shape (cylinder/mini-core specimens) show an advantage associated to more uniform force-time profiles, and less variability of the data, in contrast to irregular-particles. The results of tensile strength and specific fracture energy for mini-core specimens followed the trends of irregular-particles. Then, it is expected that for heterogeneous brittle material, the specific fracture energy is independent of the shape tested (which might not be the case for homogeneous specimens). A strong correlation between fracture toughness and specific fracture energy is reported in the literature, which is of interest for the CSG. The scale effect on strength and specific fracture energy was explored by observing specimens of distinct sizes (from 3.35 to 11.7 mm in diameter both irregular-particles and mini-core specimens) and both producing consistent results when testing coal on the SILC. Therefore, difficult associated to test standard core specimens, particularly for measurement of tensile strength can be overcame. The authors wish to declare that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication. The authors wish to thank The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at