The accurate prediction of automated sorter performance is important for the future application of this technology in the minerals industry. While it is known that sorter capacity increases with particle size, a method for predicting separation efficiency is not currently available in the literature. The separation efficiency depends on material properties, feed presentation and machine properties. In this study, we have undertaken colour separation of two materials chosen for their ease of identification using a TiTech Combisense® (BSM 063) automated sorter. Sorter performance was compared to particle proximity data obtained from the on-board counter of the automated sorter. Given the choice of feed materials, any inefficiency in sorter operation is related to the efficiency of selective air ejection which, in turn, is affected by feed presentation, feed size, compressed air valves characteristics as well as the sensitivity of the sorter.
                  Deflection efficiency can be influenced by particle trajectories, precision of the air ejection system and the sensitivity of the sensors. The precision of ejection was also found to be an important factor with the unintentional removal of “accept” particles caused by their close proximity to particles being rejected. It was found that this loss of efficiency could be explained by “touching” particles forming aggregated groups at the identification point. An increase in throughput and a decrease in particle thickness were shown to increase the probability of finding these aggregates. As the fraction of particles to be deflected increases there is an increased probability of finding both “accept” and “deflect” particles within an aggregate and therefore an increased probability of co-deflection. A simple model for predicting the efficiency of our automated sorting system (assuming perfect identification) is presented which has only two variables, % belt loading and the fraction to be deflected.Automated sorters have been used in the minerals industry since 1898 when the carboscope, based on X-ray attenuation, was developed for coal separation ( The ability of the sorter to discriminate particles using a range of sensors is vital but the selective removal of those discriminated particles is also very important. Feed preparation and presentation are recognised ( The implication of the relationship shown in  It can be shown that:  It can be shown that: It follows from Eq. The absence of examples of this general formula being used could be due to the fact that some probabilities may be difficult to estimate. For example, deflection probabilities are dependent on particle shape, sorter throughput and the fraction to be deflected (  Crushed and screened grey granite produced by Carnsew quarry (UK) was used as stock material for experiments. The density of the granite, measured with a Micrometrics helium pyncnometer, was 2650 Approximately 50% of each test sample was painted in order to make identification a simple task ( The TiTech Combisense® (BSM 063) sorter is fed by a conveyor that is 55 In the experiments performed with samples containing blue and natural granite particles, any particle with more than 20% of the related pixels in the blue category was defined as a blue particle. In experiments with a mixed feed, the two products were first weighed out to give a specific percentage of blue granite while maintaining a uniform sample weight of 10 After deflection, particles were collected in two storage bins (accept and deflect) separated by means of an adjustable splitter. These products were then hand sorted into the two colour categories and the products weighed in order to produce a mass balance. This data was then used to calculate the % grade and % recovery of the two products. Four replicate tests were performed for each set of operating conditions. In addition the separation efficiency (%) was also calculated (see Eq. Assuming that Experiments were conducted to investigate the effect of particle size, particle shape, throughput and weight% deflect on sorter efficiency. In addition to the physical separation tests, data on the size and position of approximately 5000 particles was collected from each of the operating conditions. These were used to determine the particle distribution on the belt and to provide an estimate of the number of “touching” particles (or aggregates). The distribution of particles at the point of identification was determined by examination of data from the −20 The results show that the distribution of particles across the width of the belt is not particularly good as a consequence of the feeding system. In most cases approximately 50% of the feed particles are leaving in the middle 25% of the belt width. There is some indication that the distribution is slightly better at the lower throughput (for all sizes and shapes) and for the cubical particles. This is consistent with the expected ease of movement across the belt. Cubic particles would be expected to roll more easily than the flaky particles and at higher throughputs lateral movement would be more restricted due to the greater chance of particle interactions. Improvements in sorter efficiency would be expected if the distribution of particles were improved. The distribution of the surface pixels for particles of each size and shape classification was determined (1 It can be seen that the data, for individual size fractions and shapes, approximates to a normal distribution from which a sample mean and standard deviation were calculated as shown in When processing these samples at higher throughputs the sorter identifies larger “particles” which are aggregates of 2 or more individual particles. The mean and standard deviation of single particles was used to estimate the number of these composite particles for each of the test conditions. Surface pixel cut points for the division between particle classes (single and double, double and treble for example) were first calculated for a specific probability (such as 1% probability of particles greater than a specific size) assuming a normal distribution. The numbers of aggregates was then calculated and the mean surface produced by this classification was compared against the measured value. The cut points were adjusted (by varying probability settings) using an iterative process until the predicted and actual mean surface pixels matched. The results obtained from this procedure are shown in It was postulated that the probability of multiple particles would increase as the belt loading increased. In order to estimate the % belt loading, the particles were assumed to be rectangular in shape of dimensions Reducing particle thickness on the belt, by for example by reducing particle size or having flaky particles, increases the calculated belt area occupied for a given throughput. The link between the percentage of particles in multiple aggregates (100- % single particles) and calculated belt loading for all operating conditions (size, throughput and particle shape) is shown in Experiments were carried out with the −20 It can be seen from From the same set of experiments the recovery of grey granite to the deflected product bin ( One reason for accept particles being incorrectly deflected could be that they are contained within an aggregate containing at least one blue particle. Given the low blue threshold used in this work (to maximise recovery) it can be assumed that if one blue particle were present in an aggregate the majority of the aggregate’s particles would be deflected. The probability of an aggregate containing a blue particle increases as the weight% of blue particles increases. The probability of aggregates containing all accept, all blue or mixed components is given by The probabilities depend on the fraction of feed that is accept and blue particles to be deflected ( Using the distribution of aggregates shown in The experimental results with the automated sorter confirmed that throughput (and therefore belt loading), weight% deflection, particle size and shape were all important parameters in determining performance. These factors have been shown to be linked to the probability of multiple particles (or aggregates) being present. Using elongated/flaky particles it was demonstrated that the probability of deflecting blue particles, Given the perfect identification feature of the feed particles and sorting system set-up, This procedure may be used on other industrial systems to identify the relative importance of both correct identification and precision of deflection on automated sorter efficiency.  The results confirm that sorter separation efficiency decreases with an increase in throughput, an increase in the weight% to be deflected and a decrease in particle size. It was found that under the conditions tested the efficiency of removal of particles requiring deflection was relatively constant (99.6%) for the −20 The efficiency of blue (deflect) particle removal was lower (approximately 96%) for the cubical particles in the coarser fraction. The reason for this result is believed to be insufficient air pressure/volume to consistently deflect particles from the heaviest size and shape class. The main cause of lower separation efficiency was unwanted deflection of accept particles. This results from accept particles being too close (either touching or within a minimum distance relating to speed of compressed air valve operation) to a particle that is deflected. Increased belt coverage (related to throughput, particle size and shape) and an increase in the weight% to be deflected both result in increased deflection of accept particles. Analysis of operating data can highlight areas where improvements can be made such as particle distribution at the identification point.