Multi-objective optimization (MOO) is increasingly being used in a wide variety of applications to identify alternatives that balance several criteria. The energy sector is not an exception to this trend. Unfortunately, the complexity of MOO grows with the number of environmental objectives. This limitation is critical in energy systems, in which several environmental criteria are typically used to assess the merits of a given technology. In this paper, we investigate the use of a rigorous dimensionality reduction method for reducing the complexity of MOO as applied to an energy system (i.e., a solar Rankine cycle coupled with reverse osmosis and thermal storage). Instead of using an aggregated environmental metric, a common approach for reducing the number of environmental objectives in MOO, we propose to optimize the system in a reduced search space of objectives that fully describe its performance and which results from eliminating redundant criteria from the analysis. Numerical results show that it is possible to reduce the problem complexity by omitting redundant environmental indicators from the optimization.Multi-criteria optimization arose from the economic equilibrium and welfare theories, game theory, and pure mathematics In 2011, 119 countries committed for renewables' support, the majority of which are developing. According to EU regulations, 22% of total electricity production should be provided by renewable sources. As a result, in the last years renewable energies significantly advanced, offering a row of environmental benefits to the society As a benchmark problem to illustrate the advantages of using dimensionality reduction in energy problems, we consider the design of a reverse osmosis desalination plant coupled with a solar Rankine cycle and thermal energy storage. Most of the studies performed on the optimization of similar systems were limited in scope as the economic performance was often chosen as the single criterion to be optimized. Vince et al. addressed the simultaneous optimization of the economic performance and environmental performance of a desalination plant operated with fossil fuel The scheme of the process considered in our study is shown in To model the design task, we used as a baseline the MINLP formulation introduced in Ecosystem quality: toxic emissions, acidification and eutrophication, land occupation and land conversion Human health: carcinogenic effects, respiratory effects, climatic change, ozone layer depletion, and ionizing radiation. Resources: extraction of minerals, extraction of fossil fuels. The design task is finally expressed as a MOO problem with 12 objectives that is hard to solve due to the large number of objectives included. Following the work by Kostin et al. Several MOO solution methods can be used to produce the Pareto solutions of the model. These methods, however, are very sensitive to the number of criteria considered in the analysis. We propose here to use the The objective reduction method is used to substitute the original set of objectives by a qualitatively similar contracted set of criteria. This qualitative similarity can be measured by an error of ruling out the remaining objectives (referred to as A rigorous MILP formulation was presented in The purpose of this study is to get explicit insight into the environmental performance of a desalination plant coupled with a renewable energy system. The matter of interest is to analyse the results obtained by using different environmental metrics and to establish whether the aggregated metric provides the same information as the individual impact categories. With this idea in mind, we optimized 12 objectives: unitary production cost of potable water, and 11 environmental impact categories. A set of Pareto points was generated by solving 11 bi-criteria problems (unitary production cost vs. each single environmental impact category). The model was implemented in GAMS and solved using CONOPT on an Athlon(tm) II X2 B24, processor 2.99 GHz, 3.49 GB of RAM (see In  The effect of using a certain LCA metric can be further analysed by examining the main sources of impact.  In the min STC solution ( We next applied our MILP for dimensionality reduction to get further insight into the problem. Details on this method can be found elsewhere Two main conclusions can be drawn from these analysis: 1) those objectives whose combinations within a single group lead to large approximation errors form a cluster that contains redundant information; 2) objectives belonging to different clusters are conflicting with respect to each other (i.e., interconflicting) 3) to preserve the original structure (to have the minimum delta error) of the problem in the reduced set of objectives we need to keep at least one objective from every cluster. The application of the MILP for dimensionality reduction produces results that are consistent with the graphical analysis discussed before. The advantage of this MILP is that it identifies redundant objectives in a systematic manner, thereby enabling us to focus on a reduced number of environmental indicators. In this work we have studied the application of a rigorous dimensionality reduction method in the multi-objective optimization of a complex facility in which the use of a renewable energy source plays a major role. We have shown that the use of bi-criteria optimization models where the environmental performance is quantified using a single aggregated LCA metric is not a good practice, as this does not provide complete information on the behaviour of the individual categories (which can be sometimes conflicting). Our systematic MILP allow us to identify redundant environmental indicators that can be omitted while still preserving the problem structure to the extent possible. This simplifies the optimization task and the analysis of the solutions, and makes it possible to focus our attention on a reduced number of meaningful damages that quantify the environmental performance with accuracy. The authors would like to acknowledge financial support from the  total environmental impact of the process over its whole life cycle environmental impact related to acidification and eutrophication environmental impact related to carcinogenic effects environmental impact related to climatic change environmental impact related to extraction of fossil fuels environmental impact related to land occupation and land conversion environmental impact related to extraction of minerals environmental impact related to ionizing radiation environmental impact related to respiratory effects environmental impact related to ozone layer depletion environmental impact related to toxic emissions life cycle analysis life cycle inventory mixed integer linear problem mixed integer non-linear problem pump of Rankine cycle reverse osmosis Rankine cycle specific total cost specific environmental impact thermal energy storage search space feasible objective space  set of objective functions indexed by f reduced set of objective functions  number of inequality constraints number of equality constraints number of objective functions which were optimized solution The economic performance of the process is quantified through the unitary production cost per m The total cost of the SRC accounts for the capital investment cost of every unit of the system (ICC( The coefficient 1.4 accounts for the indirect capital cost as well as the cost of the site. CC The environmental metric to be optimized is the specific environmental impact (SEI), which quantifies the amount of GHG emissions per unit of water produced. The life cycle inventory of emissions associated with the generation of natural gas and electricity are determined as follows: Here, Pumps and turbine: Collector Membranes : Modules : Boiler, condenser and gas fired heater: Storage