The crystalline Fe4(VO4)4·5H2O was synthesized at normal pressure from mixing vanadium leaching solution with Fe2(SO4)3. We investigated the effects of reaction temperature, pH and alkali type and characterized the precipitate using X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscope (SEM). The results showed that the V/Fe molar ratio and vanadium precipitation ratio decreased with the elevation of pH and reaction temperature, but the addition of Ca(OH)2 increased the V/Fe molar ratio and the vanadium precipitation ratio, then a better crystallized precipitate was synthesized. The best conditions obtained are reaction temperature at 90°C, pH 2–3, reaction time of 72h and the addition of Ca(OH)2. Under these conditions, the V/Fe molar ratio of precipitate was close to 1.0 and over 98.5% of the vanadium was precipitated. XRD and SEM analysis showed that the precipitate were conformed as crystalline Fe4(VO4)4·5H2O with grain size of 5–15μm.Fervanite is a common product in many hydrometallurgical operations, and has been investigated for many years for its wide range potential applications. For example, fervanite is widely used as gas sensor material ( Most of the vanadium products manufactories in the world extract vanadium oxide from the steel slag using the classic technology. The brief flow of the classic technology includes sodium carbonate roasting, water leaching, precipitating with ammoniate and reduction process. The vanadium oxide was produced by calcining process of ammonium vanadate and the ammonium vanadate were extracted by an ammonium salt precipitation from the vanadium leaching solution, which mainly consist of sodium vanadate. About 85% of the vanadium is used for steel production and ferrovanadium alloy is the most important vanadium product due to its physical properties such as tensile strength, hardness and fatigue resistance ( The objective of our study was to search for the best conditions of the formation of crystalline iron(III) orthvanadate(V) with composition Fe/V The industrial vanadium leaching solution was produced by the Vanadium Products Manufactory of Panzhihua Steel and Vanadium Company Limited. The solution was cleaned by addition of Al According to the previous conclusion that prolonged reaction time can affect the product and probably leads to a crystalline phase, the reaction time was prolonged to 72 The solid phase was characterized by X-ray Diffraction (XRD) and Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). The powder XRD patterns were collected on a Rigaku D/Max 2500 PC X-ray diffractometer with graphite monochromated CuK The rate of vanadium precipitation is one of the most important parameter in the vanadic products manufacturing. The effect of reaction temperature on precipitation rate was investigated at temperature from 30 To check the compound stoichiometry, the V/Fe molar ratio was measured. The effect of the reaction temperature on the Fe/V molar ratio of the compound was shown in The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the sample obtained at 30 These are twelve vanadium(V) species coexisting in solution. These can be categorized as cationic species（VO The effect of pH from 1.5 to 5.0 on precipitation at 90  When the pH of the solution was in the range of 4.0–5.0, the V/Fe molar ratio decrease to near 0.75, while the precipitation rate of vanadium decreased to below 75%. The color of the precipitate changes from yellow-brown to yellow with the increase of pH from 3.0 to 4.0, indicating that the iron orthvanadate is gradually transformed into hydro ferric oxide with the increase of pH and vanadate was released into the solution. Previous study shows that vanadium can be removed from solution by metal (hydr)oxide adsorbents, Peacpck and Sherman have identified the Fe Vanadium adsorption decreases with increasing pH, and the maximum adsorption capacities was achieved at pH 3.0–4.0 ( It can be seen from To investigate the mechanism of the precipitation reaction, the XRD analysis of the precipitate was conducted under the flowing conditions: pH 2.0–3.0, and 90  Analysis results of the iron orthvanadate precipitate at 90 It reveals that there is little effect on the content of impurities with the addition of Ca(OH) In this study the SEM was conducted to investigate the mechanism of the effect of Ca In summary, spherical grain of crystalline Fe