The Chinese economy is in a critical period of continuous transformation of new and old kinetic energy and economic transformation and upgrading. Copper, the second largest strategic raw material, is still central to China’s economic development. As the major producer and consumer of electrical and electronic equipment (EEE), China’s production and consumption of refined copper is the largest in the world. Thus, it is necessary to forecast the supply and demand of China’s future copper. There is a huge gap between copper production and consumption in China, the current identified copper resources cannot meet copper consumption in the next five years, thus the import of copper will be more crucial for China’s future copper industry. Due to trade frictions, restriction on imports and other reasons, the import of copper from other countries will exist a lot of uncertainties. Hence, the domestic copper waste and scraps could be the suitable secondary resource for recycling copper in China. According to the grade and value of copper scraps, establishing quality standards and optimizing the disassembly process of the domestic Cu-bearing waste & scraps, and using the suitable method are the key to recycling the domestic copper scraps.Copper industry is a crucial cog in the global economy as the copper widely used in industry or in daily life. Copper was one of the first metals mined and used by humans, which was used more than 10,000 years ago for items such as coins and ornaments in western Asia. Since the industrial revolution, thanks to expanding sectors such as electrical and electronic equipment, infrastructures, industrial machinery and equipment, transportation, and so on, copper and copper-based alloys are used in a variety of applications that are necessary for a reasonable standard of living In China, copper is the second largest strategic raw material, second only to petroleum In recent years, the Global economic growth has been declining as 3.0 % in 2018, and is projected to be 2.9 % to 2.8 % in 2019–2020, while the GDP growth of China was 6.5 % in 2018 Many studies have demonstrated that the production and consumption of mineral resources are closely related to GDP per capita, and regression analysis is a useful statistical tool to estimate, analyze and forecast the future production and consumption of different metals The data employed from the United States Geological Survey (USGS) consist of the global copper reserves and the United States copper situation. Data on China’s different copper products, import and export of refined copper, and the Chinese major technical economic targets of copper industry were obtained from Economic development is strongly dependent on the use of natural resource Simultaneously, in order to further study the sustainability of copper resources in China, the consumption situation and consumption structure of copper resources in the United States have also been studied (Fig. S4 and Fig. S5). As the copper situation of the United States shown, the per capita consumption of refined copper was positively correlated with GDP per capita, when GDP per capita was less than 32,500 US$. Therefore, it can be inferred that the Chinese consumption of refined copper will also be positively correlated with GDP per capita by 2035(then GDP per capita in China was not over 32,500 US$). There is a big difference in the consumption structure of copper between United States (Fig. S5) and China ( The According to the United States Geological Survey The identified copper in China was 106,078 kt in 2017 During this 14-year period, Chinese copper mine reserves showed a downward trend from 30,699 kt (2006) to 26,210 kt (2016), and copper mine productions peaked at 1,850.7 kt in 2016 (  According to the equations derived from the curves of historical China’s copper mine production and consumption/capita of refined copper against GDP/capita (Fig. S3), the future copper demand and supply were estimated. When the annual GDP growth rate was set from 5.5%–6.5 %, the supply of copper mine productions and demand of refined copper in 2035 are estimated to reach 494.6–177.9 kt and 23,453.1–26,487.6 kt, respectively. In 2013, the external dependence of copper mine production was over 70 % As can be seen from the Therefore, the imported copper will have a direct impact on the future copper consumption in China. Furthermore, it is essential to recycle copper from Cu-bearing secondary sources. Better utilization of Cu-bearing secondary sources can not only alleviate the pressure of copper resources shortage, but also achieve the goals of energy conservation, emission reduction and environmental protection. With the implementation of As can be seen from the The copper grade change curve of different copper productions is shown in As is well-known, lots of energy was consumed in the process of mining (underground & open-pit) and beneficiation, the average overall energy consumptions in these two sectors were ∼3.34 and ∼3.56 kg CE/t ( After decades of development, China established a complete copper industry chain and played an important role in the global copper industry owing the huge market shares The report of Nevertheless, some of these countries, which are poor of copper resources, like Japan, Netherlands and Poland ( In 2017, the Chinese government issued a plan, named Wang et al. The green and sustainable development of the copper industry deserves to be promoted in the period of economic transformation This article discussed the China’s copper sustainability, the China’s future copper supply and demand was forecasted by the linear regression analysis. The result showed that current China’s copper identified resources cannot meet the future five years need of refined copper productivity which was shown an almost exponential increase, the import of copper will be more important for China’s copper industry. However, there are many uncertainties in the import of copper from other countries, especially the United States. While the domestic copper waste & scraps could be the suitable secondary resource for China’s copper sustainability. Producing one ton of refined copper from copper scraps can reduce nearly 70 % energy consumption, compared with extracting copper from copper ore. Recycling copper scraps can not only alleviate the shortage pressure of mineral resources, but also conserve energy and reduce emission. Therefore, optimizing the dismantling process, setting quality standards of domestic Cu-bearing scraps, and using the suitable method of recycling domestic Cu-bearing scraps based on the grade and value of copper is the focus of future research work. Simultaneously, it is necessary for the government to improve policies and regulations on copper scraps; enhance corporate responsibility and Fund support; develop external economic and trade; encourage the new materials research. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The authors would express their heartful thanks to Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following are Supplementary data to this article: