 Unreconstructable distal humeral fracture Osteoporotic bone stock  Elderly patient Relatively sedentary patient Distal humeral articular fracture in rheumatoid  Infection/gross contamination Neurologic compromise Noncompliant patient  Poor bone stock Open fracture Heavy upper-limb loader  Intraoperative fracture Superficial infection Wound dehiscence Instability (unlinked prosthesis)  Deep/hematogenous infection Aseptic loosening Periprosthetic fracture Prosthesis fracture Triceps avulsion/failure Ulnar nerve neurapraxia Reflex sympathetic dystrophy Heterotopic ossification Bushing failure Distal humeral fractures are infrequent, when compared to other fractures and comprise approximately 1% to 2% of all adult fractures and 10% of humeral fractures. Nonoperative options of soft sling or plaster cast (bag of bones) might be considered in cases in which reconstruction is not an option by virtue of patient or surgical factors. In debilitated patients, not considered to be surgical candidates, such management will compromise upper limb function and is considered unsatisfactory in approximately 40% of cases. A prerequisite for osteosynthesis is to develop a rigid fixation construct that synchronously allows stable fixation and early joint motion. However, there are three main fracture factors that adversely affect the ability to reconstruct the distal humeral fracture: Comminution: if the distal humeral articular surface is significantly comminuted ( Size of fracture fragment(s): it is straightforward to understand the issues with a large number of small bony fragments, with a significant number made up of small osteochondral fragments. Additionally a transcondylar or very low supracondylar fracture also poses the same problem of the ability to hold the fracture sufficiently rigid while allowing joint motion ( Quality of bone: good quality young bone allows better fixation than does osteopenic/osteoporotic, older bone. Given the preceding discussion, when the fracture is judged to be unpredictably unreconstructable, joint replacement is considered. There is a well-established body of literature of successful outcomes of joint replacement for acute fracture at the hip, The use of elbow replacement for acute fracture was described 20 years ago by Cobb and Morrey. Since then a growing body of literature clearly documents this as the treatment of choice of the comminuted fracture in the older patient ( Special note should be made regarding the rheumatoid patient. This diagnosis accounted for 33% of the original Cobb/Morrey paper. There are few comparative studies of similar age and pathology. Frankle et al. reported a retrospective comparison of patients older than 65 years who were treated with either osteosynthesis or acute elbow arthroplasty. The previous discussion now prepares one to consider a salient point. Performing osteosynthesis when replacement is a better option is not “free.” The importance of a correct and timely decision is highlighted by the outcomes of a successful osteosynthesis or an acute arthroplasty, compared to a failed osteosynthesis that is “salvaged” by arthroplasty. The issue has only recently been addressed. When the decision to perform an osteosynthesis is incorrect at the time of injury and the fixation fails, requiring a secondary arthroplasty, the results are poorer than if the primary intervention was an acute elbow arthroplasty. With an aging population, with more osteoporotic bone stock, the frequency of distal humeral fracture not amenable to osteosynthesis is predicted to increase. The challenges that the surgeon faces are to: Get it right at the first intervention Have adequate competence to perform either procedure Or, if this is not the case, both competencies should be readily available The relevant imaging of the fracture should be available in the theater. A tourniquet is positioned on the upper arm, and its size should allow surgical access to a minimum of 10 cm proximal to the olecranon process for distal humeral fractures ( The patient is placed supine or in the lateral decubitus position according to surgeon's preference. The arm is placed across the chest and rested on a bolster or roll of towels. The towel roll should be sterile so that it can be repositioned during different parts of the procedure ( A straight skin incision 5 cm distal and 10 cm proximal to the olecranon tip is employed. The incision should be made just medial or lateral to the tip of the olecranon in order to avoid a painful scar or problems with wound healing. Deepen the incision to define the superficial surface of the triceps central tendon ( Nowadays the triceps preserving approach should be utilized, and we prefer the paraolecranon approach for this purpose (see Several techniques may be used to preserve the triceps attachment to the olecranon. We currently favor the paraolecranon approach. The triceps is split in the midline and continues to the lateral border of the ulna ( Depending on the fracture characteristics, often no additional bony cuts are required once the fracture fragments are removed ( Since patients undergoing acute elbow arthroplasty typically have a single joint involved, it can also be assumed that their activity level is greater than those with a chronic debility. Hence a 6-inch humeral stem is the optimal length, especially in males. However, if the patient has a preexisting shoulder pathology, with the possibility of requiring a prosthesis in the future, a 4-inch humeral stem is employed. Regardless, if a shoulder implant is in place we attempt to attain a 2-inch-diameter bridge of normal bone between implant tips. This is most easily accomplished with lateral displacement of the paraolecranon approach. This allows medial access to the rotated olecranon ( A high-speed, olive-tipped burr is used to open the base of the coronoid process in line with the ulnar shaft. A channel in line with the shaft is created in the olecranon to afford direct access down the ulnar canal ( Tip: Hold the medial and lateral borders of the ulna between two fingers, as this automatically displaces and protects the ulnar nerve. When the coronoid base is sufficiently opened, ulnar shaft rasping can begin. When rasping the canal, always orient the rasp either parallel or perpendicular to the flat spot of the ulna, which makes a 90-degree angle with the flexion axis. Since there is a risk of penetrating the ulnar cortex, we grasp/palpate the ulnar shaft with the nongrasping hand to help orient the direction of rasping down the canal. Rasping is completed in a serial manner to the correct rotation and depth ( Both trial components are inserted, and then the components are reduced. Once the components are inserted to the correct depth, the elbow should be examined through a full range of motion, carefully noting any tendency for impingement, especially in flexion. At this stage, any radial head abutment can also be visualized and addressed if needed. If the fracture level is proximal to the coronoid fossa, the proper depth of insertion of the humeral component is determined by displacing the forearm distally when at 90 degrees of flexion. This tensions the flexor and extensor muscles and allows determination of the proper depth of the humeral implant. In situations in which distal humeral bone loss is greater than that that would allow standard seating of the standard flange design, an extended flange may be used to regain humeral length. However, triceps power is well maintained with humeral loss of up to 2 cm. Once the trial component and depth of insertion have been determined, they are removed and the bony canals are pulse lavaged, a cement restrictor is inserted into the humeral canal to the correct level, and the canal kept dry until cementation commences. A single mix of polymethylmethacrylate cement—with 1 g gentamicin/40 mL of monomer—is vacuum mixed. Good cementing technique is of great importance. Both the flexor and extensor masses are repaired to the margin of the triceps. An anterior pocket is created for the ulnar nerve to rest quietly away from the implant. The closure is completed with a running suture in the split of the triceps mechanism to the level of the lateral epicondyle ( The patient can be discharged either on the same day as surgery, with instructions to maintain arm elevation, or more commonly, the morning after surgery. A nighttime extension volar splint is used for the first 2 to 4 weeks to encourage the maintenance of full extension. Active elbow flexion is commenced within a day or two of surgery. Routine physical therapy is not needed. Normal use of the elbow can be encouraged at 2 to 3 weeks as tolerated. One of the most difficult tasks faced by the surgeon–patient partnership is to educate and comply with instuctions. In summary since the last edition, the indications for elbow replacement for acute fracture have been validated. The value of making the optimum intervention at the initial surgery has been documented. An improved triceps-sparing technique has been described and longer surveillance has confirmed TEA is the treatment of choice in the properly selected patient.