Twelve patients with mallet fractures treated by open reduction and internal fixation with small screws were reviewed at an average of 31 months after surgery. The indication for surgery was a fracture involving more than one-third of the distal phalanx articular surface or with subluxation of the distal interphalangeal joint. Loss of reduction occurred in one patient and in another one screw loosened slightly without loss of reduction. There were no nail deformities, infections, or secondary procedures. The mean range of motion was from 6° (range, 0–30°) (extensor lag) to 70° (range, 60–90°) flexion. Ten patients had no evidence of degenerative changes, one had minor joint space narrowing and one had significant deformity. Open reduction and screw fixation with small screws can lead to satisfactory outcome in appropriate patients.Treatment of mallet fractures remains a controversial topic. Satisfactory results can be expected with splinting alone ( Numerous techniques of operative fixation have been described. There are reports of the use of K-wires ( Institutional Review Board approval was obtained for this study. A single surgeon (DF) performed open reduction and screw fixation of displaced mallet fractures in 20 consecutive patients over a 9-year period. The indication for surgery was a displaced fracture involving more than one-third of the articular surface. Subluxation of the distal interphalangeal joint also contributed to the indication for surgery. Eight patients, all university students, had been discharged after a follow-up of less than 6 months and could not be contacted for a late review. Four of the remaining 12 patients were women and their average age was 35 (range, 18–55) years. Eight fractures occurred while playing sports and four occurred while at work. In nine patients the injury occurred in the dominant hand. Most injuries were to the middle and ring fingers (one index; six middle; four ring; one little). Five patients had subluxation of the distal interphalangeal joint and four had comminution at the base of the articular surface. Measurement of the initial lateral radiographs indicated that the dorsal articular fragment of the distal phalanx comprised of 50 (range 30–75) per cent of the entire articular surface. The pre-operative extensor lag averaged 35° (range, 10–60°). Seven patients had operative treatment within 2 weeks of injury. The other five patients had operative treatment between 20 and 44 days after the injury due to late presentation. A transverse incision was made through the skin crease on the dorsum of the digit at the level of the distal interphalangeal joint. The fracture site was opened and cleared of haematoma and callus but the attachment of the extensor tendon to the fracture fragment was not disturbed. The fragment was then repositioned and held reduced with a forceps or a towel clip. Alignment was confirmed using fluoroscopy. A 0.5 The distal interphalangeal joint was splinted in extension for 10 to 14 days when the sutures were removed, but the proximal interphalangeal and the metacarpophalangeal joints were left free. Splinting was continued for an additional 2 to 4 weeks, until radiographs showed evidence of fracture healing. Exercises were started at 4 to 6 weeks as follows: active and active assisted range of motion supervised by a certified hand therapist followed by strengthening and full activity at 6 to 8 weeks, depending on pain and fracture healing ( Eleven patients returned for interview including a questionnaire, examination and radiographs. Data from the medical record were used in one patient who had died. The following were analysed: time to union, alignment, range of motion, presence of deformity, scar/nail bed deformity, level of activity after healing of the fracture, pain and overall satisfaction with the procedure. The final evaluation was performed at an average of 31 months (range 6 months to 9 years). Palmar prominence of the screw tip was present on the radiographs of six patients, but was entirely asymptomatic. One patient had a dorsal bump associated with a screw that had backed out by approximately 2 One patient with insulin-dependent diabetes removed his splint within 1 week of surgery and did not follow the postoperative rehabilitation protocol. The reduction was lost and the fragment healed with both radiographic and clinical deformity (dorsal bump and extensor lag). Nonetheless, he had no complaints of pain or dysfunction 2 years after surgery. The average final extensor lag at the distal interphalangeal joint was 6° (range, 0–30°), and the average flexion was 70° (range, 60–90°). The proximal interphalangeal and metacarpophalangeal joints had normal ranges of motion in all patients. One patient with Raynaud's phenomenon complained of pain with exposure of the fingers to very cold temperatures. No patient complained of pain and none had any functional limitations. Radiographic union was documented within 8 weeks in all patients. Articular incongruity was less than 1 Some surgeons feel the risks of operative treatment of mallet fractures are not justifiable given the good results of non-operative treatment (  Others have recommended accurate reduction of the articular surface, especially in those fractures involving more than one-third of the joint surface. This is done in the belief that restoration of the joint surface will prevent secondary degenerative osteoarthritis, loss of motion, and cosmetic deformity. Some have suggested that patients who are treated late (more than 2 weeks after injury) can also obtain acceptable results with surgery ( Various operative procedures have been described, ranging from percutaneous fixation, to open reduction with internal fixation. There are no large series of mallet fractures, treated either operatively or non-operatively. Our results compare well with the existing reports of operatively treated mallet fractures ( The authors would like to thank David Ring, MD, Alan Mock, MS, MPH and Elizabeth Gordon with their help with this manuscript. No funding was or will be received for this study.