This paper presents a model of flotation stage using a neural network to predict the efficiency and the effect of operational parameters on the efficiency of ink removing. Two methods are used to determine the kinetic parameters of the flotation process using particular experimental conditions: experimental data obtained at a laboratory level, and simulated data by means of a neural network.
                  Simulated values obtained with a neural network correspond closely to the experimental results. Neural networks are long-range tools for studying processes when some knowledge of the phenomena that occur in the process is acquired in order to develop models based on the experimental results. The neural network model accurately reproduces all the effects of operation variables and can be used in a simulation of a deinking plant to determine the optimal operational conditions.Recycled paper is the main source of cellulosic fibre for the paper making industry. According to data from the European Council for Paper Recovery and Recycling in 2004 the European pulp and paper industry recycled around 46.5 million tonnes of used paper, 1.8 million tonnes more than in 2003. This represents 53.7% of the total amount of paper consumed. Presently, a third of the recovered paper is treated in mills with the deinking system. Deinking plants are very complex due to: the large diversity of polluting agents present in the paper, making the deinking processes difficult; the lack of knowledge, at the industrial level, about the physic-chemistry of the different processes involved in the deinking process, such as flotation. The deinking operation is essentially a purification process in which the ink, in addition to other polluting agents that can be found in the recovered paper such as clips, staples, rubber, etc., are eliminated. The purpose of this process is to remove all the polluting agents from the recovered paper in order to produce a pulp that is free of impurities. The most important steps in the deinking process are: washing, flotation, purification and screening. The effectiveness of these operations depends on the size of the particles of the polluting agent which needs to be eliminated. A simplified flow sheet of a deinking process is presented in The deinking process includes an alkaline loop, starting from the pulper and finishing with the flotation cells, propitious to the ink-fibre separation. The second section of the process is an acid loop, which allows the colloidal matter and the soluble matter to be precipitated and therefore it can be eliminated later. Flotation technology was applied for the first time in the mining industry in the 50 Flotation is a physical–chemical separation process carried out in flotation cells, it is represented in The separation principle consists of influencing the surface of ink particles based on their hydrophobic or hydrophilic nature. If the ink is not hydrophobic it is converted by the adsorption of the surfactants added to the suspension. The hydrophobic and converted particles join to the air bubbles and are dragged in aggregate form with an inferior specific density towards the surface of the suspension where they form a foam layer. The process of eliminating ink using flotation is complex, since it involves a mixture of components: ink, water, particles, fibres and loads. The flotation process works like a separation process where ink particles are eliminated and dragged to the surface with the foam as a rejected product. The theory that explains the flotation of ink particles from a physico-chemical point of view has evolved over the last years. Different theories have been developed to explain the mechanisms that take place in the flotation process. The first theory was published by Schweizer According to Bechstein Ortner Hornfeck The more recent flotation model developed by Putz et al. The high number of flotation models that have been developed illustrates the complexity of the physical–chemical flotation mechanism. During the flotation process a number of mass transference phenomena take place simultaneously the selective transfer of hydrophobic particles together with the air bubbles from the suspension to the superficial foam; the non-selective transfer of both hydrophobic and hydrophilic particles from the suspension to the foam by hydraulic capture; the return of particles from the foam towards the suspension; the transport of particles from the foam to the foam collection zone of the flotation cell. In practical terms it is very difficult to separate the contribution made by each mass transfer mechanism with respect to the overall balance of the flotation process. With the objective of modeling the overall flotation process based on time, several expressions analogous to chemical kinetic reactions have been proposed (Eq. Integrating Eq. Obtaining and interpreting kinetic constants must be done with some caution, since there are many parameters that affect this constant. In the material purification processes using flotation, the constant increases when the airflow rate increases until it reaches a maximum value. From this maximum value any increase in the flow rate causes the decrease of the kinetic constant. The kinetic constant should be considered as a proportionality factor that is necessary to compare the flotation of different types of particles under certain conditions. More complex models considering the hydrodynamics of the suspension and the size of the air bubbles and ink particles have been developed To overcome these problems we propose to use an artificial neural network model to predict the efficiency of flotation. Neural networks has been used for several applications in pulp and paper industry specially for process control The studied experimental variables were: the suspension consistency ( During the experiments the following parameters were kept constant: Disintegration stage: suspension volume: 20 suspension initial temperature: 50 agitation speed: 1400 consistency of disintegration: 10%; disintegration time: 15 type of paper: coated and printed paper; surfactant type: Olinor 1040 from Pulcra S.A.; percentage of chemical reagents (on dry paper bases)—NaOH: 1%; H Flotation stage: suspension volume: 50 air pressure in the flotation: 1 The effect of the following variables were studied: Consistency of flotation ( Airflow rate injected during flotation ( Agitation speed during flotation ( Once the experiment was performed, handsheets were made with the deinked fibres for each combination of experimental variables to determine the brightness (% ISO brightness) and ERIC (effective residual ink concentration) of the obtained paper. Considering the increase in brightness in the flotation stage to be first order kinetic, in which the initial value (at The Neural network used in this work is a module of the software Cadsim Plus and was described by Laperrière and Wasik A model of the flotation operation has been developed based on the obtained experimental value of ERIC (residual effective ink concentration) and the brightness (% ISO brightness) of deinked paper for different operation conditions as inputs: airflow rate, time, agitation speed and consistency ( A number of trial were conducted to determine the optimal topologies of the network used to model the flotation stage by varying the number of hidden layers, the number of neurones in each hidden layer, the type of function of neurone activation, the learning rate and momentum. The best results are obtained with a neural network formed by two hidden layers each of which is constituted by 100 neurones. The activation function for both layers that gives the best result is the sigmoidal function. The learning ratio used has a value of 0.1, whereas the momentum was fixed at 0. The shutdown criterion is the absolute mean error. Mean errors of 0.5, 3 and 10% were achieved in the flotation model. The obtained model was implemented in the dynamic simulation of the flotation process developed with Cadsim Plus. The flowsheet of the simulated process is represented in The two methods were compared to find the kinetic flotation model using particular experimental conditions. In this case the following operation conditions were selected: consistency, flow rate of injected air, agitation speed,  We only show the values obtained with the neural network obtained at 0, 3, 6, 9, and 12   Once the kinetic models were compared, we have studied the influence of the different experimental variables (consistency, agitation speed and airflow rate) on the flotation operation using the neural network simulation with a mean error of 0.5%. The study has been made with the data collected at 12  The flow rate of injected air has less effect on the ERIC values than other experimental variables (agitation speed and consistency). As a general tendency the ERIC decreases when the flow rate of air injected into the flotation cell is increased ( Observing Better whiteness of the deinked pulp and effectiveness of the operation are obtained with high suspension consistencies (  Finally the experimental and simulated yield of the flotation operation is represented in Two methods were used to determine the kinetic parameters of the flotation process using particular experimental conditions. The first method was based on experimental data obtained at a laboratory level, and the second method was based on data simulated with a neural network. The results obtained by both methods are very similar. This fact demonstrates that neural networks are long-range tools for studying processes, and some knowledge of the phenomena that occur in the process is required in order to develop models based on the experimental results. The neural network model accurately reproduces all the effects of operation variables. It is possible to conclude that: Generally, the increase in the consistency of the floated suspension decreases the ERIC values and improves the brightness of the deinked pulp. For constant consistency and airflow rate, elevated agitation speeds during the flotation stage, provide better ink elimination results (low ERIC values and high brightness values). Working with a high airflow rate improves ink elimination but the airflow rate applied during the flotation stage generates less significant variations in the ERIC and brightness values, in comparison with the values obtained using the agitation speed or the flotation consistency. The model obtained can be used to determine the optimal operation conditions for the flotation cell and to simulate the flotation operation. The authors wish to thank the Spanish Ministry of Education and Science for the financial support of this work under the frame of the programme Ramón y Cajal.  brightness of disintegrated and floated white paper disintegration brightness brightness of disintegrated and floated paper consistency of suspension concentration of particles concentration of bubbles concentration of particles at concentration of non-floatable material at infinite time flotation efficiency kinetic constant of flotation obtained with brightness kinetic constant of flotation obtained with ERIC kinetic constant of flotation airflow rate exponent agitation speed during the flotation time