Microstructures and hardness of aluminum alloy ductile iron were investigated by SEM, XRD, EPMA and hardness measurement techniques. The results show, increasing the Al-alloying element leads to decrease of free ferrite and carbide, as well as increase in the pearlite volume fraction. It is also has been found that in the higher values of Al, about 85% of the matrix would be pearlite. It is indicated that an increase in the aluminum content also leads to a decrease in the spacing between pearlite layers. XRD results show, in the presence of Al, intermetallic compounds such as Al6Fe, AlFe3C0.5, Fe3Al and FeAl were produced. Furthermore the hardness measurements illustrate that by increasing the Al content, the microhardness of ferrite and pearlite and specimens hardness have been significantly increased.In comparison with the other types of cast iron, ductile iron has higher strength, appropriate toughness, good machinability, fair wear resistance, high molten fluidity and low melting point. Its major advantage is good strength and flexibility, besides the high elastic modulus. In fact, the spherical shape for graphite causes unique properties in this class of irons. The final microstructure of as-cast ductile iron has been significantly controlled by melting process, chemical composition and cooling rate The as-cast microstructure is governed by the solidification process and solid state transformation (eutectoid reaction). The inoculation practice and the cooling rate control the nodule count, while the matrix microstructure depends on the conditions under which the eutectoid reaction occurs. Among the variables that influence the mechanism of the eutectoid reaction are the chemical composition and the cooling rate through the eutectoid temperature range. The result of eutectoid transformation have key role in determining the cast iron mechanical properties. Thus, the effect of alloying elements on mechanical properties of ductile iron might be related to their influence on eutectoid transformation The investigation of eutectoid transformation in cast irons is more difficult than steels. In steel, the meta-stable transformation of Austenite to ferrite and cementite happen, while in cast iron, eutectoid transformation is comprised both stable reaction which lead to formation of ferrite and graphite, as well as meta-stable reaction that result is pearlite formation Alloying elements take significant effects in eutectic transformation by changing the eutectic stability and instability temperatures. Among the alloying elements, Al promotes the graphite formation during the eutectic transformation. On the other hand, it stabilizes the pearlite in the eutectoid transformation. Aluminum, similarly to Si, is dissolved in ferrite and austenite at high values, whereas its solubility in carbide is low The volume fraction of pearlite amount in Fe–C–Al iron matrix is significantly more in comparison to Fe–C–Si iron; the former system shows more tendencies to coring Although many of researchers investigated the microstructural changes of Al-alloy ductile iron, there is no comprehensive study about kinetically factors such as diffusion rate and Al distribution in matrix. In this paper, a more comprehensive investigation on microstructural transformation by means of SEM, XRD and EPMA and hardness test for specimens with different Al contents has been carried out. Finally, a new type of this cast iron grade has been developed. For preparation of spherical cast irons with different percentages of aluminum, we first utilized a Morgan gas-fired furnace (with 25 Finally, according to ASTM A897 M-90, the samples were prepared by sand mold casting and permanent mold casting. After sectioning and polishing the samples, Quantitative measurements of the carbon content in the experimental irons were made using equipment at Swinden Technology Centre of Corus Group PLC (formerly British Steel Ltd.). In order to analyses for aluminum in high Al content ductile irons, an atomic absorption spectrophotometry (AAS) method was used by Hi Search Technology (HIST) of Birmingham University ( For studying samples microstructures, they were sectioned in proper size and polished by 80-1200 grinding paper. First samples were polished with diamond powders with 1 Optical microscopy (Olympus BX60MF5) equipped with digital camera (JVC 10215670) and SEM (Leo 1450VP) were used to examine and delineate any variations in the microstructure, with changes in the content of Al. For characterizing of microstructure by SEM, a working distance between 12 and 18 The XRD analysis was carried out using Cu Kα target radiation. An automated Philips ADP 1700 diffractometer, operated at 40 Moreover, microanalysis investigations were performed using EPMA CAMECA SX-50 equipped with WDS and EDS, to determine the distribution of Si and Al in the samples during solidification. This instrument has also all of the automatic abilities to quantitative analysis and due to its suitable software; data were reported in form of a map or series of points. Microhardness measurements were made using a Vickers Engineering Group Vickers hardness machine at a load of 25 The microstructure of the sand mold specimens obtained by LOM is shown in  The volume fraction of the phases in the structure is reported in Alloying elements that dissolve in liquid and solid iron phases change the equilibrium temperature in Fe–C phase diagram. In general, the elements increasing the interval between eutectic stability and instability temperature, promote graphite formation while the elements decreasing this interval, promote carbide formation In the presence of inoculants, the graphite can be grown without significant under-cooling. Therefore, the solidification can be terminated above the carbide formation temperature. Enhancement of the nucleation sites, as a result of inoculant addition, results in the increase in the number of spherical graphites. So the carbon diffusion paths will be shortened therefore the carbide formation will probably be decrease. In Fe–C–Si–Al system, aluminum and its nitrides, oxides and carbides can be used as inoculants According to the literature, the amounts of graphite nodules in Al-containing ductile iron are higher than conventional ones On the other hand, In the presence of Al, finer structure is obtained Johnson and Kovacs The nature of pearlite and ferrite formation reactions is cooperative and diffusional respectively, it is clear that the cooperative reactions predominate against diffusional Comparison of The hardness and microhardness values of the samples and phases are summarized in Mechanical properties of cast iron are directly dependent on its microstructure. Mechanical properties are affected by several factors such as, shape and size of nodular graphite, ferrite to pearlite volume ratio, morphology and finesse of the phases as well as segregation and grain boundary features. In this research XRD patterns were used to interpret the results. Maximum peak of each compound has been marked in the figure and complementary results are given in the table that is shown in the bottom of Average thickness of pearlite layers is reported in By raising the Al content, overall structure becomes finer In this study cast iron samples with different Al contents were cast and their microstructure and hardness have been studied. The results show that the structure of these samples consists of nodular graphite which is distributed randomly in the ferritic–pearlitic matrix. Microstructure observations and more detailed chemical analysis show: Increasing the Al content decreases the free ferrite volume as well as increases the pearlite in the matrix. The increase of Al content results in a finer structure, especially pearlite, and a decrease in the amount of free carbides. By increasing the Al content to higher values, more intermetallic compounds were produced. The microhardness of ferrite and pearlite phases was increased by raising the Al content. High Al-containing samples have higher hardness. Major part of microstructural investigations of present study has been performed in metallography and central laboratory of Ferdowsi University of Mashhad. The authors thank Mr. M.R. Yousef-Sani and Mrs. Sadeghian for metallographic investigations. They also thank Professor D.V. Edmonds and Professor Kandlif (Material Department of University of Leeds) for their valuable support for casting the samples and EPMA and XRD data acquisitions. In the presence of graphitizing elements, the difference between stable and unstable eutectic temperatures increases, thus the formation conditions of graphite will be improved. The alloying elements, which increase this difference, are known as graphitizing elements. Eqs.