The germanium – together with other metals and metalloids contained in the fly ash generated in the Integrated Gasification in Combined Cycle (IGCC) of Elcogas plant (Puertollano, Spain) – may be extracted by aqueous leaching. Here we report the study of the selective recovery of germanium from aqueous leachate by means of ion flotation, using a complexating agent and a surfactant as collector. The use of different ligands with dodecylamine as collector and the effect of the pH were evaluated. The optimal conditions found for germanium recovery are: catechol as complexating agent, triple stoichiometric ratio of the reagents and pH 4–7. In these conditions, germanium recovery was 100% and the extraction of impurities was reduced. The recovered froth was burned and characterized by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), X-ray fluorescence (XRF) and X-ray diffraction (XRD). A high Ge product (53% GeO2) was obtained.Germanium is a rare element, which has not been found free in nature; its compounds are widely disseminated in the Earth's crust (6.7 Germanium is found in ore deposits, mainly as a substitute for Zn in sphalerite, but also in Cu, Ag, Fe, Ge sulphides such as germanite, argyrodite, renierite, briarite and canfeldite. It is also found as an oxide, mainly argutite (tetragonal-GeO Germanium is usually extracted with a pyrometallurgical route, this being followed by a separation process, such as distillation of germanium tetrachloride from 6 The industrial interest in the recovery of Ge stems from its high market price (as GeO The 335 This speciation, together with the relatively high Ge contents in the fly ash of the Puertollano IGCC facility (200–420 The recovery of valuable metals coming from fly ash and other germanium-containing minerals has been studied elsewhere. Zouboulis et al. This work showed that the ion flotation is a good method for the recovery of Ge when its concentrations is of the order of parts per million. In this study, several ion flotation tests were carried out on the leachates arising from water Ge extraction from Puertollano IGCC fly ash. These tests were performed using different reagents, and ligands under different pH values and reagents concentrations. The main objective of this research is to evaluate the selectivity of this process for the recovery Ge and the purity of the Ge product. Previous to the ion flotation tests, water Ge extraction experiments were carried out to obtain the Ge leachates. These tests were performed on Puertollano IGCC fly ash (#129) produced under current feed conditions (50:50 coal/petcoke blend, 2.5% limestone addition) of this facility. An exhaustive characterization of IGCC fly ash has been published elsewhere Leaching experimental trials were performed in a 1000 The ion flotation experiments were performed at 25 Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) of the froth recovered at the optimum conditions was performed using a Setaram TG DTA92 thermobalance, heating rate of 10 The course of the flotation experiments was followed by sampling 2 The recovered metal is calculated as: The stoichiometric molar ratio of Ge, the complexating agent and the surfactant is 1:3:2 The molar ratio was then duplicated and triplicated to evaluate the effect of the excess of reagents on the Ge recovery as a function of time. The results obtained showed a relatively high Ge recovery (up to 57%) when using the double stoichiometric ratio ( Pyrogallol (1,2,3-benzenetriol) forms a very stable complex with Ge Experimental series were performed on the Ge leachates arising from IGCC fly ash, described above, triplicating the molar ratio of ligand and using dodecylamine as collector. After the addition of the ligand, the pH value of the solution decreased to 4–4.5, depending on the ligand, in agreement with Pokrovski and Schott With pyrogallol as ligand, the tiple stoichiometric ratio was found the best experimental condition. The same ratio was then used with catechol. Ion flotation with catechol as a function of time was evaluated and the obtained results are depicted in A mechanism for the reaction between Ge and catechol is proposed, taking into account that suggested by Zouboulis and Matis The proposed reaction mechanism is the following: The effect of the leachate pH value was evaluated for pyrogallol and catechol, since these ligands provide the best results for Ge recovery. A series of experiments were performed using four pH values: very acidic (pH  Under these conditions, the lowest Sb and As recovery yields were achieved ( There were no significant differences between the use of pyrogallol or catechol, for Ge recovery (95% Ge in only 15 The optimal conditions for recovering Ge were fixed: triple stoichiometric ratio of catechol and dodecylamine and 4–7 pH. Ion flotation experiments led to the formation of a froth that was collected and dried at 105 The recovery of floated Ge complex was carried out by means of a roasting process. The roasting temperature was determined by a thermogravimetrical analysis of the floated Ge complex at a heating rate of 10 A semi-quantitative analysis of the roasted solid was performed by means of X-ray fluorescence followed by X-ray diffraction to determine crystalline phases in the sample. At laboratory scale, it was demonstrated that ion flotation is an effective method for recovering Ge from IGCC fly ash water leachate when the concentration is about tens of ppm. The Ge complex formation is strongly influenced by the location of the OH group, and pyrogallol and cathecol are the most interesting ligands for Ge recovery, whereas neither resorcin nor hydroquinone was found to be selective for the complex formation. The maximum Ge recovery in the lowest flotation time was achieved with weakly acidic pH values. The optimal pH is reached at natural pH without the addition of acid solutions. According to the equilibrium reaction (see Eq. The optimal conditions for pre-concentrating Ge from leached IGCC fly ash are the following: dodecylamine as a surfactant, catechol as a ligand because of its lower cost and pH values of 4–7. Under these conditions, 100% of Ge is recovered in only 30 Roasting the Ge-containing froth at temperatures above 600 The authors wish to thank the European Coal and Steel Community (project ECSC 7220-PR145), the Spanish Ministry of Science and Technology (project REN2001-1728) and ELCOGAS for financing and supporting this study.