Metallurgical examination of cast iron objects from the Khitan period (AD 10th–12th) in Mongolia shows that they might be classified into two groups. The first is based on Fe–C alloys of near eutectic composition and the second is based on Fe–C–Si alloys with reduced carbon content and numerous sulfide inclusions. By contrast, all the objects from the succeeding Mongolian empire period (AD 12th–15th) belong to the second group, indicating that a technological transition had occurred during the Khitan period. Accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) on carbon samples extracted from artifacts in both groups and measurement of alloy compositions suggest that the use of mineral coal in smelting was a major factor for this transition.In recent papers (  The sites of Chin tolgoi and Ulaan kherem were first discovered by Bukinich in the 1930s. At both sites he found the remains of earthen walls which have constituted defensive or military sites. In the 1950s Perlee examined inscribed ceramic tiles which Bukinich had excavated from Chin tolgoi and he concluded that the fortress was a Khitan period site ( The site at Zuun kherem in Khentii province similarly consists of the remains of a fortress with earthen walls, which was also investigated by Perlee. Based on the textual evidence for a Khitan city in this location and the stylistic aspects of artifacts which are comparable to those from the contemporaneous Khitan fortresses, Perlee considered this site to be a Khitan military base constructed between 1000 and 1125 for the defense of the northern frontier ( Artifacts M4 and M5, rectangular bars with unknown function but possibly cast iron ingots, were excavated from a site of the Mongolian empire at Avarga balgas in Khentii province, NE Mongolia. The recent survey by the Mongol-Japanese Joint Archaeological Expedition found evidence that the Avarga site was in use from the end of the 12th century to the 14th century AD. The excavators concluded that this site possibly corresponds to one of the palace sites of Genghis Khaan known as Yeke Ord ( Our experimental approach consists of analytical observations made on microstructures, alloy compositions and radiocarbon ages of those artifacts listed in The general appearance of those artifacts chosen for microstructure examination is illustrated in Optical micrographs showing microstructures of artifacts K8, K9 and K6 are shown in In every aspect of microstructural characteristics, artifact K7 was similar to K8 and K9 with the exception that its carbon level is located midway between them. Similarly, artifacts M4–M7 were equivalent to K6 apart from the exact amount of carbon and sulfur included. The carbon and sulfur contents were measured using the LECO carbon/sulfur determinator at the Research Institute of Industrial Science and Technology (RIST) installed in the Pohang Steel Company (POSCO) of Korea. The selection of artifacts from As The carbon samples for the AMS measurement were extracted from five Khitan objects in The The results displayed in The radiocarbon ages of K2 and K3 from Chin tolgoi balgas and those of K8 and K9 from Zuun kherem are fairly consistent and fall mostly within the age range predicted based upon typological and textual grounds. This consistency may not be attained if unpredictable errors, as detailed by The examination of microstructures, alloy compositions and radiocarbon ages of the cast iron objects from the Khitan (AD 10th–12th) and Mongolian empires (AD 12th–15th) shows that they can be classified into two groups. In the first group, the use of mineral coal in smelting is evident given the reduced carbon content, which accompanies a substantial increase in sulfur level. This observation is further supported by the unrealistically old age of the carbon sample extracted from one object in the group. The radiocarbon ages of those in the second group, consisting exclusively of Khitan artifacts, are consistent and in fair agreement with the estimated chronology from typological and textual sources of information. This dating indicates that the transition from charcoal to mineral coal occurred during the Khitan period. It has yet to be investigated whether there was a transition period during which both coal and charcoal were used concurrently. Although the number of objects examined here is not sufficient for broader conclusions, based on the foregoing evidence we argue that coal-based smelting must have been a key element in the cast iron industry of the Mongolian empire. The preparation of this manuscript was initiated while one of the authors, Jang-Sik Park, was on a one year sabbatical leave at the Department of Geology and Geophysics, Yale University, as a visiting scholar from Hongik University in 2006. The support he received from Dr. Robert B Gordon at Yale is much appreciated. Dr. William Honeychurch at Yale is acknowledged for his comments on English in the final revision of the manuscript. The University of Arizona's NSF Arizona AMS Facility for