Dead burning of magnesite in rotary kiln is an energy intensive process. Besides the energy consumed by the magnesite, the heat expenditures are through different areas of the process, such as kiln shell, exit gases, clinker exit, dust etc. The heat loss through the kiln shell by radiation and convection amounts to be a great proportion of the total heat loss in the process. The present work was devoted to the evaluation and assessment of the heat loss through radiation and convection in the process. The work comprises of data acquisition and utilization of the same for the evaluation and assessment of the shell heat loss of the kiln which was running for 128th day of its operation.kiln surface temperature, K atmospheric temperature, K average of radiative heat transfer coefficient, W/m forced convective heat transfer coefficient, W/m constants varies with ranges of free convective heat transfer coefficient, W/m emissivity Stefan–Boltzmann constant, 5.676×10 dimensionless factor that evaluates the effect of solid surface configuration thermal conductivity of atmospheric air, W/m free convection modulus, 1/m radiative heat loss, W/m forced convective heat flux, W/m free convection heat flux, W/m radiative and forced convective heat loss over 21 m the kiln surface, W radiative and free convective heat loss over 21 m of the kiln surface, W total radiative and forced convective heat loss over the kiln surface, W total radiative and free convective heat loss over the kiln, W surface area (πd Reynolds number, velocity of air, m/s density of air, kg/m viscosity of air, Pa diameter of the kiln, m The present work had been limited to: measurement of heat loss through radiation, measurement of heat loss through (i) forced air convection (ii) free air convection, calculate and evaluate the recoverable heat loss through the burning zone (0–30 m) of rotary kiln, investigate the pattern of the heat loss along the kiln length.  Data acquisition and utilization of the data needs proper attention, since there are certain factors such as, emissivity of the surface, velocity of air etc. influences the ultimate results, therefore mention of these data are important. The kiln shell temperatures were measured by a infrared thermometer. As per the work of Kuhle In the calculation and evaluation of heat loss by convection some uncertainty was encountered. As a general guideline if the kiln is housed in an enclosed hall the coefficient for free convection is usually applied, and if it is in the open air the coefficient for forced convection is applied. The forced convective heat transfer coefficient ( The factor of wind velocity in this particular calculation was not considered. As air is often involved in free convection calculations, simplified equations have been developed Convective heat transfer coefficient ( Details of the notations are available in the nomenclature. If we consider The values of Utilizing the Eq. The evaluation of heat loss ( The present study reveals that a good amount of heat was lost through the kiln shell. However, while comparing the results it has to be kept in mind that the kiln can be judged only after considering the approximations and boundary conditions which were applied in calculating the results. This type of work provides the data and appropriate informations to the management of the company about how the units have been functioning. Results indicate that loss through forced convection was about 29% more than in the free mode of convection. It was also observed that the loss of heat in the burning zone (0–30 m) was about 49% of the total heat loss through the kiln as shown in Author is thankful to Dr. A.K. Roy of RDCIS, Ranchi for valuable suggestions and help.