Experimental investigations and numerical simulations with the discrete element method (DEM) were carried out to improve the understanding of the movement and mechanical interaction of particles in rotary kilns. The focus is on the bed movement in the rolling motion mode with rotational speeds varying between 3 and 15rpm. Characteristic parameters for this system are the Froude number, the dynamic angle of repose, the thickness of the active layer and the particle velocity on the bed surface and at the wall. These parameters were measured in rotating drum experiments, computed in DEM simulations and compared with each other. When available, analytical and/or semi-empirical macroscopic models were included in the comparison. Both the DEM simulations and the analytical macroscopic models show good agreement with the experiments in general. The wide range of parameters considered, like drum diameter, particle diameter and rotational speeds, provide a comprehensive reference data set.Rotary kilns play a vital role in the basic materials and minerals processing industry with prominent examples being cement kilns, the thermal treatment of waste or contaminated soil as well as grinding and drying processes. In almost all of these processes the combined mass and heat exchange within the moving granular solid and the strong interaction with the kiln walls and a passing fluid are essential for the system performance. However, a pre-requisite for the description of heat transfer is the detailed knowledge of the movement of the granular material as a whole and, in addition, statistics on the details of the movement, which is the content of the current paper. For the limiting case of large numbers of small particles in kilns of large diameters and length, several theoretical models and analytical descriptions of the bed geometry, the motion type (rolling motion, slumping), and axial and radial material transport were developed in the past and employed in the design. Such models express for example the dynamic angle of repose and the thickness of the active layer in the rolling motion as a function of Froude number and filling height However, it should be noted that the details of the mixing process and the heat transfer within the so-called active and passive layers (chapter 5.2) and time histories of individual particle temperatures or their statistics are still unknown. Discrete Element (DEM) Simulations coupled with fluid flow computations (CFD) can provide insight into the movement of the bed material and the associated processes (e.g. heat transfer). Unfortunately, due to the time and memory resources required, the number of particles within industrial scale systems is far too large to be actually considered in this kind of computations. Nevertheless, although limited in the number of particles DEM simulations are a first step to a deeper understanding of the underlying physical processes and give insight into bulk internal data which are difficult or impossible to obtain from measurements. Therefore, DEM simulations are a useful tool to provide information needed to improve the macroscopic models mentioned above. The current paper can be seen as a first preparatory step in the evaluation of heat transfer using DEM. During steady state operation two boundary processes, the heat exchange at the wall of the kiln and the heat exchange at the free surface of the bulk are important. The particle velocity at the free surface and, to a lesser extent the slip between particles and the wall control the heat transfer within the bed material. A correct thermal description requires a verified mechanical behaviour at these positions. Therefore the current paper compares the measurements of angle of repose and particle free surface velocity (mean values and frequency distributions) with DEM simulations. In addition, the active layer thickness deduced from DEM simulations is compared with an analytical model of Liu et al. Several experimental investigations of rolling solid motion in rotary kilns and rotating drums (the two notions are deliberately used in this paper to distinguish between industrial scale and bench-top systems) have been carried out; most of the studies were conducted to develop a description of the overall material movement in technical systems and often for specific materials. DEM simulations of rotating drums were mostly focused on the comparisons of the dynamic angle of repose and the active layer thickness with corresponding measurements. According to Henein Yang et al. Nan Gui et al. Shi et al. Liu et al. developed an analytical solution predicting the bed motion in rotary kilns in the rolling motion mode The test rig shown in The drum was driven by an electric motor with 1.5 A glass pane at the front provides optical access and allows recording of the bed movement at this wall to determine the dynamic angle of repose as well as the velocity of the particles on the bed surface. A digital camera system (IDS U-Eye 1245LE), as shown in The measurement of the particle velocities on the bed surface requires higher frame rates; a high speed camera (Type Optronis CL600) providing 250 The investigated bed materials considered were monodisperse glass spheres with four different diameters (d Filling degrees of f The Froude number used in the following to characterise the individual experiments is defined as the ratio of centrifugal force to gravitational force: In a discrete description (DEM) the movement of each single particle in the bed is described by simultaneous integration of Newton's and Euler's equations whilst incorporating all interactions amongst the particles, the wall and free surfaces The parameters used in the simulation were the same as in the experiments. From the diameters of the drums and particles used a size ratio D/d between 28.57 and 133.33 results. In contrast to the experiments, where the drum had a fixed length of 500 Depending on the material pairing (particle–wall, particle–particle, particle–sandpaper) the coefficients of friction, rolling and restitution have different values. The coefficients for the three pairings were determined experimentally The coefficient of rolling friction was calculated from measured rolling speeds following the energy balance procedure of Kuchling The measured angles of repose as a function of the Froude number are summarised in The three diagrams show the measured angles of repose and their variances for drum experiments (f In the experiments the dynamic angle of repose increases nearly linearly with the Froude number (with rotational frequency). The angle rises by about 2° in the range from 3 to 15 To highlight the influence of the drum to particle diameter ratio D/d on the angle of repose A primary qualitative comparison between experiment and simulation can be obtained from visual inspection. In In the following three diagrams a quantitative comparison is given plotting the extracted dynamic angle of repose against the Froude number for different fillings in a drum with a diameter of D In   As already mentioned and sketched in The position of the boundary line and the associated thickness of the active layer and its dependence on operational parameters and material properties are of great importance for all transport processes in the bed. Thus this value is an important measure of the mechanical mixing within the bed which needs to be verified prior to the attempt at simulating any additional transport processes with DEM. Based on experimental results Liu et al. The differential equation for the profile of the active layer thickness in dimensionless form can be written as: The initial boundary conditions for the differential Eqs. The analytical solution to calculate the profile of the active layer thickness for Eqs. With the abbreviating constant The following parameters are needed for the calculation of the active layer thickness: operating parameters of the drum: filling angle geometrical parameters: cylinder diameter material properties: dynamic angle of repose Θ. There are no fitting parameters required for different drum diameters, particles and filling degrees. Thus the active layer thickness can be computed and compared with the simulations. For this comparison three rotating drums, again with the diameters D In the following figure the ratio t/H is plotted over the ratio x/L. H is the maximum thickness of the bulk and x is the local thickness of the active layer. The length of the line between the points A and B, the chord length, is denoted as L. The local coordinate on this line is x. The thickness t has the value zero at the point A (beginning of the chord length), and increases continuously until the largest value is reached at the vortex point W. It subsequently decreases again to zero at the endpoint B. In For a filling of 10% the t/h values from the DEM simulation are slightly higher than the values obtained from the analytical solution; the largest deviation is about 8%. For a filling degree of 20% the thickness reduces by approximately 18% in both cases. The values of the DEM simulation are smaller, but the deviation is only 4.5%. Summarising these results, the DEM simulations agree very well for the smallest test drum and a filling degree from 10 to 20% (as investigated in The two other drums (300 and 400 It is noticeable that the DEM simulations compute the expected thickness of the active layer with reasonable agreement. In addition, it is interesting to notice that the drum diameter does not appear to have a significant influence on the thickness of the active layer. As mentioned above, the free surface at the top of the bed material is an important boundary for all transport processes considered, and thus the mechanically correct description at this surface is a prerequisite. In the following The individual surface particle velocities in the middle of the drum (half-length of L) were determined from the measurements with the high-speed camera, as outlined in chapter 3, and these velocities are compared with the simulation results. The frequency distribution of the velocities obtained is plotted for both the experiment and the simulation in From this it becomes obvious that first, the current DEM simulations provide a reasonable first approximation of the experimental findings, and second, that a detailed knowledge and consideration of the velocity distribution on the free surface is very important for all transport processes. Surface averaged Nusselt- or Schmidt-numbers do not appear to be a good choice. The obvious shift towards and the higher probability of smaller velocities need to be investigated further and may require optimization of the mechanical model. The available analytical equation for the time averaged particle velocity Because rotational frequency In As in the previous sections and for completeness, Macroscopic models for particle movement in drums commonly assume no slip conditions between drum wall and adjacent particle layer. To prove this assumption the slip velocity between drum wall and the particles directly in contact with the drum wall was evaluated by DEM simulations. Since time-dependent trajectories of all particles are available from the DEM simulations, all particles close to the wall can be identified and the velocity component tangential to the wall can be computed. The result is shown in Note that the measurement of the slip velocity at the drum centerline was not possible because particles are not optically accessible. The rotational frequency of the drum in the simulation with the smallest Froude-number (Fr Note that further calculations and comparisons with measurements are underway to analyse the slip velocity and its frequency distribution in more detail. In the current study moving beds of monodisperse glass spheres in rotating drums were investigated at different filling degrees in the rolling motion mode. The experiments were conducted in three different drums (D Corresponding DEM simulations were conducted for comparison with the experiments. In contrast to the experiments, where the drum had a fixed length of 500 In the whole test series the dynamic angle of repose showed a reasonable agreement with the experiments, the DEM simulations and available analytical approximations, showing a maximum deviation of about 4.7%. The thickness of the active layer was measured in the DEM simulations and compared with the analytical model of Liu et al. and showed a good agreement. No significant deviations occur at higher filling degrees (f The computed particle velocities on the free bed surface were found to be in good agreement with the measured values too. This holds true not only for average particle velocities but also for the frequency distribution of the velocity, at least for the operation point examined. The deviations left have to be examined in further studies which are underway. At the wall, where the empirically motivated models usually assume zero slip, a distinctive amount of slip (approx. 6%) could be detected. The average slip velocity increases and the associated frequency distributions broaden with increasing Froude numbers. In conclusion, it has been demonstrated that the current DEM code is able to reproduce quantitatively the transversal bed motion in rotating drums. The evaluation shows, that from DEM simulations not only averaged values for velocities can be obtained but also frequency distributions. Thus, generalised descriptions of the frequency distributions of the velocities can be derived and used to extend the existing analytical descriptions. In a further step the statistical information on the particle movement in the drum, at the free bed surface and the drum wall will be applied to model the transfer processes within the bed, into the bed or out of the bed. Currently experiments with a heated drum wall and corresponding temperature measurements in the moving bed are underway. These measurements will be compared with DEM simulations incorporating appropriate heat transfer models. The current study has been funded by the       