An aqueous solution of green tea polyphenols (GTP) was found to inhibit lipid peroxidation (LP), scavenge hydroxyl and superoxide radicals in vitro. Concentration needed for 50% inhibition of superoxide, hydroxyl and LP radicals were 10, 52.5 and 136 μg/ml, respectively. Administration of GTP (500 mg/kg b.wt.) to normal rats increased glucose tolerance significantly (P<0.005) at 60 min. GTP was also found to reduce serum glucose level in alloxan diabetic rats significantly at a dose level of 100 mg/kg b.wt. Continued daily administration (15 days) of the extract 50, 100 mg/kg b.wt. produced 29 and 44% reduction in the elevated serum glucose level produced by alloxan administration. Elevated hepatic and renal enzymes produced by alloxan were found to be reduced (P<0.001) by GTP. The serum LP levels which was increased by alloxan and was reduced by significantly (P<0.001) by the administration of 100 mg/kg b.wt. of GTP. Decreased liver glycogen, after alloxan administration showed a significant (P<0.001) increase after GTP treatment. GTP treated group showed increased antioxidant potential as seen from improvements in superoxide dismutase and glutathione levels. However catalase, LP and glutathione peroxidase levels were unchanged. These results indicate that alterations in the glucose utilizing system and oxidation status in rats increased by alloxan were partially reversed by the administration of the glutamate pyruvate transaminase.Many indigenous Indian medicinal plants have been found to be useful to successfully manage diabetes ( Green tea is produced by enzymatic inactivation of the leaves of Male Wistar albino rats (250–300 g) were obtained from the Veterinary College, Mannuthy, India. They were housed in ventilated cages and fed with a pelleted diet (Lipton, India Ltd) and water ad libitum. Green tea was a gift from Dr J.I.X. Antony, Kancor Flavours and Extracts Limited, India. Alloxan monohydrate was obtained from Sigma, St. Louis, MO. 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene, glutathione and 5-5-dithiobis (2-nitrobenzoic acid) were purchased from Sisco Research Laboratory, Mumbai, India. Thiobarbituric acid (TBA) was obtained from E-Merck, Germany. All other chemicals used were of analytical and reagent grade. Dried green tea powder (250 g) was extracted with water and water soluble fraction was dissolved in hot water and washed with chloroform. Aqueous layer was extracted with ethyl acetate and ethyl acetate layer containing polyphenol was separated out and evaporated to dryness ( Superoxide scavenging was determined by the Nitroblue tetrazolum (NBT) reduction method ( Hydroxyl radical scavenging was measured by studying the competition between deoxyribose and the test compounds for hydroxyl radicals generated from the Fe Reaction mixture (0.5 ml) containing rat liver homogenate (0.1 ml, 25% w/v) in Tris–HCl buffer (40 mM, pH 7.0), KCl (30 mM), ferrous iron (0.16 mM) and ascorbic acid (0.06 mM) was incubated for 1 h at 37 Normal Wistar rats were fasted overnight. They were divided into three groups containing six animals each. Control rats (Group I) were given 1 ml distilled water orally. Green tea polyphenols (GTP) at a concentration of 100, 500 mg/kg b.wt. were administered orally using a syringe to second and third groups. Glucose (2 g/kg b.wt.) was given orally using a syringe to all groups immediately after the GTP administration. Blood samples were collected from the tail vein just prior to and 30, 60, 120 and 240 min after the glucose loading and serum glucose levels were measured by GOD/POD method ( Diabetes was induced in male rats by single intraperitonial injection of 120 mg/kg b.wt. of alloxan monohydrate ( Overnight fasted blood samples were collected from the tail vein on 3rd day of alloxan treatment prior to and at 2, 4, 6 and 8 h intervals after the administration of 100 mg/kg b.wt. of the extract orally. Serum was separated and glucose levels were estimated as before. In the multidose study, these animals received the same dose of the extract once daily for 15 days. Blood was collected in non fasted rats on 6, 9, 12 15 and 18th day after alloxan administration and serum glucose levels were measured. Normal and diabetic animals were treated with GTP for 15 days at dose levels of 50 and 100 mg/kg body weight. They were sacrificed on 18th day after alloxan treatment. Blood was collected and serum was separated and LP ( All the groups of animals were sacrificed immediately after the experimental period and liver was taken, washed with normal saline and one part was preserved in 10% formalin for histopathological studies. The other part was homogenized by Tris–HCl buffer and used for measuring LP and activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD; Data were expressed as mean±standard error of mean. Statistical comparisons with animals of untreated diabetic group with normal and treated with different concentrations of GTP were performed with Student's The polyphenols of green tea, was found to scavenge the superoxide generated by photoreduction of riboflavin in a concentration dependent manner. The concentration needed for 50% scavenging of superoxides was 10 μg/ml. The concentration needed for 50% inhibition of hydroxyl radical generation was 52.5 μg/ml. LP induced by Fe Administration of 2g glucose/kg b.wt. to normal rats increased serum glucose levels from 77.3±13.8 to 176.4±20.5 at 60 min but returned to normal at 240 min. Administration of GTP 500 mg/kg b.wt. suppressed the elevation of serum glucose level significantly ( The effect of polyphenols in alloxan diabetic rat is shown in Continuous administration of the GTPs (50 mg/kg b.wt.) produced 29.8% reduction in the elevated glucose level on 18th day. At dose level of 100 mg/kg b.wt., a significant ( Liver function markers like ALP, GPT and LP in serum were significantly ( Normal animals treated with GTP at dose level of 100 mg/kg b.wt. did not produce any significant weight loss ( Effect of polyphenols on total WBC in alloxan diabetic animals is shown in In vivo antioxidant activity after administration of GTP for 18 days is shown in Green tea has become very popular neutraceutical as an antioxidant and a health promoting traditional drug preparation. In the present study we report anti-diabetic and free radical scavenging activity of GTP. GTP contains gallocatechin (GC), epigallocatechin (EGC), epicatechin (EC), epigallocatechin gallate (EGCg) and epicatechin gallate (ECg). Tea components possess antioxidant, antimutagenic and anticarcinogenic effects and could protect humans against the risk of cancer by environmental agents ( Alloxan produces oxygen radicals in the body, which cause pancreatic injury (