A simple extractive separation method has been developed for the determination of chromium based on the extraction of Cr (VI) as its ion-pair with tribenzylamine (TBA). The ion-pair is extracted at acidic pH using toluene as the diluent. The concentration of chromium in the organic phase was measured spectrophotometrically at 309nm. The influence of experimental variables such as pH, sample volume, equilibration time, diverse ions etc. has been studied in detail. The extracted chromium (VI) could be stripped to the aqueous phase using NaOH as the stripping agent. The extracts were characterized using FT-IR spectroscopy. A detection limit of 0.08μgmL−1 could be achieved and the validity of the method was checked in real tannery effluent, electroplating waste water and spiked water samples.The growing concern for environmental pollution has necessitated the study and determination of heavy metals in a variety of matrices. Chromium is not an exception to this. The common oxidation states of chromium are 0, +1 and +6 respectively. Chromium (VI) is mainly used in electroplating and chromium (III) finds its utility in leather tanning operations. Chromium (III) is required for the maintenance of normal glucose metabolism, whereas chromium (VI) is carcinogenic The widely used methods for the removal of chromium (VI) are solid phase extraction (SPE) and liquid-liquid extraction (LLE). Solid phase extraction has been explored with a variety of adsorbents for the removal of chromium Even though, SPE offers high preconcentration factors, LLE is still employed as a versatile technique in hydrometallurgy for the recovery of industrially important metals such as cobalt and nickel A survey of the literature reveals that the utility of TBA as a potential extractant for Cr (VI) in environmental samples is scarce. Hence, it was decided to explore TBA as an extractant using relatively less toxic diluents for the separation and determination of Cr (VI) and Cr (III) and its application to real samples such as tannery effluents, electroplating waste water, and water samples. All reagents were of analytical grade. Triple distilled water (TDW) was used in the preparation of the solutions. Potassium dichromate was procured from S.d. Fine Chemicals (Mumbai, India). 2.826 A JASCO V-576 model UV–visible spectrophotometer was used to record the absorbance. 1 The feed containing 1 The extraction of the Cr (VI) was studied using various diluents for tribenzylamine such as toluene, hexane, cyclohexane, heptane, xylene and isoamylalcohol. The effect of halogenated hydrocarbon diluents such as chloroform was not studied since it has been already reported in the literature The effect of pH was studied in the range 1.0–8.0. The percentage extraction at various pH values are shown in The percentage extraction decreased at higher pH since the species CrO This fact is also further confirmed by FT-IR studies of the organic extract. The FT-IR spectrum of organic phase for the sample extraction is shown in The extraction studies were carried out for varying lengths of time ranging from 1– 15 The concentration of tribenzylamine was varied from 0.02–0.2 The aqueous phase volume was varied from 10 to 60 The nature of the extracted species was ascertained by equilibrium shift method (A plot of log D vs. log C). The results are presented in The stripping of chromium (VI) from the organic phase was studied with NaOH and reducing agents such ascorbic acid and Na The above fact was further confirmed from FT-IR studies of the organic phase ( The concentration of NaOH was varied in the range 0.05–0.5 The calibration graph was linear in the range 0–1 The effect of various diverse ions on the extraction of the ion-pair was investigated at varying concentrations maintaining an aqueous phase volume of 10 The proposed method was applied to study the recovery of chromium (VI) in four synthetic waste water samples (SW1-SW4) containing varying concentration of other ionic species. The results are presented in Varying amounts of Cr (III) and Cr (VI) were taken an analyzed using the proposed method. The total chromium concentration was analyzed by oxidation with H The proposed method was applied to study the recovery of chromium in tannery effluent, spiked water samples and electroplating wastewater sample. The major constituent of tannery effluent is Cr (III) in view of the organic matter and the reducing agents used in the leather tanning process. The tannery effluent was highly concentrated and greenish blue in color. It was diluted to the required concentration and the concentration of chromium (VI) was analyzed by the proposed solvent extraction procedure. A known volume of the effluent was oxidized with alkaline hydrogen peroxide and the total chromium concentration was analyzed. Cr (III) was found from the difference. The electroplating wastewater sample was diluted and the concentration of Cr (VI) was analyzed by the proposed method. The concentration of chromium in tap water and lake water samples (collected from our campus) were well below the detection limit and hence the recovery of chromium was established by spiking known concentration of chromium. The results are presented in The comparison of the present method with some of the existing solvent extraction procedures for Cr (VI) in the literature is given in The proposed method for the determination of Cr (VI) is simple, rapid and shows good sensitivity and selectivity. The calibration graph was linear up to 1 0.5 We thank University Grants Commission (UGC), New Delhi, India (Project No: F-32-312/2006(SR)) for financial support.