Studying the physical and chemical properties of rocks is significant for understanding geological and mineralization processes in mineral resource exploration. The ITRAX core scanner is a fast and non-destructive instrument to identify and determine both the physical and chemical characteristics of rocks. In this study, the ITRAX is used to study mineralized rock samples composed of marble and diorite associated with mineralization from the Baiyinnuoer skarn-type Zn–Pb deposit, which is the largest Zn–Pb deposit in northern China. Four datasets, consisting of an optical image, an X-radiographic image, magnetic susceptibility (MS) measurements, and relative elemental variations, were obtained from ITRAX examinations. The results show that the diorite associated with mineralization is characterized by a high MS value, which can be regarded as a geophysical indicator to explore for the skarn-type Zn–Pb deposits. Moreover, the ITRAX geochemical results reveal that the diorite associated with mineralization consisting of sphalerite, galena, and pyrite contains large proportions of Si, Fe, Mn, Pb, and Zn, but small amounts of Ca and Al. This suggests that the metal composition assemblages of Pb, Zn, Fe, and Mn can be regarded as a geochemical indicator to explore for the skarn-type Zn–Pb deposits. This case study demonstrates that (1) the ITRAX core scanner is a potential tool to distinguish different rock types and to identify mineralization in mineral resource exploration, and (2) the logratio transformed geochemical results reveal the Zn–Pb mineralization, and the singularity index reveals the uneven Zn–Pb mineralization or other geochemical processes.The ITRAX core scanner is an automated flat beam X-ray instrument and can synchronously provide micro-X-ray fluorescence (XRF) profiles and micro-radiographic images from rock cores up to 1.8 The resulting geochemical analysis using the ITRAX technique is affected by heterogeneity, grain size, density, water content, surface roughness, gaps or cracks, and element-interaction ( The ITRAX core scanner has been widely used to analyze sediment cores in environmental studies (e.g., The study area is located in the middle south part of the Da Hinggan Mountain polymetallic belt in Inner Mongolia (China). Fifty rock samples were collected from the south open pit of the Baiyinnuoer skarn-type Zn–Pb deposit (latitude 44°27′ N, longitude 118°53′ E) with average grades of 5.44% Zn, 2.02% Pb, and 31.36 The total length and thickness of the measured rock sample were 50.1 and 15 The ITRAX geochemical data are typical compositional data that are linked to the data closure problem, resulting in spurious correlations or associations between geochemical variables, which should be opened prior to analysis ( Singularity is a non-linear term defined as the characterization of the anomalous behaviors of singular physical processes that often result in anomalous amounts of energy release or material accumulation within a narrow spatial-temporal interval ( A pair data for The point locations of MS measurements with a resolution of 2 The MS profile (   Moreover, the singularity index is applied to measure the local element variances for log(Zn/Ti) and log(Pb/Ti). The profile of the value of singularity index for Zn and Pb along the sample using the half window size of 4 In this simple case study, the ITRAX core scanner was applied to measure the physical and chemical properties of a mineralized rock sample. The results lead to the following conclusions: The ITRAX is a potential tool to measure both the physical and chemical characteristics of rock samples in mineral resource exploration; the large value of MS and the geochemical composition assemblages of Pb, Zn, Fe, and Mn can be regarded as a geophysical and geochemical indicator to explore for the skarn-type Zn–Pb deposit in the study area; the logratio transformed geochemical results showed that the diorite has larger amounts of Zn and Pb than does the marble and revealed the Zn–Pb mineralization. Meanwhile, the singularity index measures the relative enrichment or depletion of element concentration and uncovers the uneven Zn–Pb mineralization or other geochemical processes. The author thanks Dr. Agustin Martin-Izard (associate editor for Journal of Geochemical Exploration), Dr. Peyman Afzal, and Dr. Pablo Gumiel for their constructive comments and suggestions that helped to improve the quality of this paper. The author is also grateful to Zhaoxian Yuan, Yin Bai, Yu Li, and Laiyuan Guo from the China University of Geosciences (Wuhan) for preparing the data and drawing the geological maps. This research benefited from the joint financial support from a research project on “Quantitative models for prediction of strategic mineral resources in China” (No.