Armour materials and armoured structures are required to perform under a variety of dynamic conditions, from local penetration events to global blast loadings. Understanding how these structures behave is therefore an important aspect for military engineers to consider. The armour/anti-armour interaction is certainly a dynamic event and one largely dependent upon the high strain-rate properties and impact behaviour of the materials involved. However, high velocity impacts do impart a different set of dynamic loads upon an armour material, compared to conventional structural engineering materials, especially large-strain, through-thickness compressive forces and a variety of stress wave pulses. This chapter therefore presents an overview of the many specialised test methods that have evolved to either simulate a dynamic event or measure a critical material parameter. The well-established set of Split Hopkinson Pressure Bar tests is duly covered with a comprehensive review of methods and test data. The chapter also covers dynamic fracture tests, for assessing fragmentation and spallation, as well as Plate Impact tests, for generation of Equation of State data and dynamic yield strength values.Through-thickness compression Simple compression test of a cylindrical sample Constrained Compression Test, CCT Transverse shear CCT Stamping test, with variable punch diameter Crushing and local shearing Conical indentation test, with variable cone angles Delamination Short beam shear test Central plunger delamination (CPD) test Membrane flexure 2D four-point bend test 3D centrally loaded plate (CLP) test In-plane tensile failure In-plane tensile test, with variable orientation (eg, LT or TL) Armour materials and armoured structures are required to perform under a variety of dynamic conditions, from local penetration events to global blast loadings, and understanding how these structures behave during an impact event is an important aspect for military engineers to consider. Many well-known authorities in this field have published widely on the subject, Overlaid on these dynamic tests is a range of specialised, quasistatic test methods, which have evolved to simulate and quantify particular energy-absorbing mechanisms in lightweight armour materials. Even though these tests are carried out at quasistatic rates, using conventional test equipment, they do provide a means of either ranking potential armour materials or providing input data for analytical models, as covered in One must also remember that there are numerous (more than 10,000) standard material characterisation tests as listed by ASTM International, and the International Standards Organisation (ISO) – these are not covered here but are duly referenced wherever possible. When seeking to understand the behaviour of lightweight armour materials, there is often a need to simulate a particular aspect or feature of an impact event, whether it is the initial indentation of a pointed projectile into a ductile target or the latter-stage process of delamination in laminated armour. With this objective in mind, a number of specialised test methods, carried out at near-QS rates, have evolved (see In earlier chapters, we learnt that some key properties (strength, ductility and fracture toughness) of most materials vary significantly with strain, strain rate and temperature. For example, the yield strength of mild steel, under dynamic loading conditions, could be double that under quasistatic loading. It is preferable, therefore, to measure key mechanical properties of armour materials under some form of dynamic loading. One measurement of loading velocity is strain rate, If engineering strain is employed, where  Creep and stress-relaxation regime (for strain rates less than 10 Quasistatic regime (for strain rates from 10 Dynamic-low regime (for strain rates from 5 Dynamic-high regime (for strain rates from 10 High-velocity impact regime (for strain rates from 10 The associated testing methods at various strain rates are listed in  It should not be a surprise by now to know that an indentation test is at the heart (well, at the very forefront) of understanding penetration mechanics associated with armour materials. An indentation hardness test is an excellent simulation of Hardness testing indenters come in a whole range of shapes and sizes and correct selection is essential. For example, it is fairly common when measuring the hardness of an armour casting to use a Brinell hardness test because the indenter is a ball. Remember that the surface of a casting can be fairly irregular and the substrate is likely to be heterogeneous in nature. Likewise, when measuring the micro-hardness of a ceramic, using the correct indenter diameter to grain-size ratio is very important. Classical understanding was published by The hardness test continues to be used because, more than any other singular material parameter, hardness consistently correlates very well with ballistic performance. This is why careful selection of the most appropriate hardness test from an established range of methods is so important. ISO/TC 164/SC 3 – Hardness Testing, is a useful guide. Through-thickness (TT) compression has been identified as one of the key energy-absorbing mechanisms in both monolithic and laminated armour materials, especially against blunt projectiles (see  The test itself has its historical roots in the early work of Delamination of laminated targets, whether they are fibre metal laminates (FMLs) or fibre-reinforced polymers (FRPs), is an important failure mechanism in composite armour materials. The delamination process itself embraces interlaminar shearing and interlaminar fracture (with the creation of new fracture surfaces), as well as peeling forces (normally measured in 2D) and membrane stretching (caused by out-of-plane displacement). It is a complex event and these individual components need to be uncoupled and each individually measured if any sensible development or analysis is to occur. Conventional tests are well established, as covered by The CPD test, as described by The drop-weight test is a very common tool in a mechanical engineering laboratory because of its versatility in studying the impact behaviour of structures. Reviewed by  When conducting a drop-weight test, a mass is lifted up to a certain height and drops freely to crush a specimen. The impact force history is recorded by the load cell and the displacement history of the drop mass or indenter is recorded by the laser device. A force–displacement curve can then be generated and the total energy absorbed by the specimen can be calculated accordingly, which is the area under the force–displacement curve. In such a drop-weight test, the total input energy is constant, which is In The Taylor anvil test is relatively easy to conduct. However, to precisely determine the boundary of elastic and plastic deformation zones (ie, the magnitude of As recently stated by Critical structures may be subjected to the impact from deformable objects, similar to what happened with the Columbia Space Shuttle in 2003, where a piece of foam hit a wing panel, with tragic consequences. In such events, deformation happens to both the structure and impacting object, with the impact energy being dissipated by both the structure and the deformable object. With a rigid penetrator, only the structure will deform, and the impact energy is dissipated by the structure only. The former case is, of course, the most complex to resolve and understand. In the past decade or so, Fleck and his co-workers pioneered the study of the ballistic resistance of beams and panels subjected to the impact of deformable aluminium foam projectiles ( A similar experimental set-up together with a gas gun is shown in Cracks propagate differently under quasistatic and dynamic conditions – the major differences being as follows. In quasistatic fracture, a single crack nucleates at a single site and propagates either along a grain boundary (causing intergranular fracture) or across the grains (causing transgranular fracture). However, under a dynamic load, numerous cracks nucleate at various independent sites and all propagate independently ( There is an upper bound for the velocity of crack propagation in dynamic fracture, which is normally taken as the Rayleigh wave velocity, though experimentally measured crack Quasistatic fracture toughness of a material is defined as: These are standard, metallurgical tests for ‘toughness’ – they are rather crude, comparative tests but very important as a critical component of an armour material specification, especially for steels which undergo a ductile–brittle transition. For this purpose, energy-absorption values are normally requested at both ambient and −40°C. Both the Izod and Charpy impact tests are dynamic tests, which measure the impact energy absorbed by a V-notched or U-notched specimen. Three major differences between the Izod and Charpy impact tests are as follows. In an Izod impact test, the specimen is placed vertical with notch facing the pendulum ( In an Izod impact test, the specimen is held in a cantilever beam configuration, whilst, in the Charpy impact test, the specimen is held in a three-point bending configuration. Generally speaking, the Izod impact test is used to test plastics, while the Charpy impact test is normally employed to test metals, but it can be used for other materials such as polymers. The ASTM international standards for Izod and Charpy impact tests are ASTM D256 for plastics and ASTM E23 for metallic materials, respectively. Understanding fragmentation of brittle materials, like cast irons, is not only important when designing fragmenting munitions, like hand grenades, but also in setting standards for protection against the penetration of high-velocity fragments, where size, shape and individual velocities are critical in determining lethality. When a metal ring is subjected to a quasistatic load, it may break into two pieces. However, if it is subjected to a dynamic load, it may break into several pieces ( By definition, a fragmentation event converts a monolithic material into a number of small fragments of material. The number, size and fracture pattern associated with this event are very dependent upon the nature of the impact. The failure mechanism known as spallation was described in Spallation tests can be conducted using an SHPB to determine the dynamic tensile strength of materials ( Spalling tests can be conducted on materials whose compressive strength is much larger than their tensile strength and whose behaviour is linear up to failure, such as ceramic, concrete and fibre-reinforced polymer. Otherwise, the initial compressive wave will cause failure in the material. Detailed quantitative spalling models and microstructural effects can be found in Meyer's book ( Until relatively recently, the main threat to an armoured vehicle, and its occupants, has been from small arms ammunition and high-velocity fragmentation. However, with the advent of improvised explosive devices as well as more sophisticated landmines, there has been an increased need to learn more about how armour plate, especially welded steel belly plates, behave when explosively loaded. Furthermore,  The drive for lighter-weight military structures is always on-going and the use of lightweight, composite panels or tubular structures is increasing in popularity. However, these lightweight structures can be susceptible to impact damage from low-level blast events. This section considers the research currently underway in assessing and improving the blast behaviour of these lightweight structures. Hybrid structures, such as sandwich panels (a core sandwiched between two face sheets) or sandwich tubes (a tubular core sandwiched between two thin-walled tubes), are considered in which the core materials could be honeycomb structures, foams, lattice structures and even unique 3-D printed arrays. The experimental facilities and test procedures for recording the deformation/damage modes of blast-tested specimens, supporting theoretical models, and numerical simulations were reviewed and summarised by Pendulum systems can also be used in air blast tests on curved sandwich panels ( The air blast tests were also conducted on sandwich tubes with aluminium foam cores ( Understanding the physics behind the creation, development and interaction of stress waves and shock waves is an important aspect of armour, especially hypervelocity impacts against heavy armour systems. However, whilst their role within the penetration of lightweight armour systems is quite small, if not negligible, the tracking of such stress waves through a material can reveal some fundamental properties. In a ballistic impact, the triaxial strain state created lies somewhere between uniaxial strain and uniaxial stress: uniaxial stress tests, based upon the SHPB test, will be described in  The impactor (or flyer plate) attached to the front of a sabot, is propelled down a gas gun barrel towards the test specimen (or target plate), which is well aligned to give a perfectly planar impact. The impact velocity is measured by a set of velocity pins placed immediately in front of the specimen. The impact generates a stress (or shock) wave within the test specimen, the intensity of which, and associated transit times, being recorded by an embedded gauge, like a Manganin or polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) transducer. The rear surface particle velocity is normally measured by interferometry. For a particular flyer plate/target plate combination, as the impact velocity increases, the waves change their nature from being purely elastic at low velocities, to both elastic and plastic, at intermediate velocities, to shock waves at very high velocities. The three conservation equations covering mass, momentum and energy are fundamental relationships at the heart of impact physics and any numerical analysis of an impact event (see The method required to measure these fundamental relationships is clearly described by The Hugoniot elastic limit (HEL) is the point at which plastic yielding starts to occur within a material loaded under uniaxial strain conditions ( The dynamic yield strength of the material, The following published works illustrate the methodologies described in this section: The split Hopkinson pressure bar (SHPB) technique has been commonly used for the dynamic characterisation of materials. The historical background of the SHPB technique has been reviewed in several references ( Several major developments have taken place, such as modifications of the Hopkinson bar for dynamic tension testing ( The standard configuration for the SHPB set-up is in the compression mode, as illustrated in Two long symmetrical pressure bars with a uniform cross-section and usually made from the same materials; A bearing and alignment fixture to allow the bars to move freely while retaining precise axial alignment; A compressed gas launcher/gun tube or alternative propulsion device ( A pair of strain gauges mounted on each of the input and output bars; and Associated instrumentation and data acquisition system to control, record and analyse the strain wave data ( The bars are usually made from the same material ( More recently The basic principle of a tensile SHPB is similar to the compressive SHPB. Please note that the negative sign is for a tensile pulse and vice versa. The main differences between these two techniques are the method for generating the pulse, specimen design and method for attaching the specimen (    As with any uniaxial tensile testing, necking occurs in the specimen. Thus, special data analysis has to be conducted because the average true stress cannot be calculated using standard SHPB analytical equations. High-speed photography may be applied to provide the dimensional change of the specimen, especially at the necking area. Thus, the analysis of the effective stress and strain can be obtained.  A torsional wave is generated in the input bar by the release of a stored torque ( In the application of high-speed metal-forming operations, a high strain rate is expected. Therefore, the capability of the split Hopkinson pressure bar test has been extended to conduct ( In the first technique, using a hollow tube to accommodate a double-notch shear specimen modifies the output bar. The effective gauge length in this specimen is 0.84 Similar to the first technique, a hollow tube has also been used for the output bar of a punch-test using an SHPB. A flat-solid-circular shape is used for the specimen. In this design, the effective gauge length is determined by the gap between the outside diameter of the input bar and the inside diameter of the output bar. The third technique uses a hat-shaped specimen which is sandwiched between the input and output bars of a standard compressive SHPB. A pulse shaper using a lead or copper disc of 3–5 In the study of shear band formation, it is desired to stop the shear displacement at a certain stage; therefore, a spacer ring can be used to stop the displacement at any target shear level ( Brittle materials such as concrete or ceramics may require a triaxial loading condition in order to investigate their compressive properties and failure modes. This is due to the fact that their compressive properties and failure modes are dramatically affected by stress triaxiality. However, a modified SHPB can be used to conduct simultaneous axial and lateral loading to a specimen. The lateral compression may be applied through a pneumatic pressure vessel, as used by In the early 1970s, The SHPB technique has also been extended to the determination of the dynamic fracture toughness of notched specimens,  Each technique has its own advantages and disadvantages. No standard method or even a well-agreed common approach for such experiments has been found yet ( Fundamental assumptions of the conventional SHPB technique should be maintained such as the system of the bars is linear and dispersion-free. This assumption implies that the one-dimensional stress wave analysis can be employed. In most cases (except in the single loading bar), the stress equilibrium condition should be checked by comparing the one-wave and two-wave analyses. For a valid test, the stress equilibrium should be achieved prior to crack initiation. Pulse shaping technique is strongly recommended in the SHPB for fracture testing. This technique increases the rise time and filters out the high-frequency oscillations. In the WLCT configuration, the friction between the wedge and the specimen is a significant factor that is required to be included in the analysis. The data generated by the above-mentioned SHPB tests are used, in the main, to refine the strength equations employed in numerical modelling of dynamic events. For example, the Cowper–Symonds strength model is one of the most popular phenomenological equations applied in impact problems ( The Johnson–Cook strength model is another widely used material model, which describes the flow stress of metals in terms of strain, strain rate and temperature (  ARMOX 500T is a high-strength steel with excellent ballistic resistance. For its applications in armour, it is essential to understand its dynamic properties at high strain rates There was no evidence of strain hardening observed for the true flow stress of this steel. The flow stress is not sensitive to strain rate from 1000 The flow stress keeps almost constant at temperature below 150°C, while it decreases significantly at temperature beyond 300°C. The above comprehensive test data can be used as the input of the material properties in computer simulation. They can also be used to derive the parameters in the relevant material models such as the Johnson–Cook model. Aluminium honeycombs and foams are cellular materials. They have high strength to weight ratio and attractive acoustic damping properties. They can undergo large deformation at almost constant force/stress to absorb a large amount of energy. Their mechanical properties were experimentally investigated by using a traditional MTS or Instron machine, a high-speed Instron machine and SHPBs at low strain rate (10 In other work, The mechanical properties of woolen fibres have been a subject of extensive research since the 1920s because wool fibres experience both static and dynamic loadings during their manufacturing processes and applications. Their tensile behaviour, under quasistatic loads, has been thoroughly studied, both experimentally and analytically, but only a few reports can be found in the open literature describing their impact response. The resultant impact stress–strain curves at various strain rates from mSHTB, together with the quasistatic stress–strain curve, are shown in In contrast to the low-strength woollen fibres work, above, The reader is referred to Fibre-reinforced polymers (FRPs) such as glass/vinyl ester and carbon/epoxy laminates can be applied in composite armour, as shown in The dynamic strength enhancement of S2-glass/epoxy fibre-reinforced composite was also measured by The dynamic through-thickness properties of one FRP (E-glass 24 oz woven roving in a vinyl ester, Derakane 8084 matrix) was also studied by In very recent work by