In a recent work [Basu, B., Lee, J. H. and Kim, D. Y., Development of WC-ZrO2 nanocomposites by spark plasma sintering. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 2004 87(2), 317–319], the processing of ultrahard WC–ZrO2 nanocomposites using spark plasma sintering is reported. In the present work, we investigate the processing and properties of WC–6wt.% ZrO2 composites, densified by pressureless sintering route. The densification of the WC–ZrO2 composites was performed in the temperature range of 1500–1700°C with varying time (1–3h) in vacuum. The experimental results indicate that significantly high hardness of 22–23GPa and moderate fracture toughness of ∼5MPam1/2 can be obtained with 2 mol% Y–stabilized ZrO2 sinter-additive, sintered at 1600°C for 3h. Furthermore, the friction and wear behavior of optimized WC–ZrO2 composite is investigated on a fretting mode I wear tester. The tribological results reveal that a moderate coefficient of friction in the range from 0.15 to 0.5 can be achieved with the optimised composite. A transition in friction and wear with load is noted. The dominant mechanisms of material removal are tribochemical wear and spalling of tribolayer.In industrial applications, WC–Co cermets, because of high machining performance are widely used as cutting tool inserts. Because of the potential tribological applications, the friction and wear behavior of WC-based materials had been investigated. The tribological study on the conventional WC–Co material having varying Co (4–30%) with and without addition of TiC, NbC, TaC or Mo Although considerable work had been carried out to develop various ceramic composites for tribolological application, limited work, according to the best of our knowledge, has attempted to densify WC materials with ZrO The commercially available high purity WC (primary crystallite size 200 Based on the Archimedes principle, the densities of the sintered specimens were measured in water. Using a Universal hardness tester, the Vickers hardness ( Furthermore, detailed tribological characterization was performed using a fretting wear tester (DUCOM, India) using bearing steel as a counterbody on the optimized composite material under the ambient condition of temperature and humidity. A ball-on-type of tribometer, working on the principle of the mode I fretting (linear relative tangential displacement at constant normal load) is used in the present investigation. Furthermore, detailed microstructural investigation and wear mechanism of worn surfaces were studied by Zeiss optical microscopy, SEM (JEOL-JSM840) and EPMA (EPMA JEOL-JXA8600). From the wear scar diameter measured in transverse direction, the wear volume of flat sample is calculated according to Klaffke’s formula.  XRD investigation of the sintered composite material, shown in The mechanical properties of the optimised composites, densified under different sintering conditions are presented in For tribological testing, the optimized WC–6 The wear volume measurement is based on the diameter of the wear scar in the transverse direction (according to Klaffke’s formula). The wear volume is normalized with respect to load and total sliding distance (number of cycles × displacement stroke × 2) in order to obtain specific wear rate. The wear rate is plotted against load for different fretting duration in From the obtained surface profilometer traces, the maximum depth around the center of the wear scar is measured and results are plotted in SEM images showing the detailed topographical features of the wear scar at varying load and fretting cycles are presented in The X-ray mapping (EPMA analysis) showing the presence of different elements (W, Zr, and Fe) in the wear scar is illustrated in the From SEM observation of the topographical features of worn surface and tribological data, a distinct transition in wear mechanisms is realized. At lowest load of 2 Summarizing, the present work reveals that high hardness (∼22  Our experimental results reveal that dense WC composite can be pressureless sintered to near theoretical density at 1600 An important observation is that the WC–6 The tribological experiments reveal that the optimised composite exhibits moderate COF ∼ 0.15–0.5, when fretted against bearing steel with varying load (2–10