This paper presents an analysis of the potential benefits of implementing energy sustainability concepts during comminution processes. The work is based on the classical comminution theory and on the theoretical postulates of the multi-component grinding. The assessment of the Punta Gorda grinding plant is presented as a case study. It applies factorial method from the Energy Management System perspective.Since the concept of sustainable development was born and discussed in the 1980s, it became a global subject to the prospect of long-term economic growth. With a slightly evolved definition, the basis of its statement is to improve the perspective of the current generation without reducing the perspective of the future ones. Worldwide discussions on sustainable development have been focused on finding a consensus about the use that Governments and Companies give to natural resources. It is well known that this was one of the key items of discussion in the World Economic Forum of Davos in 1999. In addition, the International Materials Assessment and Applications Centre (IMAAC) of UNIDO) and Ciencia y Tecnología para el Desarrollo (CYTED) have carried out some forums and congresses with the aim of discussing the meaning of sustainable development of mineral processes and how it can be approached Minimizing energy consumption throughout the process. Minimizing wastes. Minimizing environmental impacts. Maximizing social satisfaction. These four aspects need to be considered as the key drivers of the minerals extraction industries' development in the coming years. Sustainability of the mining industry in terms of energy management clearly depends on minimizing energy consumption during the beneficiation process. In this way, the public sector must encourage work in this area, especially in countries like Cuba. This approach would not only provide financial benefits to mining companies, but also improve the socio-economic condition of their surrounding communities. The implementation of incentives to those more energy-efficient companies is an aspect that in the short term will have to be considered by governments of countries like Cuba. Special attention should be paid by the construction materials industries of these countries (cement, aggregates), because of their dependence upon comminution processes. Generally, energy sustainability includes the following elements: Energy sources. Energy consumption in the various units of the plant. Energy management. When talking about sustainability, it is important to consider the sources of energy used to feed mineral processes, this is due to the fact that the environmental, economic and social impacts associated to the use of energy will depend upon its sources. These impacts can be qualified and quantified (e.g. number of direct/indirect jobs, air pollution levels, etc.). Energy consumption is associated to energy use efficiency of different sectors and their possibilities of redistribution. The implementation of an Energy Management System (EMS) means the definition of a group of actions directed to obtain a sustainable increment of the energy efficiency throughout the energy life cycle, from generation to consumption. The aim of this paper is to show, from the theoretical basis of multi-component grinding, the “energy reservoirs” during comminution processes, which could be saved through the right design of grinding devices. The initial research studies of the comminution processes were focused on getting a better comprehension of crushing and grinding phenomena, from the perspective of the relationship between size reduction and energy consumption. Rittinger Kick's theory Bond Tijonov and Nazarov Coello To be used in engineering calculations, in a case of binary mixtures, Eq. As expressed in the results obtained by some researchers in the case of binary mixtures This has an important practical interpretation: both the size composition of the ground mixture and its energy consumption are dependent on mineral fraction contents, although it can be pointed out that the grinding process of each mineral is ruled by its own regularities. In this way, when grinding to obtain an adequate liberation level, such level is reached with a high regrinding action of one or more minerals, and the consequent lack of efficiency. In some industrialized countries, comminution operations represent about 3% of the total produced energy The causes of energy loses during comminution are transformation of mechanical energy into heat and noise in transmissions, friction processes among particles not deriving in breakage, metal-to-metal interactions inside the mill, water evaporation, etc. These loses can be considered as “energy reservoirs” of a great magnitude, and their economical use (when possible) can permit the accomplishment of the principle of “doing more with less”, thus the recovered energy can have a great influence in people's quality of live. Thus, it is not rare that milling plants remain at the initial technological set points, without considering changes experimented by the mined ore during the mine extraction in physical and physic-chemical properties, variations in the spatial distribution of ore components, etc. It seems clear that a response can be found in the energetic and technological audits directed also to make the most of those energy reservoirs mentioned before. Perhaps the more useful tool in optimizing the energy consumption not only in comminution plants but in mining industry in general are the Energy Management Systems (EMS), whose implementation is developed through three stages: energy audits, energy saving programs and consumption control actions. Thus, the EMS involves from energy diagnosis based only on visual inspections and historical records, to operators training, processes integration, improving investments, monitoring of energy consumptions, energy accounting, etc. The basis of an EMS is unquestionably founded on Statistics: descriptive statistic, histograms, statistics criteria (when analyzing variables in different cases), factorial methods (to determine in a qualitative and quantitative way the influence of different variables), and graphics of control (to follow the behavior of Gaussian variables). In any case, other methodologies are used such as those seeing in the Pareto diagram and the cause–effect diagram. One of the main mineral processing plants in Cuba is located in the north-east of the island, the Punta Gorda plant. This plant processes a lateritic ore which contains a serpentine fraction and a limonite fraction. Comminution is carried out in a dry closed circuit, with air classification ( The results of the initial diagnosis indicated frequent mill holdups, high feed variability, high ore regrinding, high sand content in grinding product and, of course, high energy consumptions. In order to solve the problems detected, it was decided to carry out a study of the influence of operational variables on quality, productivity and energy consumption requirements, by means of the application of complete factorial method. The feed rate in t/h, The results of the experimental plan design in two cases of ball charge, 40% vol. and 45% vol., are shown in The analysis of the results shown in In   It seems clear that the final assessment must consider not only fineness quality requirements but also energy and productivity ones. A compromise solution is required amongst these three parameters: the adopted solution was regime #1 (see  It is concluded that in the mineral processing plants, there is an energy reservoir which can be returned to the local community to compensate for the energy deficit, raising the quality of life in a zone where power restrictions are frequent. We think that the implementation of rewarding policies regarding power savings is of vital importance and needs to be further considered by government authorities. The methodological tools available in the Energy Management Systems can be the answer to technological problems in mineral processing plants regarding rational energy use. The decisions about selection of an optimum regime must be taken on the basis of a technical analysis which involve quality, productivity and power consumption requirements. The case study shows the socio-economic benefits of energy optimization during mineral processes. The energy saved by the plant could be used by the local community, in a context of restricted power generation, which has been greatly valued in Cuba. The authors would like to express their gratitude to Eng. Alexis García and to the Technical Council of Punta Gorda Plant in Moa (Cuba) during the research works of Dr. Coello; also the authors would like to acknowledge the invaluable help of the Eng. Llorente.