A case study of failure analysis of a 40MW gas turbine blade made of Udimet 500 is presented. The cause of failure is found to be intergranular cracks which started during exposure to high temperature. The cracks initiated from the grain boundaries and propagated to the critical length to result in catastrophic fracture. In many locations M6C type secondary carbides were found agglomerated on grain boundaries. Also micro-cavities were found on fracture surfaces which served as an origin of creeping failure mechanism.There has recently been considerable interest in the analysis of gas turbine failure, e.g. It was reported that a 40  The investigation of the failure was carried out by using several experimental tests, including optical microscopy, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), X-Ray diffraction (XRD) and X-Ray fluorescence (XRF). The cracked blades were obtained from the power plant. Examination of the blade material was made for two different zones of the blade. One of them was near the cracked blade tip while the other was close to the blade platform. The metallographic samples were polished by standard techniques and were etched with solution of 20 From the results of the quantitative examination of the blade material it was found that the composition of the base alloy was 53Ni–18Cr–18.5Co–4Mo–3Ti–3Al and it was identical with Udimet-500 Samples for microstructural evaluation were taken from the hottest zone of the blade airfoil. A large number of cracks of different lengths were found at different regions of the damaged blades. The failure analysis of the 40 A large number of intergranular cracks were found in the failed blade airfoil. On the fracture surfaces were found micro-cavities that served as the origin of a creep failure mechanism. On the other hand it is evident from the rubbing marks that the turbine blades were touched by other objects during revolution. This surface damage might have acted as a stress raiser for crack propagation. The authors thank to Professor Sabriye PISKIN (PhD) for her worthy technical support and useful discussion.