Polyphenols reportedly exert physiological effects against diseases such as cancer, arteriosclerosis, hyperlipidemia and osteoporosis. The present study was designed to evaluate the effects of oleuropein, hydroxytyrosol and tyrosol, the major polyphenols in olives, on bone formation using cultured osteoblasts and osteoclasts, and on bone loss in ovariectomized mice. No polyphenols markedly affected the proliferation of osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells at concentrations up to 10μM. Oleuropein and hydroxytyrosol at 10 to 100μM had no effect on the production of type I collagen and the activity of alkaline phosphatase in MC3T3-E1 cells, but stimulated the deposition of calcium in a dose-dependent manner. In contrast, oleuropein at 10 to 100μM and hydroxytyrosol at 50 to 100μM inhibited the formation of multinucleated osteoclasts in a dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, both compounds suppressed the bone loss of trabecular bone in femurs of ovariectomized mice (6-week-old BALB/c female mice), while hydroxytyrosol attenuated H2O2 levels in MC3T3-E1 cells. Our findings indicate that the olive polyphenols oleuropein and hydroxytyrosol may have critical effects on the formation and maintenance of bone, and can be used as effective remedies in the treatment of osteoporosis symptoms.In bone tissues, both the formation and maintenance of bone are controlled by bone-forming osteoblasts and bone-resorbing osteoclasts, and an imbalance between these two types of cell leads to the bone metabolic diseases, such as osteoporosis and osteopetrosis ( In in vivo experiments, we utilized ovariectomized (OVX) mice as an osteoporosis model. As an animal model for postmenopausal bone loss, OVX mice or rats have long been used ( Polyphenols display antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties. Recent reports have suggested that reactive oxygen species play an important role in the regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation and metabolism. In particular, reactive oxygen species inhibit the formation of bone by osteoblastic cells ( Oleuropein, hydroxytyrosol and tyrosol were purchased from Funakoshi (Tokyo, Japan). 1α, 25-dihydroxy-vitamin D Preosteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells were obtained from RIKEN Cell Bank (Tsukuba, Japan). Cells were maintained in a 55-cm Spleen cells were collected from splenic tissues of 6-week-old male ddY mice (Sankyo Laboservice, Tokyo, Japan). Erythrocytes contaminating the spleen cell fraction were eliminated by adding 0.83% ammonium chloride in 10 Multinucleated osteoclastic cells were fixed in 3.7% formaldehyde for 5 MC3T3-E1 cells were replated in 96-well plates (area of each well, 0.32 Sirius Red F3BA was purchased from Polysciences, Inc. (Wamington, PA, USA). Dye was dissolved in saturated aqueous picric acid at a concentration of 100 MC3T3-E1 cells were subcultured in 12-well plates (3.8 MC3T3-E1 cells were subcultured in α-MEM containing 10% fetal bovine serum, 5 Intracellular reactive oxygen species were measured using the oxidant-sensitive probe 2′, 7′-dichlorofluorescin diacetate (DCFH-DA). Cells (4 BALB/c female mice (6 Bone mineral density of femurs was assessed with X-ray CT System (LA Theata LCT-100; Aloka, Tokyo, Japan). We monitored the bone mineral density of femurs at 0.3 Numerical data are expressed as means  We evaluated the viability of MC3T3-E1 cells treated with olive polyphenols using MTT assay. Exposure of MC3T3-E1 cells to 100 In order to assess the effects of olive polyphenol on differentiation and mineralization of MC3T3-E1 cells, we added each polyphenol to the culture medium of post-proliferative cells and assayed production of type I collagen, alkaline phosphatase activity, and calcium deposition ( We formed osteoclastic cells from mouse spleen cells by addition of 30 We examined the effects of olive polyphenol on hydrogen peroxide (H We examined the effects of olive polyphenols on bone mineral density using OVX mice. We decided to use the 10 In this study, we attempted to clarify the potential effects of the olive polyphenols oleuropein, hydroxytyrosol and tyrosol on bone metabolism, and we found that all compounds inhibited the formation of multinucleated osteoclasts in culture, and that oleuropein enhanced the deposition of calcium by osteoblasts. Furthermore, oleuropein and hydroxytyrosol decreased bone loss of femurs in OVX mice. We screened natural and synthetic polyphenols for their ability to regulate the proliferation, differentiation and function of cultured osteoblasts and osteoclasts in order to identify factors that might cause, prevent or treat bone metabolic diseases such as osteoporosis and osteopetrosis. To date, we have reported that the isoflavone genistein attenuates osteoclastogenesis by decreasing levels of receptor activator NF-κB ligand mRNA in osteogenic/stromal cells ( Olive leaves contain polyphenols, such as oleuropein, hydroxytyrosol, tyrosol and apigenin. Among these, hydroxytyrosol has strongest antioxidant effects. In the present study, we demonstrated that hydroxytyrosol effectively decreased H The in vivo effects of hydroxytyrosol were more potent than those of oleuropein when these compounds were orally administered to mice, although oleuropein most strongly inhibited the formation of osteoclasts and enhanced deposition of calcium by osteoblasts in culture. We found in this study that oleuropein and hydroxytyrosol effectively protect against the loss of bone mineral density of trabecular bone of femur in OVX mice, and that tyrosol had no effect. To date, it has been reported that black Lucques olives ( In conclusion, olive polyphenols, particularly hydroxytyrosol, prevented bone loss in an experimental model of osteoporosis (OVX mice). These findings suggest that olive polyphenols may provide insights into the development of tools useful in preventing and treating osteoporosis. Further investigation is required in order to clarify the detailed molecular mechanisms of action of hydroxytyrosol in bone. This work was supported by Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the