Medicines for delivering therapeutic agents to the lung as dry powders primarily consist of a carrier and a micronised active pharmaceutical ingredient (API). The performance of an inhaled formulation will depend on a number of factors amongst which the particle size distribution (PSD) plays a key role. It is suggested that increasing the number of fine particles in the carrier can improve the aerosolisation of the API. In addition the effect of PSD upon a bulk powder is also broadly understood in terms of powder flow. Other aspects of functionality that different size fractions of the carrier affect are not clearly understood; for example, it is not yet clearly known how different size fractions contribute to the different functionalities of the carrier. It is the purpose of this investigation to examine the effects of different lactose size fractions on fine particle dose, formulation stability and the ability to process and fill the material in the preferred device. In order to understand the true impact of the size fractions of lactose on the performance of dry powder inhaled (DPI) products, a statistically designed study has been conducted. The study comprised various DPI blend formulations prepared using lactose monohydrate carrier systems consisting of mixtures of four size fractions. Interactive mixtures were prepared containing 1% (w/w) salbutamol sulphate. The experimental design enabled the evaluation of the effect of lactose size fractions on processing and performance attributes of the formulation. Furthermore, the results of the study demonstrate that an experimental design approach can be used successfully to support dry powder formulation development.The development of dry powder inhaler (DPI) formulations continues to be a scientific challenge. Drug particles used in DPI formulations require an aerodynamic diameter below 5 α-Lactose monohydrate is the most commonly used carrier ( The particle size distribution (PSD) is one of the crucial parameters for DPI formulation. In order to achieve the desired particle size distribution, manufacturing steps such as milling, sieving and/or air classification are employed. Conflicting reports can be found in the literature over the effect of carrier particle size distribution and drug dispersion—whilst a correlation has previously been reported by some authors ( The mechanisms by which fine excipient particles increase the performance of DPI formulations are unclear at present (  Despite the unequivocal evidence that the fine lactose particles improve performance of DPI formulation, the challenge remains in finding the optimal size distribution of fine material and fine/coarse ratio that will not inadvertently affect the flow properties of the powder formulation ( The aim of the present study was to examine the Lactose carrier blends were prepared from samples provided by Friesland Foods Domo. Lactose sieve fractions were chosen to cover the following three nominal particle size ranges of interest: median size <10 Interactive mixtures of lactose size cuts were prepared using a Turbula T2F mixer. The material was blended in a 0.5 Homogeneity of the powder blends was assessed by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Ten randomly selected samples (20 The Particle size analysis was performed using a HELOS laser diffraction instrument (Sympatec GmbH, Germany) using a R4 lens (1.8–350 Powder particles were imaged using a conventional scanning electron microscope (SEM; Carl Zeiss SUPRA 40VP, Cambridge, UK). Samples were mounted onto 12.5 Tapped density of powder blends was measured using a Caleva TDT2 Tapped Density Tester (Dorset, UK). The sample was introduced without compacting into 100 Flow testing was conducted using a ring shear tester (Dietmar Schulze Schuttgutmesstechnik, Germany). Powder was carefully poured from a spatula in a clockwise motion until the sample cell was overflowing with powder. The flow function coefficient (FFC) was then measured at 4000 Statistical analysis of the results obtained was performed using the Statgraphics Multivariate data analysis was performed using SIMCA-P+ (Umetrics AB). Principal component analysis is used to visualise all results from the experimental design. In this paper, a plot showing both scores and loadings for the first two principal components is used to summarise the design of experiments. The scores show the correlation between the observations and the loadings show the relative influence of each variable on the scores. Particle size distribution for individual particle size cuts, described by the 10th, 50th and 90th percentiles (D[v, 0.1], D[v, 0.5] and D[v, 0.9], respectively) is shown in It is important to note that the final blends contained more undersized particles than set out by the design ( Two methods of measuring the flow properties of the blends were applied, CI and FFC, with a view to compare the two methods and correlate the results. The mean results are presented in The main effects plot ( Homogeneity and potency of the powder blends were assessed by taking ten random samples through the blend. All blends demonstrated good homogeneity (RSD The Blends 2, 3, 4 and 7 gave the best overall performance with mean FPD values ranging from 75.55 to 91.80 Blends 5 and 8 were intermediate performers with FPD values around 50 Statistical analysis of the NGI results was performed. There was no evidence of any of the lactose fractions having an effect on the emitted dose and the total recovery. The main effects plot for the FPD results is shown in Potency of blends after 28 days of storage at two conditions was assessed by taking 5 samples of 20 NGI results presented in The significant reduction in performance for blends stored at 40  As a means of visualising the results generated from the DoE, principal component analysis (PCA) was performed. The complete particle size density distributions were included in this analysis, rather than the theoretical cumulative size fractions. This allows the variability in the batches over the full particle size range to be assessed. A plot for the first two principal components showing both the scores and loadings is shown in PC1 captures the particle size variation in terms of fine and coarse particles—the fine particle size classes are on the right of the plot and the coarse to the left. Therefore, blends 6 and 9 on the right of the plot will have a larger coarse component and blends 3 and 4 on the left of the plot a larger fine component. Blends 1 and 10 are found, as expected, at the centre of the plot. The fine size classes (<10 PC2 highlights the lesser effects of the mid-range of the particle size distributions and to some extent the variation in potency, homogeneity (%RSD) and ED. As already stated, PCA does not model the latter three variables well; PC2 being dominated by the variations in the mid-range particle size classes. Blends 2 and 5 are shown to vary the most significantly in their PC2 scores. Blend 5 is shown from the PCA plot to have large amounts in the size classes 20–60 This study offered a comprehensive approach to studying the effect of carrier particle size by using a statistical design to address the effects of relevant size cuts. Ten blends were prepared in this study using different carrier particle size fractions. The resulting formulations showed clear difference in terms of both physico-chemical properties and aerosolisation performance. Powder flow measurement showed that the smallest lactose size fraction had the greatest negative effect on powder flowability. In order to achieve at least ‘fair’ flow properties, the amount of ultrafine lactose needs to be kept to a minimum although it may be possible to have up to 20% in the 10–40 The assessment of blend potency suggested that the content of ultrafine (<10 The Pharmaceutical formulations should be stable upon storage in a range of environmental conditions. Stability testing of blends after 28 days of storage at ambient conditions revealed a notable decrease in aerosolisation performance for the blends with high levels of fine lactose carrier. The reduction in FPD values was particularly pronounced for blends with high content of particles in the <10 In addition to the capillary effects described above, it is postulated that the finer particle size fractions of α-lactose monohydrate used here may contain a fraction of amorphous material as a result of mechanical processing. The processing method for the production of ultrafine lactose involved jet-milling, hence this carrier fraction is particularly prone to surface damage and creation of disordered regions. Data obtained from the manufacturer suggest that the amorphous content for ultrafine lactose is approx. 8% (when measured using dynamic vapour sorption). Absorption of water vapour by the amorphous regions can influence product stability. Furthermore, surface recrystallisation and the formation of solid bridges could also account for the reduction in drug product performance. Lactose is known to promote chemical degradation of certain active pharmaceutical ingredients ( This study was aimed at investigating the functionality within the particle size distribution using an experimental design. The need to understand and control the physico-chemical properties of the lactose carrier has been highlighted, as they strongly affect the efficiency of DPI formulations. The results obtained show that the beneficial effect that finer carrier size cuts bring to aerosolisation performance must be balanced with their negative effects on flow properties and stability upon storage. Robust and reliable measurement techniques for both surface and bulk powder measurement should be in place during the DPI formulation development. This is particularly important when large industrial scale equipment is used for powder processing as it can be anticipated that intra- and inter-batch variations in carrier properties may lead to variation in drug product performance and storage stability. The authors would like to thank John Swarbrick (Inhalation Products, Friesland Foods Domo) for his help and guidance in selecting and providing the lactose sieve cuts used in this study. Gary Nichols is acknowledged for generating SEM images and Caroline Berry and Rachel Yorath for their help in generating the particle size data.