A wide use of engineering and natural materials with microstructure makes it necessary to develop methods of describing mechanical behaviour of structures made of these materials. Yet, despite extensive research many aspects of fracture initiation and propagation in such materials remain unclear. We consider Mode I crack in particulate materials whose constituents are able to rotate. We model such materials in 2D as an idealised slightly cemented granular material where circular shaped thin discs are glued together. In order to model the crack, the bonds between a few pairs of discs are removed with crack opening being introduced by a thin wedge. Rotations of the particles are analysed using physical experiments, an analytical model and a DEM numerical simulation. It is found that the DEM simulations give results very close to the experimental ones. Furthermore, the particle rotations during fracture propagation can be well described by the pseudo-Cosserat continuum with constrained microrotations.distance between the wedge and the crack tip Young's modulus shear modulus half thickness of the wedge normal and shear stiffnesses of linear springs normal and shear stiffnesses of parallel bond springs length of the bond displacements displacement vector Westergaard complex stress function the first integral of normal and shear critical-damping ratios friction coefficient Poisson's ratio bond tensile and shear strengths rotation rotation vector Materials with heterogeneous microstructure are ubiquitous in nature and widely used in engineering so this matter generates considerable interest. For instance, geomaterials consist mostly of cemented grains (e.g. rocks) or slightly cemented and unbounded constituents (e.g. clay, sand) thus possessing highly nonhomogeneous microstructure. Concrete, mortar, ceramics, masonry are other examples of such materials. Modelling of fracture initiation and propagation in these materials represents a challenging problem. A large number of parameters (e.g. porosity, particle size distribution and morphology, water saturation, ability of particles to rotate, boundary conditions, etc.) have an effect upon mechanical behaviour. All these aspects should be considered and taken into account for adequate modelling. In the present paper the primary focus is on rotation of particles and its importance on fracture behaviour in particulate materials – materials whose constituents may rotate. Various forms of fractures and types of failure in geomaterials, such as single fractures, multiple interacting fractures, shear and compaction bands, damage zones under quasi-static and dynamic loading can be distinguished Geomaterials are often subjected to compressive load leading to compaction and shear band formation, which represent the main mechanisms of failure. Consequently it is no wonder, that these types of failure attract much interest from a practical standpoint. This topic has been given much attention from the second half of the 20th century to the present day and discussed in the literature extensively. It has been established that shear and compaction bands are associated with strain localisation and accumulation of microcracks. With development of non-destructive scanning techniques, experiments using sand and artificial materials with relatively small particles were conducted using various methods to record the particle movement, such as photogrammetry Due to heterogeneous microstructure and the presence of microrotations, the classical continuum whose every point possesses only three (two in 2D) translational degrees of freedom cannot describe satisfactory the mechanical behaviour of particulate materials. A number of non-standard continua were proposed for the task such as the Cosserat continuum (micropolar or asymmetric elasticity, e.g. Cosserat and Cosserat The Cosserat continuum was used extensively for modelling particulate materials with non-uniform deformation, in particular shear band formation in granular materials Recently Dyskin and Pasternak Here Consequently, the rotation and couple stresses can be calculated using the displacement field obtained in the conventional crack problem and the Cosserat constitutive equations. In the present paper we investigate the mechanical behaviour of an idealised particulate material with a pre-existing fracture and determine the displacement and rotation fields around a Mode I crack using physical experiment, numerical simulations and a simple analytical model based on the concept of small-scale Cosserat continuum. The paper has the following structure. The detailed description of the physical model, the experimental apparatus and technique as well as the obtained results is given in Section The physical model, the experimental apparatus and technique were reported elsewhere (see Pasternak et al. We concentrate on two-dimensional models of granulate materials with rotations. We also presume that the particles/grains are represented by discs notwithstanding the fact that particle shape can qualitatively affect the behaviour of a particulate material (e.g. Pasternak et al. The discs form a square packing assembly. The assembly consists of 15 rows by 8 columns. All discs are in contact with four neighbours. The discs are glued together by a sealant, as shown in The adhesive for the assembly has been chosen to make sure that the sealant is sufficiently flexible and delivers high movement capability. As a result, the adhesive bonds can transmit a moment load and the discs are allowed to have relative rotations. On top of that, the bonding strength and adhesion need to be considerably high. The detailed characteristics of the selected sealant Sikasil® WS-305 CN are shown in The experimental apparatus with the physical model is shown in The experiments are aimed to explore the mechanical behaviour of the square packing assembly with a pre-existing fracture. In order to implement the fracture into our physical model we removed the bonds between some pairs of the discs (to be more precise, between the discs of the 8th and the 9th rows from the bottom). Two fracture lengths were considered and several attempts of the experiment were carried out for each fracture length. First, we removed the bonds between two pairs of the discs and conducted the experiments. Then we cut off the bonds between one more pair of the discs and conducted the experiment with three pairs of the unbonded discs as shown in In contrast to the previous experiments where the same apparatus was used The initial state of the physical model and the triangular wedge are shown in The digital image correlation method recovers full-field displacement and rotation data for each disc (i.e. for each point within each area-of-interest) in all images taken during the experiment. Due to inevitable errors (e.g. image noise in a photography, camera shake during shutter release) the reconstructed rotation field is not uniform within each disc (see  The horizontal displacement of the slider is small (less than 0.5 It is noteworthy that during the evolution of the assembly the wedge hardly has a contact with the discs along the upper fracture surface (except of the disc at the left boundary of the assembly). This shows that the opening of the Mode I fracture induces the rotations while the friction is not an important factor. Particle rotations caused by wedging a crack can be modelled in the frame of small-scale Cosserat continuum. To this end, one needs to consider the crack in the frame of classical elasticity, determine the displacement field and then using Eq. While the configuration is cubic we will approximate the material as isotropic; the subsequent comparison with the experiment showed that this approximation gives errors commensurable with the general errors of this experiment and thus does not influence the main conclusion. For the plane-strain problem the displacement field around the crack can be expressed as For the case of plane-stress which corresponds to the physical model the same solution can be used if Poisson’s ratio, In order to determine the correct branches of the square root functions in Eqs. By substituting Eqs. As mentioned above, materials with microstructure require the use of non-standard continuum such as Cosserat continuum in order to find microrotations. However, as suggested in Since we consider the plane problem there is only one component, Substituting Eq.  We may assume that the angle of rotation of each disc can be calculated as a rotation field value at the centre of each disc (this proposition holds within the limits of the experimental accuracy). It is important to note that the analytical solution does not take into account the external boundary conditions (constraints and friction due to the side walls, free surface at the top). Therefore, the analytically deducted rotation of the discs away from the crack tip (i.e. outside the dash-lined rectangle and close to the boundaries) and the results of the experiment differ markedly and cannot be compared. A more accurate modelling requires the use of numerical methods. Here we study opening of Mode I crack using numerical modelling. The Particle Flow Code Two conventional built-in contact models in PFC2D are employed in our numerical simulation: the linear contact model and linear parallel bond model (PB model). The linear contact model provides linear elastic (no-tension) frictional behaviour of a contact between two bodies over a vanishingly small area. The contact behaviour is determined through a set of normal and shear springs with constant stiffnesses, Linear parallel bond model provides the behaviour of a cement-like matter that binds particles with other bodies. Linear parallel bond consists of two sets of springs that act in parallel: a set of linear springs with stiffnesses, In our numerical modelling we use the linear parallel bond to represent the silicone sealant between the discs. To simulate the behaviour of the un-glued pairs of discs we utilise the linear contact model. Similar to our physical experiments, we investigated situations of two and three unbonded pairs of discs. However since the technique is the same, we only present the results and analysis of the numerical simulation for the case of three unbonded pairs of discs here.  The micro-properties of the numerical model were calibrated and represented in Here Since we do not study fracture propagation in the physical experiment due to the small size of the assembly, we set parallel bond tensile and shear strength to infinite (a large value of 10 During the calibration stage the microparameters were changed individually to provide the best fit between the experiments and the simulations. We discovered that some parameters such as PB normal and shear stiffnesses and friction coefficient between walls and discs are the most important micro-properties for the calibration. Changes in other parameters (e.g. wall and disc stiffnesses) do not affect significantly the assembly evolution. The PFC2D solution scheme is based on the explicit finite-difference method which is sensitive to the time step. In our simulation we use the time step of The horizontal contact force was tracked during the simulation and the maximum magnitude was appeared to be less than 1.3N as observed in the experiment. Moreover, the discs in the right boundary column have fairly small horizontal displacement within 0.5 The evolution of rotations of the discs is shown in However, it can be seen from The rotation of disc I (shown in Mechanical behaviour of an idealised slightly cemented granular material with a pre-existing fracture was investigated using different approaches such as physical experiments accompanied by digital image correlation, numerical simulations based on discrete element modelling and analytical solution rested on the conventional equations of linear elastic fracture mechanics. The Mode I crack was simulated by using the wedge which produces the opening displacements. The analytical solution was obtained assuming that microrotations near the crack tip can be considered dependent on displacement gradients as in the classical continuum. In terms of continuum modelling of particulate materials it means that in the case of the crack problems the pseudo-Cosserat continuum with constrained microrotations can be used instead of the general Cosserat continuum. The comparison of rotation of the discs near the crack tip obtained by physical modelling and analytical approach demonstrates reasonably good agreement. The discrete element modelling of opening of the Mode I crack also gives good agreement with the results of the experiments. The parametric analysis shows that some parameters (e.g. stiffnesses of parallel bond) influence the mechanical behaviour of the assembly more than others (e.g. stiffnesses of wall and particles) during the opening the Mode I crack. It is interesting that the back analysis yields low values of contact stiffnesses between the particles. These are several orders of magnitude lower than the ones typically used in the literature. The authors acknowledge the financial support from the In order to convert complex functions The square roots, Thus, we can write the Westergaard complex stress function