Purpose
                  The results for fixation of comminuted posterior wall acetabular fractures are not very promising with reported complications in terms of osteoarthritis, nonunion and malunion which subsequently require conversion to total hip arthroplasty. The conversion to total hip arthroplasty is possible in patients over 50 years of age but not in younger patients. So this requires new methods for salvage of the native hip in young patients.
               
                  Methods
                  There were six patients in our series with highly comminuted posterior wall acetabular fractures where the fragments were excised and the gap filled with tricortical anterior iliac-crest strut autograft, fixed with screws and plate.
               
                  Results
                  Good results were achieved in four out of six patients analyzed clinically using the Merle d'Aubinge score modified by Matta and radiologically by Matta scoring. These patients have returned to original work and are walking independently. The good result in one patient deteriorated from good to poor between one and two years. One patient developed infection and excision arthroplasty was done. The graft incorporated well in five out of six patients.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The use of iliac crest autograft is a better, advanced and promising technique as it provides a new wall to the weight bearing dome of the acetabulum for articulation with the femoral head. The rates of nonunion, malunion, post traumatic osteoarthritis are less as compared to the fixation of the comminuted fragments. The need for conversion to total hip arthroplasty is also less.Posterior wall fracture-dislocations constitute the major bulk of acetabular fractures. We retrospectively analyzed our patient data from January 2011 to December 2013. Fifty four patients with posterior dislocation with posterior wall fractures were operated during this time. All patients were treated by the senior surgeon with intent to preserve the native hip using standard fixation techniques. Six patients were identified where comminution was so severe that fragments were deemed unfixable ( All patients were operated in lateral decubitus position using Kocher-Langenbeck approach. Additional trochanteric flip osteotomy was used in all cases to improve the dome exposure. Comminuted fragments were excised and posterior wall defect was measured using metallic caliper. Slightly oversized tri-cortical strut graft was harvested from anterior iliac-crest and shaped with bone nibblers to get a snug fit in the defect. Graft was secured with 2–3 K-wires (2 mm) and stability of the hip checked clinically and under c-arm for subtle instability. Definitive fixation was achieved using 2–3 inter fragmentary screws (3.5 mm cortical or 4.0 mm cancellous) and appropriately positioned reconstruction-plates. Flip osteotomy was fixed with 2–3 small-fragment screws and routine layered closure was done ( Patients were mobilized toe-touch with walker the next day. Stitch removal was done at two weeks and then followed up in six weeks, three months, six months, nine months, one year and two years post-operatively. CT scan was done at 2 years and patients were asked to follow up if any problem arose in the hip or yearly thereafter. All patients were available for the follow up which were evaluated clinically using modified Merle de'Aubigne score All procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and/or national research committee and with the 1975 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards. The Pearson correlation coefficient was used for assessing the correlation between the clinical outcome and the radiological outcome. There were six patients in our study with five males and one female. The mean age was 30.5 years (18–49 years). The mean follow-up was 47.66 months (43–57 months). An associated injury was observed in three patients. One of the patients had sciatic nerve palsy pre-operatively which completely recovered by itself in two years. One patient developed infection at the surgical site. None of the patients reported complication in the form of heterotopic ossification. The demographic profile and clinical/radiological follow up is cited in The clinical score at one year follow up was good in 83.33% (5/6) patients and poor in one patient. However, the clinical score at two years follow up was good in four (66.67%) patients and poor in two (33.33%) thus deteriorating in one patient from good to poor. The radiological outcome at one year follow up was good in four (66.67%) patients, fair in one (16.66%) and poor in one ( None of the patients have reported any pain and disability at latest follow up in relation to graft-harvest site. Associated focal lesions of the femoral head in the form of posterior-superior scoring were seen in all the patients. Three patients were operated within one week of injury, two had good clinical and radiological outcome while one had poor outcome because of infection. Three patients were operated after two weeks, two had good clinical outcome whereas as radiological outcome was good in one patient, fair in one and poor in one. The review of literature clearly indicates that the results of reduction and fixation of comminuted posterior wall acetabular fractures are not very promising. Letournel et al. reported good results in only 35% of the patients with comminuted posterior wall fractures. Daum et al. firstly described the use of iliac crest graft for comminuted posterior wall fractures in 1993 achieving satisfactory result in one case and poor in another case requiring total hip arthroplasty. Thus, use of iliac crest autograft in comminuted posterior wall fractures is a better, advanced and promising technique as it provides a new wall to the weight bearing dome of the acetabulum for articulation with the femoral head. The rates of nonunion, malunion, post traumatic osteoarthritis are less as compared to the fixation of the comminuted fragments. The need of conversion to total hip arthroplasty is also less. The authors certify that they have obtained all appropriate patient consent forms in which the patient(s) has/have given his/her/their consent for his/her/their images and other clinical information to be reported in the journal. The patients understand that their names and initials will not be published and due efforts will be made to conceal their identity, but anonymity cannot be guaranteed. The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at