Introduction
                  Radiocarpal dislocation (RCD) and fracture-dislocations (RCFD) are severe but rare injuries for which the treatment and outcomes are not well defined. The aim of this retrospective study was to describe the prevalence of the various injury types and their long-term outcomes.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  Between 1992 and 2014, 41 patients with RCFD were seen at our institution. According to the Dumontier classification, there were 4 cases of type 1 and 37 cases of type 2. Thirteen patients were reviewed again after a mean follow-up of 168 months (20–260).
               
                  Results
                  Among these 41 patients, 6 required secondary wrist fusion. At the latest follow-up evaluation, flexion-extension amplitude was 100° (25°–152°), grip strength was 86% of the contralateral side (10kgf–112kgf), the mean VAS for pain was 1.3 (0–5), the mean QuickDASH was 23 (0–59) and the mean PWRE was 27 (0–75). Six patients developed osteoarthritis in the radiocarpal and midcarpal joints.
               
                  Discussion
                  For cases of RCD, when reduction and stabilization have been confirmed by a dorsal approach, there is no reason to perform volar capsule and ligament suturing. For cases of RCFD, after anatomical reduction, radiostyloid pinning can be performed and an open surgical approach is not always required. Radiolunate fusion is a good solution for treating secondary instability.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The good functional outcomes and absence of osteoarthritis can be attributed to the effective reduction and radiocarpal stabilization, along with the absence of radial and intracarpal marginal fractures.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  IV, retrospective.Radiocarpal dislocations (RCD) and fracture-dislocations (RCFD) are rare (0.2% of dislocations) but severe injuries that occur following significant wrist trauma The classification system developed by Dumontier et al. The most feared complications are ulnar translation and osteoarthritis Between 1992 and 2014, 41 patients were seen at our facility: 4 had a RCD and 37 had a RCFD ( Of the 41 patient cohort, 4 died, 19 were lost to follow-up and 5 did not wish to return to the clinic for a follow-up evaluation. Thus, 13 patients were available for analysis. For each one, pain levels were quantified with a visual analog scale (VAS), the wrist's range of motion was measured with a goniometer and the grip strength was measured on the injured and healthy side with a Jamar Lateral and A/P radiographs of the wrist were used to look for the signs of osteoarthritis and to determine whether the radiocarpal joint was unstable. The osteoarthritis was classified into three stages (none, moderate, significant) as was the instability (none, doubtful, certain). Based on the Dumontier classification, there were 4 type 1 injuries that were all pure RCD (group 1) and 37 types 2 injuries (group 2). In group 1, the dislocation was palmar in one case, dorsal in one case, ulnar in one case and unknown on one case. None of these patients had a marginal or radial styloid fracture. Every patient in this group had intracarpal damage: one case of lunotriquetral dissociation combined with capitolunate diastasis (slight medial perilunate dislocation of the carpus) ( In group 2, the dislocation was palmar in 11 cases, dorsal in 20 cases, anteroulnar in 1 case, dorsoulnar in 1 case and unknown in 4 cases (secondary displacement). The radial styloid process fracture was isolated in 7 cases and had a marginal component in 30 cases ( In group 1, radiocarpal reduction was held by radiolunate pinning in two cases and a wrist cast in two cases. In group 2, 31 of the 37 radial styloid fractures were immobilized. Of the 30 associated marginal fractures, 17 were immobilized. In this group, radiocarpal reduction was maintained by pinning in 3 cases, external fixator in 13 cases, radioulnar K-wire and external fixator in 7 cases and a wrist cast in 14 cases. During the postoperative course, 6 patients required secondary wrist fusion. There was one case of complete wrist fusion due to stage 3 osteoarthritis secondary to scaphoid nonunion and five cases of partial radiolunate fusion due to ulnar translation after an initial treatment consisting of reduction and cast immobilization of a RCD (one case), residual radiocarpal subluxation following RCFD in which the marginal component could not be secured (three cases) and secondary RC osteoarthritis due to nonunion of the radial styloid (one case). These patients all had an uneventful postoperative course after their arthrodesis procedure. Three patients who underwent radioulnar fusion were reviewed in the context of another study after 194, 70 and 56 months. All joints had fused and all the patients were satisfied with the functional outcome; the pain levels on VAS were 3, 1 and 2, respectively. Among the 41 patient cohort, 13 were reviewed again after a mean follow-up of 168.2 months (20–260), which is 14 years. Twelve of these patients had been treated on an emergency basis after their injury while the other patient was referred to us because of an articular malunion of RCFD initially treated conservatively. There was one type 1 lesion (patient No. 4) and 12 type 2 lesions (6 dorsal, 6 palmar) of which one required secondary radiolunate fusion. Three of these patients had intracarpal damage. At the time of fracture healing in these 13 patients, 2 had a moderate articular styloid malunion and 3 had a significant one; one patient had residual radiocarpal subluxation with ulnar translation. Before the last follow-up visit, two patients required surgical revision: one for radiolunate fusion and one for ulnar head resection. At the final review, the wrist range of motion averaged 54.3° (15–74) in flexion, 46.8° (10–80) in extension, 31° (5–54) in ulnar deviation, 21° (5–36) in radial deviation, 76.1° (45–85) in pronation and 69.6° (45–80) in supination. The mean grip strength was 66.9 Other than the patient who underwent radiolunate fusion, severe radiolunate osteoarthritis was discovered in two patients and moderate osteoarthritis in two patients; the other eight patients had no signs of osteoarthritis. There was no radioscaphoid osteoarthritis in seven patients, moderate in five patients and severe in one patient. There was no midcarpal osteoarthritis in seven patients, moderate in five patients and severe in one patient. To bring out potential prognostic factors, the patients with and without osteoarthritis were separated into two sub-groups. Data comparing their initial treatment and the radiological and clinical findings are given in This study confirms the rare nature of these injuries, since the annual incidence in our practice is 1.9 cases per year. For type 1 injuries, Dumontier et al. Some authors recommend using an external fixator to maintain reduction and apply optimal ligament tension One of the main findings is that more than 80% of RCFD cases also have marginal fractures. These fractures contribute to a poor prognosis, particularly when they cannot be secured because of comminution. Of the six arthrodesis procedures performed, three patients had marginal fractures that were not fixed because they were highly comminuted. Of the nine patients reviewed with a marginal fracture, all four patients in which a repair could not be performed developed secondary osteoarthritis. Thus, it appears to be important to secure the marginal component. If the fracture is comminuted, K-wire will be needed in the radiocarpal joint to protect the precarious fixation and to keep the radiocarpal joint centered while the fracture heals. Based on the results of the Girard et al. study This study provides information of the incidence of radiocarpal fracture-dislocations injuries and the prevalence of various types. Type 1 injuries are rare and always associated with intracarpal ligament damage, which contributes to a poor prognosis. If the dislocation can be reduced anatomically and verified through a dorsal approach, repair of dorsal capsule and ligament structures combined with temporary RS and RL pins helps these structures to heal. Thus, palmar repair does not appear to be necessary. For type 2 injuries, intracarpal damage was found in less than 25% of cases. However, marginal fractures are present in more than 80% of cases and lead to a worse prognosis if they cannot be secured. If there is no marginal fracture and the radial styloid can be completely reduced, radial styloid pinning is sufficient and a surgical approach is not always needed. Radiolunate fusion appears to be a good solution for treating complications such as radiocarpal instability and radiolunate osteoarthritis. The authors declare that they have no competing interest.