In ageing, chronic renal disease or diabetes mellitus, the atherosclerotic process seems to be inversely correlated to bone mineralization. Previous studies suggested that oxidative stress could be involved in this phenomenon, especially oxidative stress generated by oxidized low density lipoproteins (oxLDL). It must be underlined that, in the vascular wall, differently oxidized LDL can co-exist, from the “minimally oxidized” state to much more oxidized forms. However, at the present time, no study has considered the influence of the degree of LDL oxidation on their effect on mineral deposition in bone cells. We therefore used MC3T3 murine pre-osteoblasts in which mineral deposits are induced by culturing cells up to 14 days in the presence of 4 mM inorganic phosphate (Pi), which is known to promote mineralization. Five fractions of oxLDL presenting increased oxidation levels, and well characterized by their electrophoretic mobility, their hydroperoxide and their lipid peroxidation end product (TBARS) contents, were used. In our experimental conditions, none of these oxLDL had significant cytotoxic effect. However, they reduced the Pi–induced mineralization proportionally to their degree of oxidation. Interestingly, fraction 3 and 4, which have the highest hydroperoxide content, were less effective than fraction 5, which exhibits the highest TBARS concentration, in reducing mineral deposition. In the same manner, fraction 5 reduced osteopontin (a marker of osteoblastic differentiation) protein expression more efficiently than fractions 3 and 4. Moreover, while 4 mM Pi increased by about 2 fold the activity of the transcription factor AP-1, known to be involved in osteoblastic differentiation, the fraction 5 of oxLDL was also the most efficient in reducing the Pi-induced activity of AP-1. These data suggest that hydroperoxides are not the most important factors in the oxLDL-induced inhibition of the mineralization process, and that lipid peroxidation end products play an essential role.  