Within the context of mining subsidence simulation, this paper proposes a generalization of the n–k influence function, considering two physical concepts: the first is gravity, which characterizes the forces acting on the ground, and the second, the convergence of the roof and floor of the mine workings due to the stress state of the ground. Caving in of the roof generates direct subsidence, and the swelling of the floor, indirect subsidence, which allows us to better carry out the shape of the expected subsidence trough.
                  These physical concepts are fundamental to mathematically implement the n–k influence function, permitting the interpretation of this function on the basis of physical and geometric concepts that may be evaluated more directly by the expert who has to perform the calibration, validation and sensitivity analysis of the phenomenon of subsidence. They likewise allow the scope of application of influence functions to be extended to non-horizontal seams, as well as taking into account the quality of the rock mass and the presence of preferential sliding directions, in both the roof and the floor of the seam.
                  In the development of this work, we shall first define a new generalized influence function (n–k–g), introducing the aforementioned geometric and physical concepts. The parameters n and k characterize the ground and g is related to the gravity. We shall then go on to justify their interpretation and see their application in the simulation of non-horizontal seams. Finally, we shall present the results obtained in a particular case, comparing these results with modeling previously carried out using FLAC.Subsidence of the ground, i.e. its movement caused by the loss of bearing capacity of the rock mass, is normally directly related to human activities that alter the water table or when carrying out underground mining of ore. In this respect, subsidence may be due to multiple factors: the dissolving of deep rock formations, the natural compacting of the land or the exploitation of water tables, coal fields or oil fields. In this paper, we shall specifically study mining subsidence, i.e. the movement of the surface of the ground as a consequence of the collapse or failure of underground mine workings. The ground that is above the excavated area is altered, collapses, is partially compacted and progressively subsides as the work of extraction advances. In general terms, we may speak of two types of mining subsidence depending on its extent. On the one hand, there is sinkhole subsidence, which is concentrated in areas in the immediate proximity of the excavated area. This subsidence is easily recognizable due to its characteristic shape, defined by a highly localized abrupt depression that is limited in extent. Extensive subsidence, on the other hand, results in the formation of a topographic depression on the surface (subsidence trough) that is more or less regular in shape and which is linked to the distribution of the excavated areas being exploited in the mine. In these cases, the subsidence is large in the central area and decreases progressively towards the sides, said subsidence being accompanied by horizontal displacement. While compressive stresses are prevalent in the central area, tensile and shearing stresses are prevalent in the peripheral areas. The movements of the ground produced by both types of subsidence may produce damage to buildings, roads, railway lines, oil pipelines or any other infrastructure in the surrounding areas. To estimate, quantify and prevent this damage, models must be established that allow us to determine a priori issues such as what the greatest vertical displacement of the surface of the ground will be and where it will be produced, or what the lateral extent of said subsidence will be. To answer these questions, different numerical methods have been developed ( The application of any of these numerical methods to real cases has to be accompanied by the calibration of real data, validation and sensitivity analysis. Calibration is the process of making the model match real-world data. It involves making several model runs, varying parameters until the best fit is achieved. Care must be taken that the model continues to describe the real-world situation. Validation is the process of confirming the goodness of the calibration, considering an independent data set to that used as input, which has been obtained subsequent to this calibration. Finally, sensitivity analysis consists in varying the parameters of the proposed mathematical models, with the aim of estimating how this affects the results. The most sensitive parameters need to be checked for accuracy to ensure the best model. Having established these steps, we shall now go on to develop the approach that we have adopted in our work, initially describing the theoretical basis of our method and subsequently applying it to a series of real cases. The study presented here includes the introduction of a series of physical concepts that enable ground subsidence to be studied on the basis of its real behavior and of how the excavation carried out underground is transmitted to the topographic surface in the form of subsidence. Taking the methods that use To do so, the effect of two concepts that have not been taken into account in the traditional analysis ( These two concepts are fundamental, as they enable the phenomenon of subsidence to be interpreted in a more intuitive way. This will distinctly facilitate the calibration, validation and sensitivity analysis of the phenomenon of subsidence under study. Another argument in support this work is that the rock mass corresponding to the geological roof may be different to that of the floor. In order to take into account this effect, a proportional distribution of the subsidence must be carried out as a function of the RMR (Bieniawski's Rock Mass Rating) of the ground in the roof and in the floor. The RMR classification system ( The main factors that are considered with the RMR system are the weightings given to intact rock strength, RQD (Rock Quality Designation) ( On the other hand, the method developed in this paper enables the subsidence of seams of any slope whatsoever to be explained, even completely vertical seams, thus avoiding the limitation of We shall call this new function the generalized Firstly, we shall introduce the physical concepts on which our interpretation of subsidence is based and then go on to formulate these concepts mathematically in a new generalized influence function, showing how each of these concepts influence the shape of the trough. We shall then see its application to the simulation of sub-vertical seams, and finally we shall present the results of our model in a particular case, comparing these results with other numerical models carried out in FLAC 2D. When carrying out underground excavations, the stress state of the ground is modified and a series of movements appear in the rock mass, directed towards the interior of the excavated cavity. Such movements have a preferential direction that depends on the perpendicular to the generated free faces and on the direction of gravity. When speaking of longwall coal mining, the geometry of said cavities, in which the thickness of the seams is small with regards their length and width, the displacements of the wall rock, though important, are not found to be representative with respect to the phenomena of convergence of the roof and floor. Taking a horizontal coal seam of this type as a reference, the alteration of the stress state will cause movements of the ground in a vertical direction, downwards from the roof and upwards from the floor. The direction of these movements depends on two effects: A stress effect in the perimeter of the excavated cavity, the direction of which is determined by the unit normal vector A gravitational effect, the direction of which is determined by the unit vector Let As can be seen in The caving in of the roof results in a new cavity, though now above the previous one. Similar phenomena to those described above will again be produced in the new cavity, such that the caving in of the roof of this cavity will in turn once more generate another cavity situated above it, which will be progressively transmitted upward, possibly reaching the topographic surface, where subsidence appears. This situation is analogous to the movement of a bubble (the cavity) in a fluid (the ground), in which an upward push acts on the bubble. The process that triggers subsidence may thus be described by means of two interrelated phenomena: The movement of the ground towards the cavity, with a downward trajectory due to the combination of the effect of stresses perpendicular to the cavity and the action of gravity. The migration of the cavity towards the topographic surface, which follows an identical direction to the movement of the ground, though in the opposite sense. Throughout this upward migration, the original cavity suffers a decrease in size because of swelling processes in the ground (see Thus, once the cavity has originated in the mine, there exist three possible patterns of behavior: The generated cavity is stable, and therefore there is no upward migration or subsidence. The ground surrounding the cavity collapses and upward migration of the cavity occurs (see The ground surrounding the cavity collapses and the caving in progresses until reaching the topographic surface (see This third behavior pattern of the ground is the one that is produced when there is subsidence and is therefore the one we shall consider in this study. The cavity is transmitted both vertically and horizontally in such a way that the maximum subsidence occurs at point Q, while it will decrease progressively at the adjacent points P, thus forming the subsidence trough shown in In the case of the movements of the floor of the mine workings, there initially exists a tendency for the cavity to progress downward, as a result of the stress state in the surrounding area. However, this effect is counteracted by gravity, which impedes the development of this tendency, rapidly checking it. If we consider the seam not to be horizontal (see To explain what occurs in terms of the progression of cavities, it must be borne in mind that the ascending cavity follows the direction marked by the vector This trajectory is similar to the one that a bubble would follow in a fluid when a horizontal component is initially given to its movement, and corresponds to a parabola whose axis is parallel to Once the subsidence reaches the surface, the displacements that it generates are distributed throughout the affected area as represented in The point on the surface, Moreover, as a consequence of the position of the seam, the possibility exists of the cavity progressing from the floor, i.e. the “caving in of the floor” may be produced in a similar way to that of the roof. This situation is schematically represented in Therefore, the mining of the inclined seam may cause two subsidence troughs, one corresponding to the movements induced in the roof of the seam, which we term It can be seen in As well as the length of the trajectory, the magnitude of the vectors The relative position of It is possible to modify the relative influence of the gravitational and stress effects by simply changing the gravitational parameters When Values of If the ground is homogeneous and isotropic in the roof and floor of the excavated cavity, then we shall have Firstly, the rock mass corresponding to the geological roof may be different to that of the floor. It might therefore occur that the material of the roof may be very solid, for instance sandstone with very little fracturing, and that the material constituting the floor may be not at all solid, for example a carbonaceous shale. Under these circumstances, it is logical to suppose that the greater part of the subsidence will proceed from the floor of the seam, i.e. the floor or indirect subsidence may be greater that that of the roof. The case may even arise of no roof subsidence taking place (whether as a result of the checking phenomena described above or because the roof does not actually cave in). In order to take into account this effect, a proportional distribution of the maximum possible subsidence must be carried out as a function of the RMR of the ground in the roof and in the floor. Another cause of the appearance of anisotropic phenomena is to be found in the existence in certain rock masses of planes of very marked weakness (for example, schistocity in slates) that will influence the trajectory of the movement of the ground towards the underground cavity. Depending on the importance of the weak planes, the effect of the vector Although In order to determine the subsidence in the topographic surface caused by underground mining, two qualitatively differentiated circumstances must be analyzed: On the one hand, said subsidence will depend on the geotechnical characteristics of the ground, on the dimensions of the cavity and on the relative position between the underground cavity and the surface. This dependence may be determined by means of different methods, among we chose. On the other hand, subsidence does not develop instantaneously, but rather needs a period of time to commence after the opening of the cavity and may extend over a period of many years. The majority of spatial influence functions are only applicable to the mining of horizontal seams or seams with a slight dip (less than 30°). Therefore, bearing in mind the physical concept of ground movements already presented, a new spatial influence function was formulated that allows results to be obtained for mine workings of any slope. When the excavated seam is sufficiently wide, it is possible to approximate the calculation of subsidence via a two-dimensional model. This hypothesis is not true in the areas at the face ends, but is acceptable in mine workings with sufficient length for the effect of this edge to have little significance. In excavation geometries in which this requisite is not fulfilled, it will be necessary to correct the end effects by means of a study in three dimensions. The two-dimensional working model fits the one shown in The topography is represented by means of a straight line inclined at an angle In this cross section, a system of coordinated orthogonal axes Since in the majority of coal faces the thickness The topographic surface, with a slope Considering this two-dimensional geometry of the seam and the topographic surface, we will carry out the subsidence trough. The first step to solve the problem of determining surface subsidence is to define the consequences that the mining of an elemental excavation unit has at any point on this surface. Subsequently, this influence is extended to all the mined elements by means of an additive process. Bearing in mind the aforementioned phenomena, this process implies the following steps: First, the excavation panel must be broken down into elemental excavation units A of width As each elemental excavation unit generates direct and indirect surface subsidence, it is necessary to first ascertain the points of maximum roof and floor subsidence of each one of these units. These points will be obtained by intersecting the topographic surface with the respective upward parabolic trajectories of the cavity. Once the points of maximum subsidence on the surface are known, the magnitude of the subsidence is distributed according to the The direction of movement of any point on the surface towards the cavity will likewise be marked by a parabolic trajectory, as will be justified in Once the subsidence value, calculated using the influence function, and the direction of movement are known, the movements are determined along a pair of vertical and horizontal axes. Adding for each point on the topographic surface the vertical and horizontal movements contributed by the excavation of all the elemental units of the production panel, caused by both roof and floor subsidence, we obtain the total vertical subsidence at this point. We shall now elaborate in detail each of these steps for a two-dimensional model. In the circumstances described above, when mining element A, the ground situated above the roof and below the floor tends to move towards the cavity following the stress and gravitational effects described in In the case of movements of the roof, the vectors of the stress effect (Eq. Thus, the ground in the surrounding area of the roof of the elemental excavation unit A will follow a trajectory marked by the vector denominated The vector  As can be seen, for horizontal seams ( In the case of floor subsidence, the initial trajectory of the movement will be marked by the same stress and gravitational effects, given by: In an analogous way to direct subsidence, we may now define the angle In this case, for subsidence to exist, the values of From this condition, it results that: On the other hand, however, if As the cavity progresses towards the surface, the vectors that define the caving-in trajectories are readjusted in order to adapt to the parabolic trajectory (see The intersection of the parabolic trajectories of the roof and floor with the topographic surface will allow us to obtain the points on the surface at which the excavated element A generates the greatest subsidence. To determine the equation of the parabolic trajectory of the roof, two concepts must be taken into account: The initial direction of movement is marked by the vectors This direction tends to a vertical orientation as the movement rises towards the surface, i.e. the influence of the vector This physical situation is similar to a parabolic ballistic trajectory, applied in this case to the ascent of a cavity, which combines a uniform rectilinear movement (in accordance with an initial velocity) and an accelerated uniform movement (marked by the acceleration of gravity). The equation of the parabolic trajectory may be obtained using this analogy as the one that the ascent of a cavity subjected to a parabolic ballistic trajectory would follow, bearing in mind that three conditions must be fulfilled: It must pass through point A in the seam. Its initial direction is This direction must be corrected by the effect of the vector As can be observed, the effects of stress and gravity are considered as having a negative sense, i.e. they are upward vectors whose vertical component must therefore be positive. The position vector of the roof parabola, as a function of a parameter For the floor, we have: In an analogous way to what occurs in the equation that defines the trajectory of a parabolic shot, the parameters Thus, when The point of maximum surface subsidence, Two values are thus obtained for As regards floor subsidence, the point of maximum subsidence It likewise being necessary to fulfill the condition that The coordinates of the points of maximum subsidence will be given by: This is the name given to the subsidence caused by the excavation of an elemental unit on the topographic surface. The subsidence corresponding to the caving in of the roof will be determined first, to which will then be added that corresponding to the caving in of the floor (which in many cases is a swelling), as represented in To obtain the elemental subsidence, the method of influence functions is used. The influence denominated A horizontal seam is considered, with a thickness If Q is used to denominate the point on the topographic surface that is subject to maximum subsidence ( This maximum subsidence that appears at point Q is “checked” by the distance as it moves away from the excavated area. Under these conditions, the      It can be seen in Eq. The first factor takes into account the damping of the subsidence with the depth of the mining activity, being inversely proportional to the depth squared. The second factor, which adopts an exponential form, represents the damping of subsidence as the horizontal distance increases between the point of maximum subsidence (Q) and the calculation point, i.e. between the excavated area and the calculation point. Given any point P (see The Being:     As regards the direction of the subsidence at point P, just like point It is therefore necessary to determine the parabolic trajectory that defines the movement of point P. To do so, the following determining factors are imposed: It must pass through point P, whose position vector is It must pass through point A, whose position vector is It is assumed that the subsidence due to the excavation of element A reaches all the points on the topographic surface at the same time. Thus, the parameter These three conditions are translated into parametric coordinates in the following equation: In this equation, the vector Once the equation of the parabola is established, it is now only necessary to calculate its tangent vector at point P in order to determine the direction of the subsidence at this point. This tangent vector, taken in the downward sense, is The same process as described above to obtain the elemental roof subsidence must be followed to obtain that of the floor. The movements taking place at any point P owing to the Its modulus will be obtained from the influence function, in which  Its direction will be the tangent (taken in the downward sense) to the parabolic trajectory of the floor: Thus, once the horizontal and vertical displacements suffered by any point on the topographic surface due to both roof and floor subsidence have been calculated, the total displacements or total elemental subsidence at P is obtained as: When defining the roof and floor influence functions, two parameters, respectively denominated An elemental cavity unit is assumed of width The volume The distribution between both volumes will not generally be the same, since two effects intervene in this process: When the effects of stress and gravity on the roof and floor are defined, the resulting vectors in both cases ( The geomechanical properties of the materials situated in the roof and floor of the seam may be different (with different RMR values), and hence the caving in will progress at different velocities, developing asymmetrically. In effect, assuming a material with a very low RMR in the roof and another very solid material in the floor, the collapse of the roof would be so rapid that there might not be time for floor subsidence to develop. Analogously, it might occur that we have a roof with a very high RMR and a poor quality floor, which would favor the development of floor subsidence, compensating the lower modulus of the vector of indirect subsidence. We therefore have another two proportionality factors, which will be called Considering both effects, the following formulations are proposed to determine the value of If we wish to determine the total subsidence at point P caused by the extraction of a panel from the seam (see As can be seen in When the elemental cavities are of a sufficiently small size to be considered differential elements ( We shall next show how this double integration is carried out, first with respect to The integration with respect to Expressing the influence function given by Eq. The respective components of the elemental roof subsidence given by Eq. Analogously, the components The component along the direction As the two-dimensional plane strain model is used, it will be verified that: Hence, an excavation strip of infinite width is the equivalent of assuming that Taking: The integral that allows us to obtain the Finally, the integral must be calculated along the direction of maximum dip of the seam, i.e. the integral between To do so, it is sufficient to carry out a change in variables to a local reference system ( Since point A, which defines the position of each elemental excavation unit, is on the median line of the seam, we have that The horizontal and vertical components of the total subsidence produced at point P when mining the seam between We shall say that the values thus obtained correspond to the generalized influence function proposed in this paper, which we shall now onwards call the Having defined our generalized We shall analyze in the following order the influence of the: Depth of the mine.  Gravitational weighting factors. Rock mass quality factors. Anisotropy of the ground. To study this influence, we consider the examples whose initial geometry is shown in The values assigned to the calculation parameters for the generalized The geometry of the seams remains constant, unless indicated otherwise, since in some cases as will be seen in subsequent sections, the value of An initial analysis of the general expression of the  Thus, at distances In the case of inclined seams, the influence of the depth of the mine workings is even more important, since it influences not only the magnitude of the subsidence, but may also condition whether there exists two troughs (roof and floor) or only one. The surface subsidence was obtained along a topographic cross section that passes through the center of the mine workings and follows the line of maximum dip of the seam. This cross section is represented in the drawing in  As regards horizontal movements, these have been represented in  This behavior, which is so different, is due to the fact that the greater the depth, the greater the area of influence of the subsidence. The areas of influence of the roof and the floor may overlap until they form one single trough. The horizontal displacements present similar characteristics to those described above (see Given the generalized influence function expressed in Eq. In principle, no limitation exists with respect to the values that  As regards horizontal displacements, it can be appreciated in Although the parameter The smaller the value of Finally, we shall test the influence that gravitational factors have over surface subsidence. To do so, as in the above sensitivity analyses, we shall take the mine workings represented in  The influence of The effect of the gravitational component of the floor can be seen in A similar effect can be observed in When the roof and floor subsidences are added together, the resulting curve will have its point of maximum subsidence at more or less distance from the center of the mine workings as a function of the values of The horizontal displacements for the same combinations of This effect is very interesting when we have a double trough. In this case, we shall adopt an The horizontal component of the subsidence can be seen in Other factors that influence the geometry of the subsidence trough are the rock mass quality factors of the roof and floor ( The horizontal movements have been represented in The analyses carried out until now refer to ground that is isotropic both in the roof and the floor. In the real world, however, it is common to find rock mass in which certain planes of discontinuity exist that condition the behavior of this rock, favoring the failure of the material in their direction. This is the case, for example, of schistocity in slate materials or even of stratification when the spacing between planes is small. With respect to subsidence, the presence of these weak planes affects the parabolic trajectory followed by the movement of the points on the surface, acting as preferential directions of movement. We next analyze the influence of anisotropy on the example under study, represented in the drawing in This situation is reflected in When the planes that define the preferential directions of movement are parallel to the seam being excavated, subsidences greater than the thickness of the seam may be produced, as can be seen in We have compared results obtained with the  As can be seen, the excavated length of the seam is always 250 m. The depth of the head of the mine workings has been maintained constant, its center of gravity thus varying in depth as a function of its slope. Likewise, the topographic surface has been considered horizontal in all three cases. As regards the calculation parameters, the backfill factor has been considered equal to 1 for a mining system employing caving in, so that the entire seam eventually fully converges. Likewise, the materials in the roof and floor of the seam have been considered to have identical geotechnical properties, and hence the rock mass quality factors will be: A plain strain model was carried out using the FLAC software considering the same type of material in the roof and floor. As an example, It can be seen how the maximum subsidence is displaced towards the left of the seam. If we join the points of the maximum   The horizontal distances in meters are represented on the In the case of a simpler analysis, in which the seam is considered horizontal (Case I), the results obtained with the classical formula and the generalized function would coincide when taking For Case II, note should be taken of the combined effect of the depth and of the dip of the seam on the displacement of the points of maximum subsidence, with the appearance of a clearly visible asymmetric trough. In this case, a simulation of the displacements is obtained using the generalized influence function that fits the FLAC results fairly well. As the dip angle of the seams increases, the points of maximum subsidence are displaced, the double subsidence trough appearing for very vertical seams (see As can be appreciated, this double subsidence trough appears in the FLAC model, and may also be adequately simulated with our generalized influence function. For seams with reduced dip angles, the two troughs partially overlap, giving the sensation of a single subsidence trough. However, as the dip angle of the seam increase, the aforementioned double subsidence trough can be visualized more clearly. In this paper, the The study of these parameters enables us to justify the appearance of the double subsidence trough and to determine the points of maximum subsidence with varying dip angles of the seam. To do so, it has been especially important not only to predict the magnitude of subsidence, but also to put forward a parabolic approximation that simulates the gradual variation of the subsidence vector. The consideration of roof subsidence (direct) and of floor subsidence (indirect) is a tool that reinforces the physical interpretation described in this paper, and enables the subsidence of completely vertical seams to be simulated in a more reliable way. The obtained results fit the numerical values calculated using FLAC quite well, facilitating and making the task of subsidence calibration simpler, since although there are more parameters that may vary, each one is fitted to a physical behavior that is easily predictable. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of Paul Barnes for the preparation of this paper in English. Thanks are due to the anonymous referees for their valuable suggestions.