In the present studies locally injectable docetaxel nanocrystals loaded d-alpha tocopheryl polyethylene glycol 1000 succinate-modified Pluronic F127 (DOC-NCs-TPGS-PF127) thermo-sensitive hydrogels were prepared to reverse drug resistance of P-glycoprotein (P-gp)-overexpressing human liver cancer SMMC-7721 tumors. Firstly, DOC nanosuspensions with mean particle size of 196nm were prepared and dispersed into series of mixed solutions containing PF127 and TPGS of different ratios to obtain DOC-NCs-TPGS-PF127 hydrogels. DOC NCs, exhibiting a uniform distribution and very good physical stability during three sol–gel cycles in the hydrogel network, did not influence the gelation temperature. Swelling-dependent release pattern was found for DOC NCs from hydrogels and release profiles could be well fitted by the Peppas equation. MTT test showed that hydrogels containing 0% or 0.1% TPGS had no cytotoxicity against L929 fibroblasts. Both DOC solution and DOC-NCs-TPGS-PF127 hydrogels exhibited obvious cytotoxicity against sensitive SMMC-7721 cells. When resistant SMMC7721 cells were treated, DOC-NCs-TPGS-PF127 hydrogels showed significantly higher cytotoxicity compared with DOC solution and hydrogels containing no TPGS (DOC-NCs-PF127), with markedly lower IC50 and resistant index (RI). After intratumoral injection in SMMC-7721/RT tumor xenograft Balb/c mice model, DOC-NCs-TPGS-PF127 hydrogels exhibited about 5-fold increase and 1.8-fold increase in the inhibition rate of tumor growth compared with intravenous and intratumoral injection of DOC solution, respectively. It could be concluded that TPGS-modified PF127 thermo-sensitive hydrogel was an excellent locally injectable carrier to reverse P-gp overexpression associated multi-drug resistance.Treatment of cancers with systemically administered chemotherapeutic drugs is always associated with serious systemic side effects, such as myelosuppression, phlebitis, cardiotoxicity, hepato-nephrotoxicity, hair loss, weight loss and so on Pluronic F127 (PF127, also known as Poloxamer 407), a copolymer of poly (oxyethylene)-poly (oxypropylene)-poly (oxyethylene), is a well-known thermo-sensitive matrix and can exhibit reversible solution (sol)–gelation (gel) transition in an aqueous solution The development of resistance to variety of chemotherapeutic agents, which is so called multi-drug resistance (MDR), is another major challenge in cancer treatment. Of the various mechanisms causing MDR, resistance caused by overexpressing of P-glycoprotein (P-gp) transporter is widely concerned and is of considerable clinical significance Recently, many studies proved that some non-ionic surfactants commonly used in pharmaceutical formulations, such as Pluronic L121, Brij 30, Cremophor RH40, Pluronic F68, and (d-alpha tocopheryl polyethylene glycol 1000 succinate) TPGS, could disrupt the efflux function of P-gp In the present studies, DOC-NCs-TPGS-PF127 thermo-sensitive hydrogels were prepared to reverse drug-resistance of P-gp-overexpressing SMMC-7721 human liver cancer cells. DOC is a widely used anticancer drug that is semi-synthesized from 10-deacetylbaccatin III, an inactive toxoid precursor prepared from needles of European DOC (98.0%) was purchased from Meilun Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (Dalian, China). TPGS and 3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) were purchased from the Sigma–Aldrich Co., Ltd. DMSO was purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Company (Beijing, China). Trypsin (1:250) was purchased from Solarbio Co., Ltd. New born Calf Serum and RPMI-1640 cell culture medium were purchased from Gibico Company (USA). Marketed DOC injection (30 DOC NCs were prepared by using wet-milling technique. 10 First the DOC NCs were filled into glass flasks and prefreezed at −80 15% and 20% (w/v) PF127 solutions were prepared by dissolving PF127 in distilled water at 4 Rheological measurement was performed with an AR 1000 rheometer (TA instruments, UK). After incubating at 4 The particle size distribution of DOC NCs present in various PF127 solutions was measured as a function of temperature through a Malvern Zetasizer (3000SH, Malvern Instruments Ltd., UK) Dissolution behavior of gels was studied by using a rotary shaker (HZS-HA, China). 100 Drug release was modeled by DOC NCs entrapped in DOC-NCs-TPGS-PF127 hydrogels were observed by scanning electron microscope (JEOL, JSM-6510). The PF127 gels containing DOC NCs were formed and then kept at 37 The human liver cancer SMMC-7721 cells were purchased from Institute of biochemistry and cell biology, Shanghai, China. SMMC-7721/RT cells, induced by stepwise increased concentrations of DOC The P-gp expression of SMMC-7721 and SMMC-7721/RT cells was measured by western blot method. SMMC-7721 or SMMC-7721/RT cells (3 The cytocompatibility of blank hydrogel carrier was assessed by MTT method as described previously SMMC-7721 or SMMC-7721/RT cells were seeded in 96-well plates at a density of 5 Female athymic BALB/c (Nu/Nu) mice (6 weeks, 18–20 SMMC-7721/RT cells were collected at their logarithmic growth phase and resuspended in serum-free RPMI 1640 medium to a concentration of 1 All data were expressed as means Routinely, the mean diameter of DOC bulk powder was about 16 micrometers and the size distribution was broad (Suppl. Fig. 1A). After 20 In order to determine the gelation temperature of the PF127 hydrogels, the storage (elastic) modulus ( The particle size of DOC NCs was kept stably around 200 All the DOC hydrogels showed sustained release behavior within 72 As shown in Western blot tests were performed to compare the P-gp expression level between sensitive and DOC resistant SMMC-7721 cells. The initial density P-gp/β-actin of SMMC-7721/RT cells was 83.23 MTT assay was applied to evaluate the biocompatibility of TPGS-modified PF127 hydrogels to L929 fibroblasts. The relative viability (%) of L929 fibroblasts after 48 Due to the high inhibition effect of blank hydrogel matrix containing 0.2% TPGS on the growth of L929 fibroblast, Gel 3 and Gel 6 were not considered for the further cytotoxicity study against tumor cells. It could be seen that inhibition effects on cell viability had relations with both formulation and tumor sensitivity. As shown in There were no significant differences among different DOC formulations in the IC On the other hand, for both formulations, IC The The tumor growth rate and Serious systemic side effects and MDR may be two major reasons for the failure of chemotherapy. In the present studies, TPGS modified PF127 thermo-sensitive hydrogels which could be locally administered was developed to overcome the two major problems of the chemotherapy. Nanocrystal technology has been proved to be very advantageous for water-insoluble anticancer drugs due to its ability to improve solubility and avoid the usage of solubilizers with high toxicity such as polysorbate 80 and Cremophor EL As the hydrogels were aimed to be injected locally, the formulations were expected to be in solution state at room temperature and transform to gel state in the injection site. Gelation temperature should not be too close to 37 Interaction between DOC NCs and PF127 was also investigated. Firstly, addition of DOC NCs had no influences on the gelation behavior of PF127, which was consistent with other reports about PF127 hydrogels containing drug nanoparticles The PF127 hydrogels exhibited a sustained and stable release within 72 The blank matrix of the injectable hydrogels should not be toxic to the normal tissue around the tumor, so cytotoxicity of the blank matrix was firstly evaluated by using Due to its low matrix cytotoxicity and ideal gelation temperature, the formulation Gel 5 was used to evaluate the TPGS has been characterized as an effective inhibitor of P-gp mediated drug transport in the human intestinal Caco-2 cell monolayer and many tumor cell lines In the present studies thermo-sensitive TPGS-modified PF127 hydrogel was formed as locally injectable carrier for DOC NCs to overcome the P-gp overexpression associated MDR. TPGS-modified PF127 hydrogel possessed the same thermo-sensitive property as the PF127 hydrogel, and preserved physical stability of DOC NCs without any particle size growth of NCs during the gelation cycles. The TPGS-modified PF127 hydrogel displayed sustained release of DOC within 72 None. This work was partially supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: