Vein networks of pseudotachylytes and ultracataclastic rocks are composed mainly of ultrafine-to fine-grained materials, including fault gouge and microbreccia, and are widely considered indicators of past seismic faulting events. I show that such vein networks of pseudotachylyte with both melt and crush origins, as well as ultracataclastic rocks, form by the rapid injection of ultrafine-to fine-grained material sourced from pulverized ultracataclastic rocks in seismogenic fault zones under thermal pressurization and fluidization during seismic events. The thermal expansion of seismic slip zones caused by frictional heating results in the rapid fluidization of ultrafine-to fine-grained materials along with expanded fluids and gases (e.g., water vapor and melt) that are injected under pressure into fracture void spaces within fault zones in a gas–solid–liquid system during large earthquakes. I propose that the thermal expansion of water vapor and ultrafine-to fine-grained materials caused by frictional heating in the fault slip zone is the main mechanism responsible for the dramatic increase in pore pressure that results in the dynamic coseismic weakening of faults.The main processes hypothesized to induce fluidization and pressurization of pulverized cataclastic rocks ( Pulverized cataclastic rocks, including fault gouge and microbreccia, can be injected into coseismic fractures as vein networks within seismogenic fault zones by thermal pressurization and fluidization of ultrafine-to fine-grained materials during large earthquakes (e.g., This study focuses on the formation mechanisms of thermal pressurization of liquids and the fluidization of ultrafine-to fine-grained materials sourced from pulverized ultracataclastic rocks in seismogenic fault zones during faulting. I also discuss the formation mechanisms of vein networks of pseudotachylytes and ultracataclastic rocks, and the weakening mechanisms of seismogenic fault zones related to thermal expansion and fluidization. Vein networks of pseudotachylytes with both frictional melt and crush origins, and ultracataclastic rocks composed mainly of fault gouge and microbreccia, have been reported worldwide (e.g., The intrusive structures of the irregular vein networks described above indicate that the veins were not generated Fluids are pervasive in the shallow upper crust, including in active fault zones, and such fluids have a strong influence on fault mechanics (e.g., Given that the thermal expansion coefficient of water vapor is ∼100 times greater than that of solid material ( Assuming ideal gas behavior, which is a reasonable approximation at the low ≈ 0.00170 m ≈ 1700 cm The above calculation shows that when 1 g of water (1 cm The water volume ( At temperatures of greater than 374 °C, the water in a fault slip zone becomes a pressurized vapor and the pressure exceeds the supercritical point of 22.1 MPa ( Fault-generated pseudotachylyte veins of melt origin are widely accepted as indicators of past seismic events, and the glass or glassy matrix of such veins forms as a result of frictional melting during rapid slip on the fault plane (e.g., If the vein networks of pseudotachylytes and ultracataclastic rocks shown in Field evidence and petrological analyses reveal that coseismic slip is generally localized within a narrow slip zone composed of pulverized cataclastic rocks, typically <3 mm wide, bounded by the striated principal fault plane, such as the Nojima Fault ( Based on the above, a fault–fracture dilatancy model is proposed to explain the formation of network veins of pseudotachylytes and ultracataclastic rocks ( The The dynamic weakening of faults during large earthquakes is considered to result from several mechanisms, including frictional melting (e.g., Although the dynamic fault strength during frictional melting is commonly considered to be controlled by the development of a molten layer and the viscosity of this layer ( I thank M. Miyawaki, J. Uchida and T. Satsukawa for valuable discussions and former students K. Yamashita and M. Tanaka for assistance in the field. I am grateful to Prof. E.C. Ferré and an anonymous reviewer as well as the chief editor Prof. T. Takeshita for critical reviews that helped to improve the manuscript. My thanks are also due to N. Akiyama for arranging field works and Y. Yoshida for illustrating the figures. This work was supported by a contract research project of