The separation of Mo(VI) and W(VI) from sulfate solution by LIX 63 and PC 88A was investigated as a function of solution pH. Using LIX 63, selective extraction of Mo(VI) over W(VI) in the initial pH range from 2.0 to 6.0 was achieved and a separation factor of 406 was obtained. However, it was impossible to separate Mo(VI) and W(VI) by extraction with PC 88A in the same pH range. The equilibrium pH was higher than the initial pH, suggesting a possible solvating mechanism. The loaded Mo(VI) was quantitatively stripped from the loaded LIX 63 and it was possible to obtain a Mo(VI) solution with purity of 99%. The McCabe–Thiele diagrams for the extraction and stripping of Mo(VI) by using LIX 63 were constructed.Molybdenum and tungsten are strategic metals used in many applications. The chemical properties of Mo(VI) and W(VI) resemble each other and their mixtures are encountered in mineral deposits and recycled materials ( The separation of Mo(VI) and W(VI) from aqueous solutions is difficult owing to their similar chemical properties. The predominant aqueous species of Mo(VI) and W(VI) depends on solution pH. Although MoO In a previous study, chelating reagent (5,8-diethyl-7-hydroxydodecane-6-oxime, LIX 63) was used to selectively extract Mo(VI) and V(IV) over W(VI) at initial pH > The synthetic solution containing Mo(VI) and W(VI) was prepared by dissolving Na The extraction and stripping tests were carried out by mixing 20 When the solution pH is in the range between 2.0 and 6.0, the distribution diagram indicates that most of W(VI) exists as anionic species, while some of Mo(VI) exists as cationic species ( It has been reported that LIX 63 has a strong tendency to extract metal ions in a hydroxide form ( As shown in The change in pH during the extraction by LIX 63 and PC 88A was measured and shown in Based on the performance of the two extractants LIX 63 and PC 88A, it is possible to selectively extract Mo(VI) over W(VI) by employing LIX 63 in the equilibrium pH range between 2.2 and 5.8. Therefore, the separation efficiency of Mo(VI) and W(VI) by extraction with LIX 63 was investigated by varying LIX 63 concentration at several initial pH values (3.0, 4.0 and 5.0). In these experiments, the concentration of LIX 63 was varied from 0.1 to 0.5 The separation factor (SF) is defined as SF Extraction isotherm of Mo(VI) by LIX 63 was obtained by varying the volume ratio of organic to aqueous phases from 1:5 to 5:1. In these experiments, 0.2 In order to investigate the stripping of Mo(VI) from the loaded LIX 63, the loaded organic phase was prepared by contacting the aqueous solution containing 10 The stripping distribution isotherm of Mo(VI) from the loaded 0.2 The separation of Mo(VI) and W(VI) from sulfate solution by solvent extraction was investigated as a function of the initial pH of solution. LIX 63 and PC 88A were employed in the initial pH range from 2.0 to 6.0. The concentration of Mo(VI) and W(VI) in the solution was 10 This work was supported by a grant operated by