The effect of calcium hypochlorite (Ca(ClO)2) on the flotation separation of covellite and pyrite with ammonium dibutyl dithiophophate (ADD) has been investigated through micro-flotation tests, zeta-potential measurements, infrared spectroscopy (IR) analyses, adsorption measurements and X-ray photoelectron (XPS) analyses. The flotation results illustrate that Ca(ClO)2 depressed pyrite selectively and had little effect on covellite at pH 10. The zeta-potential measurements indicate that a potential change occurred on covellite and pyrite because of the adsorption of ADD. The selective adsorption of Ca(OH)+ on pyrite causes a sharp decrease in the negative potential. In addition, adsorption studies and IR analyses demonstrate that the adsorption of ADD on pyrite is strongly inhibited by Ca(ClO)2, whereas that on covellite is affected only slightly. Furthermore, XPS analyses confirm that pyrite is preferentially oxidized by Ca(ClO)2 to form CaSO4 and Fe(OH)3 on its surface; thus, the adsorption of ADD on pyrite is prevented, resulting in the depression of pyrite.Covellite is found in nature as a metal sulfide ore and is often associated with pyrite and other copper sulfide minerals including chalcopyrite, bornite, and digenite. In addition to being an important raw material for copper smelting, covellite is also widely used as optical filter, cathode material and optical recorder based on its excellent semiconductor properties [ The selective flotation separation of sulfide minerals mostly relies on the use of various depressants. Many investigations into depressants for pyrite have been conducted; these depressants are used to separate the valuable sulfide minerals from pyrite. Guo et al. [ Recently, some organic compounds have been identified and synthesized for use as pyrite depressants in the flotation separation of metal sulfide minerals. Wang et al. [ Calcium hypochlorite, as a strong oxidant, is gradually used in the flotation separation of sulfide minerals, in addition to being widely used as a disinfectant for swimming pools or food containers, and as a bleaching agent for cellulose due to its high oxidization. Liu et al. found that calcium hypochlorite selectively inhibited jamesonite flotation to achieve the separation of galena from jamesonite [ Pure mineral samples of covellite and pyrite were obtained from the Zijin mine of Fujian Province and the Yongping mine of Jiangxi Province in China, respectively. The samples were crushed, hand-picked, dry-ground, and then dry-sieved to obtain different size fractions. The −106 + 45 μm sized fraction was used for flotation tests, and the -45 μm sized fraction was used for IR measurements and XPS analyses. All the samples were stored in sealed glass bottles to prevent oxidation. The X-ray powder diffraction data ( In the micro-flotation tests, the flotation process was carried out using ammonium dibutyl dithiophophate (ADD) as the collector, Ca(ClO) The micro-flotation tests were conducted using an XFG-type flotation machine [ The pure minerals were ground to −2 μm in an agate mortar. Then, 2 g of sample was added to 40 mL of aqueous solution with or without ADD at pH 10, and the suspension was stirred for 0.5 h. The mineral after interaction with the reagents was filtered and washed three times with distilled water. Then, the solid obtained was dried in a vacuum oven at 313 K for 24 h. The infrared spectra were recorded using a Nicolet 380 FT-IR spectrometer at 298 ± 2 K in the range of 4000–500 cm Zeta-potentials measurements of minerals before and after interaction with the reagents were performed using a Nano ZS90 zeta potential analyzer (England). For these measurements, 50 mg of the −5 μm mineral sample was added to a 40-mL aqueous KCl solution (1 × 10 The adsorption measurements were carried out using the UV1901PC UV–Vis spectrophotometer with a wave length of 226 nm. For these measurements, 2 g of mineral sample was added to 40 mL of solution, and the mineral suspension was agitated for 1.5 h to achieve the balance between adsorption and desorption of reagents on the mineral surfaces. The supernatant obtained after the centrifugation and filtration of the mineral suspension was used for concentration measurements of the residual reagents. Thus, the adsorption of ADD on the mineral surfaces can be calculated and obtained as follows [ The chemical compositions of untreated pyrite and covellite and that treated with Ca(ClO) The flotation performance of pyrite and covellite with ADD as the collector was explored at a pH of approximately 10, and the results are shown in The flotation performance of pyrite and covellite as a function of pH is shown in The effect of Ca(ClO) The effect of pH on the flotation performance of covellite and pyrite with Ca(ClO) Based on the above analyses, the micro-flotation separation of artificially mixed minerals (1.0 g pyrite and 1.0 g covellite) was conducted. The pH was adjusted to 10 with NaOH, and the concentrations of ADD and Ca(ClO) The zeta potentials of Ca(ClO) The effect of Ca(ClO) The effect of the Ca(ClO) IR spectroscopy can be used to investigate the interactions between reagents and minerals. The infrared spectra of ADD, covellite and pyrite before and after treatment with ADD in the absence and presence of Ca(ClO)   XPS measurements were carried out to investigate the effect of Ca(ClO) In order to further understand the chemical interaction between Ca(ClO) The surface oxidation of pyrite plays an important role in depressing pyrite [ In addition, the reduction of ClO According to electrochemical theory [ Based on the above analyses, a mechanism for the depression by Ca(ClO)  The flotation results indicated that pyrite was inhibited strongly, whereas covellite was affected only slightly. In the presence of Ca(ClO) Zeta-potential measurements suggested that the adsorption of Ca(OH) Adsorption studies and IR analyses revealed that Ca(ClO) Based on the XPS analyses, the depressing effect of Ca(ClO) The authors appreciate and would like to acknowledge the financial contribution to this research by the