The Caixiashan sediment-hosted Zn-Pb deposit (131 Mt at 3.95% Zn + Pb) is located in the western segment of eastern Tianshan, on the southern margin of the Central Asian Orogenic Belt, Xinjiang, northwest China. Zinc and lead mineralization is mainly hosted in the dolomite marble of the Mesoproterozoic Kawabulake Group. Four stages (I to IV) of hydrothermal activity have been identified, i.e., calcite + dolomite + quartz + pyrite stage I, calcite + dolomite + quartz + spahlerite + pyrrhotite ± arsenopyrite stage II, calcite + dolomite + quartz + galena + pyrite ± chalcopyrite stage III, and late quartz + calcite stage IV. Sphalerite and galena mainly occur in the vein ores of stage II and III. Five types of fluid inclusions are distinguished in the calcite- and quartz-bearing veins, i.e., liquid-rich two-phase (L-type), pure-liquid phase (PL-type), vapor-rich two-phase (V-type), pure-vapor phase (PV-type), and halite-bearing (H-type) inclusions. Fluid inclusions of stages I to IV were homogenized at temperatures of 336–494 °C, 240–357 °C, 140–297 °C, and 71–156 °C, with salinities of 4.0–18.0 wt% NaCl equiv., 4.2–17.3 wt% NaCl equiv., 0.2–13.5 wt% NaCl equiv., and 1.2–7.6 wt% NaCl equiv., respectively. The ore-forming fluids at the Caixiashan deposit are characterized by high- to moderate temperatures, moderate salinities, and low densities, belonging to the H2O–NaCl system. Hydrogen and oxygen isotope data indicate that the ore-forming fluids at Caixiashan have a dominantly metamorphic signature and were diluted by meteoric water. Carbon and oxygen isotope compositions of calcite, dolomite, and marble demonstrate that the ore-forming fluids were primarily sourced from the dissolution and low-temperature alteration of carbonates. Sphalerite, galena, pyrrhotite, and pyrite samples from stage I to III record high δ34SV-CDT values between 11.2 and 16.1‰, indicating a predominant sulfur source from the Precambrian marine sulfates by thermochemical sulfate reduction. The 206Pb/204Pb, 207Pb/204Pb, and 208Pb/204Pb ratios of sulfide samples are similar to those of marble and carbonaceous slate of the Kawabulake Group, whereas they differ from those of granitoid rocks, suggesting that ore-forming metals may have been primarily derived from the Precambrian basement. All of these observations combined with the stable and radiogenic isotope results reveal that the formation of the Caixiashan Zn-Pb deposit was dominated by a metamorphic system, and the ore-forming components were sourced from the Precambrian basement.Sediment-hosted Pb-Zn deposits are a significant type of ores mainly hosted by siliceous clastic rocks and carbonates that generally show no direct genetic association with intrusions, and they account for a remarkable proportion of the lead and zinc production worldwide ( The Central Asian Orogenic Belt (CAOB), known as one of the largest accretionary orogens worldwide ( The Caixiashan Zn-Pb deposit, located in the western part of the eastern Tianshan orogenic belt, was discovered by the No. 1 Geological Party of Xinjiang Bureau of Geology and Mineral Exploration in 2002. This deposit contains 131 million tons of ore reserves with an average Zn + Pb grade of 3.95% (Ag > 200 t), presenting the largest sediment-hosted Zn-Pb deposits in eastern Tianshan. To characterize the mineralization of this deposit, several geological studies have been conducted mainly focusing on the ore geology ( The eastern Tianshan orogenic belt lies between the Junggar Basin to the north and the Tarim Basin to the south ( The eastern Tianshan orogenic belt has experienced a complex tectonic evolution from the Late Paleozoic to the Mesozoic, involving the subduction of the paleo-Tianshan Ocean, collision-accretionary, strike-slip motion, post-collisional, and intracontinental extension between the Tarim Basin and the Junggar Basin ( The Caixiashan Zn-Pb deposit is in close proximity to the EW-trending Aqikuduke Fault and is located at the western segment of the Central Tianshan Terrane ( To date, the Caixiashan mining district possesses a reserve of ~131 Mt at 3.95% Zn + Pb, with orebodies outlined by a cut-off of 0.5% Zn + Pb ( There are three episodes of faults crosscutting the ore and alteration zones and wall rocks ( Magmatism is well developed throughout the Caixiashan area. The intrusions mainly include granite, granodiorite, quartz diorite, microdiorite, and allgovite dikes ( The orebodies at Caixiashan include four morphological types: stratiform, stratiform-like, veins, and lenticular. Sulfide mineralization is characterized by massive veins and laminated ores. The Zn-Pb mineralization is hosted in the dolomite marble and the contact zone between carbonate and clastic rocks. The host rocks have experienced dolomitization, silicification, tremolization, chloritization alterations, and as shown in the cross section ( Based on field investigations and microscopic observations of sulfide and gangue mineralogy, textural relationships, and paragenetic sequence, Zn-Pb mineralization can be divided into four stages ( Fluid inclusions in quartz and calcite from various kinds of veins or veinlets selected from the drill cores of different hydrothermal stages (I, II, III, and IV) were chosen for microthermometric measurements and Laser Raman spectroscopic analyses. Polished thin sections were examined under microscope to characterize the phase, shape, size, and distribution of fluid inclusions. Fluid inclusion microthermometric measurements were performed at the Resources Exploration Laboratory of China University of Geosciences at Beijing, using a Linkam MDSG 600 heating-freezing stage, equipped with a Zeiss microscope. The stage enables measurements within the range of −196 to +600 °C. The measurements comprise ice-melting temperature (T Salinities of aqueous (NaCl-H Five quartz samples from the quartz-sulfide veins as well as three quartz samples from the quartz-calcite veins were selected for H-O isotopic analyses. Hydrogen isotope compositions of fluid inclusions in the quartz were analyzed using a MAT-253EM mass spectrometer, while oxygen isotope compositions of quartz were determined by a Delta v advantage mass spectrometer, at the Analytical Laboratory of the Beijing Research Institute of Uranium Geology. Oxygen was extracted from quartz by reaction with BrF Seven calcite samples from quartz-calcite veins and two dolomite samples from dolomite-calcite veins were selected for C-O isotopic analyses. Carbon and oxygen isotope compositions were obtained using a Finnigan MAT-253 mass spectrometer at the Analytical Laboratory of the Beijing Research Institute of Uranium Geology. Calcite and dolomite were reacted with pure phosphoric acid to produce CO Eighteen sulfide samples from sulfide-bearing veins and ores of different mineralization stages were chosen for sulfur isotopic analyses. These sulfide samples were crushed, cleaned, and sieved to 40 to 60 mesh, and then sulfide grains were carefully handpicked under abinocular microscope to guarantee the purity of single sulfide separates (>99%). Sulfur isotope compositions were determined using a Delta v plus mass spectrometer, at the Analytical Laboratory of the Beijing Research Institute of Uranium Geology. The sulfur isotope compositions of sulfides were measured on SO Eighteen samples including thirteen sulfides and five granitoid rocks were chosen for lead isotopic analyses. Lead isotope compositions of most samples were measured by an ISOPROBE-T Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometer instrument, while those of five sulfide samples ( Fluid inclusion studies were performed in the quartz- and calcite-bearing veins from the hydrothermal stages. According to L-type inclusions are the most common type in the quartz and calcite in all stages ( Primary L-type inclusions are prevalent from stage I to stage IV, whereas the V-type inclusions are generally present in stages I and II, and the H-type inclusions are only observed in stage I quartz veins. In the late quartz-calcite stage, only the L-type inclusions are observed and measured. Microthermometric measurements were conducted on the L-, V-, and H-type fluid inclusions hosted in the quartz and calcite minerals. All the L-type fluid inclusions homogenized to liquid phase, whereas V-type inclusions homogenized to the vapor phase in the process of heating. The microthermometric data and calculated parameters for single inclusion of different paragenetic stages are shown in For the early ore stages, L-, V-, and a small number of H-type fluid inclusions were observed in quartz and calcite crystals. The L-type inclusions yielded homogenization temperatures of 336–488 °C, variable salinities of 4.0–16.1 wt% NaCl equiv., and estimated densities of 0.55–0.81 g/cm Homogenization temperatures of L-type inclusions in the Zn-mineralization stage are in the range of 240 to 357 °C, with corresponding salinities from 4.2 to 17.1 wt% NaCl equiv. and the densities from 0.61 to 0.93 g/cm In the Pb-mineralization stage, the microthermometric measurements were only conducted on L-type fluid inclusions, which yielded homogenization temperatures of 140 to 297 °C, with peak T Only L-type inclusions were observed and analysed in the stage IV quartz-calcite veins. These inclusions yielded T Some of the representative fluid inclusions were chosen for the Laser Raman analyses to constrain their gaseous and liquid compositions, and the results are shown in Trapping pressure can be estimated only when the exact trapping temperature is known, or if fluid boiling or immiscibility occurred in the system at the time of fluid entrapment ( Four fluid inclusions of stage I give high trapping pressures of 497 to 537 bars, corresponding to 1.8 to 2.0 km when assuming a lithostatic condition (a rock density of 2.75 g/cm Sulfur isotope data are shown in Lead isotope data of sulfides, granitoids and rocks from the strata are shown in Hydrogen and oxygen isotope compositions obtained from quartz veins of different ore stages are listed in Carbon and oxygen isotope data are reported in All sulfur isotope compositions of sulfides from Caixiashan display remarkably positive δ The lead isotope compositions of various sulfides, granitoids, and host rocks are listed in The δD On the basis of measured carbon and oxygen isotope data ( Petrographic studies of fluid inclusions indicate that the major types of inclusions (L-, V-, and H-) were present in hydrothermal calcite- and quartz-bearing veins during the different mineralization stages at the Caixiashan Zn-Pb deposit. The nature and evolution of hydrothermal fluids in terms of their composition and temperature, salinity, and associated mineralization, is reconstructed to establish a model of fluid evolution and help reveal the ore formation process. In the earlier ore stage I, the hydrothermal fluids that have extracted the ore-forming elements (e.g., Zn, Pb, and Fe) from the basement ascended, filtered through, and dissolved the calcites and dolomites, which subsequently caused the dolomitization alteration. Abundant pyrites were then precipitated with gangue minerals such as calcite, dolomite, and quartz. Fluid inclusions in the quartz and calcite crystals of this stage are mainly of the V- and L-type, yielding relatively high homogenization temperatures (336–494 °C), and intermediate salinities (4.0–18.0 wt% NaCl equiv.). Three H-type inclusions give halite dissolution temperatures of 327–344 °C, with salinities of 40.4–41.9 wt% NaCl equiv. The coexistence of vapor-rich inclusions and halite-bearing hypersaline inclusions suggests a fluid immiscibility event in this stage, also evidenced by the coexistence of L-type with V-type inclusions yielding relatively similar homogenization temperatures. However, the vapor-rich inclusions generally have similar or even higher salinities than liquid-rich inclusions, which cannot be well explained by fluid boiling ( The L-type fluid inclusions in the Zn-mineralization stage are homogenized at 240–357 °C, with moderate salinities of 4.2–17.1 wt% NaCl equiv., whereas V-type inclusions yielded homogenization temperatures of 255 to 350 °C, and salinities of 8.0 to 17.3 wt% NaCl equiv. Abundant sphalerite and pyrrhotite with limited galena sulfides were precipitated from the fluids in this stage. As for the Pb-mineralization stage, characterized by the precipitation of galena and galena-rich ores, measurements on the L-type fluid inclusions show lower homogenization temperatures of 140–297 °C, and salinities of 0.2–13.5 wt% NaCl equiv. From stage I to III, there is a gradually decreasing trend in homogenization temperatures and salinities ( Therefore, the hydrothermal fluids of the Caixiashan deposit are characterized by relatively high- to moderate temperatures and moderate salinities in early ore stage, with a gradual decline in temperatures and salinities from main stages to the late quartz-calcite stage. The fluids responsible for ore formation at Caixiashan belong to a H Generally, the transport of zinc and lead in hydrothermal fluids mainly occurs through chloride and hydrosulfide complexes, which is demonstrated by many studies on the migration and precipitation of zinc and lead in ore-forming fluid systems ( The precipitation of sulfides from the hydrothermal fluids is generally related to the processes that can influence the instability of metal complexes transported by ore-forming fluids. The main mechanisms that could cause the destabilization of metal complexes and ore precipitation include fluid boiling (immiscibility), fluid mixing, decreases in temperature, pressure, and salinity, and fluid-rock interactions ( As depictured in The Caixiashan Zn-Pb deposit shares some similar geological characteristics with the typical SEDEX, MVT, and Irish-type deposits that could be viewed as an important transitional ore type between SEDEX and MVT ( It was suggested that the regional Zn-Pb mineralization in central Tianshan was genetically associated with the Carboniferous granitic intrusions and the ore-forming fluids were magmatic in origin ( The heat produced by magmatic activity during the Mesoproterozoic to Neoproterozoic triggered the evolution of the metamorphosed water, forming the initial hydrothermal fluids. Then the fluids gradually migrated within the permeable basement and ascended, extracting the metals such as Zn, Pb, and Fe from the basement rocks. Subsequently, the evolved ore-forming fluids, primarily characterized by metamorphic water which experienced an involvement of meteoric water later, filtered into the dolomite marble through syn-sedimentary faults and dissolved calcites and dolomites, which resulted in pervasive dolomitization and provide favorable conditions for mineralization. This, coupled with efficient S sources from thermochemical sulfate reduction, caused large-scale deposition of the sulfide ores. During Early Carboniferous, these Zn-Pb orebodies might have been reworked by the granitic or dioritic dikes (  The Caixiashan Zn-Pb deposit, located in the western part of the Central Tianshan Terrane, is mainly hosted by the dolomite marble of the Mesoproterozoic Kawabulake Group, and its hydrothermal mineralization processes could be divided into four stages, i.e., calcite + dolomite + quartz + pyrite stage (I), calcite + dolomite + quartz + spahlerite + pyrrhotite ± arsenopyrite stage (II), calcite + dolomite + quartz + galena + pyrite ± chalcopyrite stage (III), and late quartz + calcite stage (IV). Hydrogen and oxygen isotope data at Caixiashan indicate that the ore-forming fluids had a dominantly metamorphic signature and were then diluted by meteoric water. Carbon and oxygen isotope compositions of calcite, dolomite, and marble suggest that hydrothermal fluids were primarily sourced from the dissolution and low-temperature alteration of carbonates. Sulfur and lead isotope results reveal that the ore-forming components were sourced from the Precambrian basement. The major types of fluid inclusions are the liquid-rich two-phase, vapor-rich two-phase, and halite-bearing inclusions. The ore-forming fluids are characterized by relatively high- to moderate temperatures, moderate salinities, and low densities, and are dominated by the NaCl-H The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was supported by the DREAM project of MOST China (2017YFC0601202), the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: