In the current research, the role of SiC nano-particles in improving the mechanical properties of friction stir welded (FSWed) 7075 aluminum alloy is investigated. To this end, friction stir welding (FSW) was conducted at 1250rpm and 40mm/min. The experiment carried out with and without incorporating SiC nano-particles along the joint line. Cross-sectional microstructures of the joints were characterized employing optical and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Results achieved through X-ray diffraction (XRD) confirmed the presence of SiC powders. Moreover, it was discovered that the volume fraction of the reinforcement particles was 20%. Along with an excellent bonding between SiC nano-particles and aluminum matrix, SEM photograph demonstrated a good dispersion of SiC reinforcements. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) results were also in tight agreement with the recent SEM microstructure. Thanks to the presence of SiC nano-particles, tensile strength, percent elongation, fatigue life, and toughness of the joint improved tremendously. The fracture morphologies were in good agreement with corresponding ductility results.Porosity, slag inclusion, solidification cracks, are some repercussions of joining aluminum alloys via the fusion welding techniques On the other hand, friction stir processing has been widely used for development of surface layer composite by applying reinforcing particles A 6 Utilizing OM and SEM, the microstructure of both stir zones were studied. SEM device was equipped with EDX. On the other hand, the X-ray diffraction method was used to determine the aluminum matrix grain size as well as the accumulated SiC particles. To this end, Scherrer equation [13] and an INEL device (EQUINOX 3000 model) were employed. Using electrical discharge machine (EDM), a specimen of 10×6×2 In each friction stir welded joint, three distinct areas are clearly visible; stir zone (SZ), thermo-mechanically affected zone (TMAZ) and heat affected zone (HAZ), On FSW, the base material experiences a great deal of deformation at elevated temperature. As a result, a series of fine grains form inside the SZ through a phenomenon called dynamic recrystallization (DRX)  Ultimate tensile strength (UTS), percent elongation and absorbed impact energy of both specimens are cited in Micro- and macro-fractographs of both specimens are displayed in The fatigue test result is provided in Meanwhile, impact test results are represented in In this study, SiC nano-particles were injected into the joint line of 7075 aluminum alloy. Subsequently, FSW was conducted at 1250 Thanks to SiC nano-particles, UTS, percent elongation, toughness, and fatigue life improved. An excellent bonding between SiC reinforcements and aluminum matrix was achieved. The improvement of mechanical properties was attributed to finer grain size of SZ associated with SiC nano-particles. The corresponding author thankfully appreciate all the remarkable and unforgettable efforts of Dr. Nader Parvin, Dr. M.K. Besharati Givi and, above all, warm, friendly and welcoming companionship of Mr. Nader Helmi without which the fulfillment of this investigation was impossible.