The typical copper recovery from medium temperature pressure leaching of chalcopyrite concentrates, such as from the CESL process, is 95–99%. In order to examine the modes of copper loss to residue, a variety of CESL process residue samples were examined by chemical analysis, Quantitative X-Ray Diffraction (QXRD), Scanning Electron Microscopy/Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy (SEM/EDX) and Electron microprobe analysis. The SEM and QXRD analyses indicated the presence of hematite and elemental sulfur as the major phases in the residue samples. Other phases present in minor to significant quantity were jarosite, pyrite, gypsum and anhydrite. Poor agreement between total chemical analyses of the residues by ICP-MS and those calculated from QXRD indicated the presence of an amorphous phase (ferrihydrite) in the residues. The amount of ferrihydrite and crystalline iron oxyhydroxide, and association of copper with these phases were determined by a sequential extraction method. There was a five-fold increase in the amount of copper associated with amorphous iron phases as compared to the crystalline phases.Stringent environmental regulations coupled with the need to exploit complex and low grade ores due to gradual depletion of primary copper ores have led to the development of hydrometallurgical processing as an alternative to the traditional pyrometallurgical extraction of copper from chalcopyrite. Although a number of hydrometallurgical processes have been demonstrated at pilot scale ( Cominco Engineering Services Ltd. (CESL) has developed hydrometallurgical processes for the recovery of base and precious metals from sulfide concentrates. The main thrust of the CESL technology is the chloride assisted medium temperature (approximately 150 Medium temperature leaching, such as the CESL leach recovers between 95 and 99% copper depending on the mineralogy and the grade of the concentrate. The unrecovered copper represents an economic opportunity. It is in the residue, generated during chalcopyrite leaching, that copper losses are incurred although it is unclear as to which mechanisms are responsible for the losses. For example Adsorption/coprecipitation of heavy metals with oxides of iron for the treatment of waste water is well established. A number of studies on adsorption of copper on amorphous iron hydroxide, goethite and hematite are available in the literature ( The variety of residues, formed under typical CESL conditions, make it difficult to pinpoint a single source of copper losses. The residue mineralogy and the conditions under which it is formed may be correlated to the copper losses in the CESL process. A systematic study of the residues formed by the leaching of different concentrates under CESL conditions has not yet been performed. For example, while Chalcopyrite leach residue samples (CLR-1 to CLR-13) were supplied over a broad range of feed and leach conditions that do not necessarily represent typical CESL operation. However, most of the residues originated from leach conditions of 150 Chemical analysis of the residue samples were carried out by ICP-MS after complete digestion with aquaregia. Quantitative phase analysis of all the residue samples was carried out using the Rietveld method and X-ray powder diffraction data. For this purpose, each sample was reduced into fine powder to the optimum grain-size range for X-ray analysis (< The amount of amorphous iron oxide phase and The leach residue produced by the leaching of chalcopyrite concentrates was dried in an oven at 60 The results of the QXRD for all the samples are given in The SEM micrograph ( The agreement between chemical analyses of the residue samples by ICP-MS and calculated elemental analysis from the QXRD was poor. For example by ICP-MS total iron in sample CLR-12 was found to be 29.1% whereas from QXRD the total iron was calculated to represent 20.7%. This suggests the presence of a significant amount of amorphous material in the residue samples. Amorphous or poorly A number of instrumental techniques are available for the quantification of amorphous material in different kinds of samples ( The selection of reagent and number of stages in sequential extraction depends on the phases or fraction to be dissolved. The adsorption/coprecipitation of copper with amorphous iron oxyhydroxide phases is well established, whereas, the extent to which copper is precipitated- or associated- with other phases present in the CESL residue is not known. Therefore a two stage extraction scheme was devised to dissolve 1) the ferrihydrite phase and 2) the In the 2nd stage of extraction, the residue obtained in the 1st stage was treated with 4 Taking into account the amorphous content of the chalcopyrite residue samples, determined by the sequential extraction method, the QXRD data for all the samples were re-normalized and are presented in The main goal of this investigation was to determine the distribution of residual copper in the chalcopyrite leach residue. During sequential extraction, copper was found in the extracts of the 1st and 2nd stages of extraction. Assuming that gypsum and anhydrite phases did not adsorb copper on their surfaces, it can be said for the residue samples examined here that coprecipitated copper is associated with both ferrihydrite and  A systematic characterization of 13 leach residues generated during the processing of a variety of chalcopyrite concentrates under CESL conditions was carried out. Chemical analyses of the residues revealed the presence of 0.5 to 2.76% copper which accounts for 2 to 11% loss of copper during the processing of chalcopyrite. A two stage sequential extraction process was developed in order to determine the ferrihydrite and The authors wish to thank Henry Salomon-de-Friedberg, Superintendent of New Technology CESL Ltd. for providing residue samples and for the valuable discussion the authors had with him during the progress of the work. Financial support from the In Rietveld method of phase analysis it is considered that In the presence of