The performance of the mixed dodecylamine chloride (DDA)/octanol (OCT) surfactants on muscovite flotation was investigated using flotation tests, and their adsorption mechanisms on muscovite and air/water interface were clarified using contact angle measurement, surface tension and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. The flotation results indicate that the recovery of muscovite rapidly decreases when the pH increases in the presence of only DDA, whereas the recovery of muscovite is high (>77%) over a wide range of pH in the presence of the mixed DDA/OCT surfactants with a ratio of 2/1. Contact angle measurements further confirm that the mixture displays a stronger collecting power than DDA and is a superior collector for the muscovite flotation. The surface tensions of DDA, OCT and their mixture indicate that the mixture is more efficient than DDA at decreasing the air–water interfacial tension and exhibits much better surface activities. MD simulations show that the mixture interacts with the muscovite mainly through electrostatic attraction and hydrogen-bonding. DDA ion is dominant in the interaction between the mixture and muscovite. OCT molecules are co-adsorbed onto the muscovite through the hydrogen-bond interaction and hydrophobic association with DDA ions. Compared with DDA, a well-compacted monolayer is formed on the muscovite surface in the presence of mixed surfactants, indicating a much stronger hydrophobic character of muscovite.As a widely used process in mineral separation, froth flotation exhibits exciting advantages, such as superior separation efficiency and cost effectiveness Among various surfactant combinations, mixed cationic–nonionic surfactants are of great interest because of their strong synergistic effects on the interfacial properties and spontaneous vesicle formation behavior in aqueous phases There are comprehensive studies on the interaction between cationic–nonionic surfactants in aqueous systems, but there are limited studies concerning the adsorption of mixed surfactants at the mineral surfaces, which should be contributed because the underlying mechanisms of the synergistic behavior remain not well-understood. Meanwhile, there is a lack of microscopic understanding of the behavior of mixed surfactants at the interfaces. Molecular-level information is necessary to achieve the desired understanding. Compared with experimental methods, computer simulations can directly provide microscopic details As a representative silicate mineral, muscovite is of significant interest because of its excellent dielectric properties and high thermal stability. Therefore, the muscovite surface chemistry/physics is of particular interest to mineral-processing engineers. In this study, the flotation performance of binary cationic/nonionic surfactant mixtures on muscovite was investigated. We used dodecylamine (DDA) as the cationic surfactant and octanol (OCT) as the nonionic surfactants because they are widely used in industrial applications. Computational calculations were used to obtain information on the adsorption mechanism of the mixed cationic and nonionic surfactants on the muscovite to elucidate the adsorptive characteristics of the mixed cationic/nonionic surfactant toward the muscovite. The study provides physical insight into the microscopic adsorption mechanism for reservoir muscovite surface. The muscovite sample was obtained from Hebei province in China. The sample was crushed, hand-selected, and ground in a porcelain mill with agate ball. The ground sample screened out the − The cationic surfactant DDA and nonionic surfactants octanol (OCT) with an analytical purity of 99.9% were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. H Flotation tests were conducted using an XFG5-35 flotation machine with a spindle speed of 1600 The contact angles of muscovite before and after treatment with surfactants were measured using the MiniLab ILMS (GBX, France). Freshly cleaved surfaces were obtained by peeling the top sheet of the mineral sample using a double-sided adhesive tape. The sample was immersed for 30 The surface tension of aqueous solutions that contained surfactants was measured using a Kruss K10 automatic tensiometer (Krüss GmbH, Germany) with a platinum plate, which was burned after washing in alcohol flame to completely remove the adsorbed surfactants before each measurement. The temperature was held constant at room temperature (25.0 The PCFF-PHYLLOSILICATE force field was applied for all simulations. This force field was developed by Heinz et al. and can be thoroughly evaluated. The atomic charges, cell parameters and surface energies are consistent with experiment The non-bond interaction term ( The monoclinic C2/c 2M1 muscovite crystal structure was used in our MD simulations According to the flotation solution chemistry, there is DDA in either ionized form in the acid solution or molecular form in the strong alkaline solution All simulations were conducted using the Materials Studio 6.0 package. The MD simulations were run at the constant-volume and -temperature (NVT) canonical ensemble. The temperature was controlled at 298 In this paper, the initial configuration of surfactants molecules such as DDA ions at the muscovite (0 0 1) surface is shown in  The effect of collector concentration of DDA alone or the mixed surfactant with ratio of 2/1 on the muscovite flotation at pH In order to investigate the wetting behaviors of the cationic surfactant and cationic–nonionic surfactant mixtures on muscovite, the contact angles of muscovite were carried out in the study, and the results are presented in Like kaolinite, muscovite belongs to a layer alumino-silicate mineral. The basal plane (001) are constantly negatively charged both in acidic and in alkaline conditions, and the charges of (0 1 0) and (1 1 0) planes creating edges depend on pulp pH, positively charged in acidic solution or negatively charged in alkaline solution. Therefore, the self-aggregation between faces and edges of muscovite particles occurs through electrostatic interaction in acidic condition, while in alkaline condition, the muscovite particles are dispersed. As a result, the muscovite flotation in alkaline condition decreases, whereas DDA adsorption increases at higher pH values. Compared to DDA, the collecting ability of the mixture is stronger, therefore at the same concentration (1 The equilibrium surface tensions of the cationic surfactant, nonionic surfactant and cationic–nonionic surfactant mixtures in pure water at pH  The MD simulation was performed to investigate the adsorption behavior of DDA and the mixture adsorption on the muscovite (001) surface in an aqueous solution. As shown in  According to Lei Huang's research The density profiles of water molecules along the z-axis were further calculated and shown in The mixed DDA/OCT surfactants were proposed as a flotation collector for muscovite flotation in this paper. Both experimental and computational simulation methods were used to study the flotation mechanism. The muscovite recovery is improved in the presence of the mixed DDA/OCT surfactants, particularly with the molar ratio of 2/1. The recovery of muscovite is high (> The computational simulations show that the DDA adsorb onto muscovite surface through the electrostatic and hydrogen-bonding interactions between the polar components and muscovite surface. OCT molecules are co-adsorbed onto the muscovite through the hydrogen-bond interaction and hydrophobic association with DDA. Compared with DDA, a well-compacted layer of the mixed DDA/OCT is formed, and the surface appears more uniformly covered, which indicates an efficient adsorption at the muscovite surface. Meanwhile, the addition of OCT can improve the adsorption density of surfactants on muscovite. Compared with DDA alone, the density of interfacial water molecules obviously decreases in the presence of the mixture, which indicates a much stronger hydrophobicity on the muscovite surface. This study was financially supported by the