In the present study LD slag geopolymer (LDSGP) was synthesised from calcium oxide rich raw LD slag, a waste of steel making industries for the use as a potential low cost adsorbent for high removal of Ni2+ ions from aqueous solution. The geopolymerisation of LD slag was performed in a plastic mould where the colloid mixture of raw LD slag and alkaine activator (sodium hydroxide and sodium sillicate (1:1w/w)) were cured for 3days at room temperature. The LDSGP was characterized by using XRF technique, BET surface area, SEM & TEM images, XRD patterns, FTIR spctra and TGA. Batch experiments for the adsorption study of Ni2+ ions were conducted at different temperatures (298K, 308K, 318K). The equlibrium data was successfully fitted the Langmuir isotherm and the maximum adsorption uptake of Ni2+, onto LDSGP, was found to be 85.29mg/g and at 318K. The adsorption rate data was fitted well to pseudo-second-order model indicating the process to be dominated by chemisorption. Thermodynamic analysis proved that the adsorption process was spontaneous in nature.Presence of heavy metals such as nickel, cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, chromium etc. in water is one of the major reasons for water pollution due to their various harmful effects to human body and other living organisms. Nickel (Ni LD slag (Linz Donawitz (LD) converter slag), is a solid waste of steel making industries generated from pig iron refining processing using LD converters. During the last decade, the disposal of LD slag has become a significant issue due to its generation in large quantity, high disposal costs and other constraints including reduction in the amount of available landfill space and unsuitableness in cement making processes because of its high iron oxide content. LD slag consists of various components like oxides of calcium, manganese, iron, silicon etc. From the review of existing literatures, it is proposed that LD slag may be a good adsorbent for Ni Geopolymers are basically three dimensional structures of inorganic polymer synthesized by low temperature polycondensation of different aluminosillicate materials The raw LD slag (LDS) used in this study, was collected from the TATA Steel, Jamshedpur, India. Sodium silicate powder (formula- Na The slag was firstly ground by ball mill and then it was sieved to pass through 100 The physical and chemical and characteristics of both raw LDS and LDSGP were carried out by standard techniques. The specific surface area was determined by BET apparatus (Quantachrome, AUTOSORB-1, USA). The images of the surface textures of the LDS and LDSGP samples were viewed in Zeiss Merlin scanning electron microscope (Zeiss Gemini) and high resolution transmission electron microscope (JEOL HRTEM, JEM-2100). The composition of both LDS and LDSGP was determined using X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy technique (PANalytical, AXIOS) and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS). Powder XR diffraction (PXRD) patterns of the LDS and LDSGP samples were obtained from Panalytical X’Pert Adsorption of Ni The LD slag geopolymerisation process is mainly a series of chemical reactions which include alkali activation of raw LDS then polycondensation of aluminosillicate followed by structural re-organisation External surface area, total pore volume and average pore diameter of raw LDS and LDSGP are summarized in From N The morphological structure of LDSGP can be seen from the SEM and HRTEM photographs, as presented in Composition of the raw LDS and LDSGP by XRF technique is documented in The elemental compositions of raw LDS and LDSGP before and after Ni FTIR spectra of raw LDS and LDSGP before and after Ni The powder X-ray diffraction pattern of LDSGP suggests more crystallinity in comparison with raw LDS which does not have any sharp peaks from the whole range (10–80) of 2θ°. PXRD pattern of LDSGP ( The thermogravimetric analysis of raw LDS and LDSGP before and after Ni Ni Langmuir isotherm model is one of the basic models which is based on the assumptions of homogenous adsorption sites and absence of interactions between adsorbed components. It is expressed as This can be written in the linearized form as, On the other hand, Freundlich isotherm model is an empirical model where the main assumptions include a heterogeneous adsorbent surface and exponentially increasing adsorption capacity of the adsorbate. It is shown as This can be written in linearized form as, The fitting of Langmuir model and Freundlich model for adsorption of Ni The fitting parameters of the two isotherms are presented in The point of zero charge (pH The effect of initial pH on adsorption of Ni The adsorption capacity of Ni The pseudo-first-order model has been used to describe adsorption kinetics of Ni This can be rewritten as: The adsorption kinetics of Ni This can be rewritten as: In case of pseudo-second-order model, the correlation coefficient value is 0.9993 which is better than the value for the pseudo-first-order model, i.e. 0.9205. The adsorption uptake Q When the geopolymerisation takes place, the surface structure of the LDSGP was improved from the surface structure of LDS and large number of exchangeable cations (Ca Therefore, the pseudo-second-order kinetic model is the appropriate model to describe the adsorption kinetics of Ni The thermodynamic nature of the adsorption process can be well understood through analysis of major thermodynamic parameters such as standard enthalpy change(ΔH R (8.314 ΔH ΔG The adsorption uptake(Q In this work, raw LDS has been successfully introduced as a potential raw material for preparing LD slag based geopolymer (LDSGP) for the highly efficient removal of the Ni Authors would like to acknowledge TATA Steel, Jamshedpur, India for providing raw LD slag and