The rock mechanical design of storage caverns in salt requires the analysis of the stability and the usability of the cavern over the planned operating time period. This design includes the build up of a rock mass model and a numerical model taking into account the geological situation, load conditions, geometrical conditions, and material parameters. The paper describes the design fundamentals and the necessary design parameters. In particular, the LUBBY2 constitutive model is considered which describes the nonlinear creep behaviour of rock salt. Examples of a finite-element analysis of caverns and the related stability and usability criteria are given.Natural gas has gained increasingly an importance as an energy source in recent years. Whilst the proportion of natural gas as a primary energy source in Germany in 1970 was only 5.4%, in 1994 it had already reached 18.3% with a continuing upward trend. A natural gas proportion of primary energy consumption of 26% is estimated for the year 2010 in the European Union. Unlike surface gas tanks, deep underground storages enable much higher volumes and pressures to be achieved. The other advantages of underground storage are the small amount of land required, and security against external influences. The rock mechanical design concept becomes of considerable significance in the layout of caverns when considered in connection with the basic understanding of the material behaviour of salt rock. The numerical processes gather the nonlinear time-dependent material behaviour of the salt rock and serve to lay down the geometrical and physical conditions necessary for establishing the storage operation conditions. The results of the recommendations for the cavern design, also provide the confirmation of the stability, and also, from the point of view of the operator, the confirmation of the economic usability of the cavern over the operating time period (see, The rock mechanical analysis includes the determination of the essential rock mechanical parameters, the build up of a theoretical model of the rock mass, the build up of numerical models for the finite-element structural analysis, and the statements for the cavern layout, which are derived from the results of the calculations. The theoretical rock mass model requires specification of those rock layers, thickness and sequence, which are to be considered, and also assumptions on the initial stress state and rock temperature, the mechanical behaviour of the discrete rock layers and rock mass coefficients. Specifying the rock mass coefficients requires particular attention to be paid to the execution of tests on rock specimens in the laboratory whilst the calculations take the coefficients of the rock mass as a whole. The next step is the build up of a numerical model to allow calculation of the stress and strain fields in the host rock surrounding the cavern, which in turn provide the basis for the theoretical proof of stability and usability of the cavern field. To this end, geometrical parameters have to be specified, suitable characteristic load states for cavern construction and cavern operation have to be formulated and criteria and limiting values have to be defined in order to assess the calculated results. The objective of the rock mechanical cavern design is to guarantee that there is sufficient stability and serviceability with respect to the planned usage. The factors influencing the stability of an unlined underground cavity are basically divided into four groups: physical effects (initial rock stresses, internal pressure, temperature), rock stresses, theoretically determined from the above with the help of a calculation model, resistance (strength) of the rock that acts against the physical effects, influence of geological anomalies. In cavern design, these variables influencing the safety factors have to be taken into consideration. In particular, establishment of the partial safety coefficient, as for instance, demanded by the processes underpinned by the probability theory, is, however, very problematic because the probability of the combined effect of different influences acting together must be investigated. The design variables to be established for the layout of a cavern, are predominantly based on the final use to which the cavern is to be put, e.g. mineral extraction, storage or disposal site. The most important parameters to be taken into consideration in the design of a gas cavern are as follows ( depth of the cavern, cavern geometry (diameter distance distance the internal pressure conditions ( The individual caverns have a cylindrical shape in order to create the largest possible storage volume in the salt dome structure. In addition to the limitation of the maximum pressure to prevent seal failures or the fracturing of the formation, the minimum allowable internal pressure during operation is also laid down, in order to avoid spalling from the walls of the cavern. Because almost all of the design parameters are dependent on one another, it is initially necessary to select a reference configuration which then can be used to investigate the sensitivity resulting from variations in individual variables which need to be established. In this way, the effort involved in carrying out the predominantly numerical calculations using the finite-element method can be reduced. Often, individual parameters are predetermined, for instance, the borehole separations in caverns to be converted, the depths associated with the actual geological conditions, or the minimum or maximum internal cavern pressure reflecting the operational or engineering conditions. A theoretical rock mass model is necessary to carry out the rock mechanical calculations that encompasses the idealisation with respect to the geological structure, initial rock stress conditions and initial rock temperatures, as well as the material models, with the associated material parameters for the individual layers. This idealisation usually involves dividing up the rock mass into overburden, rock salt and the underlying rock formation. Each of these areas is idealised as a homogeneous isotropic continuum with respect to their material properties. An example for idealisation of a geological profile into a theoretical rock mass model is shown in The vertical initial rock stress In thicker salt deposits, and especially at greater depth, the very ductile material behaviour of rock salt means that a lateral pressure coefficient of In the ADINA code there is the possibility to take into account the initial stress field by using the option of initial strain. Where no direct temperature measurements are carried out, the initial rock temperature of a central cavern zone has to be realistically assumed. Because the influence of temperature fluctuations associated with operations only affects the bounding cavern wall at a depth of ≈1 m into the surrounding rock, this phenomenon can usually be ignored. The rock being investigated incorporates lithologies with very different material properties. Idealisation of the rock mass structure does however allow differentiation between a viscoplastic–ductile material behaviour of rock salt and the more elastic–brittle behaviour of the overburden and the underlying rock formation. This means that the rock zones behaving in an elastic–brittle way can be described by a linear-elastic material model. To take the ductile behaviour of rock into consideration as realistically as possible, a sufficient material model must be used. In general, the ADINA code allows the consideration of numerous material models including thermo-elasto-plasticity and creep ( The influence of temperature can be taken account of in Eqs. Commonly, creep parameters of the LUBBY2 constitutive model are determined from the results of multi-stage creep tests on borehole samples with step-wise load increase. To allow further evaluation of data, it is first necessary to resolve these tests to single individual tests at constant load. In order to do this, it is assumed that the total strain due to transient creep in each load step results from the additive superposition of the primary creep strain component of the previous load steps and that of the present load step ( As a simplification, it is assumed that the transient creep phase of the previous load step is already finished at the start of the new step. This condition is reached when the creep rate reaches the minimum value The dependence of the creep rate on stress is taken into account by using stress-dependent creep parameters In order to determine the parameters As an example, uniaxial creep tests at stress levels of 12, 14, and 16 MPa on salt rock samples from a salt mine located in the north-west of Germany yielded the following results:       For purposes of comparison, In contrast to this, the assumption of strain hardening (Eq. Generally speaking, it appears that only constitutive models which assume strain hardening are suitable when simulating the effects of stress changes. However, when extrapolating this conclusion to long-term calculations, it should be remembered that transient creep effects continuously decrease in importance in comparison to the steady-state effects, and thus consideration of transient creep in the case of long-time durations has only a low significance. In contrast to this, when calculating rock mechanical problems of a relatively short duration (e.g., short-term field tests) or with different load conditions (e.g., gas cavern with variation of internal pressure), the transient creep has a considerably greater effect. The finite-element method can be used for the analysis of the rock stresses arising from the construction and operation of the cavern. This method allows the rock structure, the mechanical behaviour of these structures, and almost any geometrical cavity shape to be realistically represented by mathematical–mechanical models. The numerical analysis of these models allows a realistic evaluation of the mechanical behaviour and stability of the caverns. Caverns must basically be considered as cavities in a three-dimensional continuum ( It is important when assessing the rock stress state that develops during cavern operations to take into consideration each stress component as well as the effective stress As an example in In general, the cavern design differentiate between two types of proof ( proof of stability (permissible stresses and strains), proof of usability (tightness of a cavern system, limitation of cavern closure). Determining the stability of a cavern requires interpretation of the results derived from the numerical calculations including the state of stress and strain around the cavern. This in turn requires various assessment criteria. Typical criteria are as follows: exceeding the tensile strength of the rock under tensile stress; exceeding the shear strength during deviatoric stress; exceeding a specific deformation or deformation rate. If one of these criteria is not complied with, it can lead to a reduction, and in exceptional cases to complete loss in the load bearing ability of a component or a load bearing system. Concerning the criteria of exceeding the shear strength a for salt typical characteristic has to be mentioned. Empirically, the failure strength of rock salt decreases with the duration of the stress. The time-dependent reduction in material strength must be taken into consideration when determining acceptable stress levels. Calculation of the stress reduction is made with the stress intensity index, which has the meaning of a reduction factor. The stress intensity index The minimum allowable internal cavern pressure is basically dependent on the formation pressure, itself largely dependent on the depth of the cavern. In the case of caverns intended for gas storage, the shape of the cavern marginal areas have to be maintained during life time of the cavern––several decades––even though the minimum pressure will be reached on several occasions. The fracture strength of the rock salt formation must never be exceeded in any part of the cavity marginal area. Because, by exceeding the long-term strength of the rock salt, all stress conditions are associated with a certain finite life time, the establishment of the minimum internal cavern pressure is associated with a corresponding operational time limit reflecting this internal pressure condition. The criteria used are the limitation of the stress intensity index and the effective strain in the rock salt mass enclosing the cavern. The maximum internal cavern pressure is set at a value so that within the whole area of the cavern––in particular in the cavern roof and casing shoe area––fracturing of the rock and an increase in the permeability as a result of microfracturing can be avoided. Because leaky areas in the rock are difficult to confirm by measuring techniques, and fracturing of the rock is associated with high financial losses for the operator, a comparatively high amount of safety compared to the failure states should be used. Determining the maximum permissible operating pressure depends on the permeability behaviour of the rock. Rock salt analysis looking into the stress-dependent permeability behaviour has shown that permeability can increase considerably when the gas injection pressure is approximately equal to the formation pressure. This means that the numerical calculations must be used to confirm an adequate safety margin between the maximum operating pressure and the stress state existing in the surrounding rock In addition to establishing safe cavern operations reflecting the associated operating parameters, the rock mechanical evaluation should also provide an assessment of cavern usability. This evaluation involves describing the future rock deformation or cavern closure effects on the basis of the calculation results and comparing them with the operation specifications or the requirements of the operator. Volume losses associated with internal pressure reductions are determined by time-dependent calculations of the cavern closure taking into consideration realistic internal pressure changes over time. It is also possible with the help of these calculation results to extrapolate the possible effects of the cavern closure to the ground surface, and thus assess any possible risk to buildings on the surface or any impact on the hydrogeology. The material behaviour of the host rock must be given special consideration when determining the rock mechanical layout of caverns in rock salt. Rock salt behaves in a time-dependent manner both with respect to its deformational behaviour as well as its strength behaviour. This means that stability investigations must not only give consideration to the internal cavern pressures, but also to the time periods involved under which the cavern operates at different internal pressures. This time-dependent material behaviour also has an effect on the usability of the cavern because the creep of the rock salt also leads to a cavern closure with long term reduction in cavern volumes, itself associated with surface subsidence. To take these effects into account, the distinct nonlinear creep of rock salt can sufficiently be described by the LUBBY2 constitutive model including transient and steady-state creep behaviour. The variable permeability behaviour of rock salt must be taken into consideration when determining the maximum pressure. To guarantee the tightness of a cavern system, the operating maximum pressure should be considerably less than the surrounding formation pressure.