In order to understand the fault zone architecture and mechanisms that caused the Chi-Chi earthquake, the Chelungpu drilling project was conducted during April 2000 through a collaborative project between Japan and Taiwan. In this study, chemical and mineralogical variations within the overall Chelungpu fault zone, including variations between less damaged host rocks, damaged zones, and fault cores caused by the Chi-Chi earthquake were examined. Slopes of TiO2 immobile isocons were consistently >1 for analyses comparing host rocks with rocks from damaged zones or with gouges from fault cores, indicating that volume loss occurred in damaged zones and the fault cores. These results strongly imply that pervasive fluid infiltration occurred within the fault zone. Volume loss within the damaged zone and fault core is interpreted to result from a two-stage process involving: (i) coseismic mechanical wearing and/or dissolution in the fault core, and (ii) fluid infiltration within the fault zone during postseismic and interseismic periods along cracks caused by seismic failure. Semi-quantitative XRD analysis indicates that the kaolinite content consistently increases from the less damaged host rocks to the damaged zone and gouges in each fault core. Mineralogic changes indicate that pervasive acidic fluid infiltration occurred within the fault zones and reacted with the feldspars or muscovite to form kaolinite. Enrichment of kaolinite and illite found in the fault zones of southern drilling site could play some role on the slipping behavior of the southern part of the Chelungpu fault. Greater volume loss in the fault core may have resulted from moderate permeability, combined with the very fine grain nature of pulverized material in the fault core, which enhanced chemical reactions including transformation of feldspars and muscovite to clay minerals. The study results indicate that pervasive fluid infiltration occurred and changed the mineralogical and chemical architecture of fault zones caused by the cyclic earthquakes.At September 21, 1999, Taiwan was hit by a major earthquake (Mw To approach the scientific goals, two sites, the northern and southern sites ( The behavior of fluid in fault zones has been previously discussed by many studies (e.g., The samples used in this study were collected from drill cores of the southern site near Nantou City ( To understand fluid properties and compare variations of mineralogical and chemical compositions of rocks between the less damaged host rock and rocks in the fault zones, we searched for drilling cores in each fault zone with relatively homogeneous lithology, which included less damaged host rock, damaged zone, and center of fault zone (usually represented by either gouge or cataclasite). Under this strategy, sixty three samples including eight less damaged host rocks/protoliths are chosen from the five fault zones for petrographic, chemical and mineralogical analysis ( To compare the variations of chemical and mineralogical composition in different samples, X-ray Fluorescence (XRF) and X-ray Diffraction (XRD) methods were used in the study. Ten major and minor oxides including SiO Analysis on variation of bulk composition in the undamaged host rocks and fault rocks has been done through the plot between oxides and the depth of the columnar section showing lithology and fault rock distribution ( Variations of chemical compositions and volume change among different fault zones, and between damaged zones and fault cores, were evaluated using the isocon method developed by Damaged zones have an estimated 13 to 30% volume loss ( To understand the variation of the clay minerals in the less damaged host rocks and the fault rocks within each fault zone, clay mineral contents of less damaged host rocks, damaged rocks and gouge within each fault zone were estimated ( Some HFS elements like Al Larger slope of the TiO To use chemical and mineral changes to interpret fluid history, more efforts are required. Repeated infiltration of acidic water during successive earthquake cycles can lead to complete decomposition of feldspars and muscovite to kaolinite ( Enrichment of kaolinite and illite could significantly influence sliding properties of the fault zone. Based on the experiments from Slopes of TiO The estimated larger volume loss in the fault core is different than patterns for the Nojima fault, Japan ( The isocon diagram analysis ( The first author would like to thank Dr. A. Yonkee and the other anonymous reviewer for their critical reviews and elaborate corrections for the original manuscript, which significantly improved the quality of this paper. This study is supported by the National Science Council, Taiwan with grant number NSC 92-2116-M-008-008.