The mining and processing industry relies on the avoidance of waste during mining, followed by the progressive removal of waste and contaminants via comminution and beneficiation during processing. Unfortunately the low grade of valuable content in most metalliferous operations dictates that vast quantities of associated host rock and gangue accompanies the valuable material to the processing plant.
                  Waste rejection can be considered the flip side to mineral extraction, with the focus being on the development of a barren material stream that is rejected by the process, with minimal valuable metal contained. The key to a mine’s economic success lies in the liberation of the metal from within the host rock with the smallest possible investment in capital expenditure and energy.
                  Newcrest Mining Ltd., initiated an investigation into how waste rejection could be employed across their various operating mine sites and how it could be used in future operations. The total project examines a range of waste rejection techniques capable of deployment at coarser size ranges and these include systems based on, size, gravity, physical and chemical properties. This initiative is a component of the on-going Newcrest strategy of re-working the research area of “mine to mill”, to truly make it a system wide approach that looks at all the latent value opportunities.
                  This paper provides analysis of sized based waste rejection work undertaken at the Newcrest Telfer site. The results of this study show that some process streams offer significant potential for waste rejection, but in most cases there is no ‘one pass’ waste rejection option. Rather the rejection process becomes a series of liberate-separate cycles. At each stage the altered physical characteristics of the material open different possibilities for rejection techniques.The application of waste rejection is not new to the mining industry; all operations by definition must reject waste in order to convert a rock mass to a saleable metal concentrate. However in many operations, waste rejection is considered only at the extreme coarse end through mine planning and the selective mining of high grade ore, and the finer end through beneficiation methods such as flotation, which follow extensive energy intensive comminution. At each stage of the process in a mining operation there is the opportunity to exploit the known characteristics of the rock to reject waste and in doing so, concentrate the feed to the next stage. This paper reports on the first stage of a broad project being undertaken by Newcrest Mining Ltd. across their operations to explore the opportunities in coarse waste rejection to not only maximise the economic effectiveness of existing operations, but also to prove up technologies and their application to future Greenfield sites. This first phase of the study has focussed on two main areas. Firstly an investigation of existing processing facilities to identify waste streams suitable for rejection rather than further processing or recycling. Secondly, the extensive field testing of coarse screening equipment to determine the size by grade behaviour of the ore body at ROM scale. The exploitation of size by grade behaviour is not new; indeed it has been used successfully in large mining operations before, such as the pre-screening of feed at the Bougainville Copper mine ( The gradual decline in ore grades and increasing complexity of ore body extraction, coupled with declining discovery of new ore bodies has been well documented ( This traditional path of metal extraction sees two basic stages of waste rejection. Firstly, the demarcation of ore and waste for development and execution of the mine plan. Secondly, the liberation by comminution of all material deemed ‘not waste’ (hence delivered to the processing plant) to the necessary size for effective extractive metallurgy. In a typical SAG mill based operation there are three overall waste streams generated: ROM mine waste, milling scats and tailings. This list is not exhaustive or exclusive, as mill scats are not always fully rejected, they can be re-crushed and re-introduced into the process. Similarly tailings is not always a single rejection point. Tailings can be generated at various points in the finer processing, but they are accumulated into a single stream for disposal. The broad range of materials fed to a modern comminution circuit ensures process plants today are designed to handle the full range of expected ore types. Many of these broad feed sources come from deep underground which tend to be significantly harder. The result of this is the constant development of larger grinding mills and associated equipment to achieve the throughput at the target liberation size. The acceptance of using non-renewable energy to achieve sufficient comminution for liberation of all materials in the ore body will become less acceptable. The main contributor to the energy consumption profile of a metalliferous mine site is the comminution required to reduce the ore bearing material to a size where traditional beneficiation and concentration techniques can be applied. The application of minimum size reduction to value bearing material, whilst still generating a saleable product or a product requiring minimum further upgrading. The preferential application of energy into value-bearing material to generate a saleable product or a product requiring minimum further upgrading. This view was reiterated by A key part of any such redefinition is the ability to only present to the comminution process, material that absolutely must be processed, i.e. waste material should only be exposed to the minimum possible level of comminution. Inherent in the requirement to reduce the comminution requirements, but also above and beyond, is the need to reduce operating costs. Less comminution equals less energy and less cost, but this improvement can be easily cancelled-out by a concomitant increase in materials handling, or other costs associated with taking waste out of a system. Such associated costs include: Extra equipment to reject the waste. Maintenance and operational costs of waste rejection equipment. Mobile equipment costs. Conveyors and associated chutes, transfers, bins and hoppers – capital and operating costs. Waste storage and encapsulation costs if material is deemed potentially acid forming. The reduction in waste management costs when compared to the traditional approach comes through the reduction in tailings production, deferring wall lifts and extending existing dam life. The philosophy pursued in the overall Newcrest study was to seek coarse waste rejection techniques that introduce the minimum equipment and cost into the system, whilst still removing considerable quantities of mill feed. Using these approaches the tonnages exposed to comminution and generally treated and handled, would be minimized. In considering such an approach, the use of the word “coarse” is critical. Most beneficiation and concentration technologies for metalliferous mines use separation sizes in the range 80–200 The other consideration, when seeking to target coarse waste rejection, is the potential loss of value by the rejection of material at a size that still contains the target mineral. It makes logical sense for size vs. grade behaviour to be heavily linked to the geological mode of formation. The range of behaviours spans a significant space from massive, competent disseminated ores with a uniform spread of grade and strength to incompetent deposits, where not only does the grade sit within a localised and defined 3D space, but also where the poor competency naturally concentrates grade to the finer sizes. As with most topics, there is also a considerable middle-ground whereby the host material can display variable behaviour, with no discernible bias towards the concentration of grade. Such behaviour should not be dismissed as inappropriate for waste rejection, but rather it should be examined to determine if this is a function of the particle size of analysis or the treatment it has received. It is believed that a proportion of such materials may still display useful size vs. grade characteristics, but it may need to be initiated by extra breakage, or through alternative breakage mechanisms. At this point it is also appropriate to consider the application of sensor based separation methods. With the possibility of size vs. grade behaviour, the option of using a simple, sized based waste rejection approach is highly attractive and as such it is logical that it should be the first technique investigated. This paper seeks to redefine the waste rejection pathway to include more stages that exploit the rock fabric opportunity in the ore body for low cost, high return operation. Waste streams would be generated at each step (see During processing there are further opportunities available for waste rejection, such as mill pebbles or waste streams from within the gravity circuit ( The hypothesis which was tested on Telfer ore body was, could size by grade behaviour in both the upgrade of precious metals and the removal of contaminants be possible at various sizes. This hypothesis could be simplified to ‘bricks and mortar’, where the gold is contained in the mortar and surrounded by barren bricks. In the current processing flowsheet, the entire ’brick wall’ is subjected to grinding to extract the metal in the mortar. The proposed alternate allows for the bulk of the barren brick to be rejected whole, saving substantial milling energy. The study focus is on this initial rock fabric assessment and subsequent material performance through the testwork program. The focus on rock fabric in the rock mass and associated drill core will allow the extension of this work to applications in Greenfield exploration, where the potential for coarse waste rejection could radically change the economic value proposition of a project. This first phase of study covers only separation by size, as part of the broader waste rejection study. As outlined in The presence of a size by grade relationship at Telfer had been anecdotally known for some time, but never rigorously tested. ( The ‘bricks and mortar’ analogy can be seen at various scales in the Telfer rock, from bench scale down to drill core scale. Understanding the relationship between the drill core, rock mass and screening response is critical to enabling the extension of the waste rejection to the prediction of coarse rejection response for Greenfield sites. As can be seen in The size based separation phase of this study is, as previously stated, one part of Newcrest’s wider initiative to explore waste rejection opportunities. The strategic plan for the total waste rejection investigation can be summarized as a decision tree as outlined in The Telfer size separation study was undertaken on four feed types: ROM ore, (at the dig face, broken only by blasting to ∼−2000 Primary Crushed Ore, (discharge from gyratory crusher developing ∼−150 SAG mill pebbles and (rejected hard material from mill, ∼−80 Gravity screen oversize. (overflow from screens ahead of gravity circuit, ∼ The latter two streams had been identified as high potential targets by Telfer operations management during the latter stages of the study. A range of feed sources were used and a series of direct comparisons of ROM screening arrangement was undertaken, feeding a jaw crusher/vibrating screen combination, a vibrating screen alone, and a rotating trommel. The campaign was set up to target cuts at 50 Products from the screening trials were sampled using a reversed excavator bucket passed through the falling stream of each size fraction. Those samples were combined to generate a stockpile of each size fraction for each material type. The size fraction piles were then crushed to −50 The Primary Crushed material was sampled over an extensive campaign, on the back of a wider grade control campaign. Primary Crusher discharge was sampled daily for 12 Finally SAG mill pebbles were sampled over a 2 The results of the field trails have been analysed and displayed several ways, in order to provide quick understanding of the separation response. It is common to represent the size by grade separation in terms of recovery vs yield plots ( The recovery vs yield plots show the average data sets over the complete sampling period. They highlight that it is possible to reject approximately 50% of the mass and recover around 75% of the valuable metal contained from the two pit feeds sampled. However they mask the true variability of the response of samples over the life of the trial campaign (as shown in Variability is at the heart of waste rejection and this testwork program has highlighted the variability in response for the various elements, across ore sources. As such a means of illustration is required that adds this dimension to the study. For this, boxplots are used as an investigative means of interpretation of the data. They are generated to show the minimum, first quartile, median, mean, third quartile and maximum values of a data set, as demonstrated in The boxplots are generally shown in terms of% mass by size fraction, and the absolute grade of the various metals in each size fraction. This allows a quick view of the grade of each stream relative to the nominal feed and nominal tails grades and whether the mass of the stream makes it worth further consideration as either a pre-concentrated or waste rejection candidate stream. The first observation on the boxplots for the low grade material from Pit Feed Source 2 (see The results for SAG mill pebbles show no discernible size by grade response ( The current operational practice is to switch between rejection and recycling, depending on the conditions within the wider operation at the time. However, the overall grade of the pebbles makes them a clear option for waste rejection. The boxplots shown in The view generated by the analysis of the SAG mill pebbles is very similar to that of the gravity screen oversize, as shown in Again the grades of the potential reject stream are equivalent to final plant tailings grade. While the absolute tonnage is not significant relative to the overall mill throughput, the impact on the plant recirculating load is something that warrants further study. The findings of this study show that there are clear metallurgical opportunities to add significant value to the Telfer operation through reducing the throughput of material at various stages of the mining and comminution processes. Unfortunately in a Brownfield deployment, the proposition does not necessarily translate to an economic benefit. Firstly, the operation has existing sunk capital that must be fully utilised. The addition of waste rejection processes drives up the mining rate required for the same tonnage of mill feed, increasing the requirement for investment in mobile fleet and ancillary equipment. Any waste rejection stream must also be handled, be that through trucks or continuous means such as conveyors or pipelines, and areas for the deposition and storage of that waste created and maintained. All of these elements add to the bottom line operating cost. This additional cost can only be overcome if the ‘strength’ of the upgrade achieved in the additional processes provide sufficient revenue. In the case of Telfer, this strength of upgrade makes the rejection of gravity screen oversize feasible and the rejection of SAG mill pebbles feasible. In the case of the SAG mill pebbles, the feasibility relies on the assumption that the cash cost of haulage and need for fleet are kept low by utilising the mine fleet in a ‘back haul’ to a waste dump near to the active mining areas. The real power of the waste rejection approach to extraction and processing of mineral resources lies in the undeveloped Greenfield project sites. If coarse, size based waste rejection can be accurately predicted from drill core, then the comminution and processing infrastructure required can be dramatically reduced. Along with this comes reduction in the need for energy, water, reagents and grinding media. The footprint of an operation can be reduced to such an extent that the rejection of precious metals can be justified on the reduced up front capex and on-going opex of the mine once running. The flip side to this is the impact on resources and reserves, which would necessarily have to be lowered in line with the reduced metal recovery. The relationship between reserves, resources and the resource base is explained in The extrapolation from drill core to radically different processes options is one that will require the development of trust from the Newcrest business, its shareholders and the industry in general. The metallurgical testwork programs currently undertaken to predict metal recovery would become part of a wider ore body knowledge gathering exercise, widened to include geotechnical, broad geological/geometallurgical input and data specific to the coarse waste rejection sector. To the best knowledge of the authors, this has not yet been applied successfully to a Greenfield site. This application is a key focus of future work within the overall Newcrest Research & Development program. In order to establish repeatable relationships and necessary knowledge to change Greenfield project value propositions, the reverse of this extrapolation must be applied. A thorough study of drill core from Telfer will be undertaken to answer the question: ‘Could we have predicted the Telfer response?’ Once that has been answered, the study will broaden its focus to the Cadia and Lihir operations, to field test coarse waste rejection as an extension to the existing ore body knowledge study. The test program at Telfer has shown there are metallurgically significant opportunities to pursue coarse waste rejection. However the economics of a Brownfield site prohibit the application of some of those opportunities. This study will continue to develop the knowledge of the Telfer ore bodies as applied to the outcomes of this study, as well as supporting the future separation techniques that could be applied. The next issue that arises for the wider mining industry is the challenge to the notion of ‘recovery’ of valuable metal from an ore body. While mining engineers have always applied a cut-off grade, dictated by economics, to develop the ore body recovery, the language of ‘recovery’ for mill operators is very different. The metallurgical recovery of the mill will always be a key metric to measuring the success of the operation, however the full picture of valuable metal recovered from a given ore body will indicate the overall economic success of the operation. The balance must be struck between the desire to extract the highest possible volume of valuable metal from an ore body and the need to generate the highest possible cash return to the owners of the business. The application of coarse waste rejection will have an impact on the whole of life recovery, and in most cases the amount of metals recovered will be lower. However the application of waste rejection will be a success wherever the amount of additional cash flow justifies it. In the case of Greenfield deposits that could be bought into a business’ reserves from resources, the potential prize is substantial. The authors would like to acknowledge the leadership and support of Andrew Logan, Newcrest Mining Ltd., for the instigation and sponsorship of this study. Furthermore the extensive support of Telfer operations management, technical and field operations personnel in the execution of field trials and sampling campaigns. These field trials were undertaken in part with the assistance of a team from JKMRC, as part of the CRC ORE case study project at Telfer. The input to the sampling campaigns and subsequent laboratory testing from the CRC ORE team has been crucial to the success of the study. In addition, the input of Claire Bearman of Bear Rock Solutions Pty. Ltd., and Dr. Gan Samaradivakara, Newcrest Mining Pty. Ltd., is also gratefully acknowledged.