The objectives of this study are to investigate the effects of acidification and alkalization on volume/solid reduction, dewaterability, and coagulant recovery from textile chemical sludge. The results indicate that solid reduction by acidification and alkalization was mainly due to the dissolution of Al. The best conditions for acidification and alkalization are pH = 2 and pH = 12, respectively, both exceeding 60% in Al(III) recovery efficiency. However, organic matters dissolved along with Al(III) dissolution by alkalization have detrimental effects on the usability of recovered Al. Thus, acidification was a better process for recovering coagulants than alkalization. In the meantime, only acidification could decrease both the capillary suction time (CST) and specific resistance value (SRF), indicating that only the acidification can improve the dewaterability of sludge.Chemical coagulation of textile dyeing wastewater to remove suspended solids, color, and organic materials generates large quantity of sludge. After dewatering, the dewatered sludge cakes are disposed in landfill site. Due to the limiting landfill space, volume/solid reduction of sludge through recovery of useful material becomes a viable process for sludge treatment. Volume/solid reduction and coagulant recovery for sludge generated from drinking water treatment have been investigated in the past by acidification of sludge through addition of sulfuric acids If the Al(OH) Other than volume/solid reduction and coagulant recovery, dewatering efficiency and settling velocity of sludges are affected by pH, surface charge, zeta potential, and organic content The majority of the past researches has been focusing on the coagulant recovery and volume reduction of sludges generated from drinking water treatment Several batches of textile chemical sludge, generated from alum coagulation and dissolved air flotation processes, were obtained from a textile dye plant located in Taoyuan County, Taiwan during the months of April–August 2002. The characteristics of the sludge on average are pH 6.5, water content of 97.8%, total solid of 2.2%, total suspended solids (TSS) of 17,000 For each pH condition, three 250 Samples for color and Al(III) analysis were first filtered through 0.45 Sludge sedimentation time was analyzed by placing 200 Titration of dye wastewater was conducted using a titrator (AT-420, Kyoto Electronics Co. Ltd.) and sample volume of a 250 Al(OH) On the other hand, the percentages of solid reduction, i.e., TSS reduction, increase with increasing pH for alkalization samples and with decreasing pH for acidification samples. The alkalized sample at pH 12 has the solid reduction percentage of 83%, which is the highest among all of these samples. Solid reduction is due to the dissolution of Al(III) and organic matter from sludge. As shown in Although COD dissolution has minimal impact on the reduction of TSS, it might have detrimental effect on the reusability of recovered Al(III) coagulant From the discussion above, one can conclude that acidification is a better choice for treating sludge than alkalization for the reason that not only acidification process can reduce both sludge volume and TSS but also the quality of recovered Al(III) by acidification is better than that by alkalization in terms of Al(III)-to-COD ratio. The percentages of Al(III) recovery, which is defined as the weight ratio of Al(III) in supernatant of treated sludge to that in the raw (untreated) sludge after acid digestion as indicated in Eq. The efficiency of Al(III) recovery which is defined as the moles of Al(III) dissolved per mole of H The efficiencies for acidified sludges, i.e., [Al By the same token, we can express the efficiency of Al recovery for alkalization samples as [Al The dewaterability of sludge after acidification and alkalization treatment was investigated by analyzing the CST and SRF. Both CST and SRF were widely employed to study the sludge dewaterability in the past As mentioned above, the dewaterability of sludges was affected by the dissolution of exocellular polymers and the content of organics incorporated in the sludges Acidification and alkalization treatment on textile chemical sludge were employed for the sludge volume/solid reductions and Al(III) recovery. Efficiencies of volume/solid reduction, Al(III) recovery, and the dewaterability of sludges were investigated. The results indicate that solid reduction by acidification and alkalization was mainly due to the dissolution of Al. The best conditions of acidification and alkalization are pH = 2 and pH = 12, respectively, both exceeding 60% in Al(III) recovery efficiency. However, organic matters dissolved along with Al(III) dissolution by alkalization have detrimental effects on the usability of recovered Al. The weight ratio of Al(III) dissolved to COD dissolved after acidification and alkalization are ranging from 1.0 to 3.0 for acidification samples and are less than 0.3 for alkalization samples, indicating the quality of recovered Al(III) by acidification is better than that by alkalization. Efficiencies of Al recovery were calculated for acidification and alkalization samples. For acidification systems, these values increased from 0.06 to 0.35 with decreases in pH and are quite closed to the theoretical value for systems at pH 2 and 2.5 but not for those of pH 3 and 3.5. This is due to that sludges tested in our experiment containing organic materials which might consume H Only acidification could decrease both CST and SRF, indicating that only the acidification can improve the dewaterability of sludge. This is due to the charge neutralization of sludge particles through acidification.