The rock failure process is always accompanied by dilatancy. This study investigated the average infrared radiation temperature (AIRT) characteristics in the rock dilatancy process. An Infrared Radiation (IR) dilatancy precursor point was found prior to the failure of the rocks under load. During the uniaxial loading process, the stress levels of upward-AIRT and downward-AIRT rock samples at the initial point of rock dilatancy were 0.74 σmax
                      and 0.80 σmax
                     , respectively. After rock dilatancy, the AIRT change rate of upward-AIRT sample increased by 1.48 × 10−4°C⋅s−1, and AIRT change rate of downward AIRT sample dropped by 1.29 × 10−4°C⋅s−1. From the initial point to the process reached rock failure, the AIRT change was almost linearly correlated with volumetric strain increment. Based on the IR thermogram, the IR hot spot was defined, and a new index—high temperature point scaling factor (HTPSF)—was proposed for qualitative analysis. The calculated HTPSF values of upward-AIRT and downward-AIRT rock samples at the IR dilatancy precursor point were 0.4 and 0.6, respectively. This study provides a new thought to determine the initial point of rock dilatancy.Rock dilatancy plays a significant role in the instability processes of geotechnical engineering including mines, slopes, and tunnels. Gaining in-depth knowledge of the dilatancy characteristics of various kinds of rocks is of great significance in evaluating the stability of excavations in such rocks. In the past, researchers performed uniaxial and triaxial tests on soapstone, marble diabase, granite, and dolomite to evaluate inelastic volume changes. Durning rock loading different kinds of information released and recorded such as acoustic, thermal, and electric information, etc. In addition, spatial variation of IR thermogram and IR anomaly along the subsequent fracture zone also can be observed in the rock fracturing process, which can qualitatively characterize representation forms, types and spatial-temporal migration properties of precursors during the rock fracturing process. IR-based judgment of the initial point of rock dilatancy can adequately monitor the stability of rocks. The characteristics of IR exhibits in the rock dilatancy process needs to be established. It is also essential to determine IR and rock dilatancy characteristics can be combined and be used as an early warning of rock failure. These key findings can then be used to find the existence of a dilatancy precursor point. This study investigates these aspects and analyzed the variation behavior of AIRT before and after dilatancy initial point to determine the rock's IR dilatancy precursor point and conclude IR characteristics in the rock dilatancy process. The present research results can attempt solid experimental and theoretical foundations for IR-remote-sensing-based monitoring and early warning of earthquakes, mine disasters, and rock engineering disasters. In this research, the experimental tests were carried out using an electro-hydraulic servo universal testing machine (C64.106*) having maximum load capacity 1000 kN. The static resistance strain gauge (TS3866) was used for strain measurement and FLIRA615 thermal infrared imager employed for surface temperature record during loading. The strain gauge measuring precision was ±0.1% ± 1 × 10 The presentative sandstone samples collected from a mine in Shandong, China, were used in this research work. The rectangular size specimens having a dimension of 70 mm × 70 mm × 140 mm, were prepared with high geometric integrity from the same sandstone block. The end surfaces of the samples were extensively polished by the grinder and abrasive papers to avoid the end non-parallelism and to control parallelism within 0.05 mm and the length error along the direction of rock height was within 0.3 mm. After samples preparation, the rock samples were dried in a dryer for 48 h, which are denoted as The schematic diagram of the IR experiment system comprises of six components is shown in Volumetric strain ( Since or During the uniaxial loading process, rock's volumetric strain followed irregular V-shaped change. At the macro-level, the rock deformation was characterized by first compaction and then dilatancy. Under stress, rock volume compression reached to minimum and then rock expanded, during which the inflection point is generally referred as the dilatancy initial point. After the inflection point, micro-cracks in the rock rapidly developed and were gradually connected. Meanwhile, the increment of nonlinear volume significantly accelerated and volumetric strain almost followed an exponential growth pattern until the failure occurred, as shown in In this study, the rock samples were added for denoising to reduce the effects of environmental factors on experimental results. Tensile stress dominated the pre-existing pores and micro-crack boundary in the rock samples during the uniaxial loading process. The values of AIRT dropped for the rock samples undergoing tensile failures, such as A  The IR thermograms of the A According to the statistics, high-temperature regions can be observed in 40% of rock samples of IR thermogram at the dilatancy initial point, as shown in High-temperature areas in an upward-AIRT rock sample at the dilatancy initial point corresponded to shear-failure-induced cracks, while high temperature areas in a downward-AIRT rock sample at the dilatancy initial point shifted and corresponded that no tensile-failure-induced cracks. The reason explained in literature as to when micro-cracks appeared in a local rock sample, IR thermogram corresponding to tensile failure surface exhibited no abnormal high temperature areas because of no friction on the fracture plane and no friction-induced heat effect. By contrast, inclined bright bands appeared in the shear failure surface on account of friction-induced heat effect. After the dilatancy initial point, rock transitioned from crack stable development phase to unstable development phase, The statistics of AIRT change rates of different rock samples before and after rock dilatancy are described in detail in Rock's volumetric strain increased almost in an exponential pattern during the whole dilatancy (fracturing) process. Meanwhile, AIRT increased or decreased until rock failure. It is therefore important to establish quantitative relation that volumetric strain and AIRT follow in the rock dilatancy process. As listed in At the initial point of rock dilatancy, the appearance of the abnormal high-temperature area is related to the occurrence of micro-cracks in the rock. If the produced micro-cracks are concentrated in an area within the rock, heat is transferred to the local rock surface and abnormally high temperatures areas appear in the IR thermogram; otherwise, abnormal high-temperature areas cannot appear in the IR thermogram. However, internal rock structures may possess different characteristics such as particle size, particle distribution and original defects. Accordingly, abnormal phenomena can only be observed in partial rock samples, i.e., judging rock's dilatancy initial point based on IR thermogram exhibits no universal applicability and a new index is required. In this study, by defining IR high-temperature point based on IR thermogram, a quantitative analysis index, namely, High Temperature Point Scaling Factor ( In IR thermogram, the sampling point at which temperature exceeds a critical value is referred as a high temperature point. The critical value is also referred as the high temperature point threshold, which can be determined using the percentile method. As stated above, In IR thermogram at the 0.77 When The variation curves of The stress levels of rock samples at dilatancy precursor point varied within a range of 0.44–0.79 Hoek and Bienawski Previous studies revealed that the physical mechanism of IR generated by rock stress is thermodynamic coupling effect, During the uniaxial loading process, rock samples were divided into two types—upward-AIRT and downward-AIRT samples, respectively. The stress levels of upward-AIRT and downward-AIRT rock samples were noted 0.74 Overall, AIRT rate changes before and after rock dilatancy. AIRT change rates of upward-AIRT and downward-AIRT rock samples were 1.48 × 10 During the dilatancy process from the initial point to rock failure, AIRT change and volumetric strain increment nearly followed a linear correlation. A novel quantitative analysis index— C.K.contributed to the research experiments and wrote the paper. M.L.conceived this research and was responsible for the research. Z.D., L.X., and Z.Z. collected and preprocessed the original data. N.M. revise English and respond to comments. All of the co-authors helped polish the manuscript. This paper was supported by the The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We thank the anonymous reviewers for reviewing the manuscript and providing comments to improve the manuscript. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at