Background
                  There is no definite radiographic landmark in plain radiographs for proximal humeral rotation, which is an important parameter for avoiding rotational malalignment during fracture fixation. Here, we used radiographic images of cadaveric humeri to determine whether the landmark of the crest of lesser tuberosity (CoLT) in plain radiographs could be used to determine humeral rotation.
               
                  Methods
                  Twenty adult cadaveric humeri were collected and seven consecutive radiographic anteroposterior views (45°, 30°, 15° internal rotation; neutral rotation; and 15°, 30°, 45° external rotation) were obtained for each specimen.
               
                  Results
                  The proportional distance (PD) of the CoLT landmark relative to the humeral head was measured and analysed. The mean PDs of the CoLT landmark were 10.2%, 17.9%, 25.6%, 35.9%, 53.4%, and 62.9% of the diameter of the humeral head, corresponding to 45°, 30°, and 15° external rotation, neutral rotation, and 15° and 30° internal rotation, respectively. We found significant differences in the mean PDs with humeral rotation.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The projection of the CoLT in plain radiographs can be used as an important landmark to assess humeral head rotation and will be a useful landmark for rotational control of fracture fixation.Rotational malalignment is a complication that may occur during percutaneous plating or intramedullary nailing We conducted this cadaveric study to find a clinically relevant radiographic reference landmark that can be used during the treatment of humeral shaft fractures. The purpose was to investigate the hypothesis that the landmark of the lesser tuberosity projection in plain radiographs and its relative distance to the lateral–medial diameter of the humeral head can be used to assess humeral rotation, thus providing a well-defined radiographic landmark for reducing the risk of rotational malalignment in the treatment of humerus fractures. We collected 20 frozen cadaveric humeri for this study, 14 males and 6 females. The average age was 65 years (range: 50–80 years old). Plain radiographs were taken to confirm the absence of any radiologically visible pathological conditions such as previous fractures, tumorous conditions, or advanced arthritic changes that could change the anatomy of the proximal humerus. Bones were placed in a horizontal position in a custom-made frame with a goniometer. The distal part of the humerus was carefully controlled by transepicondylar K-wire in order to penetrate the humerus along the transepicondylar line from the centre of the medial epicondyle to the lateral epicondyle The radiographic images were subsequently imported into Picture Archiving and Communication Systems software (PACS, version 2.1.0.963). The tangent points of these three lines were the most lateral (Line L) and most medial (Line M) margins of the humeral head and the most lateral prominent radiodense curve of the CoLT (Line P) ( We statistically analysed the PD changes using repeated-measure analysis of variance (RANOVA), followed by a post hoc paired Student's When the humerus was in the neutral position, the average PD of the CoLT landmark, expressed as a percentage of the diameter of the humeral head, was 35.9% (range: 32.3–40.1%). With an increase in the external rotational angle, the CoLT landmark moved closer to the lateral margin of the humeral head. Conversely, with an increase in the internal rotational angle, it moved closer to the medial margin. The PDs of the CoLT landmark were 10.2%, 17.9%, 25.6%, 53.4%, and 62.9% of the diameter of the humeral head, corresponding to the positions of 45°, 30°, and 15° external rotation, and 15° and 30° internal rotation, respectively. There were statistically significant differences in the PDs of the CoLT landmark among the six positions of humeral head rotation ( At 45° internal rotation, the margin of the CoLT was not visible in AP views; hence, no relevant reference line could be identified and appropriate measurements could not be made. Thus, we could only obtain the data of six different rotational positions. There were no significant differences between the results of the three measurers ( Several anatomical landmarks of the proximal humerus can be used as reference points, including the humeral head margin, the bicipital groove, the medial margin of the greater tuberosity, and the lateral margin of lesser tuberosity Arm position may affect humeral rotational alignment and range of motion during closed intramedullary nailing and minimally invasive plate osteosynthesis. Thus, it has been recommended that closed nailing and minimally invasive plate osteosynthesis approaches of humeral shaft fractures should be performed with the upper arm in the resting position Our current study also showed significant differences in the mean PDs of the CoLT landmark with external and internal rotation of the humerus. We found that, when expressed as a percentage of the humeral head diameter, the mean PD was 35.9% in the humeral neutral position, which was slightly more than the one-third of the diameter of the humeral head. An interesting finding worth mentioning is that in most cases (i.e. 15 of 20 specimens) we found that in the neutral position the medial extent of the lesser tuberosity coincided with an imaginary vertical line drawn from the medial cortex of the humeral diaphysis ( The PDs of the CoLT landmark were 10.2%, 17.9%, 25.6%, 35.9%, 53.4%, and 62.9% of the diameter of the humeral head, which corresponded to the positions of 45°, 30°, and 15° external rotation, neutral rotation, and 15° and 30° internal rotation, respectively. Hence, during surgery, humeral rotation can be judged as 15° external rotation if the CoLT landmark lies in the outer quarter quadrant of the humerus head. It can be estimated that the humerus is rotated 15° internally if the CoLT landmark lies approximately in the centre of the humeral head. When the humerus was in the 45° internal rotation position, the humeral head was circular in shape. There were several limitations to this study. First, we did not measure the humeral head retroversion of each sample and did not take it into consideration. However, the measurements in our study presented a uniform trend according to the rotation in each specimen. Second, these specimens were taken from adult cadavers, so our results are not suitable for paediatric patients. Third, we used plain radiographs to obtain better resolution of the images than with fluoroscopy, although the bony landmark can still be identified intraoperatively using fluoroscopy ( The clinical relevance of our present study is that the results are immediately applicable to fluoroscopic identification of humeral rotation. In humeral shaft fractures with severe comminution, it is not easy to determine the rotational alignment. The transepicondylar axis using the medial and lateral condyles of the humerus to indicate the distal humerus and the landmark of CoLT for the proximal humerus can be used to identify the neutral position of the humerus. In summary, the landmark of the CoLT projection in plain radiographs and its position relative to the lateral–medial diameter of the humeral head in varying degrees of rotation can be easily applied to assess humeral rotation, especially the neutral position. This gross assessment could be used to avoid gross rotational malalignment of the humerus during fracture treatment under fluoroscopic control and could also be useful in the minimally invasive percutaneous plate osteosynthesis procedure. All authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest in this study. This study was supported by a grant (