Sampling procedures are extremely important in the analysis of sediments. It is essential to ensure that the composition of the portion of the sample being analyzed is representative of the material being analyzed. This fact is even more important in view of the fact that the size of the portion of the sample being analyzed in many modern methods of analysis is extremely small. It is therefore essential to ensure before the analysis is begun that correct statistically validated sampling procedures are used to ensure, as far as possible, that the portion of sample being analyzed is representative of the bulk of materials from which the sample is taken. This chapter considers sample homogeneity, destructive analysis, sample comminution, sample sieving, sample grinding, particle size distribution, pressure dissolution, microwave dissolution, and methods of nondestructive analysis.Introduction Sample Homogeneity Destructive Analysis Comminution of Samples Sieving Analysis of Samples Grinding of Samples Particle-Size Distribution Measurement Pressure Dissolution of Sediments Microwave Pressure Dissolution Digestion of Nonsaline Sediments Nondestructive Analysis of Solid Samples Introduction X-Ray Fluorescence Spectroscopy Electron Probe X-Ray Microanalysis Auger Electron Spectrometry Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry References Sampling procedures are extremely important in the analysis of sediments. It is essential to ensure that the composition of the portion of the sample being analyzed is representative of the material being analyzed. This fact is even more evident because the size of the portion of sample being analyzed in many modern methods of analysis is extremely small. It is therefore essential to ensure before the analysis is begun that correct statistically validated sampling procedures are used to ensure, as far as possible, that the portion of the sample being analyzed is representative of the bulk of material from which the sample was taken. The collection and handling of samples prior to analysis has been discussed by various workers and organizations, including Smith and James, The principal step of the sampling process is the taking of the sample. Here we intend to deal only with the risk of contaminating the sample during its collection, storage, and processing, since any subsequent separation is applied only after the sample has been brought into solution. The “art” of the analytical chemist consists of knowing the history of the sample, and of choosing the simplest possible analytical procedure. Ristenpart et al. Thoms Rubio and Ure Wehrens et al. Vernet et al. Fortunati et al. Droppo et al. Truckenbrodt and Einax Ruiz et al. The problem of homogeneity of a sample is closely related to the problem of the history of the sample. Whereas the literature reports many specific sampling situations, there are few papers that consider the fundamental aspects of the sampling process and their implications for the general analytical process. The aspects that relate to the homogeneity of the sample have to be considered in the context of the nature of the analytical process. Also the nature of the analytical process is determined by the characteristics of the sample to be analyzed. The homogeneity of the sample depends on the physical state of the material. Because of the natural diffusion processes, liquid and gaseous samples are much more homogeneous than solid ones. Solid samples are often heterogeneous, and have first to be homogenized by mechanical means (grinding, ball-milling, etc.) before specimens are selected. The lack of homogeneity of solid samples is the main factor that renders their processing difficult. There are two principal methods employed in the analysis of sediments: destructive analysis and nondestructive analysis. “Destroying” a sample means to bring it into a homogenous form as a solution, normally in an aqueous or a partially nonaqueous medium. There are two means of bringing solid sediment and sludges into solution, either by dissolving them or by decomposing or disintegrating them in dry form by means of fluxes. These supplementary operations not only increase the duration of the analysis proper, but also introduce the risk of contamination of the samples by reagents and working techniques. To dissolve certain solid samples, acids or mixtures of acids may be used. However, besides dissolving the sample, the acids may interfere with the subsequent analysis by converting some components of the sample into extremely stable complexes or by creating volatile components that may be lost partly or even totally during the dissolution process. Some wet dissolution/decomposition reagents, such as hydrofluoric or hydrochloric acid, may have strong competing action. Very often, the complex formed may prevent the proper determination from being performed, because it is kinetically or thermodynamically very stable. In many cases the dissolution/decomposition reagents are used to destroy an organic substrate. For example, the use of nitric-perchloric or nitric-sulfuric-perchloric acid mixtures is well known. The art of the analytical chemist consists in choosing the most suitable dissolution/decomposition system for a given sample, so that the resulting solution contains the components in a form directly usable in the subsequent concentration and separation process. When the aim of the analytical chemist is to determine trace components after a wet decomposition with water or acids, care must be taken to use clean vessels and For samples that are virtually insoluble in water or acids, either cold or hot, so-called dry decomposition may be used. This system is more tedious than wet decomposition since it involves two independent operations, the decomposition proper and the succeeding dissolution of the product. For dry decomposition, various fluxes can be used, such as Na Unlike acids, which can now be obtained in a high degree of purity, solid reagents are often of insufficient purity for trace analysis. It is this aspect of trace analysis that has led to the development of some noncontaminant decomposition systems. The simplest way of achieving faster (and noncontaminating) decomposition has been to resort to an additional physical parameter, namely pressure, coupled with an adequate decomposition temperature. As will be discussed later, the use of high-pressure decomposition vessels requires much lower temperatures for decomposing a sample, than those necessary for dry decomposition at atmospheric pressure. The appearance of the high-pressure decomposition vessels (bombs) is a direct result of the availability of a chemically inert plastic, Teflon. In analyzing solid samples, regardless of the chosen decomposition system, a preliminary and extremely important step is granulometry, which plays a decisive role when preparing solid samples for chemical analysis. Although many studies have been written on granulometry, these studies could also be considered as part of the general sampling process. Wolfson and Belyaev A great number of separation processes are based on solvent extraction, especially since this is also a concentration technique. For these reasons, solvent extraction will be considered, both from the point of view of the sampling process and from that of the general analytical process. Solvent extraction is ultimately a process of partitioning between two immiscible solvents, and for its optimization, it is necessary to know first of all the operational parameters of the system. The technique of solvent extraction has long been used in organic chemistry for concentrating and purifying some substances. In the case of organic compounds, the separation process is simple, in many cases being based only on differences in the solubility of the compounds in different solvents. Many attempts at classifying solvent extraction systems have been made. Diamond and Tuck Various comminution devices are available from Fritsch for handling these types of samples. Grinding elements are offered in various noncontaminating materials such as corundum (A1 Having comminuted the sample, it may now be required to carry out a sieving analysis in order to obtain different size fractions for chemical analysis. Fritsch supply a range of devices for sieving analyzers. The air-dried sample is ground until the whole of the sample, excluding stones, passes through a 2-mm mesh sieve. There is a limited range of apparatus available for grinding, but the Rukuhia-type grinding machine is suitable (this is obtainable from D. Mackay, 85 East Road, Cambridge, CB1 1BY, United Kingdom). The apparatus consists of a number of cylinders into which the samples and metal pestles are placed. The cylinders, which have walls of 2-mm mesh perforated steel, are rotated horizontally by means of electrically driven rollers. As the cylinders rotate, the sample is ground by the pestle and falls through the mesh into a tray below. Houba et al. Complete particle-size analyses can require the use of various analysis technologies. A microscopic examination may be performed before the sieve analysis, which in turn can be followed by a sedimentation analysis or the recording and the evaluation of a diffraction pattern. The working range of the analysis methods overlap and can be subdivided as shown in Pressure dissolution and digestion bombs have been used to dissolve samples for which wet digestion is unsuitable. In this technique, the sample is placed in a pressure dissolution vessel with a suitable mixture of acids, and the combination More recently, microwave ovens have been used for sample dissolution. These are available from Park Instruments. The sample is sealed in a Teflon bottle or a The list of applications has been expanded to include metals such as chromium, iron, nickel, manganese, beryllium, cadmium, copper, lead, vanadium, and zinc by using a quartz liner to eliminate interference from trace amounts of heavy metals leached from the bomb walls and electrodes. Various workers have applied microwave digestion to the determination of metals in nonsaline sediments. Nieuwenholze et al. Elwaer and Belzile Several manufacturers supply microwave ovens and digestion bombs ( There are methods that are capable of showing the distribution of elements on the surface of solid samples such as sediments. As such, they enable one to ascertain the homogeneity of distribution of elements on the surface of, and presumably within, the portion of sample analyzed. We have at our disposal a large number of methods for analyzing solid materials without altering the sample in any way, all of which enable us to characterize them qualitatively, quantitatively, and sometimes structurally, by the direct action of a “reagent” upon a previously prepared surface of the sample. Although there are a number of techniques that involve the destruction of at least a fraction of the sample, either because of the width of the reagent beam used or the sensitivity of the determination (e.g., laser-source emission spectrometry or spark-source mass spectrometry). In this discussion we will refer mainly to those techniques for analysis of solid materials that maintain the sample almost intact after impact of the reagent. These are the so-called surface-analysis techniques, or more correctly, beam-analysis techniques. As mentioned already, many surface-analysis techniques are available nowadays. In the opinion of some specialists in this field, The importance of these surface-analysis techniques has resulted in the development of a range of highly automated instruments. In the effort to obtain multiple types of analytical data, a trend has occurred to build combined instruments, that is, devices that will permit measurements by several techniques in a single vacuum system. In this way, greater utilization of the complex instrumentation involved, and a more economic use of the functional parameters of the instruments, are ensured. X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy is extremely useful for determining the surface concentration and distribution of elements, arsenic, etc., in sediments. It was the first nondestructive technique for analyzing surfaces, and produced some remarkable results. Some advantages of nondestructive methods are no risk of loss of elements during sample-handling operations; the absence of contamination from reagents, etc.; and the avoidance of capital outlay on expensive instruments and highly trained staff. A wide variety of X-ray fluorescence spectrometers may be used, depending on the nature and complexity of the sample and on the number of samples Even though X-ray fluorescence is now widely used to analyze a large variety of samples, it does have some drawbacks. For instance, the X-ray beam used is wide, this is of no great use for analyzing tiny inclusions present in samples, and also does not allow point-by-point analysis on surfaces (scanning analysis). This was possible because the electron beam had a diameter of only about 1 In principle, the difference between X-ray fluorescence spectrometry and electron-probe microanalysis lies in the fact the analytical information is provided, in the first case, by secondary fluorescence X-rays, and in the second by primary X-rays emitted as a result of the impact of the electron beam on the sample’s electrons. Owing to the small size of the electron beam on the one hand, and to the high sensitivity of the method on the other (a sensitivity that can go down to detection of 10 Auger electron spectrometry (AES), reported by Auger in 1923, In secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS), a primary ion beam bombards the surface and a mass spectrometer analyses the ions sputtered from the surface by the primary bombardment. This extremely sensitive technique provides both elemental and structural information.