Bone loss at menopause is an important contributor to the development of osteoporosis in women. Although alterations in bone remodeling are the implied process through which bone is lost at menopause, how menopause influences basic multicellular units (BMUs), the teams of cells that perform bone remodeling, is not completely clear. In this analysis we utilize a computer simulation of BMU activity to evaluate the changes that occur at menopause. Transient and maintained changes in both the rate of bone turnover (expressed as the BMU birthrate or origination frequency) and the focal bone balance (differences between the amount of bone formed and resorbed at each remodeling site) are considered. The magnitude of the change in BMU activity is determined parametrically through comparison to lumbar spine bone mineral density data present in the literature. We find that a change in bone turnover that is maintained after menopause, a transient change in focal bone balance at menopause, or a combination of the two is consistent with bone loss patterns seen clinically. Understanding the changes in BMU activity that occur at menopause could lead to improved strategies to treat and prevent postmenopausal osteoporosis.Bone loss associated with menopause is an important contributor to the development of osteoporosis. The bone remodeling process, as the primary means through which bone mass is changed in the adult body, is instrumental in determining the rate and magnitude of bone loss at menopause. Although bone remodeling is performed by groups of osteoclasts and osteoblasts organized into basic multicellular units (BMUs) the changes in bone remodeling at menopause are typically described in general terms that do not specify modifications in BMU activity. These descriptions suggest that there is an increase in bone turnover and a negative bone balance at menopause Bone loss caused directly by menopause occurs primarily within the first few years surrounding the final menses Alterations in BMU activity that result in significant changes in bone mass involve either modification of bone turnover or a focal imbalance (more or less bone is formed than is resorbed at each remodeling site) In this analysis we utilize a computer simulation of BMU activity based on clinical histomorphometric data that predicts how a change in BMU activity can modify bone mineral density (BMD). The model is used to determine the changes in bone turnover and focal bone balance that are consistent with changes in lumbar spine BMD observed in a longitudinal study of bone loss during menopause. Based on these simulations we develop a theoretical description of the changes in BMU activity at menopause useful for understanding bone loss during the menopausal transition and its contribution toward the development of osteoporosis. A computer simulation of bone remodeling in a representative volume of cancellous bone is used in this analysis. The model is based on the quantitative descriptions of BMUs presented by Hazelwood and colleagues Changes in BMU activity are applied to the model from 4 years before to 4 years after menopause, based on the initiation of serum hormonal fluctuations Simulations 1–4 determined the maximum percentage change in bone turnover ( In simulations 5–8 the combined effects of alterations in both bone turnover and focal bone balance were considered ( Based on our analysis we suggest that the menopausal transition is associated with two different changes in BMU activity that contribute to bone loss: an increase in bone turnover that is maintained afterward and a transient focal imbalance. These changes in BMU activity are the modifications to bone physiology that can account for the rapid phase of bone loss at menopause. These alterations in BMU activity at menopause have important consequences for bone physiology. First, the increase in bone turnover at menopause suggests that the menopausal transition leaves women in a state of high bone turnover. There are considerable data in the literature supporting a maintained increase in bone turnover including bone biomarker measurements Second, the fact that focal imbalances associated with menopause appear to be transient suggests that bone loss in the lumbar spine long after menopause is most likely caused by other, nonmenopausal factors (possibly aging, nutritional inadequacies, decreased physical activity, or factors secondary to estrogen depletion) Changes in bone mass caused by modifications in bone turnover are considered reversible. That is, if the modification of bone turnover were reversed, the change in bone mass that it caused would also be reversed. The same is not true for changes in focal bone balance. A negative focal bone balance causes bone loss as long as it is maintained and stops causing bone loss when the balance is restored, leaving a net loss of bone mass. These differences in reversibility of bone loss suggest that the relative influence of bone turnover and focal bone balance on menopausal bone loss would also determine the degree to which menopausal bone loss is reversible. The fact that hormone replacement therapy has been shown to restore bone mass in women long past menopause suggests that menopausal bone loss has an important reversible component The model presented in this analysis is a phenomenologic representation of bone remodeling that matches changes in BMU activity to rates of bone loss. The limitations of this model have been discussed in much greater detail previously The simulation models a volume of cancellous bone as a continuum; that is, it does not incorporate descriptions of bone microarchitecture and does not consider additional bone loss caused by disconnected trabeculae. A recent computer model has suggested that, at the most, 20–30% of the total bone loss in elderly adults may be caused by disconnected trabeculae and loose fragments of trabeculae In the current study we have determined the patterns of change in BMU activity that most likely occur during menopause but we have not specified the factors that cause the changes in BMU activity. Recker and colleagues have suggested that declines in serum estrogen may be the cause for menopausal bone loss based, in part, on their observation that both lumbar spine BMD and measured serum estradiol decline in a sigmoidal fashion during the menopausal transition Computer models of bone remodeling detailing bone resorption and formation at individual remodeling sites have been used by a number of researchers The authors thank Robert Marcus, M.D., Professor of Medicine at Stanford University for his comments and assistance, Robert Recker and Michael Davies for sharing their findings, Mitchell Schaffler for his encouragement, and our knowledgeable reviewers for their helpful comments. This work was supported in part by the Department of Veterans Affairs, VA Merit Review Grant 2424P, and a fellowship from the Ford Foundation. The remodeling parameters used in the analysis are based on histmorphometric measurements of the iliac crest in young healthy subjects ( The origination frequency and the BMU life span have identical effects in the model, primarily because the model does not detail bone microarchitecture and therefore cannot distinguish the difference between an increase in the birthrate of BMUs and an extension of their life spans. The current analysis considers changes in bone turnover at menopause to be due entirely to changes in the BMU origination frequency although it must be recognized that some of the changes may be the result of increased life span. The local resorption and formation rates express the volume of bone modified at each remodeling site per unit time. Modification of one of these rates causes a steady focal imbalance that prevents the system from achieving equilibrium. Because equilibrium is used to evaluate sensitivity, the local resorption and formation rates cannot be evaluated in terms of sensitivity even though their importance for determining focal bone balance gives them great influence on the model. The secondary mineralization period is defined as the time required for the mineralization process to proceed from 70% of the theoretical maximum to 95% mineralization where the theoretical maximum is considered to be tissue that is 70% ash by weight. The value for the secondary mineralization period used in these simulations (6 years) is identical to that found to predict bone mineral density increases associated with increased mineralization after alendronate treatment