The adsorption behavior of sulfur dispersing agents, including lignosulfonate, Quebracho, o-phenylenediamine (OPD), and humic acid on elemental sulfur and nickel sulfide concentrate was investigated. The charge changes on elemental sulfur surface were characterized by the measurement of the electrokinetic sonic amplitude (ESA) signal. The adsorption behavior of OPD was investigated by measuring the interfacial tension between liquid sulfur and nickel sulfate solution at 140°C. The adsorption of lignosulfonate on the molten sulfur surface was calculated by the Gibbs Equation. The adsorption of lignosulfonate, Quebracho, and humic acid on the nickel concentrate was studied at ambient temperature. The adsorption mechanism of sulfur dispersing agents on both elemental sulfur and nickel concentrate were discussed. The stability of OPD in the nickel concentrate slurry was discussed.Oxygen pressure leaching of nickel concentrate at medium temperatures (140–150  The adsorption behavior of sulfur dispersing agents, including lignosulfonate, Quebracho, OPD, and humic acid have not been studied in the system containing nickel concentrate. The main objective of this investigation was to study the adsorption behavior of lignosulfonate, Quebracho, OPD, and humic acid on elemental sulfur and a nickel sulfide concentrate sample. This includes understanding of the surface charge changes on the elemental sulfur before and after sulfur dispersing agent adsorption; to understand the adsorption of sulfur dispersing agent on the nickel concentrate surface by the measurement of the sulfur dispersing agent concentration; to understand the adsorption of OPD and lignosulfonate on the molten sulfur surface (140 Elemental sulfur was obtained from Alfa Aesar, at a purity of 99.5%. The original particle size of sulfur was −100 mesh (150 The nickel concentrate slurry was obtained from XSTRATA Nickel (Strathcona Mill). The main sulfide minerals were pentlandite, pyrrhotite, pyrite, and chalcopyrite. A sub-sample was washed with deionized water and sieved to pass −325 mesh (44 The specific surface area of the nickel concentrate was analyzed by the Quantachrome Autosorb-1MP BET analyzer under vacuum after outgassing at 40 Lignosulfonate is a complex anionic polyelectrolyte whose structure contains sulfonate, free phenolic, primary and secondary alcoholic, and carboxylate groupings ( A Zeta Probe (Colloidal Dynamics, Warwick, RI) was used to investigate the effect of sulfur dispersing agents adsorption on the magnitude of the surface charge of elemental sulfur particles. 10 The pendant drop method is suitable for the liquid–liquid interfacial tension measurement at high pressure and high temperature ( Interfacial excess of lignosulfonate at the liquid sulfur–nickel sulfate aqueous solution interface were calculated by the Gibbs Equation ( The molecular area occupied by one lignosulfonate molecule was calculated from Eq. A UV-2401PC UV-Vis recording spectrophotometer by Shimadzu was used in the study. For uniform conditioning in the adsorption experiments, a Lab-line Orbit Environ Shaker was used at a moderate setting for the indicated amount of time. A centrifuge was used to separate aqueous solution from nickel concentrate. The UV spectra of lignosulfonate and humic acid were not influenced by the acidity of the aqueous solution under the conditions of this study. The concentration of BorrePAL U, BorrePAL N, BorrePAL S, and humic acid were determined at wavelength 281 Langmuir adsorption isotherm was used to fit sulfur dispersing agent adsorption. Langmuir equation is shown as Eq. The influence of sulfur dispersing agent concentration on the ESA signal is shown in With the addition of OPD the surface charge of sulfur is not changed. Without considering the oxidation of OPD, two possibilities could happen and result in the stable state of the surface charge or charge density: – The liquid sulfur–nickel sulfate solution interfacial tension as shown in  The molecules of lignosulfonate are compact spheres in aqueous solution ( The adsorption data were analyzed according to the linear form of the adsorption isotherm ( The molecular areas of lignosulfonate taken up on the nickel concentrate surface was calculated from Langmuir adsorption isotherm and shown in The behavior of lignosulfonate is influenced by its functional groups: sulfonate (p The Langmuir adsorption isotherm was used to fit the adsorption isotherm of humic acid, and the results are illustrated in The Langmuir adsorption isotherm was used to fit the adsorption of Quebracho as illustrated in The UV–Vis spectrum of OPD solution was significantly changed after conditioning with nickel sulfide concentrate, which indicated the chemical transformation of OPD during the conditioning stage ( The effects of sulfur dispersing agents in the oxygen pressure leaching of nickel concentrate at medium temperature were investigated. In acid sulfate media, the pH of the leachate was less than 1.0, measured at ambient temperature. At such a low pH, most sulfonate groups are combined with protons or cations. Carboxylic and hydroxyl groups were not dissociated at all. The effective surface charge was near zero at pH 1 (  Lignosulfonate, Quebracho and humic acid have the ability of adsorbing onto sulfur surface at ambient temperature. Electrostatic interaction is a possible adsorption mechanism. OPD cannot adsorb on sulfur surface. The adsorption of lignosulfonate on molten sulfur surface is multilayer adsorption and hydrophobic bonding is a possible adsorption mechanism. OPD cannot adsorb on molten sulfur surface. The adsorption of lignosulfonate, humic acid, and Quebracho on nickel concentrate is monolayer adsorption. The adsorption of lignosulfonate and humic acid is through ion-binding and electrostatic interaction. Electrostatic interaction is a possible adsorption mechanism of Quebracho. OPD undergoes chemical change in aqueous solution in the presence of ferric at ambient temperature. Chemical adsorption is the major mechanism for the adsorption of sulfur dispersing agents on nickel sulfide mineral surface under leaching conditions. The authors acknowledge the Borregaard Lignotech USA of providing lignosulfonate and humic acid samples, and Chevron Phillips Chemical Company LP for providing the Quebracho sample. The kind help from Berend Wassink (UBC) is also acknowledged.