There is increasing demand for synthetic bone scaffolds for bone tissue engineering as they can counter issues such as potential harvesting morbidity and restrictions in donor sites which hamper autologous bone grafts and address the potential for disease transmission in the case of allografts. Due to their excellent biocompatibility, titanium scaffolds have great potential as bone graft substitutes as they mimic the structure and properties of human cancellous bone. Here we report on a new thermoset bio-polymer which can act as a binder for Direct Ink Writing (DIW) of titanium artificial bone scaffolds. We demonstrate the use of the binder to manufacture porous titanium scaffolds with evenly distributed and highly interconnected porosity ideal for orthopaedic applications. Due to their porous structure, the scaffolds exhibit an effective Young's modulus similar to human cortical bone, alleviating undesirable stress-shielding effects, and possess superior strength. The biocompatibility of the scaffolds was investigated in vitro by cell viability and proliferation assays using human bone-marrow-derived Mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs). The hMSCs displayed well-spread morphologies, well-organized F-actin and large vinculin complexes confirming their excellent biocompatibility. The vinculin regions had significantly larger Focal Adhesion (FA) area and equivalent FA numbers compared to that of tissue culture plate controls, showing that the scaffolds support cell viability and promote attachment. In conclusion, we have demonstrated the excellent potential of the thermoset bio-polymer as a Direct Ink Writing ready binder for manufacture of porous titanium scaffolds for hard tissue engineering.Synthetic scaffolds hold great promise for the repair and remodelling of damaged bone tissue as they remove the potential for disease transmission from donor to recipient as can occur for traditional allografts [ Chen et al. [ Direct Ink Writing (DIW) was introduced by Lewis et al. [ To date, DIW of polymers and ceramics have been investigated most extensively and has been successfully applied to manufacture of ceramic scaffolds for hard tissue implants [ In the present study, sintering of titanium in the presence of a thermoset pine-oil-based bio-epoxy has been evaluated with the aim to establish its suitability as a novel inkjet binder for DIW of titanium for orthopaedic scaffolds. The thermoset polymer ink allows the scaffold to hold its shape during sintering, enabling production of complex porous structures appropriate for hard tissue engineering. The scaffolds show abundant open porosity and remarkable compressive strength, coupled with favourable biological properties that promote cell proliferation. This manufacturing method has significant potential for rapid net shape manufacturing of metallic biomedical parts, especially for orthopaedic applications requiring intricate and fine-scale features. SUPER SAP Epoxy Systems (manufactured by Entropy Resins), a pine-oil-based bio-epoxy, was used in this study as a binder. Resin and hardener were mixed with volume ratio of 2:1, as specified by the manufacturer, to ultimately create a highly cross-linked polymer. Spherical, pure titanium powder (>99.9% purity, 0–45 μm, manufactured by Raymor, Canada), shown in the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image in The density and open porosity of the sintered samples was determined by the Archimedes method with oil impregnation. H-Galden ZT-180 was used as the immersion fluid in preference to water to give more accurate results. The density of the sintered sample, The mechanical properties of the porous titanium scaffolds were measured by compression tests following the ASTM E9 standard. The tests were carried out in triplicate using an Instron 5584 test machine, with cylindrically shaped samples 12 mm in height and 6 mm in diameter. Samples were prepared using precision CNC machining for geometrical accuracy. Tests were conducted with a cross-head speed of 0.001 mm/s at room temperature. Each test sample was loaded until fracture. The elastic modulus, ultimate compressive strength, yield strength and strain at fracture were measured. The 0.2%-offset proof strength was taken to approximate yield strength. Specimens for microstructural investigation were cross-sectioned and mounted in epoxy resin. Mounted specimens were ground on progressively finer SiC paper to 1200 grit and polished with a mixture of colloidal silica and H Titanium disks (10 mm diameter; 1 mm thick) were sliced from sintered samples using a Struers Accutom Cut-off saw with a diamond cutting disk (0.8 mm thick). A cutting speed of 2000 rpm and a cutting rate of 0.025 mm/s was chosen to generate fine sectioned surfaces with intact open pore structures without the requirement for further polishing. The disks were then cleaned in an ultrasonic cleaner, immersed in acetone, for 20 mins. The disks were subsequently rinsed with deionized water and dried under vacuum. The disks were individually wrapped in gauze to prevent damage and sterilized by autoclaving (121 °C for 20 mins, and dried at 65 °C). Human bone-marrow-derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells (hMSCs, RoosterBio) were cultured in DMEM low glucose media supplemented with 100 U/mL penicillin, 100 μg/mL streptomycin and 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) at 37 °C with 5% CO Cell viability was assessed by 3‑(4,5‑dimethylthiazol‑2yl)‑2,5‑diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay using the protocols described in [ Prior to seeding, the scaffolds were sterilized by means of autoclave at 121 °C for 21 mins, and dried at 65 °C in an oven. hMSCs were detached with TrypLE Select (Invitrogen), resuspended in DMEM/10%FBS/1%PS by volume and seeded onto the scaffolds at a density of 10,000 cells/cm All cellular experiments were performed in triplicates. Data is presented as the mean value standard error of the mean analysed with a student The thermoset polymer ink allows the scaffold to hold its shape during sintering and leaves a porous structure after its removal during sintering.  Mechanical properties of the DIW porous titanium samples are presented in To gauge the biocompatibility of the titanium scaffolds, an MTT assay was conducted to assess the viability and proliferation of hMSCs against tissue culture plate (TCP) controls after 1 and 7 days of culture. The MTT assay results, as shown in To evaluate cell compatibility and responses on the DIW processed scaffolds, samples were seeded with hMSCs for 4 and 24 h. Cell morphology analysis was used to assess the attachment of the seeded cells and actin microfilaments are the major structural element for evaluation. Fluorescent imaging ( The influence of the DIW porous scaffolds on adhesion and spreading of hMSCs was also investigated. Changes to the cytoskeletal architecture, in particular to Focal adhesion (FA) formation were examined. FA are complex protein arrays that produce, transmit and sense mechanical tension [ Direct Ink Writing (DIW) of titanium scaffolds is a promising and innovative solution to waste free 3D printing of net shape complex parts. In our study, we have demonstrated a novel biocompatible DIW ready thermoset pine-oil-based bio-epoxy binder and investigated its feasibility for manufacturing porous titanium scaffolds for orthopaedic applications. The binder was mixed with spherical titanium powder to generate green parts and was subsequently burnt out during sintering to form closed cell porous titanium scaffolds containing elongated pores with a high degree of interconnectivity (>70%). The elastic moduli of the scaffolds was ~20.2 GPa for a porosity of ~42%, which is within the typical range of human cortical bone (4–30 GPa), while the yield strength ( A thermoset biopolymer is demonstrated as a suitable binder to create an ‘ink’ for Direct Ink Writing (DIW) of titanium powders. The binder is then removed by burnout during the furnace sintering process employed to consolidate the metal powder. This concept has great potential as it solves a fundamental limitation in metallic 3D printing, i.e. controlled printing of complex parts at micrometre scales and avoids issues encountered in other technologies associated with highly localised heating and cooling. The method enables zero-waste fabrication of high value metal powders. In our study, this innovation enabled production of scaffolds which held their shape during sintering with minimal shrinkage. This is a ground-breaking concept for metallic 3D printing as it enables DIW of artificial skeletal implants for the repair of damaged bone. The porous scaffolds mimic the mechanical performance and density of human bone, addressing the primary causes of implant loosening by matching the implant stiffness to bone. In-vitro stem cell culture tests show that the scaffolds provide ideal conditions for adhesion and proliferation. The authors acknowledge the support of