We present a novel methodology for numerically reconstructing a three-dimensional (3D) texture for simulating multi-mineral rock and estimating the particle properties and liberation characteristics of its breakage products. A stochastic geometrical model has been developed to describe the intact structure of ores at any scale, potentially containing several mineral types, each with unique grade and grain size distribution parameters. Additional controls over the intact texture include the ability to vary the proportion of grain inclusions within grains of a different mineral phase and by varying the degree of spatial clustering of grains within the texture. Repeated random 2D and 3D sectioning of the 3D texture to simulate particle production and to calculate their compositions is used to generate outputs comparable to reports from mineral liberation analysis systems; including density distributions, liberation distributions, and particle class distributions. These outputs enable texture parameters to be fitted to corresponding measured liberation data and is demonstrated for a four-mineral sulphide ore, yielding a realistic distribution of particle properties, essential for accurately modelling particle separations.Better models are needed to describe and simulate the process of mineral liberation: the extent to which minerals are released from their host rock upon breakage. The degree of liberation and the composition of the particle fragments is the product of both the breakage mechanisms and the texture of intact rocks. If the relationship between texture and liberation can be modelled successfully, this information can be used to optimise size-reduction and mineral extraction processes to maximise the value extracted from the ore. The term ore texture is used in this paper to encompass a broad range of rock characteristics including the mineralogical composition of the sample, grain size and size distribution, grain shape and orientation, shape distribution, irregularity of the grain boundaries, spatial distribution of the grains, and associations between minerals ( Several models have been proposed to describe the 3D geometry of intact rock to use for liberation modelling however all with a highly simplified description of rock texture. The original liberation model of Numerous authors have employed numerical computations using voxel (volume element) grids for simulating individual particles ( X-ray computed tomography (CT) offers the potential for direct 3D measurement of the internal structure of rocks ( This paper expands on Geometrical models simulating the random breakage of an intact parent particle containing grains have mainly considered a highly simplified geometry and just two mineral phases. In order to expand this concept to a wider range of ore textures, a range of images of mineral micro- and meso-textures were examined. It is evident that a large proportion of ore textures have ( more than two phases, phases with a wide range of compositions down to parts per million, grains with broad size distribution spanning two orders of magnitude or more, regions where mineral phases are concentrated, such as in veins or clusters, regions that are barren or almost barren of mineralisation, phases that tend to be co-located rather than located independently of other phases, intergrowth of grains within other mineral grains, and a wide range of grain shapes. The proposed model aims to characterise multi-phase textures using a set of model parameters representing many of the above textural characteristics. Considering the variety of mineral textures in nature, however, it is beyond the scope of this work to develop a generic model to describe all possible rock textures; and therefore there are likely to be textures for which this approach is not suited. In addition, the modelling approach described here does not attempt a visually realistic representation of the real texture; but to create an abstract texture that when fragmented produces particles with a similar liberation distribution and properties as breaking the physical ore sample. Textures can be examined at different physical scales. Hence, a flexible texture model should lend itself to mathematically representing a volume of intact rock of any scale from a micro-texture specimen to a mining block in a geometallurgical block model of a mine. We therefore define a The phases making up the texture volume are classified as one of three types: A At least one Optionally, one or more Furthermore, a given mineral phase may be described as a composite of both primary and secondary mineral phases. For instance, chalcopyrite could be modelled as a combination of primary grains and secondary inclusions within pyrite grains. Compositions of the phases in the texture volume are expressed in terms of the volumetric concentration of grains. For a particle with Efficient closed-form solutions are available for both intersection volumes and intersection surface areas of only a small number of geometric shapes. As described in Section Mineral grains in nature occur as a distribution of sizes. 2D image analysis by The continuous grain size distribution is converted into a discrete form using Eq. Discretised grain size distributions typically result in a small number of particles in the coarsest fractions and large numbers in the fine fractions. For distribution models such as the Rosin-Rammler and log-log, Ore textures often display non-random spatial variability of mineral grains. For example, banding of mineral concentration within the rock mass can divide the ore into zones rich in mineralisation and portions that are almost pure gangue. This characteristic can make it possible to pre-concentrate minerals at particle sizes significantly coarser than the liberation size. The degree of clustering within the texture volume is modelled by applying a distribution function in one or more axes of the texture volume for each primary mineral phase, allowing different phases to be clustered or kept spatially separate. The simplest distribution function is a single parameter “filling factor” which describes the fraction of the texture volume (along a single axis) that grains of a particular mineral can occupy, and is similar to “barren waste dilution” parameter introduced by Random insertion of grains into the texture volume requires a random number generator (RNG) to select grain positions. The choice of random number algorithm can be an important one in a stochastic numerical model given that default RNG of many compilers fail many of the established tests of randomness ( The texture volume is populated by inserting primary grains at random x-y-z coordinates or as transformed by the spatial clustering function (Section Particles are calculated by sampling the texture volume randomly to produce simulated particles in 3D (volumetric sections) and 2D (planar sections) of a range of size classes; for example in a The volume composition of a particle is calculated by selecting random co-ordinates within the texture volume and computing the volumes of the continuous phase and the fully-contained grains or portions of grains that intersect with the sample volume at that position as illustrated in Two intersecting spheres produce a lens-shape at their intersection. The volume of a lens ( A particle can have from zero to numerous grains that are fully included and/or intersect it. The particle composition is calculated from the sum of intersection volumes of each grain-type. Sampling using 2D section areas at random positions within the texture volume yield different liberation distributions compared with volumetric sampling due to the stereological effect ( In the case of spherical grains, we can calculate circular cross sections having a random location and orientation. Intersecting grains produce a circular cross section if fully contained or an asymmetric 2D lens if partially contained. The surface composition of particles is an important property influencing rates of industrial extraction processes such as flotation and leaching. Thus for each particle, the surface composition is also needed. The surface composition of a cubic particle is calculated from the grains exposed on all six faces of the particle using Eq. The intersection of a spherical particle and a spherical grain forms a spherical cap with surface area; Random breakage models approach the problem of sampling an intact texture either by sampling with or without replacement. If sampling without replacement, fragmenting or tessellating the parent particle yields daughter particles with at most the same overall volume as the parent texture. On the other hand, if sampling with replacement, sampling the parent particle does not remove material from the parent texture and allows samples to overlap. Thus, the texture can be re-sampled continuously generating any number of particles. However, the parent texture can be re-sampled only so long as each particle is unique. The well-known “birthday problem” ( For a voxel-based simulation where the grid size is 1000 The algorithms and assumptions used to set the sampling scheme can influence the composition of calculated particles. As described above, sampling with replacement allows large numbers of particles to be produced from the parent particle. However edge effects are observed when a particle of size The texture modelling and the volume and area intercept calculations described above have been implemented as a computer program, GTM (geometrical texture model) coded in C/C++. Examples of texture volumes are shown in The above examples feature (a) spherical grains with inclusions of a secondary phase within one of the primary phases; (b) cubic grains with a non-random spatial distribution of the primary phases; and (c) a dense packing of grains with a volumetric filling of 62% by volume. Volumetric and planar sectioning can be used to calculate the properties of individual particles including mass, density, composition by volume, composition by surface area, number of intersected grains and calculated cyclosizer-fraction. Repeated such sampling allows the average and distribution properties of the particles for a given size class to be calculated including density and liberation distributions. Typically at least 10,000 particles are calculated for each size class in up to 60 sizes (for example from 9.5 Simulation times depend on several factors including the complexity of the texture volume (in particular the number of grains), the number of particles calculated, and processor speed. Outputs from binary liberation models often consist of a liberation distribution indicating the proportion of material liberated in each size class or a binary liberation spectrum describing the proportion of material per liberation class and size class. Software for automated liberation analysis systems on the other hand are designed to generate a rich set of reports and multi-mineral liberation statistics in a range of formats ( In this study, simulated particles are analysed and binned to construct a variety of tables for comparison with measured liberation analysis data, and then to calculate the corresponding weighted sum of squared residuals. It is requisite that the measured liberation data (from an automated mineralogy system) be performed for particle size fractions across which minerals are liberating, and that the size fractions selected for model simulation should match the geometric mean size of the particle fractions analysed in the liberation analysis. An example of the type of data suitable for multi-mineral model fitting is shown in Parameter estimation and minimising the residual error allows the parameters to be fitted. The methodology for simulation and parameter estimation is illustrated in Standard fitting algorithms such as the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm that use the first and second derivatives for convergence calculations, are poorly suited to fitting stochastic models. Instead, parameter estimation based on error minimisation using a response surface design has been used, and thus its solution is approximate. The following steps describe the fitting procedure: Several model parameters are selected and a statistical experimental design matrix is set up to simultaneously vary their values within specified ranges around their initial estimates. The model is run for each of the parameter sets in the experimental design: the simulated liberation statistics are compared with the experimental liberation data to calculate the least squared residuals for each of the parameter sets. An error surface is calculated to obtain a set of parameter values that minimises errors, and this is used to update the parameter estimates. If there are more parameters than can be accommodated by the experimental design matrix, the procedure is repeated using other combinations of model parameters until an adequate solution is found. The model described above can be used to simulate a wide range of mineral textures ranging from simple binary systems to complex ores containing several mineral phases. The following examples illustrate the model’s capabilities.    Particles can also be grouped into density classes ( Preferential associations can occur between different phases in a multi-mineral system (  These results illustrate the extent to which the relative proportion of different particle classes and the composition of binary particles created are determined by mineral associations within the unbroken parent texture. By analysing only particle properties, it should therefore be possible to infer important features of the intact texture. Hence, it should be possible to find model parameters for the parent texture that, when broken into particles, reproduce measured multi-phase composition distributions and mineral associations. This is explored in the next section for a real mineral ore.  Parameters for the four-phase texture were estimated using the procedure described in Section Twenty-six model parameters were estimated in fitting the texture: 16 size distribution parameters, 5 grade ratios and 5 filling factor values. With the exception of the relatively coarse sphalerite, the minerals present are fine grained. Pyrite grains in particular have a broad distribution of sizes as is apparent from the Rosin-Rammler m-parameter values. Although the overall grade of each mineral was known, the proportion of minerals associated with different minerals needed to be estimated. The fitted filling factor values imply the presence of a band of non-sulphide gangue occupying approximately 11% of the texture’s volume, and a band rich in pyrite occupying another 14% by volume. A rendered image and 2D slice of the fitted texture is shown in A 3D geometrical model to calculate liberation distributions and particle properties of comminution products has been developed, expanding the functionality of earlier models to multi-phase systems and incorporating additional textural characteristics with the aim of more accurately describing the liberation of real multi-mineral ores. The results demonstrate the application of the texture model to complex multi-mineral textures, and its ability to estimate the liberation and mineral association properties of comminution products. When fitted to liberation data obtained from a representative sample of particles, the texture described by the model can be considered archetypal of the rock-mass from which the particles were broken. There are however several reasons why the simulated results do not exactly match the measured data. Experimental data from techniques such as QEMSCAN are subject to statistical error due to the limited number of particles analysed. In the proposed model, simulated particles are classified as binary if they contain even a small quantity of another phase, whereas liberation analysis systems may apply a threshold value; hence the simulations may predict a smaller proportion of liberated particles and greater proportion of binary particles than measured by a liberation analyser. The assumption of random breakage is also likely to contribute to the error. It is conceivable that grain boundary breakage and preferential breakage would increase the rate at which locked (binary and ternary) particles break into fully liberated particles, and thus a random breakage model may underestimate the appearance of liberated particles. Of the many approaches to modelling texture and liberation described in the literature, the original geometrical model proposed by Gaudin remains the simplest conceptually. This model extends this idea to multi-mineral ores. However, we demonstrate in this paper that extension of texture and liberation models to three or more phases cannot be realised simply by simulating a series of independent binary liberation distributions because there are preferential associations between mineral phases. A novel feature of the proposed model is its ability to incorporate inclusions of one mineral phase within grains of another mineral phase and hence to control the composition and liberation distributions of composite particles. Modelling of multi-phase textures also necessitates developing new ways of presenting the liberation data, including describing the relative associations between minerals. The geometrical texture model described in this paper can produce simulation outputs in a form that can be compared with electron-microscopy based liberation analysis outputs. In addition to statistical properties and distributions, the model can calculate properties of individual simulated particles such as density, volume composition, and surface composition. The proposed model may have several potential applications including: incorporating multi-mineral liberation into simulations; as an efficient means of creating virtual particles that can be used by models of mineral separation processes either one particle at a time or through the use of particle classes to predict separation grades and recoveries; stereological correction of liberation data and calculation of stereological correction kernels; as a tool to perform ‘what-if’ experiments to estimate the sensitivity of processes to changes in ore texture; and characterisation of ore textures, such as for geometallurgical modelling, thus reducing the reliance on subjective or qualitative textural descriptors. Like almost all previous liberation models, random breakage has been assumed. The use of random sampling simplifies liberation calculations by allowing liberation and size reduction to be evaluated independently while ensuring conservation of each mineral phase. However, a characteristic of the random breakage assumption is that each size class will have the same average particle composition. In practice, mechanisms such as preferential grain boundary breakage and differential breakage result in a non-uniform grade distribution, often with valuable minerals reporting to the finer size fractions. Future work will consider how to incorporate these mechanisms. Coupling comminution and separation processes also presents a considerable challenge as almost any classification mechanism will preferentially select certain minerals for re-breakage. This violates the random-breakage assumption that the breakage process is independent of mineral position. Simple grain and particle shapes are used. Preliminary outputs from the model comparing cubes and spheres for otherwise identical simulations suggest that particle shape may not have a dominant effect on liberation results for textures with a broad grain size range. Further study is required to verify whether grain and particle shapes need to be represented with greater fidelity. The procedure for fitting the new model to experimental data is complex and the parameter estimation is inexact. Due to the stochastic elements in the model, fitting is based on a response-surface design that currently allows up to seven parameters to be varied simultaneously. Future work aims to improve and further automate the fitting procedure. A unique model has been developed for constructing an abstract texture containing mineral grains and calculating liberation characteristics of particles resulting from breaking the texture. The ability to define grain size distributions, for grains to occur as inclusions within other mineral grains, and to describe non-uniform spatial distributions of grains, results in a mathematically more realistic description of an ore texture containing several mineral phases. Sampling of the texture assuming random breakage allows particle properties to be estimated and is shown to produce realistic compositions and proportions of locked particles at different sizes over a limited range of particle sizes. The model parameters can be fitted to standard mineralogical data. This has been tested with a fitting and simulation program developed to apply the model. Acknowledging the limitations of the model, the methodology can provide useful liberation and particle composition predictions within a limited range of particle sizes. The model is suited to predict mineral grades ranging from parts per million up to 65% by volume and typically runs in less than 30 The author acknowledges funding from