The interaction of the rebar bolt profile with the surrounding medium is investigated analytically. The grout/bolt interface failure is categorised into dilational slip and parallel shear failure based on experimental observations. For each failure mode, an analytical expression for the failure is derived after introducing Mohr–Coulomb׳s failure criterion. The theoretical predictions are compared to, and showed good agreement with, experimental data. After introducing the concept of the most vulnerable slip angle in dilational slip failure, the role of the rebar profile is identified quantitatively with respect to bond failure. It is found that the optimal profile geometry is related to the mechanical properties of the grout and the confining pressure when failure occurs. Therefore, bolt profile studies must take into account the mechanical properties of the grout and confine pressure. In addition, conclusions drawn from laboratory pull out tests should be evaluated properly considering both the testing and in-situ conditions before any application. A case study has been included to demonstrate the application of the developed theory. In a coal mine roadway primary reinforcement design, rock bolts have to be selected out of the four most popular types currently used in the Australian mining industry. The advantages and disadvantages of each bolt are discussed analytically for each case, providing a way for engineers to select the optimal bolt in their application.Rebar bolts have been broadly used as primary reinforcement in civil and mining engineering applications. Steel bolts support the rock mass by decreasing the deformation within the rock. The load transfer capacity of the rock bolting system is the key factor in the reinforcing effect. The load transfer capacity of the bolt depends on the shear strength of the grout/rock and the grout/bolt interfaces. The interface that dominates depends on the thickness of the grout annulus and the strength of surrounding rock It is commonly accepted that the bonding strength of fully grouted rock bolts has three components: adhesion, friction and mechanical interlock. Signer showed that there is no adhesion in the grout/bolt interface Mechanical interlock is a key effect created by the asperity of the grout/bolt interface. Therefore, the rebar bolt surface profile configuration plays an important role in bonding capacity in the rock bolting system. In fact, if the chemical adhesion at the grout/bolt interface is negligible and the frictional resistance can only have its effect after relative movement, then the mechanical interlock must be the predominant factor until rock bolting failure has occurred. The bolt surface profile configuration is determined by the profile shape, height and spacing of the rib, as shown in In traditional rock bolting mechanism studies, the effect of mechanical interlocking is often integrated into the proposed load transfer model in various manners. For example, in the ‘Interfacial Shear Stress’ (ISS) model, the deformation of surrounding materials is lumped into a zero thickness interface, which is assigned with specific stress–strain or stress–displacement behaviour to simulate the mechanical interlocking effect observed in pullout tests To improve the bolt loading capacity by optimising the rebar surface profile, it is necessary to consider the interaction between the rebar bolt profile and the surrounding medium. In this study, grout/bolt interface failure is studied and categorised into Failure mode analysis is the crux of load transfer mechanisms of the rock bolting system. Only grout/bolt interface failure is studied in this paper as the objective of this research work is to optimise rebar bolt surface profile configuration. Two major failure modes can be identified via pull out tests, namely parallel shear failure (indicated by the dotted line in Parallel shear failure is characterised by a cylindrical failure surface. It occurs for the smooth bar and for very closely spaced rebar bolts (like a screw) along the rib tips of the bar. For normal rebar bolts, experimental observation suggests that if the embedded length is short and the confining material is stiff, parallel shear failure occurs in laboratory pull out tests. Dilational slip failure, on the other hand, is characterised by a conical failure surface. Parallel shear failure is a characteristic failure pattern, which occurs for smooth bars along the grout/bolt interface and for very closely spaced rebar bolts (similar to a screw profile) along the profile peaks of the bar. In the latter case, it can be found that the grouting material between the profiles will remain there to form a cylindrical failure surface ( Experimental results suggest that the load capacity of closely spaced rebar bolts is lower compared to ribbed steel bars of the same core diameter To examine the validity of the formulation of parallel shear failure and the importance of failure mode identification, the following case is used to calculate the bond strength and to compare it to experimental data. Moosavi et al. The test results provided in Before predicting the axial bolt loading capacity, the mechanical properties of the grout have to be determined. The type 1 Portland cement used for the grout in the tests was a 0.4 The confining pressure of the rebar, Ignoring the dilation at the grout/bolt interface, The following is a calculation example of the predicted failure load of the experimental assemblage in As the strength at the grout/steel interface is often much small than that of the grout, and it only occupied quarter of the failure surface area, thus it is ignored in following calculation. That is, the bond strength for the studied case is For all cases of the using closely spaced rebar bolts in Except the assumption of non-dilational deformation, other major assumptions involved in the calculation process are elastic thick-walled cylinder theory, In theory, dilational slip is often simulated by adding an introduced dilation angle, It is not easy to determine the dilation angle. In mechanical models of the dilational slip of the interface, the dilation angle can be estimated as a reduction of the geometric angle to form an “apparent dilation angle” to accommodate the data obtained from the experiments One bolt rib profile, shown in Once relative movement along the supposed surface occurs, dilational slip failure follows, according to In the case of zero cohesion, To investigate the role of the bolt rib profile in dilational slip failure of rock bolting, the dilational slip face angle must be known. Making This equation shows that the most vulnerable slip direction depends on the internal friction angle of the grout and the cohesion to confinement ratio, but is irrespective of bolt rib geometry. The mechanical properties of the grout can readily be measured in the laboratory. Therefore, once the installation pressure of the bolt is known, the most vulnerable dilational slip angle can be calculated. Furthermore, the minimum axial load to commence bond failure is predictable using Eq. To examine the theoretical prediction of the axial load at dilational slip failure, a series of short encapsulation pull out tests were conducted. The confine pressure of the bolt was measured by pulling out a smooth bolt. Then, a rebar bolt commonly used in the Australian mining industry was tested using the same assembly. As discussed previously, the confining pressure, In the laboratory, the initial installation pressure of the bolting assembly was measured by a method similar to that used in Then, pull-out tests of smooth bolts were conducted to evaluate the installation pressure of the bolting specimens. A popular rebar bolt ( Using Eq. A series of short encapsulation pull out tests of the studied rebar bolt were conducted for different embedded lengths. A typical result is shown in It should be noted that the failure load of the dilational slip is not often the peak load of the whole embedded bolt as the post-failure load is related to the subsequent shear off the asperities of the grout and associate with radial stiffness of the system. The detailed analysis of the post-failure deformation is beyond the scope of this paper, but according to the calculation, the theoretical failure load on average is 55% of the peak load. This result is in good agreement with, and also supports, the commonly recognised axial load of bond failure (or say elastic stage) in rock bolting mechanism research, such as approximately 50% proposed in As discussed previously, the parallel shear failure of the resin and dilational slip failure are the major failure modes identified in laboratory pull out tests. The failure load of each failure mode is related to the bolt profile configuration, the grout properties and the confine pressure of the bolt, and can be predicted using derived equations. It is logical that the actual rock bolting failure occurs in the failure mode with the smaller loading capacity. From a viewpoint of bolt rib profile design, if the bearable load of each profile is the same in both failure modes, the rib profile configuration of this bolt is optimal with respect to bond failure. That is, the optimal bolt rib profile satisfies The expression also indicates that the optimal bolt profile geometry depends on the mechanical properties of the grout and the initial confining pressure because they are related to the dilation angle. In previous optimal bolt profile studies, there is often only one variable that was tested in experiments, such as the rib height or the rib spacing. Results of this study suggest that conclusions drawn from such pull out tests are only applicable for the same situations as tested in their experiments. There is no universal optimal bolt for all conditions. Since they are all interrelated, bolting installation and grout properties must be taken into account to improve the loading capacity of the bond; this also means that rock bolt selection optimisation must be done in a case-by-case manner. In order to evaluate and demonstrate the computation in optimising the selection of rock bolts presented herein, an underground coal mine roadway is analysed. Metropolitan Colliery is situated in the Southern Coalfields of the Sydney Basin in NSW, Australia. The mine utilises a long wall operation and continuous miner for heading development and long wall roadways  The following is the computational procedure of optimal bolt selection using the developed theory in this paper: The immediate roof is mudstone, its stress field can be calculated as The initial confine pressure of the rock bolts can be estimated as 14 The mechanical properties of the resin can be measured in the laboratory or obtained from the manufacturer׳s specification, for example Using Eq. By solving Eq. Using Eq. According to the results in The yielding load can further be improved by adapting the rib tip interval and profile spacing for this mining condition. For example, the failure loads of T2 and T4 bolt can increase by 38% and 14% per unit bolting length respectively via fine modification of the rib spacing. However, it is difficult for the bolt manufacturer to prepare a many different kinds of bolts, and also it is hard to achieve such differentiation according to the current bolt manufacturing procedure. It should be noted that the selection of T2 or T4 bolts is based on achieving a higher failure resistance of the bolt/resin interface. It is compatible with The yielding load of T3 bolting is low; however, experimental data (not show here) suggest that this bolt is superior in post-failure performance and total energy absorption. The post-failure behaviour of rock bolting subjected to axial loading is beyond the scope of this paper, and will be addressed in the following publications. The main difference between T1 and T2 bolts is that T1 bolts have a smaller rib height. This design assists to smoothen the flowing of the resin in the bolting installation. In addition, it is also easier to be threaded by the bolt manufacturer. In summary, each studied bolt has advantages and disadvantages. From the viewpoint of shear resistance against rock bolting failure, the T2 bolt is suitable for the studied roadway support. If the roof is estimated to have good integrity, then the T4 bolt can be selected for economic purposes. In harsh conditions such as roadway junctions, the T3 bolt should be considered based on the total energy absorption theory. If bolt installation problems, such as resin extrusion, are an issue, the T1 bolt can be considered to be used in modest geo-conditions. The current bolt profile design is admirable in the respect that they still manage to address different purposes, either so due to empirical knowledge or simply by chance. This study enlightens the principles behind the design and also provides a tool for engineers to select the optimal bolt in their application. In this research work, the interaction of between the rebar bolt profile and the surrounding medium is investigated analytically. The interface failure is categorised into dilational slip failure and parallel shear failure of the resin based on experimental observations. For each failure mode, the analytical expression of the axial loading capacity is derived after introducing Mohr–Coulomb׳s failure criterion. Accordingly, the role of the rebar bolt profile has been identified quantitatively with respect to bond failure. Parallel shear failure of the resin occurs for smooth bars or for very closely spaced rebars along the profile peaks and forms a cylindrical failure surface. The predicted failure load is formulated and compared to experimental data in the literature, and showed good agreement. For dilational slip failure, after distinguishing the slipping face angle from the rib face angle, the equilibrium equation is formulated. It describes the shear slipping occurrence for cohesive materials, and is a general form of Patton׳s equation. One major finding of this research work is the introduction of the concept of the most vulnerable slip angle in dilational slip failure, at which the axial load is minimum comparing to other possible failure orientations. Comparison of the calculated axial load capacities of these two failure modes suggests that dilation slip failure at the most vulnerable slip face angle occurs if the rib spacing is large (as rebar bolt profile configurations normally are). A series of laboratory pull out tests were conducted to examine the developed theory. The initial confine pressure of the bolting assembly was measured by pulling out a smooth bolt. Then, the same setup was used to conduct pull out tests for a normal rebar bolt. The results show that the calculated failure load is approximately 53% of the peak load, which is supported by other rock bolting mechanism theories. If the bearable loads of both failure modes are equal, the optimisation of rib profile can be analytically achieved. The optimal bolt profile geometry is related to the mechanical properties of the grout and the confining pressure when failure occurs. Therefore, bolt profile studies must take into account the mechanical properties of the grout and the confine pressure. Furthermore, conclusions drawn from laboratory pull out tests should be evaluated properly considering both the testing and A case study is included to demonstrate the application of the developed theory. Four popular bolts used in the Australian mining industry are supposed to be selected for Metropolitan Colliery roadway support. The advantages and disadvantages of each bolt are discussed analytically for this case. The developed theory explains the role of the bolt profile in load transfer mechanisms. It provides an analytical approach for engineers in selecting the optimal bolt for their particular application; and also a tool to assist bolt manufacturers in creating new bolt designs.