Barium sulfate nanoparticles were produced by nanomilling in stirred media mill using sodium salt of polyacrylic acid (PAA-Na) as a dispersant. The particles sizes of the ground product obtained in the grinding mill were determined by dynamic light scattering (DLS), Brunauer–Emmet–Teller (BET) nitrogen gas adsorption method, and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The mean particle size calculated with various methods yielded different values due to the different characterization techniques. The stability of BaSO4 nanoparticles produced was analyzed by zeta potential measurement and Turbiscan. The stability of barium sulfate nanoparticles was high in presence of dispersant PAA-Na and higher pH values. Further, the changes in microstructural properties, caused by wet grinding and adsorption of PAA-Na on BaSO4 nanoparticles, were studied using X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). The surface activation and amorphization of BaSO4 nanoparticles were observed due to increased stresses exerted on the particles during wet grinding.Nanomilling is a promising wet grinding technology for the production of nanoparticles to meet increasing demand for the advanced materials. Amongst different grinding mills stirred media mill is an important grinding device for the production of ultrafine materials effectively owing to ease of operation, simple construction, high size reduction rate and low wear contamination Another interesting area in fine grinding process is the mechanochemical effects caused by structural distortions of crystalline materials during wet grinding. In addition to size reduction, the mechanochemical effects are caused on the particles surface due to the transfer of high energy by the grinding media The effects of dispersant PAA-Na and suspension pH on the stability of barium sulfate nanoparticles produced by nanomilling was investigated by zeta potential measurement and Turbiscan analysis in the present contribution. Particle size measurement was carried out using different characterization techniques; viz., dynamic light scattering (DLS), Brunauer–Emmet–Teller (BET) nitrogen gas adsorption method, and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Further, the changes in structural and surface properties of barium sulfate nanoparticles caused by intensive grinding were investigated using X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) techniques. Barium sulfate (BaSO Vertical laboratory stirred media mill operating in batch mode was used to conduct grinding experiments as shown in Zetasizer Nano ZS90 (Malvern Ltd., UK) instrument was used to measure the particle size distribution of the milled samples. It is working based on dynamic light scattering technique. The zeta potentials of the milled samples were measured based on laser doppler velocimetry (LDV) in the same instrument using Universal Dip Cell (Malvern Ltd., UK). All the particle size distributions measurement results presented are based on volume distributions of particle size. Volume mean particle size is used to denote the progress of grinding process. The samples were prepared by equilibrating respective nanosuspensions at pH 10.5 for 2 Specific surface areas of the samples were obtained by Gemini 2375 BET analyzer (Micromeritics, USA) using a sample dried overnight at a 300 The microstructural characteristics of ground samples were determined by X-ray line broadening analysis. The broadening of observed intensity profile results from crystallite size broadening, microstrain broadening as well as the instrumental effects The wet grinding of barium sulfate in stirred media mill was carried out using zirconia grinding media of average size TEM micrograph for the sample obtained after 3 The stability study of BaSO Similarly, Turbiscan results were obtained at different pH values, in absence and with 2 The XRD patterns of the feed material and material ground in the stirred media mill as a function of grinding time are shown in Gradual reduction in diffracted peak intensity and broadening of the peaks were observed ( X-ray line broadening analysis was used to evaluate microstructural properties by Williamson–Hall method and Halder–Wagner approximation. It is clearly seen from The mean crystallite sizes at different grinding times were calculated considering six most intense diffraction peaks {0 In order to study the surface characteristics and adsorption of PAA-Na, the infrared spectra of the ground and unground BaSO Thermogravimetric analysis was carried out to confirm the adsorption of PAA-Na on the particles surface and amorphization of barium sulfate nanoparticles. Highly stable barium sulfate nanoparticles in stirred media mill were produced by the use of dispersant PAA-Na. Zeta potential measurements and Turbiscan analysis clearly shows that production of stable BaSO The authors thank M/S. 20 Microns Pvt. Ltd., Vadodara, India, for providing barium sulfate sample.