Introduction
                  Clavicle fractures are common injuries in adolescent patients. In this study we present our technique and results for treating non-comminuted displaced midshaft clavicle fractures using flexible intra medullary nails.
               
                  Methods
                  A retrospective review of prospectively collected data using the electronic medical record was performed. Adolescent patients presenting to a level one pediatric trauma center with acute displaced non comminuted clavicular shaft fractures who were treated with intra medullary flexible nails were included in this study.
               
                  Results
                  Seven adolescent patients with non-comminuted displaced mid shaft clavicle fractures were treated with flexible nails over a period of five and half years with an average follow up time of 10 months. The average age was 14.6 years (range 14–16), and a 2mm nail was used in all cases. Closed reduction was obtained in five cases with only two cases needing open reduction to pass the nail. One patient had skin breakdown over the nail entry and had the nail removed in clinic two months after surgery, all other patients healed with no complication. Sports and full shoulder activity were allowed when radiographic healing was seen at an average 8 weeks. Implant removal was performed four of the seven patients.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Flexible intramedullary nailing is an effective minimally invasive method for the treatment of displaced midshaft clavicle fractures in the adolescent population. The surgeon should be aware that a 2mm nail is likely the optimal diameter, and the nail is difficult to pass beyond the lateral 2–3cm of the distal segment due to canal narrowing, but passage further than this is not necessary to achieve stability and union. Following these pearls will allow the surgeon to successfully perform the procedure.Clavicle fractures are common injuries in children, representing about 15% of all pediatric fractures, with more than 90% of these fractures located in the midshaft. Traditionally, operative treatment of clavicle fractures in adult and adolescent populations alike has been achieved by plate and screws. In this article, we describe our technique for using flexible nails in the management of mid shaft, displaced, non-comminuted fractures of the clavicle in the adolescent population. We describe the specific details related to this subset of the population. These details were not described before and are crucial to be able to fix these fractures using flexible nails. We also present our results in this patient category using this form of treatment. After Institutional Review Board approval, a retrospective electronic medical record review of prospectively collected data was performed from January 2010 to December 2015. A total of seven adolescent patients with clavicle fractures were treated using a flexible titanium nail. Inclusion criteria were mid shaft, completely displaced (no overlapping), non comminuted fractures in adolescent patients ( The patient was positioned supine on a radiolucent flat top table with a small bump in the back between the scapulae ( A towel clip in the distal lateral fragment is used to obtain reduction. If this fails, another towel clip is used to better control the medial fragment. This can be aided by external pressure of the fragments with the hammer or other flat instrument such as an army navy retractor. In our experience, closed passage of the nail across the fracture is not an easy task; however, it can be done in the vast majority of cases using the “two towel clips” technique. The surgeon should know that this step will usually require some time and considerable number of trials judged by intra operative fluoroscopy in two perpendicular views (with increased exposure to radiation). If closed reduction cannot be obtained with these maneuvers, a small one inch incision is created, centered over the fracture, and two towel clips or bone forceps are used to bring the fracture ends together. One of the authors of this article prefers to pass the nail across the fracture by open technique (rather than fighting long time with considerable radiation exposure) (please note that these cases were excluded from the study). The nail is then advanced into the distal (lateral) fragment, using hammer blows on the T handle. In most cases, the nail cannot be advanced more than three cm distal to the fracture as the medullary canal size decreases in the lateral part of the clavicle. The nail is cut very short using the wire cutter. In our experience the flexible nail cutter found in the set usually results in a longer residual stump of nail left behind as the cutter cannot be pushed flush against the bone due to the small size of the entry wound. Post operatively, the patient is placed in a simple sling for comfort. Patients are instructed to remove the sling once pain subsided. Shoulder range of motion is not restricted, however, no sports were allowed until radiographic evidence of healing. Seven adolescent patients were treated with flexible nails over a period of five and half years with an average follow up time of 10 months. The average age was 14.6 (range 14–16). The majority of injuries were due to falls associated with sports or athletic participation such as football and skateboarding. Patients were offered the option of intramedullary nail fixation as well as non operative treatment and the benefit of each was discussed in detail with the patient and their family. A 2 Closed reduction was obtained in five cases. Two cases required open reduction to pass the flexible nail. The two cases which required open reduction had their surgery seven and nine days after injury. All the patients except one (who was performed 9 Four patients underwent implant removal. One patient elected to remove it without any complaint related to the nail (was done 13 months after surgery). Two patients decided to have the implant removed due to discomfort related medial end of the nail (one patient 10 weeks after implantation and the other 12 weeks after implantation). The fourth patient had prominence of the nail beneath the skin causing skin break down, requiring removal which was done in the clinic. The patient with implant prominence beneath the skin had his surgery nine days after fracture. Closed reduction could not be obtained even after multiple attempts. Open reduction was necessary in which considerable amount of callus had to be excised to allow reduction of the bone ends and restoration of length. This patient had backing out of the nail through the skin and the flexible nail was removed in the clinic two months after surgery. The patient did not displace the fracture after nail removal. Adolescent clavicle fractures are common injuries with increasing surgical versus conservative management. While most surgeons continue to treat adolescent clavicle fractures non operatively, the improved outcomes reported in recent adult literature, have swayed some surgeons from classic non operative conservative management, to surgical fixation, especially in older adolescents. The Canadian Orthopedic Trauma Society reported improved functional outcomes and increased union rates with open reduction internal fixation in the adult population, with multivariate analysis of the study finding that non union was the only independent predictor of functional outcome. Once the decision has been made to proceed with operative fixation, many of these fractures are treated with open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) using plates and screws, however this is not without complications such as poor cosmesis due to scar, scar sensitivity, prominent implant, anesthesia surrounding the incision and concern for re-fracture after implant removal. Currently published studies in both adults and pediatrics report a high rate (>50%) of conversion to an open reduction when using ESIN. With regard to optimal nail size, Rapp et al. A crucial learning point in our technique is the narrowing of the lateral medullary canal which prevents the passage of the nail more than 2–3 We had one case of medial skin penetration by the nail. This may be due to cutting the nail too long at the insertion site, the nail backing out, or due to a “telescoping” event, caused by fracture shortening, as has been previously described. Elastic stable intramedullary nailing for displaced clavicle fractures in children is a viable alternative to plate fixation. This method avoids the complications specific to plate fixation without sacrificing functional outcomes. There are very critical technical points that the surgeon needs to know in order for him/her to be able to perform the procedure. Closed reduction can be achieved in most cases of acute fractures without the need for conversion to open reduction. Using two towel clips can facilitate the closed reduction. The surgeon should expect multiple trials before succeeding in nail passage. In our experience a 2 The authors have none to declare.