Extensive in-situ testings has shown that blast fragmentation influences the performance of downstream processes in a mine, and as a consequence, the profit of the whole operation can be greatly improved through optimised fragmentation. Other unit operations like excavation, crushing and grinding can all be assisted by altering the blast-induced fragmentation.
                  Experimental studies have indicated that a change in blasting practice would not only influence fragmentation but fragment strength as well. The strength of the fragments produced in a blast is clearly important to the performance of the crushing and grinding circuit as it affects the energy required to break the feed to a target product size.
                  In order to validate the effect of blasting on fragment strength several lumps of granite were blasted, under controlled conditions, using three very different explosive products. The resulting fragments were subjected to standard comminution ore characterisation tests. Obtained comminution parameters were then used to simulate the performance of a SAG mill. Modelling results indicate that changes in post blast residual rock fragment strength significantly influences the performance of the SAG mill, producing up to a 20% increase in throughput.To produce a saleable product from a mine, an engineering operation has to perform a series of tasks: blasting, crushing, grinding and flotation. The purpose of blast fragmentation is to deliver the feed, to the concentrator, in a form that the crushing/grinding circuit can process effectively. The finer the muck pile fragmentation, the smaller the gap setting needed on the primary crusher and the higher the SAG mill throughput. While the mining process starts with blasting, the expectation is that the ROM size distribution will affect the final product quality and quantity. Thus if the blasting process can be controlled and the optimum ROM size distribution can be generated, it is possible to optimise the overall mine/plant economics ( The principles of comminution rock breakage are similar in many respects to the blast fragmentation rock breakage principles ( Most discussion in the literature examines the influence of a different size distribution delivered to the primary crusher by altering the blast design. A finer distribution in the muck pile does have an impact on the efficiency of the concentrator ( The concept of blast damage or blast-induced pre-conditioning has been discussed in the literature in various terms and/or trends ( Studies have found that there is much inner cracking or damage in the fragments, such as branching cracks near the fracture surface and micro-cracks within the fragments produced under dynamic loading ( Different explosives release their energy and interact with the rock in different ways. Explosives significantly differ in their abilities to inflict exterior and interior damage ( To validate the concept of blast-induced pre-conditioning and its dependency on explosive energy applied, an experiment was designed at the JKMRC (as part of a larger PhD thesis experimental program). This experiment had two phases. A series of rock lumps that have as close to uniform geology as possible was selected. These were prepared and blasted at three different explosive energies. To achieve this, three explosive products were selected with significantly different velocity of detonations (VOD). The objective of this phase was to determine the influence on the residual strength of the resulting fragments and quantify blast-induced pre-conditioning. After blasting, the size distribution and strength of the resulting fragments was measured. Three JKMRC comminution ore characterisation methods were selected to test the resulting fragments. They were the impact breakage Drop Test, Ore Abrasion Test and the Point Load Index. There were seven samples in total. Three samples were blasted at different explosive energies with a repeat test of each (total of six blasts). After blasting, one sample at each explosive energy applied was subjected to a Drop Test, Abrasion Test and a Point Load Index Test. The remaining three blasts were sized and were subjected to a Point Load Index Test only. A seventh sample was prepared by cutting using a large saw, after which the resulting particles were subjected to a Point Load Index. The measured comminution parameters for each blasting condition were used to simulate the performance of a SAG mill circuit. The objective of this phase was to isolate the influence of blast-induced pre-conditioning on the performance of the mill, regardless of the effect on fragment size. To this end, a single feed size distribution was selected and simulated with the three sets of measured breakage parameters. Six 50–80 The average sample density was 2.81 The samples were placed inside a blast chamber. To reduce secondary fragmentation from blasted particles breaking against the inner wall of the chamber, rubber matting and pieces of wood were used to surround the samples. The objective was to isolate the fragmentation caused by the explosive blast. Once the samples were recovered from the chamber, their size distribution and fragment strength was measured. The size distribution was measured by sizing each sample manually to minimise degradation. A mechanically performed sizing (example in a Ro-Tap shaker) would apply energy to the fragments. The sharp edges of the fragments would be worn away as the particles knocked against each other. The worn sharp edges would become part of the finer fractions, thus altering the final size distribution The experimental results can be partially explained with some simulations of Black Powder and PETN, using the Cheetah code. Cheetah is a thermochemical code developed by the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory that simulates the ideal detonation of explosive products. It solves thermodynamic equations between explosion product species to find chemical equilibrium. The code predicts detonation properties such as VOD, explosive pressure of explosive products in simulated conditions. The constant volume calculation in the Cheetah code gives the pressure and temperature obtained by explosive, assuming that the casing of the idealised container (blastholes in this case) holds for the time scale of chemical equilibration (an order of microseconds). The energy release and resulting pressure exerted by the explosive was modelled for Black Powder and PETN (see The useful work done by an exploding charge is done in an expanding volume, ten times the original explosive volume ( The energy factor applied in the blasts used in this paper is calculated by multiplying the energy released per gram by the powder factor used ( Presented values of explosive energy could explain the difference in fragmentation between small-scale blasts conducted using these products. A conclusion could be drawn that a higher VOD explosive (such as PETN) would have a higher rate of application of energy and higher amount of energy (see The size distributions of each of the three blast designs and a replica of each are shown below in As can be observed, the PETN samples had finer fragmentation than the Riogel, which in was turn finer than the Black Powder. The higher the explosive VOD, the finer the fragmentation produced. This has been discussed in the literature ( The higher the explosive VOD, the more predictable fragmentation becomes. The focus of this paper is the strength of the resulting fragments. To quantify the strength of the large fragments, the Point Load Index Test was used ( As can be observed, the strongest sample is the unstressed sample (not blasted), followed by the black powder samples. The Riogel samples were mid range and the weakest was the PETN samples. The A two sample comparison Each hypothesis was rejected, concluding that the samples and their repeats are not statistically different. A two sample comparison The results suggest that at the 95% confidence level, Riogel and PETN have indeed weakened the strength of fragments, but Black Powder has not. This outcome supports the concept of blast-induced pre-conditioning. A two sample comparison The results in The practical implication of this phenomenon is the impact on the comminution properties of the ore and how this change relates to the performance of the grinding circuit. A second measure of fragment strength was obtained using the JKMRC comminution impact breakage Drop Test. Tests were conducted on one of each of the sample energies. The principle of the drop breakage process is well known ( Ecs (units of kWh/t) is the applied specific comminution energy and Shown below are the individual energy breakage curves of the three impact drop tests done ( The third measure of rock strength was obtained using the JKMRC ore abrasion test ( The density, It is interesting to note that the Since this study is not based on any plant survey or production blast, JKSimMet was used to estimate the effect of reduced fragment strength on mill performance. To simulate the performance of a SAG mill, the feed size distribution is required. While the feed distribution cannot be directly measured, it can be estimated from past JKMRC experience. However, an increase in the explosive energy applied would also increase the fragmentation, as noted in As this study was initiated to examine the influence of the residual strength of the fragments, a SAG mill circuit was simulated with the same feed size distribution but with the experimentally measured breakage parameters of the blasted granite lumps (which were from the same geological domain) (see A relationship between JKSimMet was used to simulate the performance of a given SAG mill circuit using the feed size distribution in The standard SAG circuit design procedure was used to develop these simulations. A 12  A summary of the three simulations done on the samples R1, R3 and R7 are shown in A summary of the throughput’s and P Shown graphically in Shown graphically in As can be observed, a change in applied explosive energy at the blast does affect the throughput capacity of the SAG mill. Ignoring the additional benefit of finer fragmentation, the reduction in fragment strength alone should yield a 21.8% increase in SAG mill throughput, by blasting with PETN instead of Black Powder. This implies that initiating a change in blasting practice, through use of higher energy blasts, can reduce cost of crushing and grinding (more tonnes of ore can be crushed for the same running costs). There is a practical limit to what explosive energy can be applied. There will be site specific restraints that limit what is possible. Back break (damage to surrounding rock not part of the blast) on the bench and stability of the pit wall are such constraints. The simulated conditions are not representative of a production blast. Black Powder and PETN are two extremes that would not be used to fragment rock in a mine. Also, this small-scale experiment does not have many of the influencing rock mass structures that would be in a production blast. The purpose of this experiment is to demonstrate a trend, which is likely to be present in a production blast. This study has demonstrated that a relatively large increase in applied explosive energy would produce a weaker ore, which in turn would result in a higher throughput through the grinding circuit. Blasting is probably the most economic method of fragmenting rock. The purpose of this study was to examine the influence of applied explosive energy on blast-induced pre-conditioning and the performance of the SAG mill. Three explosive energy levels were applied to granite in the experimental circumstance of small-scale blasting. The resulting fragments were tested for residual strength using several methods. A SAG mill was simulated using JKSimMet. The key conclusions that can be drawn from this paper are as follows: A change in explosive VOD corresponds to a change in explosive energy released. An increase in explosive energy applied corresponds to an increase in fragmentation. Blast-induced pre-conditioning is a real phenomenon. An increase in explosive energy applied corresponds to an increase in blast induced pre-conditioning. An increase in blast induced pre-conditioning can be measured using comminution rock mass characterisation methods. An increase in blast induced pre-conditioning for a constant feed size distribution would mean an increase in the SAG mill throughput. The selection of a higher VOD explosive would not only improve fragmentation, but produce weaker fragments. This in turn would lower the cost of production. The authors would like to acknowledge the assistance of Mr. Alister Grimes, Mr. Chris Bailey and Dr. Toni Kojovic. Their contributions to this paper have been invaluable.