The aim of this study was to present a new method for resource utilization of nonmetallic materials reclaimed from pulverized waste printed circuit boards. A reproduction nonmetallic plate (RNMP) was prepared by adding resin paste, glass fiber and additives into nonmetallic materials using self-made hot-press former. Principle of manufacturing process and effects of mould temperature and moulding time on the mechanical properties of RNMP were studied. The results showed that when moulding pressure was fixed at 6MPa, the optimum conditions for the RNMP were as follows: 140/135°C for top/bottom mould temperature, 5min for moulding time. The maximum content of nonmetallic materials in RNMP was up to 40wt%. When nonmetallic material content was 20wt%, the RNMP moulded at optimum conditions had excellent mechanical properties, with impact strength of 5.8kJ/m2 and flexural strength of 65.1MPa.Electronic waste is becoming a global topic as quantities of electrical and electronic equipments are obsolete. Printed circuit boards (PCBs) form about 3% by weight of the total amount of electronic waste The nonmetallic materials of PCBs mainly consist of thermoset resins and glass fibers. Thermoset resins cannot be remelted or reformed because of their network structure. Incineration is not the best method for treating nonmetallic materials because of inorganic fillers such as glass fiber, which significantly reduces the fuel efficiency. Disposal in landfill is the main method for treating nonmetallic materials of PCBs, but it may cause secondary pollution and resource-wasting. In our previous studies, a process consisting of two-step crushing and corona electrostatic separating was used to separate metals and nonmetallic materials from pulverized waste PCBs In this study, RNMP is produced by a self-made hot-press former with different moulding parameters. Moulding parameters, such as moulding time, mould temperature and so on, are intimately related to the properties of RNMP. Therefore, a major concern for production of RNMP is how to control the moulding parameters, achieving better performance of RNMP. In order to investigate the effect of moulding parameters on the properties of RNMP, four different top/bottom mould temperatures and two different moulding times were used in the experiments. The aim of this research is to develop a new technique for recycling of nonmetallic materials of PCBs and resolving the environmental pollutions during recycling PCBs. The waste PCBs used in the study are a kind of woven glass fabric PCBs without electronic elements, so the metallic portion only consists of Cu. The Cu particles and nonmetallic materials after two-step crushing and electrostatic separating were shown in  The mechanical properties of the RNMP such as flexural strength, flexural modulus and charpy impact strength were tested. Flexural strength is maximum bending stress developed in a specimen just before it cracks or breaks in a flexure test. Charpy impact strength is defined as the amount of energy absorbed in fracturing a specimen at high velocity and is expressed as kilojoule per square meter. The RNMP was cut into normalized samples for mechanical testing. Specimen shape for flexural strength and charpy impact strength was 80 Field emission scanning electron microscopy, FEI SIRION 200, was used to analyze the fractured surfaces of samples. Prior to the analysis, the fractured surfaces of the specimens were sputter coated with a thin layer of gold. RNMP is a composite material with multi-phase materials. Schematic illustration of nonmetallic materials filling in the RNMP is shown in Preparation of nonmetallic dough included two steps: the first step was stirring of resin paste. The resin and additives were stirred by the high-speed mixing. The aim of stirring is to disperse the components of resin paste. The second step was mixing of resin paste, nonmetallic materials and glass fibers. The mixing process is the key process for the preparation of nonmetallic dough. Bonding of different components in the raw materials was fulfilled through the action of wetting between a liquid and a solid surface. The amount of wetting depends on the energies of the interfaces and the degree of wetting can be described by the contact angle. The contact angle is determined by the Young equation where When 0  The liquid resin paste wetted the nonmetallic materials, CaCO After nonmetallic dough was prepared through the mixing of double Z-kneader, curing process of the RNMP only occurred under high temperature and pressure. Mould process was performed by the hot-press former through the action of resin and additives. At the initial stage of compression moulding, nonmetallic dough was heated by contact with the hot mould, and TBPB decomposed and generated free radicals to initiate the reaction at elevated temperature ( In addition, component of nonmetallic materials was shown in Crosslinking transforms the dimensional molecular chains of a monomer into the three-dimensional molecular structures of a polymer. Time and heat are required when UP polymerized. The degree of crosslinking and properties of RNMP are related to the moulding parameters, such as mould temperature, moulding time and moulding pressure. In the study, the moulding pressure of the hot-former was fixed at 6 When the added content of nonmetallic materials is fixed at 20 Generally, if mould temperature was too low, the degree of crosslinking is likely to be lower than desired, leading to poor mechanical and physical properties. On the other hand, if mould temperature is too high, crosslinking may proceed so quickly that the nonmetallic dough did not fill the mould completely, making a drawback present in the RNMP as shown in  In addition, the variation trends in impact strength and flexural strength of RNMP with different moulding time are similar. The impact strength and flexural strength of RNMP are determined by the interfacial adhesion between the resin and fillers. Better adhesion inside the matrix leads to better performance of RNMP. Flexural performance of RNMP can be demonstrated by the SEM photographs. When nonmetallic materials content was 20 Modulus is one of the basic properties of composites and is related to the stiffness of RNMP. Surface quality of RNMP is also related to the moulding parameters. When the top/bottom temperature was 140/135 The value of metals contained in waste PCBs is economic incentives for the recyclers. Recyclers use different methods to reclaim metals with high purity, which can be sold at a high price. However, nonmetallic materials are generated inevitably. The amount of nonmetallic materials is enormous, but economic value of nonmetallic materials is very low. Recyclers incur additional expenses when handling and disposing of nonmetallic materials. PCBs recyclers have to pay fee when nonmetallic materials are sent to the landfill sites or waste incineration plants, reducing the recycler's net revenue. In contrast, using nonmetallic materials to produce RNMP can save large amount of treating fee and generate economic value. Additionally, the Chinese government provides more incentives for resource utilization of waste. PCBs recyclers may gain subsidy to some extent. Therefore, from economic analysis viewpoints, producing RNMP is attractive for the recyclers. Nonmetallic materials reclaimed from waste PCBs were used to produce the RNMP by a self-made hot-press former through adding resin paste as a bonding agent. This technique provided a new method for resource utilization of nonmetallic materials of PCBs. When moulding pressure was fixed at 6 The maximum content of nonmetallic materials in RNMP was 40 This work was supported by the National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (863 program 2006AA06Z364), Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University and Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education (20060248058).