The particle size distribution of the carbonation products from sodium aluminate solution was analysed based on the relative mass supersaturation and the particle number conversion from the Malvern volume distribution curves. An approximate relationship was developed which showed that the rate of change of particle number in each particle size interval (0–20μm, 20–45μm and 45μm–∞) per unit volume was proportional to the rate of change of the relative mass supersaturation of the solution. The evolution of agglomeration of gibbsite particles in the carbonation process was also studied and the results show that the agglomeration rate constant is mainly influenced by the initial particle number of gibbsite Al(OH)3 under the experimental conditions. The agglomeration between fine grains (<20μm) plays a dominant role when the initial particle number is large, while the agglomeration between relatively coarse particles (20–45μm) occurs with a small initial particle number. A carbonation product with extremely narrow-sized distribution and ideal large average size of 75μm was produced by regulating the relative mass supersaturation of the solution, the amount and particle size distribution of added seeds and other carbonation parameters such as temperature and stirring rate.Carbonation of sodium aluminate solution is one of the important operations of the lime-soda-sinter process in the production of alumina. It directly influences the physical properties of the product, such as the mean particle size, the particle size distribution and morphology. Carbonation has been the key process for producing sandy alumina which can satisfactorily meet the requirements of modern aluminium molten salt electrolysis in the alumina production by the sinter process ( Agglomeration is the process that a number of particles adhere together to form a stable attached polymer ( A considerable amount of work has been reported on the individual influences of crystallizing parameters on the gibbsite agglomeration. Crystallization temperature and supersaturation of the solution play the most important role in the gibbsite agglomeration. Moreover, an increase of the crystallization temperature and supersaturation promotes the gibbsite agglomeration ( As for the relationship between agglomeration rate constant and particle size, there are two quite different opinions. One is that there is a strong dependence of agglomeration rate constant on the particle size ( Although a lot of work has been reported in the gibbsite agglomeration literature, consensus has not been reached completely on the intrinsic mechanism and influencing factors of agglomeration. Different researchers have different opinions and established different models. Furthermore, the focus of almost all of the previous research is on the particles with size range from 4 Up to now, there is little report of agglomeration of gibbsite particles from carbonation. Therefore, this investigation of the agglomeration of gibbsite from the carbonation process, as well as the development of an applicable and efficient agglomeration model, is necessary for effectively and precisely controlling the gibbsite agglomeration. Rather pure supersaturated sodium aluminate solution was synthesized in laboratory by dissolving Al(OH) At prescribed times, 5 The total concentration of soda includes caustic soda (NaOH) which gradually converts into sodium carbonate with the carbonation process. Taking into consideration that the volume of the aluminate solution may change with carbonation and that the total amount of soda is a constant in the whole carbonation process, we can calculate the carbonation rate of sodium aluminate solution by the following equation: The equilibrium concentration of aluminium species (as Al We divide the particle size of the carbonation product into three size intervals 0–20 The gibbsite precipitation in the carbonation process is very similar to that of seeded precipitation and includes a series of complex physical and chemical changes such as nucleation, agglomeration, crystal growth, grain grinding and breakage. These sub-processes are usually inter-twined and present in the whole carbonation process. But one of the sub-processes such as crystal nucleation, agglomeration or crystal growth may be dominant in certain stages of the process under the specific carbonation conditions.   With less seed added initially, the results in It is well known that the gibbsite crystal growth rate is very small — usually in the range of 0.01–1 As shown in  A number of different definitions of supersaturation of aluminate solution have been reported in the literature. They are expressed in terms of the concentration of the aluminium species in the aluminate solution, C All the supersaturation measures are appropriate for the gibbsite crystal growth. However, the agglomeration process mainly includes collision among particles and binding (or cementation) of gibbsite precipitates. These two sub-processes are closely related to the particles or the total surface area present in the solution. When a large number of particles are present in one unit volume of solution, there are much more chances for the particles to collide in each other to become temporary physically flocculated. However, there is probably poor binding or cementation for forming agglomerates because of a lack of binder if the gibbsite precipitation rate is constant. Based on this consideration, we propose the relative mass supersaturation, There are two major steps in the gibbsite agglomeration process in the carbonation process: The particles randomly collide to each other and some form loose physical flocculation, which is a reversible process (the physical flocculation can disintegrate to the original grains because of its low mechanical strength). With the carbonation of sodium aluminate solution, Al(OH) Therefore, all the factors influencing the agglomeration process can be attributed to collision and binding and the rate of agglomeration of particles in each size interval in one unit volume can be expressed by the following equation The collision frequency of particles is proportional to the initial particle number with constant stirring rate. Furthermore, collisions between particles can be divided into effective collisions and ineffective ones and only those which result in temporarily flocculants are the effective collisions. So According to the definition of the relative mass supersaturation, Differentiation of Eq. The mass amount of gibbsite precipitated from carbonation, Differentiation of Eq. The equilibrium concentration of aluminium species as alumina, Differentiation of Eq. The concentration of sodium hydroxide as Na In the carbonation experiments, the amount of seed added is 70 Then Eq.  The relationship between − The agglomeration rate constant of gibbsite particles from the carbonation of sodium aluminate solution,  Based on the developed agglomeration model of gibbsite particles from carbonation process, a carbonation product with average particle size, An approximate mathematical agglomeration model of gibbsite particles from carbonation of aluminate solution is proposed, which shows that the rate of change of particle numbers in each particle size interval of 0–20 A carbonation product with extremely narrow-sized distribution and average particle size of above 75 The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the