Greenhouse gas emissions in Ireland are expected to be 25% higher in 2010 as compared to 1990, whereas Ireland's Kyoto commitment is a maximum rise of 13%. One of the measure taken to reduce this gap (about 7Mtonne CO2-eq.) could be the development of biomass based electricity production. This study focusses on various biomass resources and a range of conversion technologies, in order to select promising routes for biomass based electricity in the short term. This article extends previous analyses by: (i) including the use of forest residues and sawmill residues as potential biofuels; (ii) considering both co-firing in retrofitted existing peat stations and co-firing in the new to be built Europeat power plant; and (iii) including other promising conversion technologies to generate electricity from biomass. Although the potential for energy crops in Ireland could be large, their cost is relatively high, 4.7–8.2 
                        
                           
                        
                      GJ−1, dependent on the type of land used. Lower cost biomass can be obtained from currently unutilised forest residues. It was estimated that about 3.4PJ could be extracted from the forests at a cost of 2–3 
                        
                           
                        
                      GJ−1. The present market price of sawmill residues (in total about 7PJ) is 1.4–3.5 
                        
                           
                        
                      GJ−1. Three promising routes for electricity generation were selected: co-firing with peat in the new to be built Europeat power plant, small scale CHP generation with fixed bed gasifiers, and co-firing in the Moneypoint coal fired plant. Co-firing in the Europeat plant is the most attractive. The electricity production costs are 0.033–0.053 
                        
                           
                        
                      kW−1
                     h−1 as compared to 0.041 
                        
                           
                        
                      kW−1
                     h−1 for peat based electricity. Costs per avoided tonne of CO2 are between −7 and 12 
                        
                           
                        
                     . Electricity generation from wood could fill about 14% (about 1.0Mtonne CO2-eq.) of the Irish ‘Kyoto gap’.In order to meet their Kyoto commitment of an at most 13% increase of greenhouse gas emissions between 1990 and the 2008–2012 budget period, the Irish government launched the ‘Green Paper on Sustainable Energy (GPSE)’ in 1999 The total capacity of electricity generation in Ireland is 4100 In 1996 a first assessment was made to reduce the CO Beside directly using dedicated energy crops as an energy source, forest residues and forest industry residues can be considered as biofuels that could be made available for power production as well. These sources may form more cost effective alternatives to energy crops, especially in the short term. Although there are more biomass residues available in Ireland than the forest and sawmill residues (e.g. demolition wood, road side grass), we concentrated on these two, since they are relatively easily accesible and since their potential is larger than that of other residues In this article, the potential for utilising biomass for electricity generation in Ireland is reassessed. It extends previous analyses by: (i) including, beside energy crops, the use of forest residues and sawmill residues as potential biofuels; (ii) considering both co-firing in retrofitted existing peat stations and co-firing in the new to be built Europeat power plant; and (iii) including other promising conversion technologies to generate electricity from biomass, i.e. co-firing in the Moneypoint coal plant, small scale fixed bed gasification with CHP production, stand alone biomass combustion, and stand alone Biomass Integrated Gasification with Combined Cycle (BIG/CC). After shortly describing the main methodological starting points, we investigate the three biomass sources mentioned above. Of each source we describe the energetic potential, factors that might limit the use of this potential, the fuel chain from a technical point of view and the related costs. Thereafter, we focus on a range of conversion technologies for power generation from woody biomass. We present three promising biomass chains to produce electricity in the short term, and compare their electricity production costs and the costs to avoid CO We assessed the energetic potential of each of the potential bioenergy resources as mentioned in the previous section. Largely in line with Kent (i) (ii) (iii) The assessment of these potentials was partly based on a previous biomass resource assessment Our assessment of conversion options for electricity generation was partly based on previous work Some specific methodological points that should be mentioned are: In the case of co-firing of biomass in existing power stations we distinguished between new additional investments to be made to enable co-firing, and existing investments allocated to biomass electricity production, representing the value of the existing plant that is used to generate electricity from the biomass fraction fired. The allocation was based on the amount of electricity produced from biomass and fossil fuels. In the case of new to be built plants there are, of course, only new investments. The selection of promising routes for the introduction of biomass based electricity generation was mainly done on a cost basis, since competitiveness amongst various renewable energy systems is crucial within the Alternative Energy Requirement systems as used by the Irish government. In this respect we focussed on potential implementation in the short term, i.e. within the coming 10 years. Environmental impacts are largely limited to greenhouse gas emissions since the anthropogenic greenhouse effect is considered to be the main driver behind the introduction of biomass energy. In theory, if all suitable soils (being 60% of the Irish land area As is indicated in the previous section, the cost of electricity from energy crops may be the main limiting factor. From a technical point of view short rotation forestry as willow cultivation has been proven in practice, e.g. in Sweden Willow is considered to be a suitable crop for dedicated energy plantations in Ireland An alternative to pure energy plantations is the use of wood for energy purposes from tree plantations that also supply wood for other applications. This may reduce the cost of the part of the wood that is used for energy purposes. This concept of multi-product plantations is basically undertaken when forest residues are used for energy purposes as is dealt with in We calculated the costs of the cultivation of willow in Ireland as compared to the cost of tree plantations with longer rotations, which produce trees which larger diameters so that they can be used as sawwood and pulpwood as well. We present cost estimates of the currently widely used Sitka spruce with a rotation of 35 years and two types of poplar plantations (of 15 and 25 years) that could serve as an alternative to spruce. Data on which the willow and poplar cost estimates were based, have been presented in a background report by Teeuwisse  The production costs, excluding the net margin for the farmer, are the lowest for poplar and the highest for willow. However, by including the net margin, the costs for willow are about equal to those of poplar in the low cost range. Willow is the cheapest alternative in the high cost range. The reason for this is the higher yield level of willow and the discounting effect of the year in which the yield becomes available. In the case of spruce the first income only comes after 15 years, while willow already has a saleable product after 5 years. Moreover the arrows in the figure show that forestry grants are very significant in Ireland. If the grants were available for poplar and willow as well, this would have a large impact on the final production costs of these trees. For willow it would reduce the original margin of 4.7–8.2 down to 1.0–4.4 In conventional Irish forestry three types of products are harvested: large sawlogs (diameter>200 The share of the forest residues in the total above ground biomass in forests depends on the age of the tree, the species, and the wood assortment harvested There are two major factors that could limit the feasible energetic potential of forest residues in Ireland as compared to the technical potential as discussed in the previous section The first factor is the fact that forest residues in Ireland generally serve as a brash mat, i.e. a reinforcement of the soil against the weight of the harvesting machine. Normally in mechanised harvesting, trees are cut and the forest residues are removed by the harvest machine and dumped in front of it, so that it can drive over them, thus helping to prevent soil damage and reducing the risk of the machine getting stuck. The wet climate and large amount of soft peaty soils in Ireland make this a serious problem. It may still be possible to utilise the forest residues afterwards. However, they could get heavily stuck in the soil and as a result of this could become contaminated by soil particles. The latter may be solved by leaving them on site for a while (which also facilitates drying) so that the rain can wash part of the contamination away. Another option might be, at least on a certain part of the Irish forests, to use only part of the residues as brash mat, e.g. combined with the use of lighter machines. The second limiting factor in the extraction of forest residues, is the removal of nutrients from the site. Although forest residues compose about 30% of the tree weight, they may contain up to 75% of the above ground main tree nutrients In addition to these two factors, removal of forest residues may influence biodiversity in forests, since dead wood serves as a food base for micro-organisms The two main limiting factors mentioned above may coincide, since most of the nutrient limited forest locations in Ireland are also the locations with the softer soils There are several techniques of extracting forest residues from conventional forestry. Hoyne Whole tree comminution is limited to first thinnings in which the amount of sawlogs and pulpwood is insufficient to be harvested separately. By comminuting the whole tree a costly activity, delimbing, can be avoided. Integrated harvesting involves forwarding the tree to the forest road, i.e. the forest landing, where sectioning takes place and the forest residues (including needles) are separated from the sawlogs and the pulpwood. A disadvantage of this method is the fact that needles are removed from the forest as well. This type of harvesting can be used in niches with difficult terrain and slopes. In the case of residue harvesting the roundwood is harvested separately and extraction of the thinnings takes place afterwards. Some adaptations could be made to the residue piling in order to facilitate collection later on. This may slightly increase the cost of conventional harvesting For the cost estimation we assumed the residue harvesting system as described above. Conventional harvest remains unchanged in this system, forest residues are converted into bundles of about 2.5 There are about 100 sawmills in Ireland, with 12 of them responsible for 80% of the produced sawn wood. The products of these mills are structural timber, joinery timber, and stakes. Residues produced include white chips (without bark), dirty (or ‘brown’) chips (with bark), sawdust, peelings, and barked and unbarked slabs. Almost all of these residues have a present use. In 1992 all residues sold comprised about 13% of the total sawmill turn-over in Ireland An estimate of the total production of sawmill residues in Ireland can be linked to the total roundwood production. The average efficiency (volume of sawn wood divided by the volume of roundwood needed for this) of Irish sawmills is estimated as 50% There is hardly any technical limiting factor in using the sawmill residues for energetic purposes, which makes the feasible potential equal the technical potential. Sawdust performs a special role. This residue may not be suitable for small scale fixed bed gasification (or only in a very limited quantity) without significant pretreatment (such as briquetting). At the same time, it could be the only fuel that may be co-fired in a pulverised coal plant without any additional pre-treatment. Particle distribution of sawmill residues in Spain The main limiting factor for the utilisation of sawmill residues for energetic purposes is an economic one, since the residues are already sold at present for other purposes. The main consumers are the three (non OSB) panel board mills. Sawdust is also used for animal bedding. Bark is utilised for (for example) horse trails, walking trails and garden mulch No special technology is needed for utilisation of sawmill residues in Ireland. There is already an existing infrastructure for transportation of these residues. Possibly, if a large part of these residues would be sold to one main consumer, economies of scale could reduce logistical costs of transporting the residues to the power plant. For most residues, container transport could be used. The market of sawmill residues has a relatively local character in Ireland. Therefore prices may change between various regions, dependent on supply and demand. Estimates of various sources are presented in A wide range of technologies is available to generate electricity from biomass An option that has been investigated in detail in previous work is the option of sole firing or co-firing wood in existing peat plants The upcoming construction of the 118 Co-firing in existing coal plants is one of the technologies that has been picked up in many industrialised countries during the last decade. Ireland has one big coal power plant, Moneypoint, consisting of three 305 Constructing a stand-alone biomass combustion plant is the most classical option that has been implemented for decades in various countries. The presented plant in Higher efficiencies can be obtained with biomass integrated gasification with combined cycle power generation (BIG/CC). This technology is still in a demonstration phase with an first 8 The final technology considered is small scale (100  The lowest cost levels in On the basis of the above mentioned figures we present three promising routes for electricity generation from biomass in Ireland in the short term. The first route is the use of the Europeat power station for co-firing peat and biomass. Biomass used could be a mixture of sawmill residues and forest residues. Energy crops were left out in this assessment, since their price level is too high; i.e. between 4.7 and 8.2 The second route is the use of the Moneypoint coal based power station for co-firing a modest percentage of biomass (e.g. 5–10% per unit). As a first step sawdust may be used without further modifications to the existing facilities. This is reflected in the low cost range. The higher cost range reflects the use of other sawmill residues and forest residues which are pulverised before co-firing. We use the higher range of fuel costs in this estimate. Here biomass electricity costs range from 0.033 to 0.065 The third route is the small scale CHP generation with fixed bed gasification technology. This technology was selected because of the fact that it has recently been investigated in Ireland in various regions as an interesting option  Of the three promising routes, biomass co-firing in the Europeat power plant appears to be the cheapest alternative from the point of view of CO  The total amount of forest residues generated related to the total amount of roundwood was estimated to be about 43% with clearfelling (including needles). This is relatively low when compared to Finnish estimates, stating that the amount of residues produced with spruce amounts 54% of total roundwood An additional biomass resource is demolition wood. This is not yet separately collected in Ireland. Utilising this resource would complete cascade utilisation of biomass in which the wood is first used for other purposes and for energy at the end of its lifetime. Other possible low cost fuels could be arboricultural residues such as prunings of trees in parks. Previous work showed that the impact of the transport distance on the fuel cost is relatively small Although the costs per avoided tonne of CO Although the gasification route is more expensive at the short term, in the long term this technology may offer a competitive alternative, because the improvement potential is relatively large as compared to conventional biomass combustion. Moreover, although in the short term the higher efficiency does not lead to lower costs per tonne of avoided CO In a recent study it has been considered to convert the Moneypoint power station into a natural gas fired or a coal and gas fired station in order to reduce CO  In the case of sawmill residues there are uncertainties with respect to the cost and the net amount of CO Peat bogs have natural methane emissions The feasible energetic potential of forest residues and sawmill residues is, respectively, 3.4 and 7.2 The practicable potential of energy crops has been estimated in previous work at nearly 150 Three promising routes for electricity production from biomass in the short term in Ireland are: co-firing of biomass in the Europeat peat fired power plant, small scale CHP generation with fixed bed gasification, and co-firing of biomass in the Moneypoint coal fired power plant. If forestry grants will not be eligible for willow in the short term, fuel supply has to focus on forest and sawmill residues. Co-firing biomass in the new to be built Europeat power station would hardly require any adaptations to the existing power plant design. Costs of co-firing biomass were estimated to range between 0.033 and 0.053 In terms of costs per tonne of CO Summarising it can be stated that the use of forest residues and sawmill residues could lead to negative or low cost avoidance of CO We are very grateful for all the help we received during this research. We would especially like to acknowledge the help of Seamus Hoyne of the University of Limerick for assistance on the use of forest residues. We would also like to thank Paul Kellett of the Renewable Energy Information Office of the Irish Energy Centre, Dara Connolly and Frank McCarthy of the Electricity Supply Board, Gordon Knaggs of Enterprise Ireland, Dermot 'O Brien from Coillte Teorante, Robert Percy from Finsa Forest Products Ltd, Rory Robberts of Laois Sawmills Ltd, John Hannon of Willamette Europe and Neil Foot of Louisiana Pacific OSB mill. Outside Ireland, we thank Mr Tiihonen from IVO Research and Development in Finland and Peter Kofman of the Danish Forest and Landscape Research Institute and from the Netherlands Niek Borsboom of the IEA Bioenergy Task 18, Mr Knol of the State Forestry Department and Leen Kuiper of the Forest and Wood Foundation in the Netherlands.