The purpose of this study was to present a new internal fixation technique for transcondylar fractures of the humerus in elderly patients. Seventeen patients, aged older than 70 years, with displaced transcondylar fractures were treated by our new surgical method. All fractures were fixed by a customized AO small T plate and a transcondylar screw passed from the lateral epicondyle to the medial wall of the trochlea across the humeral condyle. The plate was hand-shaped, trimmed, and applied at the lateral side of the fracture site, and either a cannulated cancellous screw or an AO one-third tubular plate was applied at the medial side of the fracture site. All patients in this study had osteoporotic bone and a small distal fragment. They were followed up for a mean of 30 months (range, 24 to 60 months). Radiographically, union was achieved completely in all patients, and all except 1 had maintained the postoperative alignment. Bone graft or cement fixation was not required in any case. The assessment of the results by use of the modified Cassebaum’s rating scale was excellent in 3 cases, good in 11, and fair in 3. With the custom AO small T plate and transcondylar screw fixation technique, the screw that passes through the humeral condyle provides good stability even in cases with a small osteoporotic fragment of the distal humerus. The screw does not damage the articular surface of the elbow joint, and stable fixation can be obtained even in osteoporotic bone.Distal humeral fractures are usually extremely difficult to treat successfully. From 1994-1999, we treated 17 displaced transcondylar fractures in patients aged older than 70 years with our new surgical method. One surgeon performed the operations in all 17 cases. Of the patients, 2 were men and 15 were women. The mean age was 77 years (range, 70 to 88 years). All patients had closed fractures, and 6 had dementia, but none had rheumatoid arthritis. Seven fractures occurred in the dominant extremity, and ten were in the nondominant extremity. The causes of injury were falls in 15 cases and motor vehicle crashes in 2. The AO/ASIF (Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen/Association for the Study of Internal Fixation) classifications were A2 in 12 cases, C1 in 3, C2 in 1, and C3 in 1. The plate was trimmed and bent to fit a model (Foam Cortical Shell; Sawbones, Pacific Research Laboratories, Vashon, WA) based on the diagnostic radiographs. The plate was contoured preoperatively in 3 dimensions and cut to fit the complex geometry of the distal humeral lateral column for placing the transcondylar screw in the hole of the distal part of the plate ( The posterior approach was used. A 20-cm-long and slightly curved incision around the radial side of the olecranon was made. The ulnar nerve was identified and gently protected. If the fracture extended into the articular surface, we used a transolecranon approach. In typical transcondylar fractures (A2), osteotomy of the olecranon was not required, and we used a posterior approach with a triceps-preserving technique. The distal fragment was reduced to the humeral metaphysis and temporarily fixed with Kirschner wires (2 mm). The 2.5-mm drill bit was advanced carefully through the lateral epicondyle to the medial wall of the trochlea, until the tip of the drill bit penetrated the medial cortex of the trochlea. Accuracy in this measurement was important to prevent screw loosening when the screw was too short and ulnar nerve or medial collateral ligament impingement when the screw was too long. After insertion of the transcondylar screw through the screw hole of the custom AO small T plate, the fracture site was rechecked with an image intensifier before insertion of other screws in the proximal fragment. All fractures were fixed by the customized AO small T plate at the lateral side of the distal humerus. At the medial side, an AO one-third tubular plate or a lag screw for augmenting fixation from the medial epicondyle was used ( Sixteen patients were allowed to perform early range-of-motion exercises at a mean of 11.0 days after surgery. One of our early patients wore a splint for 6 weeks. All patients were available for follow-up at more than 2 years (mean length, 30.1 months; range, 24 to 60 months). Clinical results and functional outcome were based on the modification of Cassebaum’s rating scale Complete union was confirmed radiographically in all 17 cases at last follow-up. Sixteen cases had maintained the postoperative alignments. According to Kundel’s modification of Cassebaum’s rating scale, we had satisfactory results in 14 cases. The mean total score was 17.2 points (range, 14 to 20 points). Of the patients, 3 had excellent scores, 11 had good scores, and 3 had fair scores, but none had a poor score ( Treatment of transcondylar fractures of the distal humerus in elderly patients has been controversial. In displaced, unstable distal humeral fractures, even if multiple Kirschner wires or screws are used, redisplacement of the fracture leading to delayed union or nonunion may occur. Many authors recommend fixation with the AO one-third tubular plate, We found dense subchondral bone beneath the cartilage of the trochlea and the capitellum, especially in the trochlea-capitellar groove, and dense trabecular structure around the lateral epicondyle and medial wall of the trochlea in the cross-section of the distal end of the cadaveric humerus in elderly donors ( Good results in elderly patients have been reported in several articles, We believe that the ideal plate fixation system of the transcondylar or supracondylar fracture for the distal humerus should have a locking mechanism between an anatomically contoured plate portion and the transcondylar screw.