In recent years, the stability of wear behavior for diamond-like carbon (DLC) coatings is very crucial and challenging. However, insufficient adhesion of the DLC coating to the substrate makes some problems for its wear application. Nitrogen doped in DLC coatings was prepared by D.C. Pulsed Plasma Assisted Chemical Vapour Deposition (PACVD) technique on the H13 Tool Steel under different conditions to improve the adhesion and finally tribological properties. The coating structure was assessed with Visible Raman spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and scanning electron microscope (SEM). The mechanical and tribological properties of the coatings were evaluated by nanoindentation technique and rotational ball-on-disk tribometer. The results revealed that as the nitrogen content in the coatings rises, the friction coefficient of the coatings is more stable, however, it is higher than the other coatings at the beginning of the sliding distance. Therefore, the nitrogen-doped DLC coating deposited with the highest nitrogen gas flow rate (N2 = 10sccm) at 120 °C, demonstrated the best adhesion quality of the coating to the substrate (with a hardness of 15.39 GPa) and a stable friction coefficient of 0.24 at the end of the test and lowest wear rate of 1.15 × 10−6 mm3/Nm.One of the most important elements which have been considered in various applications is carbon. Carbon is found in many forms which two of the most important ones are diamond (sp In spite of their exclusive properties, DLC coatings demonstrate inadequate adhesion to the substrates such as steels due to the generation of strong residual stress which restricts the practical application [ In general, a lot of research has been done on the effect of nitrogen on mechanical and structural properties of the DLC coatings. However, limited research has been conducted on the influence of nitrogen on the tribological properties for DLC coatings, none of which has been deposited by D.C. Pulsed PACVD technique. In this study, in addition to the effect of nitrogen, the influence of deposition temperature on the structural changes and tribological properties of nitrogen doped DLC coatings by D.C. Pulsed PACVD technique on the H13 Tool Steel was investigated. The microstructure variations were studied using Visible Raman spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and scanning electron microscope (SEM). The main purpose of this work is to promote the friction coefficient stability of the coatings by combining the deposition temperature and nitrogen incorporation. The samples of AISI Type H13 Hot Work Tool Steel were prepared in dimensions of 20 mm diameter and 8 mm thickness. The chemical composition of the substrate is illustrated in After the plasma chamber was evacuated to a pressure of 10 All of the coatings were deposited on the nitrocarburized samples in a mixture of argon, nitrogen and methane gases using the pulsed DC PACVD which their parameters are shown in The bonding structure of the coatings was studied by visible Raman spectroscopy (Horiba Yvon Xplora). This technique worked at a power of 40 mW and recorded a spectrum with a range of 800 to 2000 cm To investigate the surface chemical composition and bonds of the coatings, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) with Gammadata-scienta ESCA 200 hemispherical analyzer (an Al Ka (1486.6 eV) X-ray source) was applied. The analysis was performed at a fixed pressure of ∼10 The hardness of the coatings was measured by nanoindentation (TriboScope system, Hysitron Inc., USA). It was equipped with a cube corner tip and the hardness was calculated by Oliver–Pharr method. The maximum depth of indenter was no more than 10% of the coating thickness due to the substrate effect [ Rockwell C indentation experiment was performed to determine the adhesion quality of the coatings to the nitrocarburized specimens (substrate). According to Rockwell C indentation test, a cone-shaped diamond 120° tip (200 μm in radius) was indented perpendicularly on the coating with a normal load of 150 kg [ A ball-on-disk tribometer was applied to evaluate the friction behavior of the specimens. The ball was 5 mm in diameter made of SiC with a hardness of 24 GPa. The wear tests were carried out under a normal load of 5 N, the same wear track diameter (10 mm) and sliding distance of 500 m. The wear track profiles of the specimens were obtained by a 2-dimensional contact profilometer (BRUKER Dektak XT 2D Profilometer) after wear test at three various locations to calculate the wear volume. The wear rates were calculated by the subsequent equation: The SEM cross-sectional images of the as-deposited N10 T120 specimen at different magnifications are shown in One of the useful technique for analysis the bonding types and domain sizes of the DLC coatings is the Raman spectroscopy method. In general, there are two important peaks in the Raman spectra of the DLC coatings which consist of a G peak around 1550 cm  At the same gas flow rate and a deposition temperature of 90 °C (N10 T90), the FWHM and position of the G band are 109 and 1560 cm According to the results obtained, it can be concluded that the N10 T120 and N10 T90 specimens are more graphitized than the other samples because I To evaluate the surface chemical composition and bonding of the coatings, the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was carried out. The nitrogen atomic concentration of the different types of DLC coatings was measured by the area fraction of the N1 s and C1s peaks in XPS spectra of the coatings.  The C1s high-resolution spectra were analyzed to evaluate the bonding state of the coatings. The C1s high-resolution spectra of five different coatings are shown in The different types of atomic carbon bonding concentration for five specimens are shown in As the N Nitrogen atom which is incorporated in the DLC coating structure has a variety of neighbors. The number of atoms that bind as neighbors to the nitrogen atom are closely related to the nitrogen content in the DLC coating. In other words, at low nitrogen percentages in the coatings, due to the high amount of the C − C (sp The effect of various N  By increasing the voltage and subsequently the deposition temperature at the same gas flow rate, the number of plasma components ionization increases. With the growth of ionization rate, the plasma density, electron temperature, energy of ion species and the substrate temperature increase. At this conditions, the decomposition of methane gas is more occurred. On the other hand, by increasing the ionic bombardment and etching of the coating surface, nitrogen concentration in the coating decreases [ These cases closely are related to the results obtained in The friction coefficient of different samples in terms of sliding distance is illustrated in The friction coefficient of the DLC specimen is around 0.15 at the first 200 m of the sliding distance and lower than other curves. From this point onward, the friction coefficient continuously rises up to a value of 0.3. In contrast, it can be seen that the friction coefficient for the nitrogen doped DLC coatings is more stable than (nitrogen-free) the DLC specimen. Among the nitrogen doped DLC coatings, the friction coefficient of the N5 T120 sample is around 0.2 and less than the rest of the samples up to the 350 m sliding distance, but after this point, it loses its steady state and reaches a value of 0.3 continuously. The friction coefficient for N10 T150 specimen increases from 0.2 to 0.3 steadily. Although the friction coefficient of the N10 T150 specimen at the beginning of the test is greater than DLC and N5 T120 samples, the coefficient value of them reaches each other at the end of the test. The friction coefficient behavior of the N10 T120 and N10 T90 samples are completely different from other samples. Both of them exhibit a stable friction coefficient after the run-in stage. As seen in The wear rates of all the coatings, as well as nitrocarburized specimen, were illustrated in In this paper, the DLC coating and the nitrogen doped DLC coatings have been successfully deposited on the H13 Tool Steel by D.C. pulsed PACVD technique. Nitrogen incorporation in the coatings and deposition temperature play a significant role in the structural modification, mechanical and tribological properties of the DLC coatings. The Raman and XPS spectrum results revealed that the N The authors gratefully appreciate Dr. Amir Sharif Ahmadian for their useful advises and support, in this research.