A liquid–liquid extractive separation between hafnium and zirconium from thiocyanic acid medium using the mixtures of diisobutyl ketone (DIBK) and di (2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (P204) as the extractant was developed. The effects of the aqueous acidity, the concentration of P204, the contacting time, the concentration of NH4SCN, and the concentration of (NH4)2SO4 and NaCl on the extractive separation of the two metal ions were investigated. It is observed that hafnium was enriched in the organic layer while zirconium enriched in the aqueous layer in DIBK-P204 system. The optimum conditions for hafnium and zirconium separation were that the aqueous acidity is 1.0mol/L, the concentration of P204 in the organic phase is 10% (v/v), the contacting time is 15min, the concentration of NH4SCN is 4.0mol/L, and the concentration of NaCl is about 2.0–3.0mol/L. Under this condition, the separation factor of hafnium and zirconium is up to 10.5.Zirconium is mainly used for cladding nuclear reactor fuels due to its low neutron capture cross section and strong resistance to corrosion, whereas neutron absorption cross section of hafnium is 640 times higher than that of zirconium ( Recently, synergist extraction has exhibited improvement on the extraction separation of zirconium and hafnium. For instance, However, the conventional extractant of MIBK has the limitation in industrial application because it is easy to burn, and it has high volatilization and water solubility. The extractants Cyanex 301 and Cyanex 302 are only used in the low-level zirconium and hafnium concentration. While DIBK with lower solubility in water, higher flashing point and boiling point is superior to MIBK in industry, and the extraction mechanism of DIBK is almost similar to that of MIBK for their similar molecular structure. It can be presumed that DIBK will extract hafnium over zirconium preferentially. However, to our knowledge, the separating of hafnium and zirconium using the extractant of DIBK had rarely been reported. It was demonstrated in our previous work that it is preferential to extract hafnium over zirconium using a single DIBK-HSCN extraction system, but the extraction percentage of hafnium is too low (only 21.56%) ( The DIBK was provided by Dow Chemical Company, USA. Zirconium oxychloride (purity: 99.9%) was obtained from Zhejiang Shenghua Biok Biology Co., Ltd., China. P204 (industrial grade) was supplied by Luoyang Zhongda Chemical Co., Ltd., China. DIBK and P204 didn't need to be purified. Ammonium thiocyanate, hydrochloric acid, sulfuric acid, ammonium sulfate, sodium chloride and ammonia were used at analytical reagent grade. De-ionized water was used for the whole process. The feed mixtures, namely feed solution, were prepared by dissolving zirconium oxychloride and ammonium thiocyanate in de-ionized water. All extraction experiments were carried out in separator funnels of suitable volume at room temperature. The aqueous solution was obtained by dissolving a certain amount of zirconium oxychloride and thiocyanate ammonium in deionized water. The organic phase was obtained by mixing a certain amount of P204 with a certain amount of DIBK, and the organic phase was first saturated with 3.0 The distribution coefficient (D) was taken as the ratio of the concentration of metal present in the organic phase to that in the aqueous phase at equilibrium, and the separation factor (β) (β The influence of the aqueous acidity on the extraction of hafnium and zirconium by the mixture of DIBK and P204 was investigated in the range of 1.0 to 7.6 The distribution ratios of zirconium and hafnium decrease with the increasing of the acidity. The Hf/Zr separation factor decreased from 2.6 to 0.2 when the aqueous acidity increased from 1 to 7.6 The influence of P204 concentration (v/v %) on the extraction of hafnium and zirconium by the mixture of DIBK and P204 was investigated in the range of 5% to 40%. In these experiments, the conditions of 1.0 P204 instead of the water is used in extract complexes of zirconium and hafnium to increase their solubility in organic phase and improve the extraction of hafnium. The extraction ratio and the Hf/Zr separation factor increase with the increasing of P204 concentration. But P204 concentration doesn't exceed 10 The influence of extraction time on the extraction of hafnium and zirconium by the mixture of DIBK and P204 was conducted under the conditions of 117.1 It can be found that the extraction of zirconium and hafnium using DIBK-P204 system is a rapid process. When the contacting time is 15 The influence of concentration of zirconium and hafnium on the extraction and separation of zirconium and hafnium was carried out by mixing the organic phase with 10% (v/v) P204 and 90% (v/v) DIBK and the aqueous phase with 1.0 With the increasing of [ZrO The extractions of zirconium and hafnium as a function of NH With the increasing of ammonium thiocyanate concentration, the distribution ratio and the extraction percentage of zirconium increase only a little while the extraction percentage of hafnium and the Hf/Zr separation factor increase gradually. When the addition of ammonium thiocyanate is over 5 The influence of (NH The addition of (NH The influence of NaCl concentration in the range of 0.5 to 3.0 With the increasing of sodium chloride, the extraction ratio of hafnium and the Hf/Zr separation factor increase while the extraction of zirconium is unchanged. When 3.0 The results of this study show that the proposed mixture of DIBK and P204 can be used successfully in the separation of hafnium over zirconium from thiocyanic acid medium. The optimum technological conditions for the system were obtained for the more effective separation of hafnium over zirconium. The addition of ammonium sulfate and sodium chloride greatly affects the separation of hafnium over zirconium. By addition of ammonium sulfate, separation factor increases from 3.0 up to 9.5, while in the case of sodium chloride, it increases from 3.0 up to 10.5. The advantages of the new process over conventional MIBK process are higher separation factor and lower solvent loss. The work is financially supported by the