Background
                  Conservative management for uncomplicated displaced clavicle fractures is common practice. Delay of surgical fixation may result in less favorable outcomes.
               
                  Methods
                  A retrospective cohort study was conducted of 60 patients with a closed mid-third clavicle fracture that did not meet current operative or nonoperative guidelines; 20 primary (plate fixation <6 weeks), 20 delayed (plate fixation >6 weeks), and 20 matched conservative patients were included. Each patient completed 2 questionnaires, the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand and the American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons, as well as visual analog scales for pain, cosmetic satisfaction, and overall satisfaction. In addition, 10 patients from each group underwent clinical review of scapular rotation by the lateral scapular slide test, clinical impingement, range of motion assessment, and radiologic review of clavicle union and length.
               
                  Results
                  The American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons patient self-reported questionnaire demonstrated a median score of 5.5 for the delayed group, 2 for the primary group, and 1 for the conservative group (P = .032). The median Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand score was 7.92 for the delayed group, 3.32 for the primary group, and 1.67 for the conservative group (P = .212). Six patients in the delayed group had scapular malrotation compared with 2 in the primary group and none in the conservative group (P = .008). Flexion and external rotation in 90° abduction were decreased in the conservative group (P = .049 and .041, respectively).
               
                  Conclusion
                  We support the conservative management of uncomplicated displaced clavicle fractures but recognize that a lower threshold for early surgery should be considered where optimal shoulder function is required.The clavicle is one of the most commonly fractured bones in the body, with an incidence of 2.9% to 5% of all fractures in the adult. Of these, the middle third accounts for 69% to 82%. Since the early 1960s, it has been viewed that almost all clavicle fractures heal nonoperatively. It is widely accepted that nondisplaced fractures do not require surgical intervention. There are recognized indications for the surgical fixation of midshaft clavicle fractures. These include open fractures, neurologic or vascular compromise, tenting of the skin, and widely displaced and comminuted fractures. Between these two categories is an area in which controversy exists about the optimal management, and the surgeon's opinion still dictates whether the patient receives primary operative fixation or conservative treatment. Displaced middle-third clavicle fractures have been shown to result in poor outcomes, which include decreased strength and function, ongoing pain, and patient dissatisfaction. Restorative osteotomies for malunion and plate fixation for nonunion have previously been shown to have acceptable results in terms of nonunion rates and patient satisfaction. The aim of this study was to investigate the long-term differences in outcome between primary fixation, delayed fixation, and conservative management in the treatment of uncomplicated displaced middle-third clavicle fractures ( This study was reviewed and approved by the local clinical human research ethics committee. All involved participants gave written informed consent to participate in this study. The research was conducted at a level 1 trauma institute. Participants were identified by the hospital coding system as being older than 18 years and having presented to the emergency department with a fractured clavicle or having undergone surgical fixation of the clavicle between July 2002 and July 2011. Radiographs from the initial presentations were viewed, and those sustaining an Edinburgh type 2B1 clavicle fracture were included ( Patients were excluded if the initial radiograph demonstrated >2 cm shortening, comminution, or displacement greater than one shaft width between bone ends. The records of these patients were then viewed for exclusion criteria: corrective osteotomies, open fractures, pathologic fractures, neurovascular compromise, skin compromise, concurrent shoulder girdle injuries, recent shoulder injuries or interventions (<2 years), contralateral shoulder injury, or those identified as deceased. The Edinburgh classification was used as it has the highest correlation with prognosis for the middle-third fractures of the clavicle. After radiologic and electronic record reviews, 77 surgical patients (45 primary, 32 delayed) met all the inclusion criteria; 11 were unable to be contacted (5 primary, 6 delayed), 10 declined to participate (6 primary, 4 delayed), and 2 patients were deceased. A matched control group with the same inclusion and exclusion criteria was added. Selection was based on fracture pattern, mechanism of injury, age at the time of the injury, gender, smoking status, and hand dominance. Twenty controls were used to match the size of the surgical groups ( The primary fixation group consisted of 20 participants, of which 13 were male and 7 were female. This group had surgery within 6 weeks of injury (mean, 12.5 days; range, 1-27 days). The mean duration from surgery to follow-up was 5.2 years (range, 2.9-9.4 years). The mean age was 36 years (range, 18-63 years) at the time of the injury. The delayed fixation group consisted of 20 participants (15 men, 5 women) with a mean age of 40 years (range, 25-65 years) at the time of injury. The mean time from injury to surgery was 7 months (range, 2.3-16 months), and the mean duration from surgery to follow-up was 6.27 years (range, 2.3-10.9 years). The reason for surgery was ongoing residual symptoms or patient request. The matched conservative group consisted of 20 participants, of which 16 were male and 4 were female. The mean duration between injury and follow-up was 4.3 years (range, 2.9-6.8 years), and the mean age for this group was 46 years (range, 22-78 years) at the time of injury. The groups were not different in terms of gender, age, hand dominance, mechanism of injury, smoking, dependence on the shoulder for occupation/hobbies, or compensation claims ( There was a slightly longer duration from injury until follow-up in the delayed operative group, with a median follow-up of 6.6 years compared with 5.4 years for the primary fixation group and 4.3 years for the conservative group ( The Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand (DASH) In addition to these 2 questionnaires, each participant rated level of pain, aesthetic satisfaction, and overall satisfaction by a visual analog scale (VAS). The DASH and ASES questionnaires were selected over other outcome measures as they have been shown to be more suitable in the population being studied Within each group, a sample of 10 participants was examined further for biomechanical malfunction by a qualified orthopedic physiotherapist. Scapulothoracic rhythm was assessed by the lateral scapular slide test as previously described by Kibler. Statistical analysis was performed with IBM SPSS Statistics version 22 (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA). Percentage, frequency distribution, mean, median, and standard deviation were used to describe the characteristics of variables. Kruskal-Wallis tests were performed to test for difference in distribution for categorical variables because there were more than 2 groups for comparison and the variables had a nonparametric distribution. Mann-Whitney The ASES patient self-reported questionnaire demonstrated a median score of 5.5 for the delayed group, 2 for the primary group, and 1 for the conservative group ( The median DASH score was 7.92 for the delayed group, 3.32 for the primary group, and 1.67 for the conservative group ( The VAS responses also demonstrated trends toward poorer outcomes for the delayed group, with 13 of 20 in the delayed group reporting pain with a mean score of 1.47 compared with the primary (10 of 20; mean, 0.93) and conservative (7 of 20; mean, 0.83) groups ( Scapular malposition was present in 6 of the delayed group, 2 of the primary group, and none of the 10 assessed in the conservative group ( A decrease in ROM was most pronounced in the conservative group. Flexion was decreased from 5° to 40° (mean, 13°) in the conservative group, −10° to 20° (mean, 3°) in the delayed group, and −20° to 10° (mean, −1°) in the primary group ( There was no difference in pectoralis minor length ( Conservative treatment of mid-third clavicle fractures remains the treatment of choice for nondisplaced clavicle fractures with nonunion in 1% to 6%. Laboratory studies have shown that shortening or malunion of the clavicle leads to altered biomechanics. Potter et al In this study, we isolated those mid-third clavicle fractures (Edinburgh 2B1) that were uncomplicated yet completely displaced, less than an entire shaft width between bone fragments and <2 cm of shortening, and therefore not meeting current guidelines for either surgical or conservative treatment. We found similar trends, with more patients with scapular malrotation in the delayed group (6 of 10 compared with 2 of 10 primary). The delayed group reported more ongoing pain than the other 2 groups did, but it was not significant ( Despite the increased incidence of scapular malrotation, there was no increased incidence of impingement. This implies that impingement is dependent on more than just scapular position and rotation, and an intact functioning rotator cuff can compensate. There was an association between clavicle shortening and scapula malrotation, with all patients who had impingement having shortening >10 mm, but not all patients with shortening had impingement. Again, this can indicate that there is potential for soft tissue compensation to correct for the shortened clavicle. This may explain some of the discrepancies between studies reporting on the effect of clavicle length in shoulder girdle function. The role of clavicle length remains controversial in the literature, with some authors finding an association between a shortened clavicle and poorer functional outcomes. The limitations of our retrospective study are the small sample size, which did not provide us with the power to apply these results to the general population. This could lead to a type I error. The DASH score, for 80% power, assuming a standard deviation of 14.7, would require a sample size of 136 per group for a difference of 5 to be extrapolated to the general population. A similar sample size was required to extrapolate the ASES scores to the wider population. The median DASH and ASES scores were within the population normative values, so although there were differences between the groups, their clinical significance can be questioned. There were more smokers in the delayed group, which may be a causative effect leading to their fractures not healing and therefore predisposing them to the delayed group and a selection bias. However, there is no known association between smoking and scapular malposition, and therefore smoking is not a confounder and cannot have led to a spurious result. The conservative group performed better in many aspects, but this is likely a result of study design. Patients in the conservative group who had poor outcomes would be considered for surgery and become part of the delayed group for follow-up, thus biasing the conservative group toward a better outcome. In this study, all plate fixations after 6 weeks were included, except corrective osteotomies, into the delayed group with no end time frame cutoff. Therefore, both delayed unions and nonunions were included. Das et al This study has identified trends that even uncomplicated, moderately displaced Edinburgh 2B1 mid-third clavicle fractures can have worse outcomes if surgery is deferred longer than 6 weeks. Patients had an increased incidence of scapular malrotation and slightly poorer scores on the outcome measures used. However, the significance is likely reserved for the select few who are dependent on upper limb function for their livelihood and should not be used as justification for primary fixation indiscriminately. We support a trial of conservative management with adequate follow-up and a low threshold to convert to early operative management, in the first 6 weeks, in individuals who require optimal shoulder function. The surgical fixation of completely displaced mid-third clavicle fractures within the first 6 weeks after injury results in better shoulder positioning and patient satisfaction. These results can be subtle and therefore not important in the elderly or sedentary patient, yet they may be hugely significant in the young patient who relies on the upper limb for work, sport, or hobbies. It is therefore advised that a lower threshold for early surgical intervention be considered when optimal shoulder function is required. The authors wish to thank Peter Tamblyn for his intellectual contributions and for overseeing the clinical reviews. Also, Katharina Denk for assisting in the organization of this project and her contributions to manuscript edits. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.