Small strain consolidation theories treat soil properties as being constant and uniform in the course of consolidation, which is not true in the case of electro-osmosis-induced consolidation practices. Electro-osmotic consolidation leads to large strain, which physically and electro-chemically affects to a non-negligible extent the nonlinear changes of the soil properties. For the nonlinear changes, iterative computations provide a mathematical approximation of the soil consolidation when the time steps and spatial geometry are intensively meshed. In this context, this paper presents a finite-difference model, EC1, for one-dimensional electro-osmotic consolidation, and this model is developed based on a fixed Eulerian co-ordinate system and uses a piecewise linear approximation. The model is able to account for the large-strain-induced nonlinear changes of the physical and electro-chemical properties in a compressible mass subjected to electro-osmotic consolidation and to predict the consolidation characteristics of the compressible mass. EC1 is verified against exact analytical solutions and test results obtained from an experimental program. Example problems are illustrated with respect to the numerical solutions of large-strain electro-osmotic consolidation.experimental derived exponent of the coefficient of electro-osmotic permeability coefficient of compressibility average area of the cross section between contiguous elements, compression index hydraulic permeability index dielectric constant of pore fluid void ratio threshold void ratio energy consumption index specific gravity of soil solids total head of water total head of water adjacent to cathode total head of water adjacent to anode initial height of compressible soil mass voltage gradient hydraulic gradient element co-ordinate coefficient of hydraulic or electro-osmotic permeability coefficient of electro-osmotic permeability equivalent series coefficient of electro-osmotic permeability coefficient of hydraulic permeability equivalent series coefficient of hydraulic permeability threshold coefficient of permeability thickness of element length of compressible soil mass loop calculation termination variable soil porosity stress/load in oedometer test volume of flow flow volume induced by hydraulic gradient flow volume induced by electrical gradient number of elements for soil mass number of piece-linear points in compressibility constitutive relationship curves number of piece-linear points in permeability constitutive relationship curves average settlement of soil mass settlement of element elapsed time of consolidation final elapsed time time factor pore pressure average consolidation degree electrical potential at element electrical potential difference between electrodes volume of soil mass water content plastic limit liquid limit width of compressible soil mass distance to cathode elevation of upper corner of element elevation of node of element total stress effective stress viscosity of pore fluid unit weight of soil unit weight of water soil zeta potential electrical resistivity electrical resistivity of soil solid particles electrical resistivity of pore water Electro-osmosis is a process enabling the flow of pore fluid in a soil mass in the direction toward a negative electrode (cathode) in response to a voltage gradient (electrical field or potential difference) of direct current that is applied between the cathode and a positive electrode (anode). The cathode and anode are installed in pairs in the soil mass, between which electrical current is transmitted primarily by the movement of ions through the pore fluid. The capacity of electro-osmosis is employed in many geotechnical and geoenvironmental practices, such as soil remediation, site reclamation and ground dewatering, where clays or other very low permeability materials are intensively deposited and the uses of conventional soil treatment technology are less efficient. Though the liquid and solid phases of the soil mass are taken to be incompressible, the consolidation induced by electro-osmosis may subject the soil skeleton to significant compression for high moisture content fine-grained soils, e.g., newly reclaimed or dredged coastal sediments, municipal sludge and industry solid–liquid mixed disposals. That is, the soil properties undergo changes under electro-osmotic consolidation, which has been noted in many previous experiments For the approximation of large strain consolidation, a suitable point of departure involves a piecewise-linear approximation that is based on Eulerian co-ordinates. Compared with theories This paper presents a piecewise linear numerical model, called Electro-osmotic Consolidation 1 (EC1), to describe one-dimensional electro-osmotic consolidation. This model is developed with the aid of model CS2 The initial geometry of a compressible mass prior to the application of a voltage gradient (time A vertical Eulerian co-ordinate, The constitutive relationships for the compressible soil mass are shown in There is proportionality between the voltage gradient induced velocity of the fluid flow and the voltage gradient In terms of Because the permeability of two contiguous elements will generally not be equal, an equivalent series coefficient of permeability is defined to calculate the inter-element fluid flow. At time Regarding Regarding the constitutive relationship for the electro-osmotic permeability in To offer a general form of the coefficient of electro-osmotic permeability, Eq. The vertical total stress at each node in The vertical effective stress at node The form chosen for the compressibility constitutive relationship in The pore pressure for node The electrical resistance’s dependence on the void ratio is not very clear. Nevertheless, some guidelines are available from the literature to select a reasonable electrical resistivity. Based on the experimental results of Turner An electrical voltage of There are two opposite fluid flows superimposed in the compressible mass for one-dimensional electro-osmotic consolidation Following the fluid flow, at time ( At time ( The boundary drainage conditions are configured in terms of the choices of the access to water at the electrodes and the upper/lower boundary surfaces of the geometry (  EC1 adapts the criteria used in CS2  The performance of EC1 is verified against the analytical exact solutions given by Esrig The geometry of Esrig’s one-dimensional solutions is identical to the one shown in Referring to the geometry in Esrig Averaging   The materials used in the experimental tests were fine-grained kaolin, which is a chemically stable mineral material and widely deployed as a model clayey soil for the approximation of electrokinetic tests A permeameter was developed to measure the coefficient of electro-osmotic permeability,  The last two properties in The above approximation reflects the ion concentration of the pore fluid and the diffusion double layer of the solid particle of the soil. It is acknowledged that the resistivity of any material is dependent on the amount of free ions and the valence values of the ions. For soils, the ion concentration of the pore fluid and the exchangeable ions of the solid particles are neither accessible to measure nor constant during the electro-osmotic consolidation process. Thus, measuring the exact resistivities of the pore fluid or the solid particle of the soils is not feasible. The above approximation adapts the resistivity approximation used by Komine The results in  The sample soil of kaolin in  The effective voltage decreases nonlinearly over time, diminishing from 40 The values of the effective voltage are inputted into EC1 to calculate the electrical potential over time. The values of the potential are in close agreement for each plot in The flow rate of water was examined to verify the accuracy of EC1 experimentally. The rate is defined as the volume of water discharge against the elapsed time, and this definition was also adapted in a previous study The values of the effective voltage were used to calculate the rate of flow, which is shown in the upper part of The lower part of Example problems are illustrated to analyze the electro-osmotic consolidation of a compressible soil mass that involves large-strain deformation.  Three criteria are often combined to assess the efficiency of electro-osmotic consolidation, i.e., the settlement achieved (equal to the volume of water discharge), the time elapsed and the energy consumed to accomplish the settlement. The aim of practical applications is to consolidate the soil to a sufficiently high extent of settlement given a relatively small elapsed time and energy consumption. The first criterion (water discharge) and third criterion (energy consumption) are combined into an energy consumption index, The curves of the energy consumption index vs. the elapsed time and the consolidation degree vs. the elapsed time are shown in The energy consumption index, The consolidation of the soil is expedited in response to the increase in the voltage gradient. The elapsed times to reach a consolidation degree of 90% are 70  As consolidation is position dependent, it is of interest to suggest an average cut-off time to account for the accomplishment of major consolidation of the entire soil mass. Based on the time range of the curves in   In EC1, a one-dimensional large-strain electro-osmotic consolidation model, was developed, validated and implemented. The model, which is in the form of a nonlinear finite-difference equation, represents a collection of several constitutive relationships, particularly, the relationships for the compressibility, hydraulic conductivity, electro-osmotic permeability and electrical resistivity in response to a large-strain settlement and as a function of the void ratio. EC1 is validated against analytical exact solutions involving a small-strain settlement. For experimental tests where large-strain settlement occurs, the performance of EC1 is acceptable. In addition to validating the numerical model, the experimental tests lead to the setups of the hydraulic and electro-osmotic permeameter, the Miller soil box and the electro-osmotic consolidation box. The permeameter is novel in that it provides the measurements of the electro-osmotic permeability as well as the hydraulic conductivity in one domain. The void ratio of the soil placed in the permeameter varies so that the relationship between the electro-osmotic permeability and the void ratio can be found. The Miller box is deployed to determine the relationship between the electrical resistivity and the void ratio, which leads to the approximation of the respective resistivity of the pore fluid and the solid particle of soils. The electro-osmotic consolidation box is designed to imitate a one-dimensional horizontal flow for different boundary conditions. The use of the box successfully implements the electro-osmotic consolidation of soils, allowing the measurements of the electrical potential at various positions and the estimates of the flow rate over time. Based on the numerical results of the example problems involving one-dimensional large-strain electro-osmotic consolidation, a parametric study was conducted with respect to the consolidation degree, settlement of the soil, rate of flow and pore pressure of the soil. A higher voltage gradient leads to expedited consolidation and increased settlement. The increase in the rate and value are nonlinear in response to the increase in the voltage gradient. An input of voltage gradient 30 The study began in Hohai University and was continued and completed when the second author moved to the University of Adelaide. The authors appreciate the technical support provided by Hohai University and the EMCS start-up grant of the University of Adelaide. The programming code offered in Fox and Berles’s paper