The extraction of molybdenum and nickel from a carbonaceous shale ore was investigated by oxidation roasting, followed by sulphation roasting and water leaching. The results indicated that this process was an efficient method for the extraction of molybdenum and nickel from the ore. Sulphation roasting promotes the reaction of sulphuric acid with molybdenum and nickel oxides and also decomposes the molybdenum-bearing mineral phase powellite in the roasted Ni–Mo ore. Under the optimum experimental conditions (sulphation roasting at 240°C for 1h; 32ml sulphuric acid/100g roasted Ni–Mo ore; water leaching for 2h. at 98°C with a liquid-to-solid ratio of 2:1), the water leach extracted 92.1% Mo and 83.5% Ni.Molybdenum and nickel have strategic and industrial importance due to their applications in many technological fields ( In China, important molybdenum and nickel ore sources exist as carbonaceous shales in Guizhou, Hunan, Hubei, Yunnan and Zhejiang Provinces and the gross reserve is 9.37 Several mineral processing treatments have been tested on the ore, such as flotation separation or gravity separation combined with flotation ( The traditional process for molybdenum and nickel recovery from the high grade Ni–Mo ore is roasting and melting reduction, producing a high impurity Ni–Mo–Fe alloy. In recent years, several other processes have been proposed to recover molybdenum from the Ni–Mo ore, such as direct leaching with NaOH/NaClO ( The purpose of the present work is to establish the optimum conditions for the extraction of both molybdenum and nickel from the Ni–Mo ore through studies on sulphation roasting and water leaching. The raw Ni–Mo ore used in this study was obtained from Hunan province in China. After crushing, grinding and making the pellets, the raw Ni–Mo ore was roasted at 650 All the reagents used in chemical analysis, including sulphuric acid, sodium hydroxide, sodium citrate, copper sulphate, thiourea, ammonium thiocyanate and citric acid, were of analytical grade. The roasted Ni–Mo ore pellets were ground and sieved and particles below 124 After roasting, the sulphation roasted ore was leached by water in an agitated flask, heated by an electric jacket. After the required contact time, the supernatant was vacuum filtered and the leach residue cake was submitted to successive rinsing with water; lasting up to 10 In raw carbonaceous Ni–Mo ores, the molybdenum and nickel mainly occur as sulphides which cannot react with sulphuric acid until they are converted into oxide phases. Therefore, the purpose of oxidation roasting was to oxidize the sulphide to form oxide. As seen from In the roasted Ni–Mo ore, there are five crystal mineral phases, namely, quartz (SiO In this step, the sulphuric acid volume was varied in the range of 15–35 Over 90% Mo and 80% Ni was leached when the volume of sulphuric acid was > In order to study the role of roasting time on the extraction of molybdenum and nickel, the time was varied from 0.5 to 2.5 The effect of sulphation roasting temperature on the extraction of molybdenum and nickel was studied from 100 On the other hand, as the temperature increases, the nickel extraction increases and reaches a peak value of about 83%. Beyond 240 In the temperature range of 100–240 To understand the mechanism of sulphation roasting, XRD analysis was conducted. When the temperature is above 120 After sulphation roasting under optimum conditions, the molybdenum and nickel sulphate formed is easily leached with water in an agitated flask. The effect of leaching time, leaching temperature and liquid to solid ratio on molybdenum and nickel extraction was then studied.  The effect of leaching temperature on the extraction of molybdenum and nickel is illustrated in The effect of liquid/solid ratio on molybdenum and nickel extraction during water leaching was examined at 98 Under the optimum conditions, the extraction of molybdenum and nickel was 92.1% and 83.5%, respectively and the pH of the final leach liquor was pH 0.89. The concentrations of the main metal components of the leach liquor are shown in The XRD patterns of the leached cake are shown in The treatment of a carbonaceous ore for the extraction of molybdenum and nickel can be performed in a three-step procedure consisting of a oxidation roasting, sulphation roasting and water leaching. It is proved from the experiments that it is an effective technique to leach molybdenum and nickel from the low grade Ni–Mo ore. During the oxidation roasting process, molybdenum and nickel sulphides are oxidized and a molybdenum bearing phase — powellite (CaMoO