The ability of pyrite and chalcopyrite to adsorb gold was examined. Experiments were conducted in cyanide deficient solutions with and without activated carbon. Chalcopyrite was shown to be very strongly preg-robbing. It competed with activated carbon to remove the majority of gold from solution. Pyrite was also strongly preg-robbing, and in cyanide deficient solutions adsorbed the majority of the gold in preference to activated carbon. The degree of adsorption onto the ore or the activated carbon was a function of the kinetics of the adsorption process.
                  The role of the cyanide complexes of copper, silver, zinc, nickel and iron was also examined. It was found that these complexes counteract preg-robbing, and serve to stabilise the aurocyanide complex by precipitating prior to gold precipitation. When cyanide or cyanide-species were present in solution, the adsorption onto activated carbon was found in general to take preference to the adsorption onto the minerals. The ability of a sulphide ore to adsorb Au(CN)2
                     − from solution was found to be a function of how rapidly the ore consumed cyanide and precipitated metal–cyanide complexes.
                  A mechanism was proposed where the gold is reduced at the chalcopyrite surface through the formation of an adsorbed intermediate. The gold was reduced, along with the oxidation of chalcopyrite to form copper–cyanide complexes in solution. Reduction of gold on the pyrite was observed to occur with the release of zinc as an impurity into solution, and a mechanism for this reaction was proposed.Preg-robbing is the phenomenon whereby the gold cyanide complex, Au(CN) The most studied of the preg-robbing ores are those in Carlin, NV. This carbonaceous ore has kerogen as the principal preg-robbing component. Hausen and Bucknam This type of carbonaceous preg-robbing may be inhibited by the addition of diesel or kerosene to the leaching circuit of a plant. At the Stawell Gold Mine, Australia, kerosene was used to reduce preg-robbing to graphitic material in the ore Osseo-Asare et al. This work was extended Adams and Burger Pyke et al. Apart from carbonaceous material, the other source of preg-robbing is the minerals of the ore. The first study of adsorption of gold cyanide onto minerals was undertaken by Urban et al. Clay minerals were also found to be able to adsorb gold, though to a lesser degree. Hausen and Bucknam Chryssoulis In contrast Hausen and Bucknam Quach et al. More recently, Adams et al. Adams et al. It is the purpose of the work described below to examine the preg-robbing behaviour of two sulphide minerals, i.e. pyrite and chalcopyrite. Pyrite and chalcopyrite were chosen for study as they are commonly associated with gold ores. This paper differs from other studies on preg-robbing in that it shows how the interactions between different species affect the kinetics and process of preg-robbing. The dependence of preg-robbing on the initial free cyanide concentration is examined, as it has not been studied before. The addition of free-cyanide to refractory sulphide ores results in the formation of a large number of metal–cyanide species, so that the interactions between these metal–cyanide complexes and the role they play in preg-robbing are also described. Finally, the competitive processes of adsorption of gold at the ore surface and onto activated carbon are quantified and the role of cyanide in shifting the equilibrium towards adsorption onto activated carbon described. This study on preg-robbing has a number of industrial applications. Carbon-in-leach (CIL) is a common process alternative when an ore is preg-robbing. This process is preferable for preg-robbing ores, as the aurocyanide adsorbs onto the activated carbon in preference to the ore due to the greater adsorptivity of activated carbon. In the CIL process preg-robbing due to minerals is likely to be low because of the relatively high cyanide concentrations and the competitive effects of activated carbon, as shown in this paper. In heap-leaching, when the concentrations of cyanide are low, preg-robbing would become much more important in gold processing. It would also be significant when there is no activated carbon stage, such as in the Merrill–Crowe process, where the slurry is filtered prior to precipitation. A flotation feed, pyrite concentrate and a chalcopyrite concentrate were used for the preg-robbing experiments. These were obtained from the Telfer Gold Mine, Australia, and are the feed and product of a two-stage sequential flotation sequence. Gold-free samples of pyrite and chalcopyrite were obtained from Geological Specimen Supplies, Australia. These gold-free mineral samples were crushed in a rolls crusher to −2 mm and milled in a ball mill to 80% passing 75 μm. The copper concentrate and flotation feed had a particle size distribution of 80% passing 75 μm, while the pyrite concentrate had a slightly finer particle size distribution of 90% passing 75 μm. A rotary splitter was used to obtain representative samples of the ores for experimental use. Quantitative XRD was used to determine the mineralogy of the samples. The results of this analysis are shown in An elemental analysis was performed by digestion of the ore. A list of those elements considered most important in this study is detailed in Experiments were performed in a 1 L baffled reactor using an overhead stirrer with a flat-bladed impeller. One liter of distilled water was added to 400 g of the ore or gold-free mineral sample. This was the maximum percentage solids found to give satisfactory mixing characteristics at 200 rpm with these dense ores. This stirring speed was also believed to give a similar level of mixing as is commonly used on gold mills. All experiments were performed at 20°C. The pH was kept constant at 10.5 by the addition of potassium hydroxide. When cyanide was added the concentration was allowed to degrade from its initial level, in order to monitor the effect of the degrading cyanide concentration on the interactions between metal–cyanide complexes and gold preg-robbing. Nitrogen purging was used in a number of experiments to prevent gold leaching by the removal of oxygen. When used, this was sparged into the slurry for 30 min prior to the addition of any reagents. Nitrogen sparging was continued for the duration of the experiment. Activated carbon was also used in a number of experiments. Prior to use, a sample of Norit extruded carbon was prepared by first washing the carbon in distilled water to remove any loose fines. The carbon was then stirred in a solution of 1% hydrochloric acid for 24 h, followed by removal of the carbon fines. The carbon was then stirred in distilled water, with periodic additions of 1 M KOH until the pH stabilised at 10.5. This process took approximately 6 days. Further carbon attrition during experiments was likely to be small, and no carbon fines were observed in suspension. Solution analysis was performed using a Perkin-Elmer ICP-OES. A cadmium internal standard was added to alkaline cyanide solutions and the solutions analysed for Au, Ag, Fe, Cu, Ni, Zn, Ca, Mg and S. Standards were created using stock cyanide solutions. Activated carbon was analysed by ashing the carbon at 750°C for 6 h. The ash was then digested using aqua regia and analysed by ICP in 10% HCl. Fire assay of the ores and mineral samples was performed by Genalysis Laboratory Services (WA). Cyanide concentration was determined by performing a silver nitrate titration, using rhodanine as an indicator. For some of the experiments performed, the level of copper in solution was high, so the titration was not an accurate indicator of the actual level of free cyanide. This was due to the dissociation of copper(I) cyanide complexes during the titration. Copper cyanide complexes with three or four ligands dissociate, and a significant amount of the cyanide bound in these complexes is titrated, giving higher results for free cyanide. This problem may be overcome by the use of an ion-chromatographic method to determine the concentration of free cyanide in solution and the concentration of metal–cyanide complexes Initially, experiments were performed with five different ores. These five ores consisted of two oxide ores, which contained mainly silicate and clay-type minerals. A sulphide ore was also studied, which was the feed to a flotation plant. Pyrite and chalcopyrite were the main sulphide minerals in this ore. A pyrite concentrate and copper concentrate produced from this feed were also investigated. A 1000 ppm stock solution of gold was prepared by adding KAu(CN) It was found that the oxide ores showed no preg-robbing behaviour. Therefore, none of the minerals in the two oxide ores had the capacity to adsorb gold. These ores contained no chalcopyrite and less than 5% pyrite. They consisted of mainly silicates, clay-minerals and quartz. It can be concluded that the silicate minerals present were not preg-robbing. The clay minerals also did not adsorb gold, which agrees with the work of Hausen and Bucknam The kinetics of the preg-robbing of the three sulphide ores is shown in Under zero-cyanide conditions the gold that is adsorbed may be reduced at the surface of the minerals in an oxidation–reduction reaction. Zhang et al. The preg-robbing of the sulphide ores could not solely be the result of a deficit of free cyanide, or preg-robbing would have been observed for the oxide ores. The Au(CN) In order to investigate the competitiveness of the adsorption onto the ore, an experiment was performed with activated carbon. A concentrated Au(CN) From In order to test the effect of cyanide on the preg-robbing behaviour of the flotation concentrates, nitrogen purging was used to inhibit the leaching of gold. Preg-robbing tests were then conducted on the pyrite and copper concentrates at an initial cyanide concentration of 300 ppm. Under these conditions, preg-robbing was completely eliminated, with no gold adsorbing to the pyrite concentrate or the copper concentrate. This is despite the fact that the free cyanide concentration immediately dropped to zero. It would be expected that the gold would begin to precipitate under these cyanide deficient conditions. The absence of preg-robbing is due to the stabilising effect of other metal–cyanide complexes in solution, as discussed below. The kinetic curves for gold, copper and cyanide for the pyrite concentrate are shown in In order to investigate the reversibility of the preg-robbing phenomena and the effect of activated carbon at higher cyanide concentrations, a number of tests were performed on the pyrite and chalcopyrite mineral samples. As these samples contained no gold, preg-robbing tests in the presence of oxygen and cyanide were possible. The experiments were conducted by adding the appropriate amount of KCN powder and Au(CN)  The gold-free pyrite sample was found to be a stronger adsorber than the chalcopyrite, which is in contrast with the results found for the flotation concentrates. The pyrite is 100% pure however, and may be more active. Hausen and Bucknam When both activated carbon and cyanide were present with the gold-free mineral samples, To test the reversibility of preg-robbing, activated carbon was added to a fresh slurry made up using the mineral samples. The samples were previously loaded with gold from a solution containing 5 ppm Au. Any gold that was pulled from the mineral onto the activated carbon would indicate that adsorption is reversible. For zero-cyanide conditions, this would clearly indicate that the gold was adsorbed in the Au(CN) The gold was not removed from the chalcopyrite sample at zero cyanide concentration. This indicates that the gold–cyanide complex was reduced at the surface of the chalcopyrite, rather than physically bound, as Adams et al. The role of the stable Fe(CN) This investigation was carried out to determine what the role of cyanide is in inhibiting preg-robbing. It is possible that the dramatic reduction in preg-robbing behaviour when cyanide is present, is due to adsorption sites on the ore being blocked off. Ferrocyanide was used to test this hypothesis, as it was envisaged that it would perform similarly to cyanide in blocking adsorption sites. Fe(CN) For the copper concentrate the aurocyanide complex was not adsorbed onto the ore in the presence of 300 ppm CN For the pyrite concentrate no preg-robbing was observed at 300 ppm free CN The role of ferrocyanide in preg-robbing is clearly contrasted by examining the different behaviour of the preg-robbing of the gold-free pyrite sample and the pyrite concentrate. The kinetic curves for gold and iron are given in Therefore, the preg-robbing behaviour of the pyrite or copper concentrate in the presence of Fe(CN) From these results, it is clear that preg-robbing is not inhibited by a blocking of active adsorption sites on the mineral surface. Instead, the Fe(CN) The above discussion raises a number of questions about the difference in preg-robbing behaviour between the mineral samples and ore. The gold-free sample of pyrite is much more adsorbing than the pyrite concentrate. There was also a small difference in the adsorptive behaviour of the copper concentrate and gold-free chalcopyrite mineral samples in the presence of cyanide, as seen in It was expected that the differences in adsorption observed could be due to the different levels of oxidation of the ores and samples. 400 g of freshly milled gold-free mineral samples of pyrite and chalcopyrite were taken and contacted with a 5 ppm gold solution. Another sample of these minerals was milled and spread out and exposed to the atmosphere for a period of 2 weeks. Identical conditions were then used to perform an adsorption experiment. No difference in adsorption was observed, so the different adsorptive behaviour cannot be accounted for by the different levels of oxidation of the samples. The difference in adsorption between the pyrite concentrate and gold-free pyrite could be due to the different forms of carbon present in the ores. Adams and Burger While the difference in the level of organic carbon is likely to be a factor, the ability of a sulphide mineral to adsorb Au(CN) The gold-free pyrite mineral sample and the copper concentrate both showed very high and fast cyanide consumptions and precipitation of metal–cyanide complexes. When these solutions become cyanide deficient, preg-robbing was observed to occur rapidly. However, the pyrite concentrate and gold-free chalcopyrite generally showed lower cyanide consumption and more stable metal–cyanide complexes in solution, despite their mineralogical similarity to the other ores. Preg-robbing was observed to be lower as more cyanide was available to stabilise Au(CN) Therefore, rather than examining the mineralogy of an ore, an examination of the ore's cyanide consuming pattern, in terms of free cyanide and metal–cyanide complexes, should be undertaken to determine the extent of preg-robbing expected from an ore. Further investigation of the interactions between metal–cyanide species and their role in preg-robbing was undertaken by synthesising a solution of 50 ppm of each metal in a combined solution. The metals present were Au, Cu, Ag, Ni, Zn and Fe. These species were present as Au(CN) An experiment was performed to gain greater understanding of the mechanism of gold reduction by chalcopyrite and to quantify the extent of preg-robbing. The gold-free chalcopyrite sample was contacted with a 50 ppm gold solution of KAu(CN) The redissolution of the gold is likely due to the greater stability of the gold cyanide over the different copper–cyanide species. The peak observed on the copper curve between 1 and 4 h could be due to the reduction in the cyanide complexation of copper from Cu(CN) For the reduction of gold by the pyrite concentrate, zinc was observed to be released into solution. The pyrite concentrate was contacted with a 5 ppm gold solution made from KAu(CN) The level of metal–cyanide complexes in solution was much lower than that expected from the release of cyanide which occurred from the reduction of gold. This may be due to the formation of solid Zn(CN) The release of copper, zinc, silver and iron into solution was observed for the gold-free pyrite mineral sample, but the results are not given here. This shows that more than one mechanism may be important in the reduction of gold at the pyrite surface. Adams et al. A mechanism whereby the gold is reduced at the chalcopyrite surface is also strongly supported by the work presented above. At low overvoltages, a mechanism for the reduction of gold was proposed by Mac Arthur Following the argument Quach et al. Quach et al. Gold may also be reduced at the surface of pyrite, with the subsequent release of zinc into solution, as shown in For preg-robbing to occur from solution to a pyrite or chalcopyrite mineral surface, it was found the solution must be cyanide deficient. Preg-robbing was found to occur if all the free cyanide was consumed. When this consumption resulted in the formation of metal–cyanide complexes, such as Ag(CN) The propensity of an ore to rapidly adsorb gold is not only a function of the organic carbon concentration, but also related to how quickly the ore consumes cyanide. This is not necessarily just a function of mineralogy, as the pyrite concentrate and gold-free pyrite sample had similar mineralogy, though the gold-free pyrite had faster cyanide consumption. Activated carbon competes very strongly with the ore for Au(CN) A mechanism for the reduction of aurocyanide was proposed whereby the aurocyanide reduces at the chalcopyrite surface. The chalcopyrite was oxidised to form sulphide, iron–hydroxide and copper cyanide complexes. These complexes can potentially redissolve the gold to form the more stable Au(CN) The authors wish to gratefully acknowledge Newcrest Mining and the Australian Research Council for funding this research. Gratitude is expressed to the staff of the Telfer gold mine, who provided the ores for experimentation. Much appreciation goes towards Dr. Ratan Chowdhury for his helpful discussions.