Volcano flanks are usually covered by deposits of fine materials (tephra) with variable thickness originated by the explosive activity. The deposits form bedded sequences of tephra layers often alternated with paleosols. Pyroclastic successions on Etna volcano (Italy) are composed of scoria or pumice lapilli and ash deposits, representing separate eruptions, and volcanogenic sediments developed between eruptions. The origin of paleosols cropping out in three pyroclastic successions on Mt Etna is here discussed on the basis of stratigraphic, pedological, chemical and mineralogical data. The results suggest that the sequences originated from the accumulation of primary volcanic materials produced by explosive events, together with material of secondary origin derived from wind-transported materials originated by the alteration of the pyroclastic deposits formed at higher elevations. The vegetation present at the surface at any time would have favoured the aggrading of the soil by exerting a trapping effect on the wind-blown materials. At the same time, the presence of plants would have favoured enrichment in organic C and mineral alteration. In the studied paleosols, the pedogenetic processes were not sufficiently intense or did not act for a sufficient time to favour neogenesis of mineralogical phases, either crystalline or “amorphous”.Volcanic soils are often classified as Andisols ( Volcanic soils are widely dispersed on the Earth's surface, following the distribution of active and dormant volcanoes ( Mt Etna, in Southern Italy ( In this paper we present stratigraphic, pedological, chemical and mineralogical features in order to reconstruct the events that originated the paleosols occurring in the pyroclastic successions on the flanks of the Etna volcano. Mt Etna (Italy) is characterised by a quasi-persistent basaltic effusive and explosive activity, mainly concentrated at the summit craters. Because of the dominant winds direction, pyroclastic fall deposits occur mostly on the northeast, east and southeast flanks of the volcano and they have been grouped into five stratigraphic units: A, B, C, D and E; these latter run from about 100 kyr B.P. (before present) to the present, corresponding to five main periods of explosive activity ( Cubania (37°45′08″ N, 15°04′13″ E) is a pine forest located in the municipal district of Zafferana Etnea, at an elevation of 1550 m. The mean annual precipitation is 1560 mm and the mean annual air temperature is 11.9 °C. The area hosts a vegetation made of The sub-sequence 1 ( The sub-sequence 2 ( Mt Salto del Cane (37° 40’ 10’’ N, 15° 02’ 11’’ E) is a scoria cone located in a chestnut wood in the municipal district of Zafferana Etnea, at 1350 m above sea level. The mean annual precipitation is 1300 mm and the mean annual air temperature is 11.0 °C. Vegetation consists of Piano delle Concazze is an almost-barren flat area at 2800 m above sea level. Climatic information on this site is scarce. In winter, the soil surface is frozen and covered by snow, while in July, at 2–3 cm below the surface, the soil may reach the temperature of 50 °C at noon, and 7–10 °C during night. During the explosive activity of the summit craters, the area accumulates large amounts of pyroclastites. In summer 1999, the surface was mantled by a thickness of 210 cm of black pyroclastic materials ejected during the 23/12/1995 lava fountain episode. Within this layer, from 15 to 150 cm of depth, the larger clasts hosted sand caps with a grey-yellowish colour. These sand caps are analogous to the silt caps reported by Pedological descriptions of the sequences were made following Particle-size distribution was determined by the pipette method ( The organic C content was estimated by the Walkley–Black method without application of heat ( For all the horizons and materials, the determinations were performed in duplicate, one per each sub-sample collected. In order to obtain a relatively low standard error, for available P the replicates were seven (three from one sub-sample, four from the other), whereas for the extractions with Na-pyrophosphate, NH Mineralogical assemblage was assessed on powdered aliquots by x-ray diffractometry with a Philips PW 1730 diffractometer, using the Fe-filtered Kα At Piano delle Concazze, samples of fresh pyroclastic material were collected to assess their resistance to cycles of freezing and thawing. For this aim, 15 aliquots of 40 g each consisting of black scoria lapilli with dimensions from 20 to 30 mm were placed in a plastic container and submitted to 20 freezing–thawing cycles of 12 h at − Aliquots of fine (0.25–0.053 mm) and coarse (2–0.5 mm) sand from the C and A horizons of the Cubania sub-sequences and from the A and Bw of Mt Salto del Cane were observed with a scanning electron microscope (SEM) and analysed by an energy dispersion spectrometer (EDS). The specimens were preliminarily sonicated for 15 min at 15 kHz and dried at 40 °C; then, they were fixed on aluminium sample holders and metallized with graphite. In the A/Bw horizon, the A material was more abundant than the Bw one. The A material was darker, less sticky and more porous than the Bw, while both materials had similar texture (loamy sand), structure (poorly developed subangular blocky), plasticity (no plastic) and plentiful roots ( Particle-size distribution confirmed the field textures, with abundance of sand and very scarce clay content, from 2 to 10 g kg Concerning the mineralogical assemblage, the A and Bw materials showed a similar composition, respect to which the 2C horizon exhibited a lesser amount of plagioclases and a higher quantity of glass and pyroxenes ( From the whole samples, the NH In spite of the depth of this sub-sequence (more than 6 m from the surface), all the horizons were crossed by fine roots, even though in few amounts ( The samples comprised 680–800 g kg The Na-pyrophosphate extracted very little amounts of Si, Fe and Mn from all the horizons ( This sequence appeared to be formed by a superimposition of three paleosols, each one constituted by A and Bw horizons ( The horizons forming these paleosols had a sandy loam or loamy sand texture, with amounts of sand ranging from about 690 to about 810 g kg Mineralogical composition of the samples from this sequence was similar to those of the sub-sequences from Cubania ( The Si, Fe and Mn extracted with Na-pyrophosphate were rather small (less than 1 g kg Tephra collected at Piano delle Concazze completely fractured after 20 freezing–thawing cycles. The 75% of the initial specimens reached a size between 4 and 2 mm, the 23% was between 2 and 0.053 mm, and the 2% was less than 0.053 mm. The material finer than 0.1 mm showed a yellowish-grey colour. A similar tinge was obtained by grinding the fresh pyroclastic material with an agate mortar. The SEM observations confirmed that primary minerals of the horizons were plagioclases, glass, pyroxenes and magnetite. In some horizons, also few grains of olivine were observed even though this mineral was not recognised by x-ray diffraction. Observations of the mineral indicated that plagioclases were present as crystals with a well recognisable habit ( The studied paleosols developed from pyroclastites forming sequences dating back to about 7000 years as a maximum. Nevertheless, these soils may be considered at the early stages of their evolution. Their low degree of weathering is witnessed by the content of a small amount of clay-size particles ( As a whole, the morphological properties of the horizons of the Cubania sub-sequences 1 and 2 indicated that each horizon derived from the weathering of its own parent material and that the parent materials deposited one over the other. A similar condition was reported also by With respect to the taxonomy, physical and chemical characteristics indicated that, according to In reconstructing the events that lead to the formation of these paleosols, two aspects appeared necessary to interpret: the presence of charcoal of The considerations expressed above imply that the soils should host vegetation at any time, so favouring accumulation of wind-blown materials by exerting a trapping effect. As a support to this hypothesis, two artificial traps placed in the Cubania forest from August 1999 to August 2000 collected materials for 1–2 mm of thickness; these materials contained minerals, organic debris and small charcoal fragments, even though there had not been fires within a radius of some km from the area. In field, such an increase of soil thickness did not suffocate the grass. The SEM observations indicated that most of the sand-size grains forming the C horizons were weakly or not altered and displayed morphologies rich of edges and conchoidal fractures (glass), while the remainders showed an altered aspect. Such a grains assemblage confirms that these horizons were formed by pyroclastites deposited in consequence of an eruption and that, after deposition, they experienced a minimum alteration. The A and Bw horizons were formed by weakly altered grains together with corroded, rounded and fractured grains, suggesting that these horizons originated from the accumulation of volcanic material produced by explosive events and volcanic material derived from wind-transport. To similar conclusions arrived Concerning the source of the reworked pyroclastites, Arnalds (2004) reported that in the desert area of Iceland many freeze–thaw cycles occur every winter and that tephra sediments of the desert are the source of depositions of about 2 mm per year in the neighbouring areas. The freezing–thawing experiments performed on the pyroclastic material collected at Piano delle Concazze indicated that 20 hard thermal excursions were able to produce a considerable comminution of the clasts. In addition, the material with a size of less than 0.1 mm had a grey-yellowish colour similar to that of the sand caps and the Bw horizons of the paleosols. This fact suggests that the fine particles produced by freezing–thawing are partly illuviated to form sand caps and partly wind-blown and deposited at the surface of soils at lower altitudes where they contribute to the formation of horizons. Considering the climate of the high-elevated areas of Mt Etna, the pyroclastites accumulated on the semi-barren areas close to the top of the volcano can undergo to dozens of freezing–thawing cycles per year. This paper benefited funds from the project PRIN “Ruolo dei frammenti rocciosi del suolo (frazione >