Wear parts of many mineral processing and mining equipment are often subjected to high stress loads applied at high speeds and at varying angles of incidence, where the prevalent mode of wear is high-stress gouging/sliding impact abrasion. Examples include crusher liners, wear liners in hoppers and chutes, picks on roadheaders, discs on tunnel boring machines and ground engaging tools. Abrasion under these conditions is characterised by a high material removal rate and thus has a direct bearing on wear rates and service life of the equipment concerned. However, at present there appears to be no method for rock abrasiveness assessment under these conditions. This paper describes a new Gouging Abrasion method and apparatus for testing abrasivity of rocks under high-stress gouging/sliding impact wear. A Gouging Abrasion Index (Gi) is introduced, which can be used for prediction and assessment of component life expectancy and efficiency of mineral processing and materials handling equipment. Experimental data from Gouging Abrasion testing of numerous Australian rock types are presented. It is suggested that the results of Gi testing can be used for wear rate predictions for a variety of mineral processing and materials handling equipment working under high-stress gouging/sliding impact abrasion conditions.Abrasiveness is a property that reflects the abrasive effect of rocks and minerals on materials in contact and therefore has a large bearing on the service life and efficiency of materials handling equipment. There are several methods for estimating the abrasiveness of rocks and minerals, used with various degrees of success and relevance. They can be broadly divided into three categories: Indirect methods — abrasivity assessment through a combination of hardness, compressive strength and other fundamental rock properties. Direct methods — abrasivity assessment from test methods where there is relative movement of rock sample and a wear tool in contact under standard controlled test conditions. Holistic approaches — abrasivity assessment via a combination of fundamental rock properties and many varied process parameters and environmental conditions. As an example of indirect measurements, Another example of an indirect method is rock abrasiveness that can be estimated relative to the scratch hardness value of the rock. In this case, scratch hardness is defined relative to the Moh's hardness scale and the volume ratios of different minerals in the rock. One of the more common methods of determining the hardness values is the Vickers hardness test, with the values correlated to the Moh's hardness, while the percentages of different minerals in the rock are determined by petrographic analysis ( Grain size and size distribution, Grain shape and orientation, Porosity, Microcracking. In an example of a holistic approach, In another example, An example of a direct method, based on the earlier work by In another example, As can be seen from the above examples, the indirect methods of rock abrasivity assessment have the advantage of using data which is either readily available or relatively straightforward to obtain. However, they do not take into account process variables for specific modes of wear. Hence, they are normally not used in isolation, but rather in combination with direct methods, or holistic approaches, to supplement or confirm other more relevant direct measures. On the other hand, the holistic approaches to rock abrasiveness assessment are specific to certain equipment or processes and therefore of limited value for other applications. The direct methods of rock abrasivity assessment use standard conditions to determine rock abrasiveness in a specific mode of wear, either low or high stress, or impact abrasion. The tests examine the effects of relative movement of a rock sample and a wear tool in contact. These tests use loads applied to a rock sample either statically or dynamically, under a low sample/wear tool relative speed and in many instances they employ low-impact abrasive conditions. In reality, a great deal of mineral processing and mining equipment is subjected to conditions not replicated by any of the available test techniques described above, simply because of the magnitude of stress, differential velocity and angle of attack. Examples include jaw and impact crushers, wear liners in hoppers and chutes, discs of tunnel boring machines, ground engaging tools to name but a few. Despite its obvious importance, there appears to be no consensus between different researchers on the terminology used when discussing this mode of wear. Consequently, this mode of wear, i.e. gouging abrasion, is variously referred to as either gouging ( As wear dramatically influences the process performance of equipment it is critical to establish a basis for predictive equations to estimate potential wear rates. To date there has not been a test which can be used to establish baseline wear in these gouging/impact applications. In the following sections the Gouging Abrasion Index is introduced and the test method outlined. It is suggested that this test will significantly contribute to the ability to predict wear rates in aggressive applications seen in mining. The Gouging Abrasion test simulates very high stress abrasion under high-energy impact conditions. The testing is performed as follows. A flat rectangular rock sample is placed into a sample holder. A steel wear tool with a 90° sharp conical point is affixed to the swinging pendulum arm of the tester and the arc of the pendulum travel is adjusted so that the wear tool forcibly contacts the surface of the rock sample as it swings past. The design of the test apparatus for Gouging Abrasion testing is shown schematically in The apparatus currently in use at the Advanced Manufacturing Technologies Centre is illustrated in It is essential to ensure uniformity of testing conditions for any comparative test. In the Gouging Abrasion test great emphasis is placed on the dimensions and wear surface quality of the test specimen. The test samples used in the work reported here were rectangular, 80 After cutting, each sample was inspected for any inherent or cutting-induced defects in the immediate vicinity of the future test passes and discarded if deemed unsuitable for testing. If found satisfactory, the sample was dried for 3 h in an oven at 60 °C, or for 24 h at room temperature. Hardness of the wear tool should be of the level to ensure reliable and measurable wear tool material removal during the gouging abrasion testing of a wide range of rocks and minerals. It must be not too high, or too low, as this could lead to either insufficient, or excessive, wear tool material removal. In this regard the Rockwell hardness level of 40/42 scale C was found by the authors to be satisfactory for testing a range of rocks of varying abrasiveness. The wear tools are made from AS 1444/4340-Y steel ( With the rock samples prepared as described in The wear tool is securely fixed in the wear tool holder of the pendulum arm in such a way as to ensure that when the arm is fully suspended (i.e. vertical) the conical tip of the wear tool points vertically down towards the wear surface of the rock sample in the holder. At this point, there is a few millimeters clearance between the conical tip of the wear tool and the wear surface of the rock sample. The sample holder with the rock sample is then raised using a transmission screw assembly until a very slight contact between the wear surface of the rock sample and the conical point of the wear tool is achieved. The swinging pendulum arm of the testing apparatus is raised to its initial position. The sample holder with the rock sample is then further raised by using a transmission screw assembly to 1.0 mm with the aid of a micrometer-type engineering dial gauge readable to 0.001 mm. This ensures 1.0 mm available depth of contact between the wear tool and the rock sample, which in turn provides a 78.0 mm long cord of the arch-line cutting through the body of the rock sample as illustrated in The pendulum of the testing apparatus is released. The conical tip of the wear tool gouges the rock sample on the downward swing of the pendulum. The pendulum continues to travel past the rock sample and upwards to the highest point of its trajectory. Immediately after the wear tool disengages from contact with the rock sample on the forward stroke of the pendulum, the sample holder is rapidly moved horizontally, via a spring-loading mechanism, in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the pendulum travel. This displacement of the rock sample ensures that no contact between the sample and the wear tool will be made on the return stroke of the arm. Upon displacing the test sample, pendulum arm is stopped, the wear tool taken out of its holder for inspection and wear flat measurements. The rock sample holder is brought back to its working position and advanced by approximately 5 mm to provide a fresh wear surface for the next test pass. The procedure thus described constitutes a single test pass in the Gouging Abrasion test. For each subsequent test pass, a new, unused wear tool is inserted in the wear tool holder of the pendulum arm and the above procedure repeated. Similar to the methodology for calculating the abrasiveness of the rocks reported by After a test pass, the conical tip of the wear tool is cleaned of any rock debris and the wear face of the tool is visually examined using a stereo microscope of × Where the wear face is found to be flat and therefore suitable for measurements, wear flat diameter measurements are taken using a microscope of × For a representative value of Gi, a number of tests should be conducted on a single rock sample. In reality, however, this is limited by the number of the wear tools and the size of the rock sample. As each test pass uses a new wear tool, a large number of test passes on a single rock sample leads to wear tools stock depleting rapidly. On the other hand, production of rock samples wider than 25 mm to accommodate a large number of test passes is very difficult due to inherent properties of the rock (e.g. friable and/or low strength). In practice, a minimum of three test passes should be made on a single rock sample, each using a new wear tool and a fresh wear surface. This can be accomplished with three wear tools and a 25 to 30 mm wide rock sample. As was shown by the results of Gouging Abrasion and Cerchar testing of iron ore, copper ore, and basalts carried out by the authors and other researchers on granite, marble, limestone and other rocks and minerals Where stratification is observed in the rock, testing should be undertaken in two orthogonal directions: along the top faces and across the end faces of the stratified layers ( When the wear tool makes contact with the rock specimen during a test pass, the following three results are possible: a groove is produced in the test sample, with no wear of the wear tool; a groove is produced in the test sample, with corresponding wear of the wear tool; no clearly visible groove is produced in the test sample, with corresponding high wear of the wear tool. In the latter case, when the wear tool does not bite into the wear surface of the rock sample, a ‘pencil mark’ rather then a wear groove is produced. In Cerchar abrasiveness testing, which uses the wear tools of similar geometry; such rock samples are reported as being too hard to test ( To determine the repeatability and assess the validity of the gouging abrasion test results, the testing methodology was tried on two samples of a consistent, uniform material. To exclude any possible influence of varying rock morphology, the material chosen for the trials was an ordinary Portland Cement mortar of two different formulations, cured for 28 days. Three test specimens of each formulation were made and each test specimen was tested three times. The testing results and details of the two mortar mixes are shown in  The Gouging Abrasion Test and the testing apparatus described in this paper allow rock abrasiveness assessment for the Gouging (sliding impact) abrasion mode of wear. The results of testing can be used for wear rates predictions of crushers, wear liners in hoppers and chutes, ground engaging tools and other mineral processing and materials handling equipment working under high-stress gouging/sliding impact abrasion conditions. Furthermore, the results can provide a good basis for predictive modelling in areas such as power consumption, process performance and life expectancy of mineral processing and materials handling equipment. Future work with the Gouging Abrasion method will help to ascertain any possible relationships between Gouging Abrasion Index and other, established rock properties such as, for example, compressive and tensile strengths and abrasivity indices obtained using other testing methods. It is anticipated that further results will provide more complete information on abrasive behaviour of rocks and minerals in high-stress gouging/sliding impact mode of wear. The authors would like to acknowledge the contribution of Mr. David Coe and Mr. William Roberts of Advanced Manufacturing Technologies Centre, Central TAFE, without whose dedication the original work reported in this paper would not be possible.