One of the aims of developmental biology is to understand how a single egg cell gives rise to the complex spatial distributions of cell types and extracellular components of the adult phenotype. This review discusses the main genetic and epigenetic interactions known to play a role in tooth development and how they can be integrated into coherent models. Along the same lines, several hypotheses about aspects of tooth development that are currently not well understood are evaluated. This is done from their morphological consequences from the model and how these fit known morphological variation and change during tooth development. Thus the aim of this review is two-fold. On one hand the model and its comparison with experimental evidence will be used to outline our current understanding about tooth morphogenesis. On the other hand these same comparisons will be used to introduce a computational model that makes accurate predictions on three-dimensional morphology and patterns of gene expression by implementing cell signaling, proliferation and mechanical interactions between cells. In comparison with many other models of development this model includes reaction–diffusion-like dynamics confined to a diffusion chamber (the developing tooth) that changes in shape in three-dimensions over time. These changes are due to mechanical interactions between cells triggered by the proliferation enhancing effect of the reactants (growth factors). In general, tooth morphogenesis can be understood from the indirect cross-regulation between extracellular signals, the local regulation of proliferation and differentiation rates by these signals and the effect of intermediate developing morphology on the diffusion, dilution, and spatial distribution of these signals. Overall, this review should be interesting to either readers interested in the mechanistic bases of tooth morphogenesis, without necessarily being interested in modeling per se, and readers interested in development modeling in general.One of the aims of developmental biology is to understand how a single egg cell gives rise to the complex spatial distributions of cell types and extracellular components of the adult phenotype. Ideally this problem can be separated into the problems of cell differentiation, or how cells become who they are, and the problem of how cells become arranged in specific spatial patterns, that is, how cells end up where they are. This review considers this second problem for the case of teeth, that is: how a tooth develops its morphology. This review discusses the main genetic and epigenetic interactions known to play a role in tooth development and how they can be integrated into coherent models. Computational models provide a method to explore the logical implications of hypotheses about developmental dynamics. It will be discussed whether existing models in tooth development provide precise predictions about how three-dimensional morphologies and patterns of gene expression change during development. By precise it is meant that computational models can give quantitative descriptions of morphology by specifying the three-dimensional positions of cells, which cells they have as neighbors and what are their levels of expression of several genes. More importantly computational models relate these morphological changes to a specific set of genetic and epigenetic interactions and to their specific organization of those. Then the morphological consequences of a genetic or epigenetic manipulation can be explored by making the same manipulations on model “genetic” and “epigenetic” interactions and seeing the There are several characteristics of teeth that are very convenient for studies in development and evolution. The tooth organ develops without too many influences from other parts of the body. In fact, teeth can develop Teeth are probably the mammalian organs that are most often preserved in the fossil record. In fact, many extinct mammalian species are known only from tooth remains. The fossil record, thus, provides a relatively good description of the morphological transitions that occurred in tooth evolution ( The developmental systems that are currently best understood are often characterized by a relative decoupling between cell signaling and cell movement. Thus early anteroposterior and dorsoventral patterning in This section describes the main morphological changes occurring during tooth development. This description is merely phenomenological. The genetic and epigenetic bases of such changes are covered in later sections. This section, and most of the article, is focused on the mouse first molar because it is the best described tooth but most of the discussion is valid for many other teeth. In that sense the description, in this section, of the morphological changes during tooth development should be seen as the description of the problem that the model and the research review in this article tries to understand. Teeth start from an invagination of the oral epithelium. In this initial bud stage, the invagination deepens in the underlying mesenchyme and extends in an anterior and posterior direction from its starting point. By embryonic day E13 it is deep where it started and shallow in its anterior and posterior borders ( There is over 300 genes known to be expressed in teeth ( Gene regulation ultimately acts on development by affecting a limited number of cell behaviors (proliferation, apoptosis, matrix and signal secretion, differentiation, adhesion and consequent changes in cell shape and motility). Some understanding of morphogenesis is achievable without having to consider the details of intracellular signaling but by simply considering in which ways those behaviors change when cells receive specific growth factors. In this review the account of developmental mechanisms is based on considering how cells respond to specific growth factors by secreting other growth factors, proliferating, differentiating, expressing some receptors and changing their adhesive properties. What happens inside cells is then largely simplified to facilitate the understanding of the collective behavior of enamel epithelium and dental mesenchyme during morphogenesis. As I will try to show, the rise of the whole tooth morphology can be understood from these relative simple developmental rules and some few epigenetic constraints. At E12, when a starting invagination is morphologically visible, intense expression of several signals appears in a subset of invaginating cells. This transient, early epithelial signaling center expresses signals in all four major morphogen families (BMPs, Shh, Wnt, and FGFs) as well as other genes associated with signaling such as p21, Msx2, and Lef1 ( The proliferation that knots promote around them combined with their lack of proliferation has been proposed ( In mammals, cusps in a tooth appear at a distance from each other. Grossly the shape of a tooth can be described by the relative positions and heights of cusps and the border of the tooth. If, as suggested, knots appear after exposure of dental epithelium to Bmp4 there has to be some mechanism to restrict the expansion of these knots and allow the formation of different discrete knots (instead of a single large one). Knots have been suggested to secrete some signal that would inhibit neighboring cells from becoming knots ( More generally it has been suggested that the spacing between knots in the tooth would arise by a reaction–diffusion or reaction–diffusion-like mechanism ( Reaction–diffusion mechanisms produce symmetric regular patterns in which a number of repeated elements, either stripes or spots, are homogeneously spaced through a (cellular) field. However, when looking at the morphological disparity of mammalian molars it is clear that molars tend to be nonsymmetric and not all cusps are of the same size and height. In addition, not all cusps are equally spaced nor, always, regularly arranged in the tooth. In fact, the disparity of molar shape can be described as variation in these aspects of cusps. Therefore, a simple reaction–diffusion-like mechanism alone cannot account for the development of the morphologies of molars. As briefly explained in the introduction, growth and its interaction with signaling is the additional factor that needs to be considered. This growth signaling interdependence happens, as I will explain in the next section, at several levels. The components of the reaction–diffusion-like mechanism, at least BMP and Shh, affect proliferation in the epithelium and mesenchyme. This affects local growth that in turn affects the amount and shape of the space in which these molecules can diffuse. This regulates the distances at which Bmp4 concentration reaches the threshold to form new knots and indirectly regulates the heights and positions at which new knots form. Thus these morphodynamic mechanisms cannot be understood as the mere addition of growth to reaction–diffusion mechanisms, but, as I will show, represent a distinct class of dynamics that allows a repertoire of morphologies larger than that of reaction diffusion or growth alone ( The next sections describe these morphodynamic dynamics in detail. This is done by introducing the models and how they can be used to explore the implications of several alternative hypotheses about the interaction of signaling with specific aspects of growth. Thus, much relevant experimental evidence is introduced along with the models to make explicit the biological assumptions upon which the models are built. Two computational models of tooth morphogenesis will be reviewed here ( The model includes four cell behaviors: cells can secrete signaling molecules; cells can receive signaling molecules (and change their behaviors in consequence); cells can also divide and differentiate. The model includes a network of gene products that regulates these behaviors and interact between them. Model 1 includes an activator which, as Bmp4 does indirectly, activates itself and, after a concentration threshold, knot formation. The inhibitor is produced from the knot at a rate proportional to the activator concentration in the knot and it inhibits activator production by epithelial cells. The model starts with four epithelial cells distributed in a regular rectangular grid. Three layers of mesenchymal cells lie under these epithelial cells. All epithelial cells secrete activator at an intrinsic rate ( Diffusion takes place inside the three-dimensional space (subdivided into a three-dimensional grid of boxes) of the growing tooth. The system has zero-flux boundary conditions in the epithelium (diffusion is not allowed in their apical side) and open boundary conditions in the mesenchyme (molecules exit the system through the borders). The mesenchyme is surrounded by the epithelium (where diffusion is allowed), except in the ventral border where lies the nondental mesenchyme (where the activator and inhibitor can diffuse out of the system). The rate of activator secretion in nonknot epithelial cells is: In model 1 all cells are positioned in a three-dimensional grid made of regular cubes. In that sense the initial tooth primordium is made of 4 columns of cells (with epithelial cells in the top of each column). Epithelial growth is implemented by making epithelia increase its depth into the mesenchyme. This is made by displacing epithelial cells downwards as they growth. Epithelial growth rate is Mesenchymal growth occurs mainly in the direction offering least resistance (away from the space apical to the epithelium). This growth is proportional to the concentration of inhibitor in each mesenchymal cell. Thus the inhibitor in the model has two effects (although  The lateral expansion is mimicked by adding new cells to a column when it receives lateral pressure in a given direction that exceeds a unit corresponding to a cell size in a given direction. For a column that is not in the border of the tooth, the lateral force received from neighboring columns causes the whole column to displace upwards. Note that mesenchymal pressure only moves from tall to short columns and thus this upward movement is equivalent to the growth of a column (or dome) to the sides. When this displacement upwards exceeds one unit a new cell is added at the bottom of the column. Mesenchymal pressure from a column in the border of the tooth to the border leads to the addition of a new column in that direction (when accumulated pressure in that direction exceeds unity). A new column starts as a single epithelial cell. This way the tooth can grow in width (and this is due to the effect of signals emanating from the knots). Mesenchymal cells are also added at the bottom of the tooth at the level of the deepest column. This does not represent a real biological phenomenon, it simply indicates that more space is considered for the model calculation (essentially these additional mesenchymal cells were already there but were not considered for the calculations). Lateral growth can be biased in the anterior, posterior, buccal and/or lingual direction by increasing the lateral force on cells in the perimeters of the tooth in any of these four directions. There is a bias in the posterior ( In spite of the overall coarseness by which the model implements cell mechanical interactions and growth, the model is able to reproduce, to a large extent, the three-dimensional changes in morphology and patterns of gene expression observed during development in mouse and vole first molars (see The model also has some obvious limitations that have motivated the construction of a second model. These have to do, mainly, with the way growth and mechanical interactions between cells are implemented. These are also the aspects of tooth development that are less well understood. Model 1 does not explain how epithelial cells grow down but it simply takes it for granted. Although it is possible that on average increased epithelial grow leads to sharper cusps, dividing epithelial cells tend to bud-off in the plane of the epithelium. Thus, epithelial growth does not necessarily move cells downward but moves cells in the plane of the epithelium (which changes locally and over time). Although, on average, the implementation of mesenchymal growth pressure may give rise to lateral growth towards the borders, it is unlikely that this pressure is the result of summing up the growth along a column of cells. Instead, it may be more realistic to assume that every mesenchymal cell grows and divides in any possible direction. In the model the cells can only move as cohesive columns in a fixed rectangular grid. Lateral growth in a column is mimicked by vertical growth in neighboring columns. This provides a rather discrete description of space, cell position and cell displacements. Morphodynamic model 2 ( Gene networks in model 2 are implemented in a similar way to model 1. Three more genes are included, The model only considers tooth development from the later moments of the bud stage. The model's initial conditions consist of an initially flat epithelium. This epithelium represents the tip of the invagination before the first knot forms (see Each cell is a three-dimensional volume that includes the cell itself and its immediate extracellular space. Molecular diffusion between two cells is proportional to the area of contact between those cells and their surroundings (finite volume method). This method is used because it allows accurate calculations even when cells change their shapes. The contour conditions for diffusion are the same than in model 1. The initial condition includes the expression of Bmp4 in the borders of the tooth at the level of the epithelium. The concentration of Bmp4 is kept constant and asymmetric in the borders all the time: Border epithelial cells that extend buccally from the midline have concentration set to a model parameter, Epithelial cells grow by pushing their neighbors in the plane of the epithelia. Each epithelial cell pushes each of its neighboring epithelial cells away from it. In other words, this pushing is, for each pair of cells, in the direction of a unit vector pointing from the center of one cell to the center of the other. For each cell the direction of push made by all neighboring cells is summed up and normalized to determine the direction of growth. The amount of growth by a cell is, in a similar way to model 1, proportional to With the above-mentioned rules the model's teeth would simply grow as flat epithelia. As explained above, once the first knot forms two epithelial folds form buccally and lingually from the knot. Sections at successive times show that the cervical loops tend to bend towards the midline as time progresses. In some molars that bending is so large that the buccal and lingual cervical loops get very close to each other at their tips ( Instead of simulating the whole dynamics of spreading and condensation of the dental mesenchyme the current version of the model takes a much simpler approach. The borders of the tooth in the model, analogous to the cervical loops, have a tendency to grow following the interface between the dental and jaw mesenchyme. The more condensed mesenchyme there is, the less steep is that interface and the more the epithelium grows laterally. In the model I assume that Fgf-4 enhances mesenchymal proliferation [as has been shown by bead experiments ( Mesenchymal growth is implemented as a pressure exerted in each epithelial cell in a direction normal to the apical surface of the epithelium. This force is proportional to the concentration of Fgf-4, to a model parameter specifying how strongly Fgf-4 promotes mesenchymal proliferation and to 1 minus the differentiation of the epithelial cell. This implementation assumes that proliferation in the mesenchyme produces local increases in its volume that exert a pressure in all directions. Pressures exerted downwards to the mesenchyme simply displace nondental mesenchyme and have no effect on the form of the epithelium. Then, only the pressures that are perpendicular to the epithelium surface need to be considered. In addition to growth, cells interact by pushing each other if their centers become too close. This is meant to add physical realism to the model and can be visualized as the cells being united by an elastic spring. This simply simulates the inevitable physical resistance of cells to external pressures. A traction force that tends to decrease the distance between neighboring cells when they get very far away from each other is also implemented to provide physical realism. Overall, all of these displacement equations are summed up in each iteration. It is assumed that the stellate reticulum exerts a pressure on the epithelia. Then, all displacements in its direction are discarded (this rarely happens however). In addition, knots are not allowed to move down because they are supposed to be attached to the stellate reticulum and they do not seem to move down in any species examined ( A special situation applies to the cells in the anterior and posterior borders. At these borders the cervical loops form very late while the oral epithelium is still extending anterioposteriorly. This seems to happen at different rates in the anterior and posterior border and this asymmetry seems to be responsible for the anteroposterior asymmetry of the molars. Thus, this asymmetry needs to be implemented in the model. However, the genetic or/and epigenetic interactions that give rise to this asymmetry are not known. The only thing that is known is that Bmp3 and follistatin, molecules that sequester Bmp2, Bmp4 and activin, are expressed in the anterior border of the first mouse molar at E14 (  Although the model can produce a tooth shape that reasonably resembles that of the adult mouse, the model does not currently include any aspects of the mineralization process. Thus, although the morphology of the epithelium gives a clear outline of the final adult morphology, the deposition of enamel may slightly modify that outline. This is specially the case in species which, unlike mouse, have substantially thick enamel. In general, more enamel deposition ( Three points are worth considering in evaluating the validity of both models: The models, implementations and parameters come from some understanding and hypotheses about the genetic and epigenetic interactions involved in tooth development. Thus the models are not statistical models that fit some parameters to a given target. Different morphologies can be produced by changing the parameters of the model but the model cannot be fit to any arbitrary morphology nor do the parameters keep their biological validity for all values. Both models are also able to produce tooth morphologies, and its change during development, of other species, for example: voles, seals and early tribosphenic mammals. Overall these are first (developmental) principles models where morphological changes are predicted from hypotheses and assumptions. More generally, however, these models provide a tool with which these hypotheses can be tested by comparing their morphological consequences in the model with real morphological variation arising from artificial manipulation of tooth development or arising in evolution. Thus the hypotheses of the models can be changed or revised according to how well they explain new morphological variation. This has, in fact, been done to develop model 2 from model 1 ( The morphological outcome of the models arises from the dynamics of the model. In other words, all the parameters and hypotheses of the models (except for the anteroposterior asymmetry) are at the low level of genetic and epigenetic interactions but explain high level phenomena such as the overall morphology of the tooth. This is performed without arguing for the existence of complex spatial prepatterns or genetic interpretations. In other words, nowhere in the models it is prespecified where knots are going to arise. That the hypotheses of the models are consistent with mouse first molar morphology and development does not necessarily mean that the hypotheses of the models are correct. That would require the design and realization of further experiments on the bases of the models. In particular, other hypotheses could also explain the development of mouse first molar. In the next section model dynamics are discussed in detail and compared with tooth development to explain how specific hypotheses of model 2 produce specific outcomes and how alternative hypotheses can be discarded (or not). In model 2 Bmp2 signaling from the knot slows down proliferation rate in surrounding tissue by enhancing cell differentiation. This way cells around the knot are left behind by the rest of the epithelium that is dividing more intensively. This gives rise to a morphologically distinct cusp with slowly dividing cells near the top and the knot at the top. However, in the model, if Bmp2 secretion is totally inhibited cusps still form as long as there are nonproliferating knots. Without knots, proliferation in the epithelium, and the pushing between its cells, results, in the model, in the progressive flow of the epithelium towards the edges of the developing tooth (where the cervical loops are engulfing the dental mesenchyme). This leads to the formation of teeth that are nearly flat. This situation is also found in tooth tissue cultures in which a “tooth” without knots also forms ( Although the model suggests that Bmp2 (and its differentiation enhancing effect) may not be strictly required for cusp formation, the absence of Bmp2 leads to cusps that are much sharper than in mouse first molar. Bmp2 increases cusps bluntness by producing a gradual, rather than sharp, extension of the area around the knots where proliferation is decreased. A similar effect is produced by mesenchymal growth. These hypotheses about the effect of differentiation and mesenchymal growth on cusps sharpness could be further tested by specifically inhibiting Bmp2 (and other BMPs with possible redundant functions as Bmp4) expression in the knots. Similar experiments could be performed for Shh. These manipulations could be rather complex because these genes are extensively used through development. Conditional knock-outs or/and overexpression transgenes would then be required. Ideally, manipulations that produce gradual changes in the expression of these genes from the knots would be much more informative. In model 2 the formation of valleys between cusps also produces, indirectly, the movement of cusps away from one another (for the mouse mainly away from the midline buccally and lingually). For the stages considered in The hypothesis that nondiving cells are responsible for the bending of the epithelium and the formation of cusps is technically more difficult to test because it is a biomechanical explanation that is not so readily approachable from the molecular techniques most commonly used in developmental biology. Ideally, this hypothesis could be tested by inhibiting proliferation in specific locations in the epithelia. However, the enamel epithelium is surrounded, even As mentioned above, bead experiments ( In mouse molars, as well as in many other rodent molars, several cusps have, roughly, the same height. Taking into account that knots form at a distance from each other and that the knots rapidly become higher than the surrounding proliferating epithelium it would seem difficult to explain how that happens. This may seem inconsistent with what is expected from a reaction diffusion model. In reaction–diffusion models the distances between peaks of activator concentration tend to be constant (over a field of cells) and depend on the several kinetic parameters (such as the diffusion rates and the inhibition of activator production). However, in model 2, the initial asymmetric expression of Bmp4 in the borders of the developing tooth results in the second knot forming very close to the first one. The second knots forms close to the side where Bmp4 is expressed less strongly (lingual side). This happens early, before too much growth occurs. In mouse first molar (see In the mouse first molar the third and fourth knots form at the same level in the anterior–posterior axis. This pattern seems to require some specific positioning of the Bmp-4 sources. As mentioned, Bmp4 is expressed in the borders of the tooth throughout tooth development. This means that new knots tend to form towards the borders of the tooth (and away from existing knots). Without this external source of Bmp-4 the third knot forms, in model 2, where there is more space (and away from existing knots). That is, the third knot forms in the midline (in the buccolingual axis) in the posterior part of the tooth. The fourth knot forms then much posteriorly and the resulting tooth morphology does not resemble that of the mouse first molar. The Bmp4 expressed in the borders results in the third knots forming close to the buccal border (Bmp4 border expression is larger: In mouse first molar the distance from the first knot at which the second knot forms is much smaller than the distance from the first knot at which the third and fourth knots form. This seems to be due, as will be discussed in following sections, to the morphodynamic interrelationship between signaling and growth. Other than the hypothesis implemented in the current version of the model there could be other hypotheses explaining the bending and growth pattern of cervical loops. It could be that the cervical loops would bend due to differential growth rates between inner and outer enamel epithelium. It could also be that the dental mesenchyme exerts some mechanical pressure to the epithelium that is larger near the knots and produces, then, a tooth that is wider near the knots and narrower near the cervical loops. As a side effect of that the cervical loops would seem to bend towards the midline. With the model I have explored these possibilities. Differential growth between inner and outer epithelium is unlikely to be responsible for the morphological changes occurring in the cervical loops. Proliferation in the outer enamel epithelium seems to stop by E15. In addition, when the model included extensive outer enamel epithelium proliferation the tooth primordium developed into an inflated spherical balloon-like shape that did not resemble tooth primordia morphology at early or late stages. Mesenchymal growth is, as described, implemented in model 2. The vacuolization of the stellate reticulum seems to be stronger near old knots and away from the tips of the cervical loops. Increased vacuolization may imply higher hydrostatic pressure. This suggests that mesenchymal growth would more efficiently push the epithelium near the cervical loops (where the stellate reticulum is less developed). When that is implemented in the model the loops do not tend to bend inwards medially but outwards laterally. It is possible that the mesenchyme exerts some pressure on the epithelium but the previous arguments and simulations suggest that it may not be able to explain, by itself, the bending growth trajectory of the cervical loops. Thus, at present, the differential adhesion hypothesis implemented in the model is the only one that seems consistent with the cervical loop growth pattern observed mouse molars. This hypothesis could be further tested by experimentally manipulating the amount or adhesiveness of the dental mesenchyme. For example, specific inhibition of proliferation in the dental mesenchyme (locally) or experimental subtraction of part of it should lead to steeper cervical loops. These latter experiments are under way in our laboratory. The fact that signaling and cell movement is happening at the same time has some important consequences for the dynamics of the model. In reaction–diffusion models the distance between knots (or activator peaks) depends on several kinetic parameters such as the diffusion rates and inhibitor and activator productions rates. The inclusion of growth and its interdependence with signaling means that knots can appear at a larger range of distances. Moreover, this interdependence affects where new knots form. First, new knots will appear where there is (epithelial) space for them. That depends on the growth biases ( In addition, the volume enclosed by tooth morphology also affects the concentration and dilution of growth factors. Thus, sharp cusps produce, because of smaller volume relative to blunter cusps, a smaller dilution of inhibitor and thus new knots form at larger distances from the knot in the tip of the cusp (although that also depends on the relative rates of diffusion of the inhibitor and activators). Blunter cusps produce the contrary effect and in general the local morphology of the tooth at each time point affects the patterns of diffusion of all the growth factors and thus subsequent morphological changes. Since growth factors also affect local growth in the epithelium and mesenchyme there is a strong interdependence between the effects of model parameters affecting signaling and model parameters affecting growth. Extensive model simulation has shown that this interdependence between growth and signaling allows for a larger spectrum of tooth morphologies compared with a situation where both things would act independently ( This review has explained how current experimental evidence in tooth development can be integrated into a predictive coherent model. The current and previous models have been shown to be able to produce the forms of mouse first molars and also many other teeth ( Studies in the previous version of the model have shown that the model is also able to predict the morphology of a mutant ( Model 2 has also been shown to be able to produce the morphology of ringed seal ( Most of the model parameters (all except With few exceptions ( In summary this review has described a number of hypotheses about how tooth morphology develops from genetic and epigenetic interactions. By implementing these hypotheses into a mathematical developmental model the capacity of these hypotheses to produce the developmental and morphological transformation observed in mouse first molar have been evaluated. The studies and models here reviewed provide developmental accounts for morphological changes that are gradual and complex. In other words, these studies do not focus on gross and discrete morphological alterations of morphology to identify the genes involved in development. Instead, the focus, and the model predictions, is on complex multivariate gradual changes and on how small genetic variation regulates these morphological changes. The models have been used as a framework to compare different hypotheses in developmental biology. In this way I have reviewed our current understanding of tooth morphogenesis and outlined possible future lines of investigation in which this understanding can be improved. At the same time I have provided an example of how close collaboration between theoretical and experimental developmental biologists can give rise to operative models than can be used as reference for discussion and evaluation of hypotheses, experiments and computational implementations of organ development. I thank Bruno Julia, Janne Hakanen, Alistair Evans, and Jukka Jernvall for comments and Juselius foundation (Helsinki, Finland) for funding.