A methodology for obtaining a nanocrystalline Al91–Mn6–Nd3 alloy and characterizing its mechanical properties is presented. The fabrication procedure, based on the melt spinning method, allowed the preparation of thin ribbons of ∼30μm in thickness. The hardness and elastic modulus have been determined by classical and instrumented indentation tests considering the influence of the ribbon thickness on the indentation measurements. The Martens hardness has been calculated by means of instrumented indentation tests, for which the fixing support of the sample has no influence on the indentation measurement. The results have been subsequently compared with those obtained from classical Vickers hardness measurements, for which some composite hardness models have been applied in order to separate the contribution of the fixing support to the hardness measurement. It has been concluded that both methodologies lead to similar values for the mechanical properties of the alloy, i.e. ∼3.4GPa for the macrohardness and ∼3.8MPam1/2 for the hardness length-scale factor of the material. The elastic modulus of the material, resulting from the analysis of the unloading indentation curves, has been found to be ∼131GPa.From an industrial point of view, aluminum alloys have a remarkable interest mainly for their potential application in the aeronautic and chemical fields due to their low density, appropriate thermal and electrical conductivities and good corrosion resistance, in comparison with other light alloys. On the other hand, the relative low mechanical strength of aluminum alloys limits their use for some specific purposes. Therefore, in order to improve the mechanical properties of these materials both the introduction of additional alloying elements into traditional aluminum alloys as well as the use of new manufacturing procedures have been studied in the past few years. As a consequence, a large variety of high strength aluminum alloys has been developed, which for simplicity have been classified in three broad groups: precipitation hardened, dispersion hardened and composite alloys As an example of the new manufacturing routes that have been employed for the fabrication of novel aluminum alloys, Klement et al. From a general point of view, the nanostructured aluminum alloys are also classified in three broad groups: (1) nanocrystalline alloys in which the aluminum nanocrystals (or aluminum solid solution) are dispersed into an amorphous matrix, (2) nano-quasicrystalline alloys in which the nano-quasicrystals are dispersed in a matrix consisting of an aluminum solid solution and (3) nano-amorphous alloys in which the nano phase is immersed in an amorphous matrix of an aluminum solid solution Metallic materials with a nanocrystalline structure can usually be obtained either by rapid cooling of the melt or by controlling the crystallization degree of the amorphous phase. Depending on the cooling rate, metastable (rapid cooling) or stable (standard cooling) phases are obtained. As can be seen schematically in In addition, according to Foley et al. Based on the above mentioned results, a novel method for the manufacture by rapid cooling, employing the melt-spinning method and subsequent mechanical and microstructural characterization of nano-crystalline aluminum alloys ribbons of ∼30 In order to obtain the Al The melting inductor was sized according to the caster diameter, with the possibility of performing a vertical motion to approach or separate from the roller. Additionally, it can be inclined in a rotation plane of the cooling roller with a variable angle in the range of ±30°. The caster, which is shown in This device allows the correct positioning of the inductor and the caster in relation to the roller during heating. The mechanical system also permits the vertical displacement of the caster into the inductor for approaching or moving away from the caster ejection nozzle of the cooling roller, depending on the pressure of the molten metal. Likewise, a horizontal displacement in relation with the cooling roller center allows the manual positioning of both the caster and the inductor. The roller displacement system permits the rotational movement of the roller with an adjustable speed through a DC electric motor powered by an electronic variable voltage and equipped with DC tachogenerators for the speed measuring. The speed ranges between 0 and 3000 The production of the ribbons requires the introduction of the primary alloy in the caster and the fitting of the quartz caster before starting the inductive heating and melting of the material. Afterwards, the cooling roller is brought at its optimal rate and the caster is positioned at a given distance from the cooling roll. Finally, overpressure is applied to the melt by means of an inert gas in order to eject the melt through the ejection nozzle on the surface of the cooling roll. The optimum conditions for the fabrication of the ribbon are presented in For the mechanical characterization of the alloy, classical indentation tests were conducted employing a Duramin micro-hardness tester (Struers) with a Vickers indenter, according to the ASTM E92 and E384-10e2 standards. At least, five indentation tests were preformed at each applied load ranging from 0.1 to 10 Both hardness and elastic modulus of the Al From the unloading part of a load–depth curve obtained by instrumented indentation, the bulk modulus can be calculated from the total compliance of the specimen and of the instrument In relation The contact stiffness is an important parameter in IIT since it is required for the calibration of the indentation depth prior to the hardness or the bulk modulus calculation. However, Fischer-Cripps It is well-known that the hardness value of a material could be independent of load or it could increase, decrease and even show a complex variation with changes in such a parameter, depending on the material. This hardness-load dependence, known as the indentation size effect (ISE), has been associated with various causes such as work hardening, roughness, piling-up, sinking-in, shape of the indenter, surface energy, changes in material composition and crystal anisotropy, which have been all discussed extensively by Cheng and Cheng In order to conciliate the results obtained at the two scales of measurement, Chicot Eq. In the range of microindentation loads, the presence of the substrate may interfere in the hardness measurement of a thin specimen. In fact, this situation is somewhat similar to that which arises during the determination of the intrinsic hardness of a thin film, in a substrate-coating system. For this purpose, numerous models able to separate the contribution of the substrate from the composite hardness measurement are available in the literature The model advanced by Jönsson and Hogmark Subsequently, Iost and Bigot Another way of considering the problem was proposed by Korsunsky et al. On the basis of geometrical considerations about the dimensions of the indent, Puchi-Cabrera It is important to mention that, although the last two models for thin film hardness determination presented above are mainly descriptive since they involve fitting parameters, these approaches are able to provide a smooth transition of the composite hardness, from indentation depths where the film hardness predominates to depths where the hardness is mainly determined by the substrate. In order to obtain representative parameters of the film hardness, the choice of the experimental data range is important. Therefore, according to the above explanation, the Jönsson–Hogmark model could be employed strictly within the range of experimental hardness data for which the substrate interferes into the measurements, whereas the models of Korsunsky et al. and of Puchi-Cabrera could be used to represent the change in composite hardness over the entire data range. For this reason, the hardness data corresponding to ( Under the experimental manufacturing conditions presented in Section In order to confirm the nanocrystalline structure of the Al As an example, This is an important result, which shows clearly that the measurement of the bulk modulus is not affected by the presence of the substrate. When the presence of the substrate interferes with the bulk modulus measurement, the relationship between 1/ Therefore, the slope of the linear relationship shown in The compliance value deduced from the straight line is equal to 0.668 In order to study the indentation size effect on the hardness behavior of the ribbon, a large range of indentation loads was applied by means of both classical (0.1–10   The film hardness parameters deduced from all the models, i.e. HV For instrumented indentation tests (IIT), which allow the plot of a load–depth curve, the calculation of a hardness number can use the maximum distance (maximum indentation depth, On the other hand, in On the other hand, by studying one load–depth curve, it is possible to use the loading curve for calculating the dynamic Martens hardness. Usually the loading part of a load–depth curve ( However, numerous results In microindentation, the influence of the indenter tip geometry is less pronounced than in nanoindentation since the influence of the rounded tip is sensitive only within a range of approximately 30–50 Then, by introducing Eq. In order to take into account the indentation size effect, Chicot et al. The proposed model representing the applied load ( As a conclusion, for the characterization of the hardness behavior of the Al As a result, both the Vickers and Martens hardness numbers are directly comparable since the macrohardness and the hardness length-scale factor deduced from these two techniques have the same values ( In this paper, different methodologies for determining the mechanical properties of thin materials have been applied. By means of classical Vickers indentation, which allows a direct measurement of the alloy hardness and also by considering some of the models for separating the influence of the fixing support for the highest applied loads, the same values for the hardness parameters have been found, i.e. a macrohardness equals to 3.4