The structure of hydrocyclone was designed with a series of modifications, and the comprehensive effects of the structural modifications on operation performance indices of hydrocyclones were investigated experimentally with orthogonal design method. Based on the conventional hydrocyclone, the structural modifications with central insertions named winged core, solid core and inner diffuser could increase all the reduced separation efficiency, separation sharpness, cut size, capacity and flow split, and decrease the energy loss coefficient. The structural modification of 20° cone with spiral has the same function. The parabola type of cone part could increase the separation efficiency, separation sharpness, cut size and capacity, and decrease the energy loss coefficient and flow split. For increasing separation efficiency and reducing energy loss coefficient only, straight vortex finder with siphon and straight underflow pipe with cone are efficient structure designs. From experimental results of this study, useful clues or guidance could be obtained for the structure design of hydrocyclones with different target indices in different applications.solid weight concentration of feed (wt.%) solid weight concentration of underflow (wt.%) particle size (μm) hydrocyclone diameter (mm) cut size (μm) corrected cut size (μm) total separation efficiency reduced separation efficiency inlet characteristic Euler number gravitational acceleration (m/s reduced grade efficiency with mass flow of feed (kg/s) mass flow of underflow (kg/s) level code of structure design ( energy loss coefficient label of structural group ( inlet pressure (Pa) volume flow of overflow (m volume flow of underflow (m radial position (mm) volume flow ratio of underflow to feed flow split inlet velocity of liquid (m/s) average certain index with structural code fixed as sum of the five certain indices with structural code fixed as axial position (mm) separation sharpness density of liquid (kg/m Hydrocyclones are being used in an increasing number of applications in many industries, because of their obvious advantages such as simple structure, low cost, large capacity and small volume. Beside a large amount of applications in mineral processing, hydrocyclone separation technique recently has got numerous applications in environmental engineering The performance indices of hydrocyclones are all structure-sensitive. To get satisfactory separation performance, a great deal of investigations has been made concerning the geometric dimension scale of the hydrocyclone Consequently, based on changing the fluid flow characteristics inside the hydrocyclone, some efforts have been made to improve certain performance indices by introducing special structural modifications to the conventional hydrocyclone. For example, a diffuser type of vortex finder was introduced to reduce the energy loss by recovering the velocity head However, any structural changes affect not only the target index but also other performance indices. Therefore, before adopting a structural modification into the application of hydrocyclone, it is important and essential to know the answers of the following questions. (1) Whether or not will the structural modification result in any negative effects on the performance? (2) If any, what kind of negative effects will be? (3) Which should be the best choice among different modifications? To answer these questions, a comprehensive understanding of the effects of structural modifications on hydrocyclone performance indices is needed. The objective of this study is to understand the comprehensive effects of structural modifications on the hydrocyclone performance indices, including reduced separation efficiency, separation sharpness, cut size, capacity, flow split and energy loss efficient, so that useful clues or guidance could be obtained for designing hydrocyclones or developing new hydrocyclones. Available previous structural modifications will be included in the hydrocyclone design in this study, and some brand-new structural modifications will also be designed according to recent investigations on the flow field in hydrocyclones. Experiments will be carried out systematically according to the orthogonal design method. A conventional hydrocyclone was designed according to Rietema's optimum geometry for separation Because too many researches have been carried out on the dimension scale of the hydrocyclone, the investigation in this paper nearly did not concern the variation of dimension scale, but focused on the structural modification. However, fewer experimental results have been got on the length of cylindrical part previously, so the length of cylindrical part was included in this study as an exception. In the experiments, the following geometric parameters of hydrocyclones were always the same as those of the conventional hydrocyclone, (1) the hydrocyclone diameter; (2) the area-equivalent diameter of inlet; (3) the inner diameter of the entrance of vortex finder; (4) the length of vortex finder; (5) the diameter of the entrance of underflow pipe; and (6) the length of cone part. The structural modifications were designed for the inlet, vortex finder, cone part, underflow pipe and central insertion. Structure designs of the inlet are shown in Five designs of the vortex finder are illustrated in The designs of the cone parts are given in In type C1, the equation of the generatrix was designed as, The designs of underflow pipes are shown in The designs of central insertions are given in The ratio of the diameter of solid core to the inner diameter of vortex finder entrance was 0.56. The upper end of the solid core was inserted into the vortex finder, and the lower end was above the entrance of underflow pipe with axial distance as 40 mm. In type E3, the upper and lower cone angles of the central cone were 120 and 60°, respectively, and the diameter ratio of the larger end of central cone to the hydrocyclone was 0.41, and the larger end was located below the entrance of vortex finder with axial distance as 15 mm. The length of the inner diffuser illustrated as type E4 was 50 mm, the outer diameter was 14 mm, and the inner diameter of the upper larger end was 10 mm and that of the smaller end was 6 mm. The inner diffuser was inserted into the vortex finder, and the smaller end was located above the entrance of the vortex finder with axial distance being 5 mm. A kind of winged core was designed as type E5 according to recent investigations on the flow field in hydrocyclones The design of the length of the cylindrical part of hydrocyclone is shown in The schematic diagram of the experimental apparatus is illustrated in Because the objective of this study was to understand the effects of structural modifications on the hydrocyclone performance indices, the characteristics of feed slurry and the operating parameters were not changed in the experiments. The liquid phase was water. Solid particles were made of quartz with density of 2650 kg/m The flow rates of the feed slurry and underflow of hydrocyclone were measured simultaneously. Samples were simultaneously taken from both the feed and underflow, and then the solid weight concentrations and the particle size distributions of the samples were measured. To scientifically design the experiments on the performances of hydrocyclones with different structures, the orthogonal design method The reduced separation efficiency of hydrocyclone is defined as follows, The orthogonal analyses of the reduced separation efficiencies of hydrocyclones with different structures are shown in For example, in For reduced separation efficiency, separation sharpness and capacity, the highest average index is relevant to the best structural level in each group; whereas, for energy loss coefficient, the lowest average index is relevant to the best level in each structural group. Furthermore, the larger the largest gap of average indices in a structural group, the greater is the effect of this structure group on the indices. In In the structural group of inlet pipe, compared with the traditional tangent type, all the structural modifications could not improve but decrease the reduced separation efficiency. In the group of vortex finder, compared with the conventional straight pipe with thin wall, only the straight thin-wall pipe with siphon could improve reduced separation efficiency. In the structural group of cone part, compared with the commercial 20° cone with smooth wall, both parabola type cone and the 20° cone with spiral are effective to improve reduced separation efficiency, and in which the parabola type cone is better. In the group of underflow pipe, compared with conventional straight pipe, the straight pipe with cone could slightly improve the reduced separation efficiency. In the group of central insertion, compared with the commercial hydrocyclone without any insertions, hydrocyclones with three insertions could improve reduced separation efficiency to certain degrees. In these three insertions, the winged core is the best one to improve reduced separation efficiency, and then the solid core and the inner diffuser. The reduced separation efficiency increases with the length of cylindrical part increasing, which indicates that the centrifugal sedimentation in the cylindrical part makes a remarkable contribution to the separation process in the hydrocyclone. The code of the optimum structure design of hydrocyclone for the highest reduced separation efficiency is A2-B5-C1-D4-E5-F5. Grade efficiency is featured with probability characteristics, and the grade efficiency curve is also called as probability distribution curve because the curve stands for the probability that the particles with a certain size grade could be separated into underflow from the feed of hydrocyclone. Therefore, according to the grade efficiency curve, the particle size grade related to the grade efficiency of 50% is a size grade of the particles with 50% separation probability, which is called cut size Cut size is an important index of separation performance of hydrocyclones, and the target cut size is dependent on the application case of the hydrocyclone. If the hydrocyclone is used for solid–liquid separation, the smaller the cut size, the better the performance. If the hydrocyclone is applied for classification, the target cut size is designed according to the technological requirement. The orthogonal analyses of the corrected cut sizes of the hydrocyclones with different structures are shown in The reduced grade efficiency curve could be mathematically described as follows The orthogonal analyses of the separation sharpness of hydrocyclones with different structures are shown in For improving the separation sharpness of the hydrocyclone, the effective structural modifications could be concluded as follows. In the group of cone part, parabola type cone, 20° cone with rings, hyperbola type cone, and 20° cone with spiral are all efficient. In the group of central insertion, the winged core is the most efficient one, and the solid core, inner diffuser and central cone are all efficient. The comparison of the reduced grade efficiency curves of hydrocyclones without insertion and with winged core is shown in The code of the optimum structure design of the hydrocyclone for the highest separation sharpness is A2-B1-C1-D1-E5-F4. When the inlet pressure is maintained constantly and the separation performance of hydrocyclone could meet the technological requirements, the larger the capacity of hydrocyclone is the better. The orthogonal analyses of capacities of hydrocyclones with different structures are given in In the structural modifications, 30° diffuser vortex finder with cone, 20° diffuser vortex finder with annular teeth, parabola type cone, hyperbola type cone, 20° cone with spiral, 20° cone with rings, 20° diffuser underflow pipe, solid core type insertion, inner diffuser type insertion and winged core type insertion are all effective to improve the capacity of hydrocyclone. While, in the group of inlet pipe, the conventional tangent type inlet pipe relates to the largest capacity. The optimum structural code of hydrocyclone for the largest capacity is A2-B3-C3-D2-E5-F5. Flow split of the hydrocyclone is defined as the ratio of the volume flow of the underflow to the overflow, i.e. The orthogonal analyses of the flow splits of hydrocyclones with different structures are shown in The energy loss coefficient of hydrocyclone is defined as the ratio of overall energy loss to the inlet kinetic energy by referring to the concept of loss coefficient in fluid mechanics  The analyses of the energy loss coefficients of hydrocyclones with different structures are shown in The results on the inlet pipe seem to be somewhat unexpected. The data show that the energy loss coefficient of the hydrocyclone with tangent type pipe as inlet pipe is the smallest, while when involute type pipe, arc type pipe, slanting pipe and spiral type pipe are introduced as the inlet pipe, the energy loss coefficients all increases to some extent. Whereas, some previous investigations In the structural group of vortex finders, 30° diffuser with cone type and 20° diffuser with annular teeth type are the best types to reduce the energy loss coefficient. The diffuser could effectively transform the kinetic head into pressure head, and therefore, reduce the outlet energy loss. In the group of cone part, compared with the conventional 20° cone with smooth surface, the parabola type cone and the 20° cone with spiral both make the energy loss coefficient drop. The effect of underflow pipe on the energy loss coefficient is the lowest, which is due to that the flowrate of the underflow is small. Compared with the conventional straight pipe, all the modifications taken for the underflow pipe in this study result in lower energy loss coefficient. 20° diffuser reduces the energy loss coefficient by transforming the kinetic head in the underflow into pressure head. Both the cone and the water-sealed tank set under the underflow pipe could prevent air from entering the hydrocyclone and then hinder air core from forming, thus the energy loss in the air core could be cancelled, therefore, the energy loss coefficient could be reduced. With the length of cylindrical part increasing, the energy loss coefficient of hydrocyclone decreases. This indicates that the frictional loss accounts for only a little of the total energy loss, because the frictional loss should be directly proportional to the distance of fluid flow. The longer the cylindrical part is, the larger the space inside the hydrocyclone, and then the longer the retention time of fluid flow across the hydrocyclone, thus the smaller the minor loss and turbulent dissipation in the hydrocyclone, and from which the smaller the energy loss coefficient will be resulted. The optimum structural code of hydrocyclone for the lowest energy loss coefficient is A2-B3-C3-D2-E5-F5. From the data in From If there are several effective structural modifications in the same structural group, the best one could be chosen by comparing the relevant data in Based on the conventional hydrocyclone, the structural modifications with central insertions named winged core, solid core and inner diffuser could increase all the reduced separation efficiency, separation sharpness, cut size, capacity and flow split, and decrease the energy loss coefficient. The structural modification of 20° cone with spiral has the same function. The parabola type of cone part could increase the reduced separation efficiency, separation sharpness, cut size and capacity, and decrease the energy loss coefficient and flow split. For increasing separation efficiency and reducing energy loss coefficient only, straight vortex finder with siphon and straight underflow pipe with cone are efficient structural modifications. The comprehensive effects of structural modifications on performance indices of hydrocyclones has been summarized on the basis of experimental results, from which useful clues or guidance could be obtained for the structure design of hydrocyclones with different target indices in different applications. The research was supported by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation and by the Doctoral Science Foundation of State Educational Ministry of China.