High Voltage Pulse (HVP) comminution has the potential to be used in ore pre-concentration. Mineralisation after HVP breakage is concentrated into the finer sizes and size separation can then be used to produce high and low grade ore streams. Previous work on this technique has been performed using a single particle (SP) testing method where HVP energy is applied to every single particle. This paper presents an improved method where HVP is applied to multiple particles (MP). The MP method gives HVP the “freedom” to differentiate between particles and selectively only break those containing mineralisation. The MP method is shown to result in better mineralisation deportment into the finer sizes, at a lower specific energy, than the SP method of HVP application. This enables higher metal recovery and waste rejection rates during ore pre-concentration. HVP MP breakage consumes more energy but generates a better ore pre-concentration result than mechanical breakage. The ways to further enhance HVP selective breakage using the MP method are discussed.Falling ore head grades, soaring energy costs, coupled with shrinking access to resources are making it increasingly expensive to produce metal from ore using conventional methods ( While a variety of ore pre-concentration methods have been explored over the years, the application of high voltage pulses (HVP) as an identification technique to discriminate particles was only recently discovered and studied at the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre (JKMRC). The technique involves applying a controlled pulse energy to an ore sample to induce mineral selective breakage, followed by size-based screening to separate an ore into high grade and low grade components ( The initial studies of ore pre-concentration using HVP were performed by breaking particles one at a time, which in this paper will be referred to as a single particle (SP), single pulse method. This method was originally developed for HVP pre-weakening of ores ( Four ore samples were tested in this study. Ores 1–3 were collected from a copper-gold mine operation in Australia. The minerals were predominantly veined, but in some particles both veined and disseminated minerals coexisted. The major valuable minerals comprised native gold, pyrite, chalcopyrite and bornite. The three ore samples were collected from different locations on different dates. Ore 1 was a ROM ore sample collected before the stockpile, Ore 2 was the SAG mill feed from one of the two underground mines, and Ore 3 was SAG mill pebbles collected from the milling circuit. Ore 4 was collected from an iron oxide-copper deposit from South American. The dominant sulphides were chalcopyrite with subsidiary siegenite and millerite and minor pyrrhotite and pyrite, and they were predominantly hosted by intrusive vein-like structures. It should be noted that the sample also contains a significant amount of magnetite. All four samples are highly resistant to mechanical breakage as is evident by their very low A × b values (32.8, 33.3, 31.0 and 39.3 for the four ore samples respectively) measured in JK rotary breakage tests (JKRBT, The fragmentation of ore samples by electrical discharge was carried out using a selFrag Lab installed at the JKMRC. The unit was manufactured by SELFRAG AG, Switzerland. The major components of this unit include a high voltage (HV) power supply, HV pulse generator, discharge electrode and a portable processing vessel (see The closed configuration which utilises a solid closed bottom electrode in the processing vessel was employed in the SP tests. Each test involved placing a single particle in the processing vessel such that it was centred below the top electrode. Then, a single pulse was delivered to the particle. After that, whole progenies from the HVP treatment were removed from the vessel and later sized and assayed. For each single particle tested, fresh deionised water was used. The specific energy input for the SP tests was changed by adjusting the applied pulse voltage. The actual spark energy used can be recorded and displayed in the control panel of the selFrag unit. The procedures to treat one particle at a time were repeated until the required number of particles were completed, typically more than 30 particles per test. The objective of the SP tests is to deliver the similar amount of energy into every single particle. The water gap between the electrode and the particle has been shown experimentally to play a vital role on the percentage of energy transferred to a particle during HVP application ( The spread in this measurement was considered significant and therefore there would be a varying water gap between the particle and the top electrode if a fixed gap between the top and bottom electrodes was employed. A large water gap would cause the pulsed energy lost in water to create shockwave (a mechanism called the electrohydraulic breakage, which is not as energy efficient as the electrodynamic breakage that takes place when the water gap is minimal). To deliver a similar pulse energy to every single particle, all SP tests in this study were conducted by setting the electrode gap to be close to the length of the short particle axis. Note that in this circumstance the SP tests were assumed to be conducted at an optimal condition that can reduce the pulse energy loss in water gap. In contrast to the SP tests, a processing vessel with an aperture of 8 mm (round holes) sieve bottom was employed ( For each batch of sample, a weighed quantity of feed was placed on the cathode. The sample volume was controlled so that it resulted in the cathode being fully covered without particles making contact with the insulating plastic lining of the processing vessel. Particles were arranged in layers but the height was kept lower than the top electrode to facilitate particle movement. In doing so, it is hoped that the material will have equal probability of breakage in the “treatment zone”. Particles were then subjected to a number of pulses. The particles retained on the sieve aperture for each batch test were removed from the processing vessel and sized with an external screen (the external screen sizes are given in Several batches of HVP treatment at identical conditions were performed to improve statistical validity of the results. Fresh deionised water was used for each batch of particles. The oversize particles were accumulated and returned for the next cycle of treatment. This process would be repeated until the specific energy (total spark energy divided by the total mass of ore sample in a unit of kWh/t) that was to be applied in the test had been achieved. The gap between the electrodes of the selFrag machine can be set between 10 and 40 mm. In the experimental design, the gap was invariably set at 40 mm for all MP tests to serve two purposes: to maximize the “treatment zone” to accommodate larger sized particles, and to prevent restriction of particle movement by the anode. Particles less than 2 mm were not considered in this research since it has already been repeatedly demonstrated that HVP disintegration efficiency decreases by an order of magnitude in fine grinding applications ( It should be pointed out that currently there is no reference in the literature as to the optimum conditions that should be used for ore pre-concentration using the MP testing method. As such a wide range of operating parameters were varied in the testing program, including the total specific energy input (varied by changing the number of pulses applied to the particles), feed mass and the external screen size. To narrow down the number of tests performed, a few parameters such as the applied voltage and feed size, were set constant at 170 kV and 22.4–26.5 mm, respectively. The testing conditions that achieved the optimal ore pre-concentration results presented in the next section are summarised in JKRBT was used in this study both to determine the A × b parameters of a specific ore sample as well as a conventional rock fragmentation device that could be compared to the selFrag machine. The industrialised JKRBT consists of a rotary feeder, a rotor-stator impacting device with a drive system and an operational control unit ( The four ore samples were subjected to multiple particle HVP breakage under various testing conditions such as the feed mass, specific energy input and the external screen size.  Based on these results, it should be possible to separate by screening the product after HVP treatment into high grade and low grade streams. A cut size of 19.0 mm that is one sieve size smaller than the parent feed size was consistently used to separate an HVP product into screen oversize and screen undersize streams. Using the data in The results shown in Ore 4 feed has the highest copper content (1.26%) of all samples tested and in this case, despite significant differences in the grades produced after screening, it may not be possible to reject the screen oversize because of its high copper grade (0.44%). The results produced for Ore 4 suggest that coarse waste rejection using HVP for ore sources with very high head grade may not be feasible, as there are not a large quantity of coarse barren particles for the HVP to miss. However, it still provides an opportunity for an operation to separate the ore into high and low grade streams and use different processing routes optimised for the different streams to achieve better circuit productivity. Improved liberation and the pre-weakening of the ore, which is often observed after HVP treatment ( In the case of Ore 4, for example, it was visually observed that the integrity of the mineral grains was preserved in the particles broken by HVP ( In summary, it has been demonstrated that multiple particle HVP for the ores tested resulted in significant preferential deportment of the copper mineralisation into the finer sizes for the four ore sample tested. This provides an opportunity to improve circuit profitability by either enabling coarse particle gangue rejection or by providing metallurgists with the opportunity to use more flexible processing routes for streams of different grade. Several sets of SP tests using different energy inputs were carried out on Ore 1 using the same feed size (22.4–26.5 mm) as used in the MP tests. The aim was to compare the pre-concentration performance of the SP and MP methods. The initial intention in the SP tests was to produce a product that had a similar mass recovery to screen undersize as the MP test so as to enable a fair comparison. With this in mind, several SP tests were conducted with various applied voltage settings with the objective of breaking about 56% of the material as achieved in the MP test (ie. about 44% retained on 22.4 mm as shown in To confirm the superiority of the MP tests over the SP tests, a SP test was also performed at an increased applied voltage of 170 kV, the same as that used in the MP tests. It may be possible that a better performance can be achieved using a higher specific energy input (increase the applied voltage in this case) in the SP tests as it had been observed that an increased pulse specific energy resulted in a decrease in the copper grade of the screen oversize product. More breakage occurred at this higher applied voltage with enhanced mass recovery to screen undersize obtained (62.6%), and an overall better pre-concentration performance was achieved ( When high voltage pulse is transferred from the pulse generator in the electrical breakdown process, a portion of the generator energy will be lost within the pulse generator and the liquid dielectric surrounding the particle ( Tests were performed to enable a comparison between the HVP energy transfer efficiency of the MP and SP processing modes. A comprehensive set of SP tests were performed on Ore 1 with particles from three size fractions tested, each at three specific energy (generator) levels. Each SP test at each energy level consisted of breaking approximately 30 (±2) particles. The spark energy applied to each particle was recorded and the total generator energy inputs were calculated to enable the energy transfer efficiency to be calculated. Similar measurements and calculations were performed to determine the energy efficiency of the MP test for Ore 1 performed under the conditions outlined in A comparison of the energy transfer efficiencies of the two modes of HVP breakage is presented in Upon inspection of Another interesting trend is that larger particles clearly result in higher energy transfer efficiencies than finer particles (over the particle size ranges tested). This is expected as it has been demonstrated in the literature that larger particles are considerably more amenable to HVP in terms of pre-weakening ( By contrast, the energy transfer efficiency of the MP test was clearly superior to that of all the performed SP tests, despite this test using the smallest particles (22.4–26.5 mm) and a greater electrode gap. This may be attributed to the formation of more than one discharge channel which allow a larger proportion of pulse energy to enter the particles. An alternative possibility is that the MP tests employ a higher volume of particles, and multiple particles can be affected in a single pulse which gives rise to a higher energy transfer efficiency. Preferential deportment of mineralisation into the finer sizes is also observed during conventional breakage ( To enable a fair comparison, JKRBT was operated to achieve the same product size distribution as HVP. To determine the conditions to be used in JKRBT to achieve this aim, Ore 1 was first characterised with JKRBT to determine the characteristic parameters M, p, q in the JK Size-dependent breakage model (   It should be noted that the HVP MP test used 1.7 kWh/t specific energy (spark) while less than 0.5 kWh/t was used to achieve the mechanical breakage in the JKRBT. Conventional breakage uses less energy to achieve the same product size. The experimental study has confirmed that applying HVP via the MP method is superior to the SP method with respect to the pre-concentration application. This section summaries the HVP selective breakage features using the MP method, based on which the methods to improve the efficiency of HVP selective breakage for ore pre-concentration are discussed. The general concept of the MP testing method is presented in To take the full advantages of the multiple particles, multiple pulses treatment method (MP), the following notes should be considered in designing an effective processing system. The electrode system should provide evenly distributed electrical filed for every pulse discharge in the pulse treatment zone. This will allow particles at anywhere in the pulse treatment zone to have the same probability receiving the same amount of pulse energy, which permits HVP selective breakage being based on particle electrical properties, rather than its location. In the point-plate electrodes configuration as illustrated in Particles in the pulse treatment zone should have a similar ratio of mineralised particles to barren rocks as in the feed in each batch test. It has been found in the HVP pre-concentration experiment by the MP method that electrical properties of the particles in the pulse treatment zone affect HVP selective breakage result of other particles. In a paired-particle test, a mineralised particle may be selectively broken if it is in a pair with a barren rock ( The fragments in the pulse treatment zone should be removed immediately after a particle is broken. These fine fragments often contain high grade and high conductivity/permittivity minerals released from the prior pulse treatment. These high grade minerals would preferentially attract the pulse energy in the subsequent pulse discharge used in the MP tests. As a result, pulse energy would not be effectively delivered to the other particles in the batch. Instead, the subsequent pulse discharges may focus on the high grade fragments generated from the initially selected breakage. The authors have conducted studies of the potential for ore pre-concentration after HVP treatment using a multiple-particle (MP) method. Four copper ores were tested with head copper grades varying from 0.19% to 1.26%. The HVP treated products of these four ore samples exhibited a common trend of preferential deportment of copper minerals into the finer product size fractions. Thus, after HVP processing, ore particles can be screened to produce low and high grade ore streams. Results from processing three of the low grade ore samples showed a potential to reject 44.4%, 30.2% and 61.0% of the mass whilst recovering 86.0, 90.7 and 73.0% of the copper after HVP treatment. Copper grades in the rejected stream would be lower than typical tailing grades, varying between 0.06 and 0.09%. Results from treating a higher grade ore indicated that the HVP MP method would enable a split of the feed into low (0.48% copper) and high grade (1.84% copper) product streams, potentially improving processing economics by enabling separate downstream treatment. The MP method produced better preferential deportment of the copper into the finer sizes than a previously used single particle (SP) method. The MP method also resulted in reduced HVP specific energy consumption and higher energy transfer efficiencies. This was a consequence of the SP method having to apply HVP energy into every single particle whereas the MP method allows the HVP the “freedom” to differentiate and selectively target those particles with higher mineralisation (i.e. those with a propensity to attract the high voltage pulse). The MP HVP method was also found to result in much better mineralisation preferential deportment by size than mechanical crushing when a similar product size distribution was produced. Coarse particle HVP treatment thus has the potential, for the ore tested, to result in a better ore pre-concentration result than when using mechanical breakage. The ways to further enhance HVP selective breakage using the MP method are discussed. The financial support from the