This paper presents modifications to existing relationships that analyze the breach potential of concrete elements subjected to impact by plate fragments. Experimental data associated with a previous study that evaluated plate fragment impacts were analyzed to determine the impactor kinetic energy required to cause reinforced concrete to present a breached condition. This value was compared to the energy that the existing contact charge relationships indicate is required to breach a wall of the same thickness. Modifications were made to existing contact charge equations to account for the difference between the contact charge energy required to cause a breach condition and that required from fragment impact to produce a breach condition. A numerical model that simulates concrete slab breach response was also created and utilized to further evaluate the breach relationships. These modified relationships provide the ability to determine the thickness of wall required to prevent a breach due to impact from a plate fragment at varying impact velocities; however, they appear to be less reliable for thinner slabs and are not recommended for low aspect ratio projectiles.breach throat area width of contact charge ball bearing tamping factor charge mass cubic centimeter centimeter diameter of breach throat equivalent TNT of contact charge mass kinetic energy of plate fragment compressive strength of concrete foot gram height of contact charge thickness of target Holmquist-Johnson-Cook high strength concrete breach impact contstant inch joule Johnson-Cook material factor specific mass of explosive kilogram kilojoule pounds of mass meter millimeter mass of projectile or fragment megapascal maximum nomnial aggregate spall size coefficient normal strength concrete pascal specific energy of detonation specific energy of TNT explosive standoff distance breaching radius regression coefficient second slab thickness Unified Facilities Criteria velocity of projectile or fragment fragment velocity to cause breach condition fragment impact velocity scaled explosive weight adjusted charge weight steel casing weight radius of explosive cone explosive cone slope angle difference between E breach parameter for contact charges breach parameter for non-contact charges density of concrete density of explosive shape coefficient The ability to assess local effects resulting from a fragment or projectile impact is critical to evaluating the level of protection that can be expected for a concrete structure. These localized impact effects can include perforation and/or penetration of structural members. In addition, concrete ejecta on the impacted member face and the ejection of concrete material from the member's distal face may be created. When the damage zones on the front and back of the member intersect, an opening, or breach throat, is created. Breaching of a protective structure can result in loss of perimeter containment and can negatively affect the global performance of a protective member due to the volume of concrete that is lost or damaged, resulting in capacity reduction. A breached response can occur in conjunction with, or in the absence of, fragment perforation through the slab. Breach due to contact charges and airblast due to close-in detonations have been evaluated in several different experimental test series [ A plate fragment was utilized to compare with a contact charge detonation because the high width-to-thickness, or aspect, ratio of the fragment reduces the likelihood of perforating a typical concrete protective element. In addition, this type of fragment geometry reduces the ability of the fragment to penetrate into a target while still creating a breached condition. The physics associated with transferring stresses from a contact charge detonated on the slab surface are fundamentally different than those related to a fragment impacting the slab surface. However, while different, both a contact charge detonation and a high-aspect ratio fragment impact impart energy into the proximal face of the slab and can result in a breached condition if enough energy is applied. Experimental results demonstrate that a high-aspect ratio fragment will not perforate, and only minimally penetrate, into a slab but result in a breached condition from the energy applied to the impact face A simplified depiction of plate fragment impact and contact charge detonation is illustrated in A high-aspect ratio fragment can be produced from many types of high-energy events, such as explosions internal to pressure vessels or large pipes. Modifications to existing breach relationships were made using energy equivalence between contact charge detonation and experimental plate fragment impact data from explosive tests in which a plate fragment was utilized to impact concrete elements of varying thicknesses and compressive strengths. Detailed discussion of the experimental process, data collection, and similar, can be found in Brown et al. The fragment utilized in the experimental test series was an ASTM The concrete materials tested included one normal strength concrete (NSC) and two high strength concretes (HSC-A and HSC-B) as well as HSC-B with steel fiber reinforcement (HSC-B-F). The fibers were brass-coated steel 0.2 × 13 mm with hooked ends included at a proportion of 2% of mixture volume. The NSC, HSC-A, HSC-B, and HSC-B-F had average compressive strengths ( The damage incurred on each slab can be attributed to penetration of the fragment into the proximal face, the resulting reaction's producing ejecta from the distal face, and the subsequent breach throat creation if the proximal and distal face damage zones intersect as shown in Breach findings from Brown et al. Brown et al.  The average Studies that included the evaluation of breaching of a concrete element were assembled. This review focused on establishing the scope of the existing breach experimentation for reinforced concrete targets. The notations associated with the variables in each relationship discussed herein are defined in Using experimental data from 374 tests, McVay Lonnqvist The Unified Facilities Criteria (UFC) 3-340-02 The prediction of breach is made by extrapolating from the relationship shown in Remennikov et al. This model can be used in conjunction with other relationships that predict the breach throat area and crater dimensions due to a contact charge detonation. Prismatic-shaped coefficient formulae were also developed in Remennikov et al. Remennikov et al.   The values determined for As reported in The application of The charge mass can also be expressed as a function of the explosive density ( Setting The The pressure and subsequent stress produced by a plate fragment impact was also compared to the pressure induced stress produced by a contact charge detonation. In order to estimate the pressures induced by the contact charge and the plate fragment, the shock was treated as being one dimensional and the Hugoniot properties of the concrete were assumed to be similar to those of similar concretes The Hugoniot for concrete target was assumed to follow the general form given by The explosive pressure is given in The constants used to evaluate the pressure due to explosive detonation are also provided in The estimated initial pressures of the two different events are different by an order of magnitude. Additionally, the duration of the loading event is also very different. Contact charge detonation is a high pressure event with a relatively low duration compared to the lower pressure but longer duration of the plate fragment impact. The duration of the pressures induced by contact charge detonation are largely dictated by the shape of the pulse produced by the explosion. Using the method of estimating loading durations in Remennikov, et al. The proposed Modifications, shown in The resultant The modified relationships have been evaluated by way of calculating a breach envelope in The The experimental A computational model was utilized to evaluate the modified breach relationships developed herein using the multi-physics numerical simulation software ALE3D. This software utilizes arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian techniques to analyze hybrid finite element and finite volume formulations to model fluid and elastic-plastic response The NSC slabs were selected for simulation to further refine the Δ The constants presented in Holmquist, et al. While modifying D1 from 0.04 to 0.08 was identified as the best method to fit the model to the experimental data, this change also affects the material model's softening curve and can lead to an inaccurate description of the strain-softening of the concrete. However, this model was developed as a first attempt to simulate impact from this type of fragment without any other data other than f The effect of the mesh size used to simulate the different materials in the model was also evaluated. The size of the mesh effects almost all aspects of the model including computational resources and the simulation run time. Smaller mesh sizes require more time and computational nodes; however, smaller mesh sizes may also provide more detailed results ideally, but not always, converging towards a solution as mesh size decreases. Several different mesh sizes were evaluated as part of this process in the model utilized herein. The coarsest mesh size was selected to be half of the diameter of the reinforcement, or approximately 6.4 mm, in order to minimally approximate bending of the rebar where a single element is insufficient. Iterative simulations were conducted with element sizes ranging from 6.4 mm to 2 mm in an effort to determine the mesh size at which the damage behavior began to converge to a qualitatively constant behavior. It was found that for meshes of 3.18 mm and finer the damage patterns were qualitatively similar and in good agreement with the experimental data. Thus for all the simulations reported herein an element size of approximately 3.18 mm was used. In order to approximate effects of concrete comminution and ejecta, as well as to promote stability of the simulation, elements were eroded based on plastic strain, distortion, volume, and damage of the materials. The failure criteria for each variable were selected based on two factors. These include where the material would be expected to fail or fracture, e.g. tensile strain to failure in the rebar, and/or where the material model was in a regime that the model was not designed to represent, e.g. large positive relative volumes in concrete. The concrete material exceeding the relative volume criteria was responsible for the greatest amount of element erosion. The failure criteria specific to each of the different materials utilized in the model is shown in Calibrated simulations produced results that are shown in A cross sectional view showing the high-aspect ratio fragment at several different points of the impact process from the simulations is provided in Modeled slabs that displayed a breached condition were considered to be those where sufficient elements were eroded to produce a visible hole in the slab when post-processing the computational data. Volumetric strain was the most common form of element erosion noted in the modeled slabs. The illustrations in  In general, the computational results and associated trendline mostly fit within the upper and lower limits of breach found in The function in Several studies have considered the effects of contact charge detonation on concrete elements of thicknesses ranging from 8 cm to 40 cm The ability of the proposed methodologies to predict breach performance of other fragment shapes was also evaluated. This was accomplished using data associated with another experimental effort that evaluated the ballistic limit and other impact properties of the same concrete materials discussed previously (NSC, HSC-A, HSC-B, HSC-B-F) against 1.3-cm-diameter ball bearing (BB) fragments. The concrete specimens evaluated were unreinforced and radially confined using a steel ring to limit target edge effects and simulate a semi-infinite surface similar to a slab. The targets had an approximate diameter and depth (thickness) of 40.6 cm and 5.1 cm, respectively. The projectile was propelled into the targets utilizing a sabot in conjunction with a gun system equipped with a rifled barrel. In an effort to determine the ballistic limits of the material, the BB impact velocity was varied from approximately 400 m/s to 2,000 m/s. Two of the targets that were impacted at velocities near the lower perforation range produced a breach throat without the projectile passing through the target similar to that of the plate fragment impact experiments analyzed herein. The impact velocity that result in a breached condition without BB perforation was taken as the average of the two targets that presented this condition during experimental evaluation. This average velocity that resulted in breach of the unreinforced target without perforation is provided in Clearly, the There are likely many reasons why this is the case for this specific scenario, including the fact that the fragment did not have the same pressure versus area (i.e. smaller projectile at similar velocity) as the plate fragment. This is to be expected given that the BB and plate fragments are much different geometrically. Geometric effects in traditional penetration are a relatively strong function of areal density, impactor nose shape, etc. Quantification of the effects of each of these fragment properties cannot be provided because their influence on penetration response has not been sufficiently studied. In addition, detonation wave velocity decreases as the diameter of the charge decreases below some critical value thereby reducing the energy imparted due to detonation This paper presents modifications to existing contact charge breach relationships that were developed from experimental data to account for the difference in energy imparted from a contact charge detonation versus a fragment impact. The new relationships provided in Future research is suggested in the areas listed below. Perform experimentation to improve the accuracy of the breach envelope presented by the new relationships, especially for thinner slabs. Further investigate the effect of impact velocity on the modified relationships presented herein. Develop the ability to quantify the effect of fiber reinforcement on breach performance. Further develop computational model to simulate breach throat and spall. None.  None. This study was supported by the