Modified-cold-induced aggregation microextraction (M-CIAME) was used for determination of gold in saline solutions. It is robust against the much higher concentration of salt (up to 40%). In this method sodium hexafluorophosphate (NaPF6) was added to the sample solution containing Au-TMK complex and a very small amount of 1-hexyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate [Hmim][BF4]. Afterward the solution was cooled in an ice bath and a cloudy solution was formed. After centrifuging, the extractant phase was analyzed using a spectrophotometric detection method. Under the optimum conditions, the limit of detection (LOD) was 0.7ngmL−1 and the relative standard deviation (RSD) was 1.65% for 50ngmL−1 gold. The method was applied for the determination of trace amount of Au in mineral and seawater with satisfactory results.Gold belongs to the group of transition metals. Its products are extensively used in various areas such as the petrochemical industry, medicine, electronics and nuclear power industries ( For this purpose, several techniques such as solid phase extraction ( However, in the presence of a high content of salt the performance of these methods decreases, significantly. Cold-induced aggregation microextraction (CIAME) was presented by authors ( In this work M-CIAME was used for extraction and preconcentration of Au(III) by thiomichlersketone (TMK) as a complexing agent. Analysis was carried out using a spectrophotometric detection method. Different conditions were studied and optimized. A spectrometer (UV–vis, lambda 25) was purchased from Perkin Elmer (Waltham, MA, USA). A Universal 320R refrigerated centrifuge with swing out rotor (12-place, 5000 All reagents used were of analytical grade. TMK, ethanol, [Hmim][BF A solution of 4 Ten milliliters of the sample containing Au(III), TMK (4.8 The effect of pH on the complex formation of Au(III) was studied in a range of 2.0–7.5. The results reveal that the absorbance is relatively constant in a pH range of 3–5. Therefore, pH 4 was chosen. The effect of the TMK on the absorbance was studied in a range of 0.8 In M-CIAME, NaPF The effect of [Hmim][BF NaNO The effect of centrifugation rate, centrifugation time and centrifugation temperature on the absorbance were studied. The results showed that for the optimum conditions, 5000 Effects of common coexisting ions on the recovery of gold were studied. About 10000-fold excess Na Under the optimum experimental conditions, the calibration curve was linear in a range of 1.8–160 In order to validate the accuracy and precision of the method, water samples and related spiked samples were analyzed by the modified-CIAME ( Modified-cold-induced aggregation microextraction (M-CIAME) was used as a sample preparation technique for the determination of gold in saline solutions. M-CIAME is simple and robust against a very high content of salt (up to 40%). Therefore, modified-CIAME is a powerful sample preparation technique for saline solutions and salt products. The authors extend their appreciation to University of Tehran for providing financial support to this research.