The use of conductivity as a means to determine the volume fraction of solids in a suspension of poorly conductive solids in water combines the benefits of high sampling rates and ease of use at the cost of a high sensitivity to salinity and fluid temperature. In this paper we investigate a custom built CCM, to which a third parameter was found to be of much influence: the grain size of the suspended phase. This paper describes a calibration experiment with which the influence of grain size on the CCM output has been investigated. The data give rise to an alternative calibration curve which is different from the regular effective media theories.cross section area (m volume fraction of solids (–) particle diameter (m) median particle diameter (m) pipeline diameter (m) bed height (m) fluid conductivity (S/m) mixture conductivity (S/m) mass (kg) mass inserted in the test setup (kg) mass measured (kg) temperature (°C) reference temperature (°C) solid's bulk velocity (m/s) constant of proportionality (–) solid's density (kg/m exponent in Archie's equation (–) exponent in the data fit equation (–) conductivity concentration meter The electrical conductivity of a fluid containing suspended particles depends on the conductivity of the fluid and the volume fraction of the suspended particles. The larger the volume fraction of the suspended particles, the more the conductivity of the mixture is affected. In the research reported here the electrical conductivity of the suspended particles is very small compared to the conductivity of the fluid. Adding such particles to fluid (water) in a measuring volume forces the measured conductance to a lower value as long as the particles remain well distributed over the entire volume. By measuring the electric conductance or electric resistance of a mixture, it is thus possible to get information about the volume fraction of the different individual phases in the mixture. There is a wide range of application for this technique, for instance in wellbore logging in the oil and gas industry or the measurement of the volume fraction of suspended solids in a mixture of water and solids. The latter application has been mainly concerned with suspensions or slurries with fine material. Nasr-El-Din et al. Holdich and Sinclair Although many industrial applications are concerned with mixtures of fine material in a carrier liquid, there are exceptions to this case. Since 1960s deep sea mining is being considered as a viable alternative for terrestrial mining, and laboratory research and technology development in this field are still progressing The authors are concerned with laboratory scale vertical hydraulic transport experiments of large particles, in which the determination of the in situ volume fraction of solids (up to Individual particles will not be noticed when the particles are small relative to the size of the measuring volume and the electrodes used to measure the conductance, so the mixture will act electrically homogeneously. If the particles and the electrodes have dimensions of the same order of magnitude, then the measured conductivity will also vary with the position of the particles relative to the electrodes. In that case the measured conductivity will not only depend on the concentration of the suspended matter but also on the ever changing positions of the particles, in particular those close to the electrodes. The electrical conductance between two electrodes depends on to what extent the current can spatially develop between the electrodes. Would the current be confined to a narrow corridor between the electrodes, then a smaller conductance will be observed than in the case the current can fully spread between the electrodes. When used inside a pipe, the current is confined to some extent, hence the observed conductance will not reach the maximum level. The Conductivity Concentration Meter used in this research is designed and built by Deltares, The Netherlands. It is based on their standard devices for measurement of the volume fraction of sand particles in different laboratory and commercial applications. The current design has been proposed for the use in vertical hydraulic transport experiments with relatively large particles. The device consists of four pairs of platinum electrodes, placed opposite of each other in the cross section of a pipe section with internal diameter As mentioned, the measured conductance not only depends on the volume fraction of suspended particles but also on the particle size in relation to the electrode size. The design particle size for this device is The electrode pairs are subjected to an alternating voltage (sinusoidal). The average voltage, i.e. the DC component, is kept zero to avoid polarization of the electrodes. The CCM electronics supports 16 channels, so alternative connections between pairs are possible. Combining electrodes 1–5, 2–6, 3–7, 4–8 for instance could provide information about the spatial distribution of the suspended sediment. Other combinations could also be made, e.g. 1–5, 1–6, 1–7 and 1–8 and also 2–5, 2–6, 2–7, and 2–8, and so on. By making various combinations more detailed information about the spatial and temporal distribution of the suspended particles could be obtained. This is especially interesting for future work, but it is outside the scope of our present research. The relation between electrical conductivity and the volume fraction of individual phases is often modelled with the Effective Medium Theory, which treats the mixture as a continuum The review of Banisi et al. The Maxwell model, for non-conductive solids reads An alternative to Eq. The exponent The conductivity of water shows a linear relation with the water temperature In Eq. The grain size dependency first emerged in a series of experiments at the MTI Holland Laboratory, see van Wijk et al. The single batch experiments have been checked in hindsight for conservation of mass, i.e. to check whether the measured volume fraction of solids is quantitatively correct. The mass passing a CCM can be found by calculating: The volume fraction of solids The procedure of finding When this procedure is applied to the single batch experiments with fine sand, coarse sand, fine gravel and coarse gravel, the results as shown in Since the relatively large particles are of special interest for experimental research into vertical hydraulic transport for deep sea mining, there is a need for improved calibration. The calibration needs a large range of The calibration is done by means of fluidization. A schematic view of the setup is shown in The fluidization experiment follows the following procedure. A batch of particles is inserted at the top section of the riser by opening the valve and letting the particles settle on the grid, see Each calibration experiment follows a standard procedure. First the fluid conductivity and temperature are measured with a Greisinger GMH 3430 portable conductivity meter (its conductivity range is set Before starting the experiments, the relation between The results of the calibration are shown in For the purpose of the analysis, an alternative relation is introduced: Note that Eq. To this end, a least square fit is made of the form Eq. The data shows a trend very different from the classic calibration curves, and no other reference could be found in literature in which this is the case. The trend in the data is very consistent. In finding a suitable calibration curve, the first step was to look at Eq. For practical application there is a downside to Eq. The new calibration will be used to recalculate the results of The sensitivity to the choice of The output of conductivity concentration meters has been shown to depend on particle size. For particles with a diameter up to The fluidization experiment as described in The new calibration curve was tested against a transport experiment which shows an improvement over the use of the Maxwell equation. When Besides particle size, the particle shape and particle size distribution are expected to play a role. In this paper these effects are included by tuning The configuration as used in this research project consists of four pairs of electrodes, coupled in such a way that one pair of two virtual electrodes results. The virtual electrodes cover a part of the pipe's circumference, so the shortest distance from one electrode to the opposite is not constant. Regular calibration with water has shown that this configuration does work well for well mixed media (i.e. almost perfect continua), but when a mixture contains large particles, there could be preference paths of least resistance along the circumference of the pipe, where the volume fraction of solids is smallest due to geometrical constraints. This would be an interesting topic for further investigation, and modelling the currents in the CCM plane is recommended for this can provide more insight in the influence of both relative particle size and particle orientation with respect to the electrodes. The experimental work of T. Corstjens of Eindhoven University of Technology is greatly appreciated. The work presented in this paper has been financed by