         1,25D is also essential for the maintenance of a healthy skeleton. Vitamin D deficiency in animals and humans produces defects in bone mineralization, such as rickets and osteomalacia, which are characterized by an increase in osteoid (unmineralized bone matrix) and impaired calcium phosphate deposition [ Thus, although the data from the CYP27B1, VDR gene ablation studies suggest that 1,25D may not be essential for bone mineralization when high dietary calcium is available [ Nonetheless, numerous The osteoblast regulates bone synthesis and coordinates its resorption during remodelling in response to a large number of regulatory signals, of which 1,25D appears to be an important and pleiotropic member ( Osteoblasts originate from mesenchymal stem cells. The differentiation program of the osteoblast has been described for human, rat, mouse, and chicken [ As mentioned, The foregoing studies imply that the particular cohort of genes expressed in response to 1,25D in the osteoblast is regulated according to their stage of differentiation. Differential responses of osteoblasts to 1,25D may result from different VDR signaling complexes. As detailed elsewhere in this volume, upon ligation of 1,25D with VDR and translocation to the nucleus, the complex forms a heterodimer with the retinoid X receptor (RXR). This induces a VDR conformation that is essential for effective binding to the VDRE. This association serves to recruit nuclear proteins as coactivators or co-repressors, necessary for VDR-mediated transcriptional regulation. In short, the interaction of the 1,25D-bound VDR-RXR complex with nuclear proteins forms a so-called “preinitiation complex,” which regulates the rate of transcription of the target gene [ In general, 1,25D inhibits the proliferation of osteoblasts. This antiproliferative activity is associated with the ability of 1,25D to induce osteoblast differentiation [ Type I collagen is expressed in the proliferative stage of osteoblast development and is essential for the tensile strength of bone. Stein and co-workers [ Inhibition of osteoblast proliferation can signal their differentiation and induce the up-regulation of the genes that are expressed only during their progression to the mineralization phase. Osteopontin (OPN), an extracellular glycosylated bone phosphoprotein, is one such gene that, in bone, is secreted by matrix-producing osteoblasts at the mineralization front [ It has been found that the helix–loop–helix–type transcription factor (HES-1) is expressed in osteoblastic cells and is suppressed by 1,25D. Overexpression of HES-1 in ROS17/2.8 cells suppressed the vitamin D–dependent up-regulation of osteopontin gene expression in these cells [ Bone sialoprotein (BSP) is largely specific for mineralized tissues and is highly expressed during the initial formation of bone and cementum [ In the mature osteoblast, 1,25D has been found to down-regulate the expression of BSP and type I A number of studies have reported the induction of both OCN mRNA and protein synthesis by 1,25D in human and rat bone cells [ The characterization of the OCN gene has identified a number of factors that are potentially involved in the development of the osteoblast phenotype. Besides the identification of a VDRE in the distal promoter of the OCN gene, several other promoter sites have been shown to be crucial in the expression of the OCN and in osteoblastic differentiation. For example, the requirement for the osteoblast transcription factor, core binding factor alpha (CBFA)-1/AML-3, is best demonstrated in the CBFA-1/AML-3-null mutant mouse. These mice died at birth and had major skeletal deformations characterized by disrupted mineralization of osteoblasts [ Alkaline phosphatase activity is important for the mineralization of bone and represents a useful biochemical marker of bone formation [ Matrix Gla protein (MGP), like osteocalcin, requires vitamin K–dependent gamma-carboxylation for its function. MGP has been identified as a calcification inhibitor in cartilage and vasculature since MGP-null mice die soon after birth due to aberrant cartilage and arterial calcification [ A question that arises from studies of 1,25D in bone is the source of the hormone Overwhelming clinical evidence suggests that vitamin D is important for calcium/phosphate and skeletal homeostasis. Numerous direct and indirect effects of 1,25D have been demonstrated on a range of critical bone proteins, as discussed in this review, and 1,25D appears to be involved in their regulation at all stages of osteoblast differentiation and indeed, bone remodeling. Future studies will be needed to unravel the complexities surrounding the involvement of 1,25D in the coordination of these processes. However, the evidence for a fundamental and nonredundant role for 1,25D in skeletal biology