Industrial development of microalgae biomass valorization relies on process optimization and controlled scale-up. Both need robust modeling: (i) for biomass production and (ii) for integrated processes in the downstream processing (DSP). Cell disruption and primary fractionation are key steps in DSP. In this study, a kinetic model, including microalgal cell size distribution, was developed for Chlorella sorokiniana disruption in continuous bead milling. Glass beads of 0.4 mm size at impeller tip velocity of 14 m.s−1 were used as optimal conditions for efficient cell disruption. These conditions allowed faster disruption of big cells than small ones. A modified expression of the Stress Number, including cell size effect, was then proposed and validated.
                  Separation of starch, proteins and chlorophyll by mild centrifugation was studied as function of the disruption parameters. Low energy consumption conditions led to extreme comminution. An intermediate zone drew attention for allowing moderate energy consumption and efficient metabolites separation by centrifugation.Microalgae are considered as a sustainable alternative feedstock for different industrial fields: food, feed, fuels, bioactive molecules ( For the recovery of both hydrophilic and hydrophobic microalgal compounds, the wet route processing (no preliminary drying) is the most adopted strategy, and it starts with the protein and polysaccharides release in an aqueous phase. The wet route reduces the process cost due to dewatering. In such a process scheme, the different fractions yield and purity are highly influenced by the method used for their release from the cells ( Mechanical cell disruption, in particular bead milling, is a promising technique for industrial scale application due to its efficiency of disruption and the commercially available devices at large scale ( Several studies were addressed to the description of the process from the mathematical point of view in order to find the main parameters for the optimization. In particular, cell disruption kinetics was successfully described with a first order kinetics model by  Moreover, the comparison of the disruption behavior of different microalgae species ( The aim of the present study is to identify a relation between the bead milling parameters and: I) the kinetics of disruption for different cell size classes; II) the purity for specific cell metabolite release. To this end, the first order kinetics model was evaluated for describing the cell disruption of each cell size classes. The effects of the operating parameters were studied. The stress model was modified and implemented for interpolation and extrapolation purposes. Mild centrifugation was then used to settle part of the non-soluble particles and to study the purity of biomolecules release in the water phase. Centrifugation conditions were chosen to ensure low energy investment and compatibility with low-cost and large-scale equipment. The partitioning of proteins, pigments and starch between pellet and supernatant was related to the bead milling parameters. The microalgal strain used in this study was Disruption experiments were performed in Dyno-mill multi lab from Willy A Bachofen AG (Muttenz, Switzerland). The bead milling was operated in pendulum mode as already described by ( Cell counting and cell size distribution were performed at process outlet, for each pass in the bead mill, using image analysis with the software ImageJ (1.50b, Wayne Rasband National Institutes of Health, USA). At steady state, (after 3 chamber’s volumes) 10 mL of sample was collected. Cells were then fixed with 20 µmol of Lugol’s iodine per mL of sample to enhance the contrast. The sample was placed in two Malassez counting plates and analyzed by a To set the ranges of these filters, the size and the shape of intact cells at the steady state of the culture were analyzed. The cells sizes were between 2.5 and 8 µm with a mean circularity of 0.93. The ranges of the filters were chosen to select most of the non-disrupted cells in the lysates without counting cell debris. The selected ranges, were: 2.5 <    The cell disruption kinetics was modeled as a first order model for the overall population and for each size class. Concerning the process hydrodynamics, the two-continuously stirred tank reactors in series (CSTR) was used for the residence time distribution modeling as demonstrated in The mass balance at the steady state of the continuous operation is written through      The combination of The modeled The experimental Kwade and Schwedes ( the stress intensity the stress number the specific energy According to the stress model, when two of the three parameters are fixed independently of the corresponding set of operating parameters (impeller tip velocity, bead size and density, milling time…), the quality (disruption rate or product fineness) of the product during wet grinding is the same. The real stress intensities and stress numbers distributions in the grinding chamber can only be obtained by complex numerical calculations combining the flow field and beads motion ( The the most intense and frequent mechanism of disruption is the result of the collision of beads due to high gradients of tangential velocity near the stirrer ( only single particles are stressed between two colliding beads for particles larger than 1 µm in low solid concentration suspensions (when particles have enough freedom of motion) ( the tangential velocity of the grinding media is proportional to the tip velocity of the impellers; the collision of bead to particle collisions are assimilated to elastic impacts ( Therefore, the maximal stress energy available for disruption is proportional to the maximal kinetic energy of the grinding media.   Combining all these hypotheses,  The number of stress is commonly reported to the number of particles which is a parameter that decreases in the course of the process. Here the expression of In the present study, the disruption behavior is detailed for each size class of cells and the effect of cell size was included in the In  The microalgal lysate generated by bead milling was centrifuged before carrying out the analysis of the released products. Centrifugation parameters were selected in order to ensure the efficient settling of dense and insoluble particles (such as starch) and minimum energy consumption. Mild centrifugation at 2500 After disruption and centrifugation, two fractions were obtained: pellet and supernatant. The dry matter, starch, proteins and pigments were quantified in the two fractions. The dry matter in the pellet was measured by weighting the pellet after drying at 100 °C for 24 h. The dry weight of the total biomass was measured by filtering a known amount of culture by cellulose filter, then dried at 100 °C for 24 h and weighted. The dry matter released in the supernatant was calculated as difference from the total dry weight of the biomass. The starch concentration was assayed in the pellet by Total Starch Kit by Megazyme (Wicklow, Ireland). Proteins concentration was assayed in the supernatant by BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). Pigments concentration was measured in the pellet by spectrophotometric quantification after methanol extraction ( The recovery was defined as the ratio between the metabolite quantity released in the pellet or the supernatant and the initial quantity in the crude biomass. The initial composition in the biomass was obtained as following: for the starch: quantity recovered in the pellet after two 270 MPa passes in high pressure disrupter (CellD, Constant System) at centrifugation at 3000 for the proteins: concentration expressed as BSA for the pigments: methanol extraction on the intact cells after centrifugation. The product yield ( The purity (  At the steady state the biomass composition was constant over the time. In particular, the protein content was 35%, the starch content was 7–8%, the chlorophyll was 2–3%. The remaining fraction represented 55%. All the percentages were calculated based on 100 g of biomass dry weight. For each experimental condition, the size distribution of the cells in the lysate has been followed in the course of the process time. The effect of bead size and agitation speed on disruption kinetics is presented in The higher resistance of small microalgae cells to bead milling disruption was previously reported by  The difference between big and small cells was accentuated by increasing the circumferential velocity of the impellers ( As mentioned in In In The analysis of the disruption kinetics results of the different size classes, highlighted a correlation to the stress frequency, The amount of metabolites recovered for different bead milling conditions was quantified. The recovery was referred to the selected centrifuge parameters calculated in the In Below a For higher These results suggest the possibility to select the Otherwise, if the target metbolites are the soluble proteins with low level of chlorophyll associated, The use of small beads, corresponding to low The opposite trend was related to high As a conclusion, the optimization of the bead milling parameters cannot exclude the analysis of the product recovery in the following operation unit (in this case the centrifugation). The data reported highlighted that low The understanding of the different repartition of the product in function of the energy requirement for the disruption is a crucial point for the design of downstream process in function of the target product and the refinery application. It opens the way to a customization of the disruption parameters in function of the value and the required purity of the target product. A kinetic model, including cell size distribution, was developed for Separation of starch, proteins and chlorophyll by mild centrifugation was studied according to disruption parameters. Optimal disruption conditions led to extreme comminution. An intermediate zone was pointed out for allowing moderate energy consumption and preserving efficient metabolites separation by centrifugation.