A novel low-intensity pneumatic planar magnetic separator designed to recover and concentrate fine-grained magnetite minerals is investigated and the performance compared with those of conventional wet magnetic separators, i.e., Davis tube tester and drum magnetic separator. The results of the studies show that the magnetite recoveries and grades achieved by the novel planar magnetic separator compare favourably with that of the Davis tube tester. Moreover, the outcomes of the studies show that the magnetite concentrates recovered by the planar magnetic separator showed higher magnetite grades with fewer impurities than that of the wet drum magnetic separator. The findings from the study show that the planar magnetic separator could be a potential laboratory-scale substitute for the Davis tube tester, as well as replace wet magnetite beneficiation technologies in drought-ridden and remote regions where the paucity of water could be a potential economic challenge to wet processes.Steel has been a major contributor to the recent global industrialisation due to its unique combination of strength, formability, versatility, recyclability, and low cost ( Currently, industrial magnetite beneficiation is carried out as a wet process ( The current mining climate has seen more magnetite projects being developed in remote and arid regions. For example, South Australia is the driest state in Australia but houses about 14 billion tonnes of low- to medium-grade magnetite deposits ( The application of dry processing technologies in iron ore beneficiation is a topical area of research. Dry low-intensity magnetic separators are more commonly used for tramp iron removal ( The challenges related to dry processing of fine-grind magnetite particles motivated the development of an innovative pneumatic planar magnetic separator (PMS). The design and operation of the PMS eliminate dust pollution. Some optimisation and comparative studies conducted using the PMS on different magnetite ores have been presented by In this study, we investigate and compare the performance of the novel pneumatic planar magnetic separator with selected conventional wet magnetic separators, specifically, drum magnetic separator (DMS) and Davis tube recovery (DTR) tester. Before this, the study investigated how selected operational parameters (air velocity and magnet disc speed) and feed grind sizes of the PMS affect its performance. The key research questions to be addressed in this study are: What operational conditions (air velocity and magnet disc speed) of the PMS will result in its optimum performance in terms of concentrate mass yield, grade, and purity? What is the effect of magnetite feed particle sizes on the performance of the PMS? How does the PMS performance compare with those of DTR and DMS? The PMS, pictured in The pneumatic conveyance system of the PMS consists of a prime mover, the feeding system, the mixing and acceleration zone, the conveying zone, and the gas-solids separation zone. The prime mover supplies the conveying air for transporting the dry feed into the separation chamber. The PMS is equipped with positive and negative pressure pumps at the feed entry and tailing discharge points, respectively, to ensure there is no pressure drop within the separation chamber. This is the section where the dry feed is introduced into the moving air stream resulting in a substantial change in its momentum. The acceleration zone consists of the horizontal pipe through which the conveying air flows. A venturi allows the mixing of the feed and air and accelerates the feed-air mixture into the separation chamber. Once the feed has passed through the acceleration zone, it is conveyed through the separation chamber where magnetic force, eddy current, and centrifugal forces separate and recover the magnetic particles from the nonmagnetic particles. In this zone, a cyclone dust collector is used to separate and recover the tailing particles from the transporting air stream. The PMS’ inlet air velocity and magnet disc speed have been identified as its fundamental operational parameters that affect its performance. The derivation of these parameters has been summarised in To investigate the effect of the operational parameters of the PMS on its performance, a mixture of magnetite powder and quartz powder (generating feed containing ~30% Fe) were used for each test. The magnetite powder was used to represent the magnetic particles in the feed whilst the quartz powder was used to represent all the nonmagnetic particles. Both the magnetite powder and quartz powder had particles with a top size of 150 µm with 80% passing (P Subsequently, a magnetite ore sourced from South Australia was used to investigate the effect of feed particle sizes on the performance of the PMS and also for the PMS, DTR, and DMS comparative studies. The ore was crushed using a single toggle jaw crusher to obtain a product with a top size of 32 mm and P X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectroscopy, quantitative X-ray diffraction (QXRD), Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS), and Quantitative Evaluation of Minerals by Scanning Electron Microscopy (QEMSCAN™) were used to characterise the ore, the concentrate, and the tailing obtained from the various magnetic separation tests. Additionally, QEMSCAN was used to determine the magnetite liberation characteristics of three size fractions (-106 + 75 µm, −75 + 45 µm, and < 45 µm) of the magnetite ore before the magnetic separation studies. These characterisation techniques followed those described in The PMS experimental setup (depicted in The highest operationally feasible inlet air velocity of the PMS is 25 m/s whilst the least is 10 m/s. Therefore, to investigate the effect of the conveying air velocity on the performance of the PMS, four air velocities (10 m/s, 15 m/s, 20 m/s, and 25 m/s) were studied at a fixed magnet disc speed of 100 rpm. During the operation of the PMS, the movement of the magnet embedded disc assembly is vital for the discharge of the recovered magnetic concentrate from the separation chamber. The highest operationally feasible magnet disc speed of the PMS is 100 rpm whilst the least is 25 rpm. Therefore, to investigate the effect of magnet disc speed on the performance of the PMS, four magnet disc speeds (25 rpm, 50 rpm, 75 rpm, and 100 rpm) were investigated at a fixed conveying air velocity of 10 m/s. This inlet air velocity was selected based on the outcomes from the previous study in After each test, the recovered concentrate was weighed and labelled as the initial mass. Subsequently, the magnet disc was operated for an additional 60 s to recover any residual concentrate within the separation chamber. The residual concentrate was weighed and labelled as the accumulated mass. The total concentrate mass is the sum of the initial and accumulated masses. As was mentioned in the introduction, conventional dry magnetic separators are less efficient when processing feed with particles finer than 75 µm, therefore, it was necessary to investigate the feed particle sizes best suitable for the PMS. For this reason, five feed grind sizes (P DTR tester (pictured in The DTR tests were conducted at the Bureau Veritas Australia Pty. Limited (Wingfield). Each test was conducted at a magnetic field intensity of 0.2 T, a wash water flow rate of 540 ml per minute, and an agitation rate of 60 strokes per minute. For each test, 20 g of the representative sample were mixed in 1 L of water. Before each test, the DTR tube was filled with water and operated in its normal manner. The feed slurry was then introduced into the tube and washed for 15 min. DMS was also selected for the PMS comparative studies because it is universally accepted and applied in both laboratory and industrial magnetite beneficiation operations. The PMS and DMS comparative studies were aimed at establishing the PMS’ performance against that of DMS, thereby providing the basis to justify the introduction of the PMS into new and existing magnetite beneficiation flowsheets. An Eriez L8 model DMS pictured in All PMS tests were conducted dry whilst the DTR and DMS tests were carried out wet. Both PMS and DMS tests were conducted at a feed rate of 10 kg/h. Each of the PMS, DTR, and DMS test was replicated three times and the reported performance indices are their respective arithmetic means, with error bars indicating 95% confidence interval. After each PMS test, the concentrate and tailing products were weighed and assayed. On the other hand, after each DTR and DMS test, the concentrate and tailing products were filtered and dried before weighing and assaying. The performances of the PMS, DTR, and DMS were evaluated based on their respective concentrate mass yield, iron and magnetite recoveries, and concentrate quality. The concentrate mass yield, iron recovery, and magnetite recovery were estimated using Eqs. Detailed elemental composition, mineralogy, and liberation-locking data of the ore used in this study have been presented in our previous study ( QEMSCAN identified magnetite (38%), goethite (16%), and hematite (5%) as the dominant iron-bearing minerals in the ore. The major gangue minerals were carbonates (14%), quartz (5%), pyroxene (7%), and chlorite (7%). The results also showed that the average magnetite grain size is ~26 µm. Moreover, the results showed that magnetite is closely associated with hematite and goethite as well as minor carbonates, silica, and sulphides. Similarly, hematite and goethite were in close association with each other as well as the siliceous and carbonate gangue minerals. The degrees of magnetite liberation in the various size fractions of the ore has been presented in The liberation data suggests there is higher liberation in the coarse feed compared with the fine feed. However, this can be ascribed to microcracking of individual progeny particles along grain boundaries as described by In mineral processing, several separation techniques are used to concentrate the mineral of interest based on its unique characteristics such as surface properties (as in the case of leaching) or bulk properties (e.g. magnetic separation) ( The study showed that variations in the PMS’ inlet air velocity have a significant effect on concentrate mass yield and Fe recovery, however, inlet air velocity variations have a minor effect on concentrate Fe grades. The results obtained from the studies of the effect the PMS’ inlet air velocity on mass yield, Fe recovery, and concentrate Fe grades have been depicted in The decrease in the concentrate mass and Fe recovery with increasing inlet air velocity is due to the high momentum change impacted to the feed particles at high inlet air velocity. The high air velocity subsequently conveyed more concentrate particles which are not strongly attracted by the magnetic forces within the separation chamber to tailings, thereby reducing the concentrate mass. These concentrate particles, at low air velocities, were retained and reported as a concentrate. Furthermore, these results conform to the grade and recovery equation (Eq. At a constant On the other hand, the results show that variations in inlet air velocity had an insignificant effect on the concentrate iron grades. Specifically, the concentrate iron grade slightly increased when the air velocity was increased from 10 m/s to 15 m/s from ~68% to ~70% and a subsequent increase in the inlet air velocity resulted in statistically identical concentrate iron grades with the grade plateauing for both the 20 m/s and 25 m/s inlet air velocities. The consistent concentrate iron grades which were attained for all the inlet air velocities studied show the consistent operations of the PMS except for the high momentum changes impacted on the feed particles at high inlet air velocities which resulted in the reduction of the concentrate masses. Based on these results, an inlet air velocity of 10 m/s was selected as the optimum. This PMS’ optimum air velocity is consistent with the typical air velocity of 10 m/s to 12 m/s used for conveying fine powder described by The study showed that variations in the PMS’ magnet disc speed have a significant effect on concentrate mass yields (the initial and accumulated masses), however, the magnet disc speed has a minor effect on the iron recovery and concentrate and tailing grades. The effect of magnet disc speed on the PMS mass yield, concentrate grade, and Fe recovery has been summarised in The results show that the total concentrate mass for all the magnet disc speeds studied was identical which shows consistency in the operations of the PMS. The key effect of the variations in the PMS magnet disc speeds, however, was observed in their respective initial and accumulated concentrate masses. The highest initial concentrate mass and the least accumulated concentrate mass were achieved at the highest disc speed of 100 rpm. Conversely, at the lower magnet disc speeds, i.e. from 25 rpm to 75 rpm, their initial concentrate masses were lower than that of the 100 rpm magnet disc speed. These outcomes show that a high magnet disc speed was necessary to transport the recovered magnetic concentrate from the PMS separation chamber and discharge it through the concentrate port. The significance of the initial and accumulated concentrate masses as a result of the PMS magnet disc speed variations can be explained based on their potential impact on large-scale operations. Based on the results from the study, operating the PMS at a lower magnet disc speed continuously in a full-scale plant will potentially result in the accumulation of excessive magnetic particles within the separation chamber and subsequently clog it resulting in a decreased plant availability and throughput, thereby lowering the performance of the magnetic separation circuit. Additionally, the results show that iron recovery and concentrate iron grade obtained from the variations in the magnet disc speed studied were identical which shows consistency in the operations of the PMS. Finally, the results confirm that variations in the PMS’ magnet disc speeds do not influence the recovery of magnetic particles in the feed but rather, affect the discharge of the recovered concentrate out of the separation chamber. Based on these results, a magnet disc speed of 100 rpm was selected as the optimum. The study showed that different feed grind sizes have a significant influence on the performance of the PMS. The elemental composition and the magnetic susceptibility of the individual feeds have been presented in The results show that concentrate mass yields consistently declined with finer particle sizes. However, the decline in mass yields was characterised by a gentle slope as the particle sizes declined from P In terms of magnetite recoveries, the PMS achieved recoveries of more than 95% for all the feed sizes studied except the P The decrease in the PMS’ efficiency in processing the P The outcomes of this study show two key findings. First, it confirmed that grinding the ore finer resulted in improved magnetite liberation which led to improved iron and magnetite grades with the finer feed sizes. For example, with the average size of the magnetite mineral in the ore being approximately 26 µm, crushing the feed to P Secondly, the study revealed a limitation on the performance of the PMS concerning the feed particle sizes it can efficiently process. The study showed that the PMS' efficiency was significantly reduced when processing feed with particle size finer than 20 µm. Although the P  The results summarised in The PMS tailings obtained from all the feed sizes studied contained an average iron grade of 22% ( From As was mentioned earlier, the PMS was inefficient for processing the P The studies showed that the PMS performance compared favourably with that of the DTR in terms of concentrate mass yields and grades, however, the PMS’ concentrates contained slightly higher impurity elements compared with that of the DTR’s. A summary of the results obtained from the PMS and DTR comparative studies has been presented in The results show that both PMS and DTR concentrate mass yields consistently declined from the P In terms of concentrate iron and magnetite grades, both PMS and DTR grades consistently increased with decreasing feed sizes due to improved magnetite liberation in the finer size fractions. For example, for the P Furthermore, the results showed that the PMS' concentrates contained slightly higher impurity elements such as Si, Al, P, Mg, and Ca than that of the DTR for all the feed sizes ( The significance of the PMS and DTR comparative studies can be summarised into two points. Firstly, although DTR tests have been used for decades for benchmarking the maximum theoretical recoveries and grades of magnetite ores, the tests are usually conducted on small sample masses (≤ 50 g) in batch processes. This means that any error or bias in the sampling procedure will lead to misleading information. The PMS tests, on the other hand, are usually conducted on larger samples (usually greater than 2000 g) in a continuous process. This ensures adequate sample representativeness compared with the DTR and thereby provides more operationally relevant results in terms of concentrate recoveries and grades. Secondly, the operation of the DTR is conducted wet which means that its application in drought-ridden areas such as the Taklimakan desert in China, where studies by  The DMS and PMS magnetite recoveries to concentrate for P The DMS concentrate mass yield declined from ~54% for the P The significance of the outcomes from the PMS and DMS comparative studies have been highlighted below. First, not only did the PMS achieve significantly higher concentrate iron grades in all the size fractions studied, but it also produced cleaner concentrates than the DMS. This is especially important in the iron commodity market where prices depend on the quality of the iron product. For example, the Platts Iron Ore Index ( Secondly, because gangues in steel mill feeds are converted to gaseous emissions and slag during steelmaking, iron concentrates containing fewer impurities will lead to more environmentally friendly steelmaking. In that case, the use of the concentrates obtained from the PMS tests offers a smaller carbon footprint and slag disposal facility than those obtained from the DMS. On the other hand, the quality of the concentrates obtained from both the PMS and DMS can be improved before steelmaking through cleaner magnetic separation stages, silica removal by cationic flotation, and removal of phosphorous, silicon, aluminium, and sulphur by caustic and acid leaching ( Comparative studies between an innovative dry magnetic separator and wet magnetic separators, i.e., DTR and DMS, were performed. Before that, the effect of selected operational parameters (air velocity, magnet disc speed, and feed particle sizes) on the performance of the PMS was investigated to optimise it. The studies show optimum PMS performance at an inlet air velocity of 10 m/s and a magnet disc speed of 100 rpm. Furthermore, the results show that the PMS is less efficient in processing feed with particle size finer than 20 µm. Additionally, the comparative studies show that the PMS performance agrees favourably with that of DTR in terms of concentrate mass yield, and iron and magnetite grades. On the other hand, the PMS generated magnetite concentrates containing higher iron and magnetite grades with fewer gangue particles than the DMS. The findings from the studies indicate that the PMS could potentially replace DTR (on laboratory-scale) and DMS, especially in drought-ridden and remote areas where the scarcity of water can potentially impede the economic application of wet beneficiation technologies for magnetite processing.  I (First author: Emmanuel Baawuah) declare that I have no financial and personal relationship with other people or organisation that could inappropriately influence (bias) this work. This research work is part of a PhD research which is aimed at the application of novel dry processing technologies for magnetite beneficiation. The second author (Christopher Kelsey) provided access to the technology. The third (Prof Jonas Addai-Mensah) and fourth authors (Prof William Skinner) are my research supervisors and advisors. The Australian Government Research Training Program Scholarship and the Future Industries Institute of the University of South Australia are thankfully acknowledged for the financial support toward the Ph.D. studies of Emmanuel Baawuah. The authors also acknowledge Bureau Veritas Australia Pty. Ltd (Wingfield) for allowing the use of their DTR equipment for this work. Finally, the Technical Services of the Future Industries Institute of University of South Australia are also acknowledged for the QEMSCAN and SEM-EDS analyses. The PMS separation chamber can be divided into four sections as shown in This is the feed entry point where dry feed is conveyed in air suspension (dilute phase) through the separation chamber. The dominant forces in In this section, the conveying air travels in a semi-circular path which imparts a centrifugal force to the particles. The cyclone effect of the centrifugal force drags the nonmagnetic particles and other magnetic particles that are weakly attracted by the magnetic field in the separation chamber towards the peripherals of the separation chamber effecting their separation from the strongly attracted magnetic particles. The conveying air carries the nonmagnetic particles out of the separation chamber through This is the section where the nonmagnetic particles are transported out of the separation chamber and discharged as tailings. Like The attracted magnetic particles are conveyed to Assuming a particle of unit mass is conveyed via an upward air stream with velocity As mentioned earlier, at the points Furthermore, for nonmagnetic particles to travel along with the air stream and discharge at points where These constants