Water-only cyclone (WOC) is an autogenous medium cyclone which performs a gravity separation using water as a separating fluid. Modified water-only cyclones (MWOC) are presently being used for fine coal cleaning in only two washeries in Turkey. In this study, MWOC was designed, installed via local facilities, and then implemented for the treatment of fine coal. The effects of the major parameters of MWOC, such as cyclone diameter, vortex finder diameter and apex diameter, on washing performance were investigated in detail. Then, the results obtained through the MWOC under optimum conditions were compared with those obtained through spiral and flotation. The tests show that the MWOC produced clean coal equal in quality to that produced by the spiral and flotation machine. However, the clean coal yield of the MWOC is quite a bit lower than that of the spiral and flotation machine, and the reject contains a significant amount of combustible matter. In summary, it was concluded that the MWOC can be used in washeries for pre-enrichment due to its simple structure, easy-control features and lower operational costs.In coal industries around the world, the percentage of − A better technical and more economic option for cleaning coal fines that is proving promising and effective is water-only cyclone. A water-only cyclone is a centrifugal gravity-based concentrator which can accept coal in the size range up to 3.0 Various studies exist in the literature about WOCs, whose industrial usage is not very prevalent. Some of the more significant of these studies are summarized below along with their findings. Patil et al. No study of enrichment of Turkish coals using a water-only cyclone can be found in the literature. Also, the WOC was not modified before the use; however, some design parameters were altered to test its performance. In this study, experiments were implemented for cleaning of − In a CWOC ( The experimental studies were conducted in a washery owned by Karbomet Mining Company in Zonguldak province, Turkey. The fine bituminous ROM coal used in this study was collected from the fine beneficiation circuit which is fed into the washery. The ash content of the coal sample ranges between 45% and 56%. This washery produces metallurgical coals with a desirable ash content of 10–15%, which is suitable for coking. Coal samples were collected from each batch sent to the washery for a month, and then these samples with different ash contents were blended at the end of a month to obtain an average ROM coal sample for the study. The average ash content of the ROM coal samples are given in In the existing Karbomet plant, coarse particles (− As seen in the literature reviews, there are many parameters affecting the CWOC's performance. However, this study focused on the effects of the major parameters having an effect on the WOC's performance, which were cyclone diameter (CD), apex diameter (AD) and the vortex finder diameter (VFD). CWOCs made of stainless steel at diameters of 400, 600 and 800 For performance evaluation, screen products +  As can be seen in The increase in the cyclone diameter brought little increase in the clean coal yield in either WOC. The average clean coal yield is 23.60% using 400 Many researchers emphasized that the vortex finder and apex diameters are major parameters affecting a WOC's performance. In general, as the VFD becomes larger, the amount of the material received by the cyclone's overflow increases and, as a result, the quality of clean coal decreases while the yield increases. It is reported that if the VFD is reduced, cleaner coals can be obtained with lower yield values. On the other hand, if the cyclone's AD is made larger, the amount of the material received by the cyclone's overflow decreases, as is the case when making the VFD smaller, and so the clean coal yield decreases. However, clean coal with lower ash content may be produced  Spigots (apex) with diameters of 80, 100 and 120 In previous years, fine coals ranging between sizes of − As can be seen in  This study aimed to research the effects of some major design parameters of the CWOC and MWOC separators. To this end, the MWOC's performance in the beneficiation of − An MWOC consisting of 2 cyclones with central feed and running in horizontal position can produce clean coals with similar ash content with those produced by a CWOC. However, higher clean coal yields were obtained. This can be attributed to the differences in design of the cyclone and its horizontal position when running. As the cyclone diameter of the MWOC was bigger than the other small cyclones, the ash content of the clean coal increased; however, the yield of clean coal did not change significantly. Performance tests of cyclones at diameters of 400, 600 and 800 An increase in the MWOC's vortex finder diameter caused an increase in clean coal yield; however, the product's quality decreased. An increase in spigot (apex) diameter caused a decrease in clean coal yield; however, the quality of the product improved. The optimum values for the beneficiation of − In a comparison of the results produced by the MWOC with those produced by the spiral concentrator and the flotation machine, it was seen that the MWOC produced high quality clean coal comparable with that of the spiral concentrator and the flotation machine. However, the MWOC showed quite poor performance compared to the spiral concentrator and the flotation machine from the point of view of clean coal yield. In conclusion, the MWOC can compete with other devices in ash rejection; however, their performance is poor from the point of view of clean coal yield, and thus they should be seen as a pre-treatment device. This work was supported by the