Two flotation models, particle at the liquid–gas interface and particle–bubble aggregate, both based on balance of forces, were used for evaluation of experimental data relating the maximum size of floating particles d
                     max and their advancing contact angle. It was noticed, by comparing the experimental and model data, that for a given flotation device and material the maximum size of floating particle d
                     max increases with increasing particle hydrophobicity and at the same time the acceleration a, experienced by the d
                     max particle at the moment of rupture, decreases with particle hydrophobicity. The acceleration values change with cell dynamics and type of flotation device and are usually not available, therefore empirical apparent cell constants A, which characterize flotation dynamics and relate particle acceleration with advancing contact angle have been proposed instead. The values of A were determined by evaluation of experimental data relating d
                     max and advancing (detachment) contact angle for constant: particle density, medium density, surface tension, and flotation cell dynamics. Since A depends on particle density, a tentative formula was proposed to link A with density-independent flotation cell constant Ao
                     . The values of Ao
                      for selected flotation cells were calculated and presented.
                  Using quartz as an example, it was shown in the paper that a positive advancing contact angle does not guarantee flotation because a prerequisite for flotation is non-zero receding contact angle.Flotation is used for upgrading of ores and other materials (waste paper), and is a dynamic process resulting from interaction of forces acting in the bubble–particle–water system. The capillary, gravity, and inertia forces are essential flotation factors. A special role is played by the inertia force because it characterizes the dynamics of flotation and greatly reduces the limit of coarse particle flotation. The significance of the inertia in flotation of coarse particles has been discussed in many papers, for instance by Flotation can occur when a particle, which is immersed in liquid, attaches to a gas interface or bubble. Particles float when the adhesive forces exceed the detachment forces and the coarse particle limit of flotation is determined by equality of the adhesive and detaching forces. The main forces operating at the moment of spherical particle–gas phase rupture are ( gravity,  buoyancy,  hydrostatic pressure,  pressure inside bubble,  capillary,  inertia, There is some dispute regarding the formula for the inertia force,  Another formula for the inertia force Forces which are used for calculating the maximum size of particles depend on the model of the process. Usually two models: particle at the liquid–gas interface (so-called particle moving through the liquid/gas interface or film flotation) ( For the model of particle at the liquid–gas interface the balance of forces is Eq. Considering flotation as a particle attached to a bubble ( Eqs. A comparison of model and experimental data relating the maximum size of floating particles and detachment contact angles was performed utilizing the data and procedure of The maximum size of floating particles A comparison of the particle at the liquid–gas interface model and empirical data is presented in  Since particle acceleration during detachment depends on particle hydrophobicity, a direct application of the equations resulting from the model for predicting The Schott funnel (SF) technique was previously described by Data on quartz flotation in the presence of dodecyl amine (DDA) in a Jameson cell ( The results of tests performed in a modified multi-bubble Hallimond tube were described in an unpublished source ( To relate Different mathematical formulas were tried and the best approximation was achieved with the formula For a given mineral, Now parameter According to According to The increasing dynamics of flotation results in decreasing maximum size of floating particle. It means that for upper limit particle size under more turbulent hydrodynamic condition, flotation recovery decreases. This was previously observed by In this study surface-modified methylated quartz was considered because pristine quartz is non-floatable material providing only some entrainment in flotation experiments. On the other hand many authors ( The maximum size of floating particles depends on their size, density, hydrophobicity, dynamics of the process, and other parameters. A comparison of experimental data and flotation models indicates that acceleration Instead of using acceleration constant The flotation cell constant Eq. Financial support by the Polish Statutory Research Grant (343-165) is greatly acknowledged. Fellowship co-financed by European Union within European Social Fund.