A grout penetrability method based on explicit grout forehead pressure (EGFP) algorithm for joints and cracks in rock mass is developed. This algorithm is more accurate and effective, and demands less computation power and time compared to previously used methods, for almost all types of fluids, under different flow regimes. The pre-existing pore pressure in rock joints is also considered in the present developed algorithm. EGFP does not require a complex program for calculating penetration length, and any simple calculator-based program also could be utilized to implement it. This algorithm is flexible enough to develop to a network of conductors. EGFP divides the conductor to a number of elements and continues the calculations to where the grout forehead gets stopped in the conductor owing to limitation factors. In the present algorithm there is no initial experimental prediction of total penetration length or flow rate of grout fluid that causes increases the accuracy. A series of laboratory tests were conducted and were used to validate and calibrate the numerical results. The results obtained by present algorithm show good agreement with experimental results.Joints and cracks in the rock mass often reduce resistance properties and increase the permeability of a fractured rock mass. Since the early nineteenth century, after the grouting technique was invented by Charles Berrgny for improving and sealing rock masses, this method has been faced with ever increasing usage. Nowadays, grout operation is an important part of engineering works in weak rocks, and has a great impact on overall cost and time of project. Therefore, study of the effect of important parameters, such as operational, rheological and geometrical parameters on penetrability of grout fluid, is critical. In this case, the amount of grout uptake and spreading area, which prevents additional time and expense in grouting operation in each borehole, should be evaluated. In general, some limitations could be seen in previous methods, for instance, a number of them uses a general equation (traditionally Lombardi equation) to predict the maximum penetration length which is limited by various limiting factors including filtration and pore water pressure which are not accurate methods according to the results provided by other researchers. What is taken into consideration in this study is utilization of an explicit grout forehead pressure (EGFP) criterion as the core of calculations. It is the main deference between this study and many previous studies that were described above. Using EGFP there is no need to predict maximum penetration length by an experimental equation which causes enhancement in accuracy, as will be explained in the following sections. Also EGFP predicts penetration length without using of a complex software source, in the other word, any simple mathematical based program also could be utilized to implement it. If joints are considered as conductors in an electrical field, the differential pressure required to inject grout into the joints can be simulated by electrical potential difference. Therefore the grout pressure drop and calculations of pressure changes in multi-ways can be simulated using the laws govern the flow of electricity in series or parallel circuits. Analogously to most of the previous reported research works, in this study a joint is considered to be a pair of parallel plates with unit width. Rheology is the science of deformability and flow of material. To simulate the state of flow, the rheology or structural relationships of fluid must be known. In most cases, the material behavior can be described with various rheological models. A common example of a Newtonian fluid is water. Fluids such as very fine-grained cement-based grouts (silicasol) and also bacterial grouts (MICP) are described by this model. A Bingham fluid is a viscoplastic fluid which behaves as a rigid material at low shear stresses and as a viscous fluid at high shear stresses. This rheological model is used most often as the main rheological model for cement-based grouts, in which relationship between shear stress and velocity gradient is of the form of (  Power-law fluids can be divided into three subcategories according to the flow behavior index. As shown in According to mentioned contents, because the Newtonian rheological model is obtained from both Bingham and power-law rheological models ( Since the basis of the calculations in this study is fully explicit, the joints must be divided into a number of elements with specified lengths, which constitutes computational steps. It is assumed that all parameters are constant in each element, and each parameter is allowed to change only when computations of a step continue to the next step. A joint with length At each element along a segment of a conductance, viscosity of grout fluid which controls grout hardening, is updated and becomes an initial condition for calculating grout pressure head in the next element. Equivalent hydraulic diameter for a pair of parallel plates is calculated from the equation below, and mean velocity in each element which is the initial value of grout slurry velocity is considered equal to the mean velocity of grout slurry in the previous one: There exist several factors that limit the flow of grout fluid. These factors consist of the total pressure drop, pore pressure effect, time dependent grout hardening, filtration phenomenon and user defined limitations which are described in detail in the following. One of the grout flow limiting factors into the joints is total pressure drop, which includes major pressure drop due to friction and minor pressure drop inside the separation point of multi-paths. The major pressure drop, which is calculated from Eq. If the flow regime is laminar and fluid type is Bingham, the Darcy friction factor is estimated from the Swamee–Aggarwal equation which is explicitly obtained by solving the Buckingham–Reiner equation If the flow regime and fluid type is turbulent and Bingham respectively, the Darby and Melson empirical formulation is used to obtain Darcy friction factor If fluid type and flow regime is power-law and laminar respectively, the Darcy friction factor is obtained from Eq. Another factor that limits the flow influenced by the grout forehead pressure is the pressure drop due to friction inside the separation location of multi-paths. In this location an additional pressure drop which is called minor pressure drop is occurred and calculated as Pre-existing initial pore pressure inside the conductance may limit grout forehead pressure. In rock mass media, pore fluid pressure is created by the water head. If the grout forehead is below the water table, the pore fluid resistant pressure is calculated for each element of a joint using With considering aforementioned pressure drops, if Once With the availability of the element length ( Many researchers have studied the time dependent behavior of grout fluid, especially time dependent hardening. In this study, to obtain fluid viscosity in each specific computational step, the total time spent in the previous steps is placed in Eq. In relation to grouting, filtration of the suspension can have a great influence on grout spread and sealing effect. This is why it is important to incorporate the limited penetration ability a grout possesses in the description of grout behavior. Filtration can occur when a constriction in the flow path is met and the particles are withheld from passing. It may be seen as obvious that a particle in the paste is unable to penetrate if the aperture is smaller than itself. Ericsson et al. considered the filtration as a mechanical phenomenon. Thus, they attributed the filtration directly to the particle size and joints aperture. The minimum aperture at which filtration does not occur is denoted as Values of the critical aperture ( As previously discussed, the primary entry point into the grout joints, injection pressure to the initial pressure decreases continuously. From the first moment of entering the grout fluid into the joints, grout forehead pressure is continuously reduced than primary pressure. Therefore, it is expected that grout fluid is eventually stopped after traversing a specified distance in the joints. On the other hand, when the final pressure in the last element becomes zero, then the present algorithm is finished. In this study, the point where grout forehead pressure is zero, is called the “cutoff” point. When the explicit computation process is stopped, coordination of cutoff point and also the grouting time are accounted. If the calculated grout forehead pressure is not zero at the end of a segment, the algorithm indicates the coordinates of the endpoint of the segments as a “cutout” point and its final pressure is also calculated. In order to validate the developed algorithm for predicting grout penetration length in a conductance, a series of laboratory tests were conducted. The test apparatus consists of four main sections: an air pressure compressor, a reservoir tank to compress grout fluid by air pressure, an aerator shower reservoir tank which automatically makes possible to adjust grout fluid pressure to a desired level and thin transparent tubes with an inner diameter of 2 Four types of motor oils with different fluid viscosity was used as the grout fluid. All four types of oils have almost the same density 800 After the air pressure compressor is turned on, the pressured air flow throw the reservoir tank which causes the fluid potentially charged. The aerator shower reservoir tank adjust amount of desired pressure according to a predetermined schedule. Pressured fluid runs into transparent tubes. Distance between start point and stoppage point of grout forehead is considered as grout penetration length. The experiments were carried out in three stages. In the first stage, considering a constant reservoir pressure and fluid type, it was attempted to determine the fluid penetration length at different time intervals. In the next stage, for each fluid type and grouting durability time ( As shown in  Grout dynamic viscosity has also a great impact on penetration length in a conductance. As can be seen in The presented grout penetrability method in this study is based on EGFP algorithm for joints and cracks in rock mass accurately and effectively. Another advantage of this method compared to many previous methods is the lack of computational limitations in closed form complex equations owing to use of fully explicit computational algorithm. The pre-exiting pore pressure in rock joints is also considered in the developed algorithm, beside an accurate calculation of the grouting time and fast computing process. The results of the prediction of the algorithm and the results of laboratory tests performed in this study were compared and validated. The grout penetration length is increased when grouting time is increased but after a certain level of time the rate of penetrability is decreased. According to downward concavity and steady declination of slope of the curve, it could be concluded that after a specified period of grouting time, grouting operation is not efficient and results in a waste of time and money. With increasing initial grouting pressure from 0 to 100