In this paper, gamma-crotonlatone (GCL) was tested as an additive to electrolyte solutions of 1M LiPF6 EC:DMC (1:1, vol) for lithium-ion batteries. Smaller volume amount in the order of 10−6 GCL improved the cyclability of MCMB electrode, and decreased the impedance of MCMB/Li cell. The results of cyclic voltammetry show that the GCL has higher reduction decomposition potential at about 2.1V. The surface morphologies and chemistry of the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) film formed on MCMB electrodes cycled in 1M LiPF6 EC:DMC with and without GCL were studied by SEM, FTIR and XPS analyses, and the results show that a uniform, stable and low-resistive SEI film was formed on the surface of MCMB electrode, which cause the excellent cyclability of electrode.Electrolyte based on non-aqueous organic solvent mixture of ethylene carbonate (EC) with dimethyl carbonate (DMC), and/or diethyl carbonate (DEC) is commonly used in commercial lithium-ion battery. EC is an indispensable component because of its higher dielectric constant and excellent film-forming ability, but it owns higher melting point and viscosity, which usually cause the poor low temperature performance of lithium-ion battery Controlling the physicochemical properties of electrode surface (Li metal, lithiated carbons, and lithiated transition metal oxides) was tested an effective technique to obtain the desirable cyclic performance of electrode In this paper, we introduce gamma-crotonlatone (GCL) as an additive in the EC-based electrolyte solution and explore the effect of GCL on the electrochemical behavior of MCMB electrode. Mesocarbon microbeads (MCMB) was used as a working electrode material, and metallic lithium as a counter electrode. MCMB-based electrodes were made as follows: 85% MCMB, 5% carbon black were mixed with 10% PVdF (polyvinyledene fluoride) in an organic solvent ( The preparations of liquid electrolytes, together with coin type cell (CR2025) assembly, were all conducted in an argon-filled glove box (M. BRAUN, Germany, H The constant current charge/discharge measurements were carried out with Land Cell test. The cyclic voltammetry and electrochemical impedance spectra were used in order to understand the influence of added GCL on the electrochemical property. Both of them are performed on a CHI 660B electrochemical workstation. After the charge–discharge test, the MCMB electrodes were separated from the coin type cell in an Argon-filled glove box and rinsed with ethanol solvent to remove electrolyte, then dried in glove box naturally. The morphologies of the SEI film were observed using scanning electron micrograph (SEM, JECO JSM-6360LV). The organic components of the SEI film were characterized by an FTIR spectrometer (EQUNOX 55). XPS (VG Microlab MK II) was used to obtain information about the elementary chemical state for the SEI film on the MCMB electrode. Both of the samples of FTIR and XPS were prepared in a manner similar to that used for the scanning electron micrographs. As is well known, electrochemistry stability, which is assessed by stable voltage window, is very important to electrolyte solvents for Li-ion batteries. In our study, we use frontier orbitals to characterize the electrochemistry stability, which can represent the electrochemical activity of the material. The frontier orbitals are the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO), the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO), and orbitals close to the two previously mentioned orbital. When electrons are added or removed from the molecule, they will be firstly added to the LUMO or removed from the HOMO. Because of it, there should be a connection between the HOMO energy and the first oxidation potential of a molecule, also the LUMO energy and the first reduction potential. As an ideal film-forming additive, which should have the property of higher reduction potential, i.e. it must be of lower LUMO energy. The data of frontier orbitals for commonly used solvents calculated by standard procedure are given in As seen from The concentration of additive plays an important role on the electrochemical performance of batteries. In general, the concentration of additive was in the order of 10 In comparison with the electrolyte with 10  In order to better understand the role played by GCL in EC-based electrolyte, cycle voltammetry was performed on the electrolytes with and without GCL. As known, the total impedance of the battery affects the cycle performance, i.e. higher impedance often causes larger polarization, smaller capacity and poor cyclability, so, the preferential reductive decomposition of GCL, which accelerate a less resistance SEI film formation, maybe the origin of the excellent cyclic performance of MCMB electrode with the electrolyte containing 10 To further understand the effect of GCL, we test the physicochemical properties of SEI film on the surface of MCMB electrode. The chemical components of the SEI film play a very vital role on determining the electrochemical performance. So following surface observations, we proceeded to SEI film components analyses used by FTIR and XPS. Through above discussion, we may draw a conclusion as follows: Firstly, smaller volume amounts in the order of 10 Secondly, the results of cyclic voltammetry show that the GCL has higher reduction decomposition potential at about 2.1 Thirdly, the SEI film derived from the electrolyte with GCL was more smooth and uniform than that form derived from the electrolyte without GCL. Finally, the results of FTIR and XPS show that the main components of the SEI film all include (ROCO So, the preferential reductive decomposition of GCL causes a smooth, uniform, stable and low-resistance SEI film, which leads to the excellent cyclability of MCMB electrode during long cycles.