Extensive research in global biomedical industry has been driven rapidly due to problems faced in bone implants such as loosening of implants in knee and hip prosthesis as well as short service life of orthopaedic implants. Advances in biomedical engineering have resulted in formation of various materials utilized for orthopaedic transplants and artificial implants. Among the various available materials zirconium dioxide is observed as potential material for biomedical application due to its superior biocompatibility, good compression resistance (2000 MPa), good viability of cell culture, good opacity, and radiopacifying capacity showcasing it's diverse applications in bone and tissue regeneration, orthopaedic implants as well as bone resorption. Bone tissue regenerative modifications is accompanied with coating of zirconium dioxide on metal alloys or 316 L SS substrate, composite formation with silica carbide or organic acids (usnic acid), surface propargylation achieved using chemical treatment of propargyl bromide, electrochemical treatment of zirconium dioxide to evaluate corrosion resistance, etc. Zirconium dioxide is also recorded for exhibiting enhanced mechanical properties as well as biocompatibility in hip arthroplasty as well as bone implants; it also serves application in bone cement to provide adhesion between the biomedical implants. The review paper majorly focuses on effective utilization of zirconium dioxide with various additive materials and functionalization techniques used for enhancement of properties, enabling the application of material in orthopaedic implants as well as bone tissue applications. The mechanical and biological performance analysis of various orthopaedic implants containing zirconium dioxide has been elaborately discussed along with possible measures implemented to enlarge the life of biomedical implant.According to a survey conducted by Grand View Research, United States of America is identified as the largest producer of zirconium dioxide utilized for various biomedical applications. Among the various polymeric as well as ceramic materials for biomedical applications [ The wide application of zirconium dioxide in orthopaedic applications, whereas high degradation rate of biomaterial resulting in short life time of implant has emerged the future scope of biomedical sector for detailed study. The modification technique of zirconium dioxide composite is achieved by surface treatment or chemical treatment using properties enhancing materials. The use of zirconium dioxide has also been recorded as surface coating material of metal alloy substrate to incorporate cell adhesion, cell proliferation and development of cell culture properties on substrate surface, as the material shows non-cytotoxic behaviour after modifications in properties. Although having all this properties, the use of zirconium dioxide for biomedical application is a matter of consent due to short life time of biomedical implant arise due to degradation of the biomaterial. Various studies have been focused on enhancing the mechanical properties and mechanical stability of biomaterial as it is recorded as possible measure for enhancement in lifetime of the implant. The methodologies used for modification of zirconium dioxide in bone and tissue applications comprises of surface deposition of ZrO This review elaborately discusses about various amelioration techniques for problems faced in hip prosthesis, bone tissue engineering and orthopaedic implants as schematically represented in There have been various methodologies available for synthesis of medical grade zirconium dioxide based on properties requirement for various biomedical applications. An investigation studied had reported the sol gel synthesis process for manufacturing medical grade zirconium dioxide, showcasing the ameliorated results helpful for biomedical application [ Partial hydrolysis of alkoxide Polymer condensation of alkoxyl or hydroxyl groups Various researchers studied about the parameters which affect synthesis of zirconium dioxide, an investigation done by Stefani et al. demonstrated the influence of alterations in processing parameters on performance of the synthesized product. The researchers synthesized hydrous zirconia by hydrolytic poly-condensation of zirconium propoxide in isopropanol; they carried out an experimental study by altering the processing parameters (pH, temperature and various types of ions) followed by calcination of synthesized product at a temperature of 400 °C resulting in formation of a tetragonal zirconia. A detailed study of product explained the increment in surface area of zirconia with elevation in temperature along with a raised pH of up to 7.5 demonstrating the effect of pH on stability of metastable zirconium dioxide [ An investigation done by C. Stocker and A. Baiker demonstrated the synthesis of zirconia aerogel with help of sol-gel process using tetra-n-butoxy zirconium along with acid catalysis [ Sol-gel synthesis: Precipitation synthesis: An alternative approach for synthesis of zirconium dioxide using sol-gel process has been investigated by D. A. Ward and E. I. Ko, they synthesized zirconium dioxide using mixture of zirconium-n-propoxide along with nitric acid and n-propanol, this mixture is mixed with an another mixture containing n-propanol and water subjected to extensive stirring. The synthesized gel is kept at room temperature for duration of 2 h followed by vacuum drying or supercritical drying using CO There are various methodologies available for functionalization of zirconium dioxide by implementing surface treatment or composite formation, the study comprises of functionalization techniques for orthopaedic applications as well as bone tissue applications. The elaborative study of functionalization methodologies will provide a deep insight about the governing science behind improved properties of biomaterials resulting in ameliorated performance. The global population is facing critical problems due to increase in number of accidents or natural calamities leading to bone structure defects. The bone defects are necessary to be replaced or repaired to function properly, resulting in emergence of extensive research in area of orthopaedic implants, hip arthroplasty and bone cement for biomedical applications [ In the recent study done regarding total hip arthroplasty, hip prosthesis and joint replacement; wear debris and corrosion of biomaterial implants has been found as a prominent reason behind the failure of medical implants. A study has reported that hip replacements are expected to increase up to 5 lakhs by 2030 [ D. Kluess et al. studied the mechanical properties of material developed using alumina, zirconia and alumina-zirconia composite utilized in total hip arthroplasty, According to obtained results zirconia showcased the lowest grain size of 0.5  μm resulting in small particle size, comparable flexural strength (1050 MPa) with alumina-zirconia composite (1150 MPa) enabling the application of zirconia in knee joint replacements. Lowest hardness of 1250 H V 0.5 and young's modulus of 210 GPa was achieved when compared to other substrate, whereas highest poisson's ratio of 0.3 leads risk of breakage when subjected to normal tensile conditions ensuring wide application of zirconia in orthopaedic applications. Alumina toughened zirconia resulted in low wear (0.086 mg/million cycles) of the medical implant [ Mohamed N. Rahaman et al. studied the utilization of ceramics for reducing wear of the prosthetic devices and bearings in hip and knee joint replacements leading to tissue inflammation; their study was focused on utilization of zirconia nanoparticles for modifying properties of a prosthetic implant. Strong atomic bonding between the crystals results in achieving desirable mechanical properties of prosthetic material utilized in total hip arthroplasty. The incorporation of zirconia in composite material results in enhanced flexural strength (usually higher than 500 MPa) along with low thermal conductivity of 2 Wm The low temperature degradation of zirconia is observed as a major reason for functioning of hip prosthesis. The zirconia exists in 3 crystal structures: (A) monoclinic, (B) tetragonal and (C) cubic, whereas a tetragonal to monoclinic transformation occurs at 1000 °C. Hence the major source to provide strength in zirconia is through composite formation by using oxides such as yttrium oxide or alumina which lowers the tetragonal to monoclinic transition temperature, the modified material has lowered transition temperature around 250 °C. A study done by kobayashi et al discovered the slow tetragonal to monoclinic transformation of yttria stabilized zirconia particles in presence of humid atmosphere, which results in micro-cracking and loss in strength [ Ageing of the orthopaedic implants is accelerated with roughening as well as micro-cracking, having inevitable impact on wear performance of orthopaedic implant. The particles generated by wear of zirconia at contact surfaces enter the peri-prosthetic tissues which triggers macrophages to react which results in release of pro-inflammatory cytokines stimulating the osteoclastic bone resorption, leading to osteolysis as well as loosening of orthopaedic implants. The micro-cracking of material was concluded due to lowering of hardness from 18 GPa to 11 GPa. The ageing of zirconia can be controlled by providing importance to basic parameters of material such as density, grain size and homogeneity of the phase distribution which plays a vital role in maintaining cohesion between particles and monitoring mechanical properties of the material [ Oleksandr Gryshkov et al. demonstrated the effect of hydroxyapatite/zirconium dioxide on surface of porous silicon carbide substrate for developing a bioactive surface [ Sunghwan Kim et al. experimentally studied the effect of antibiotic on poly-methylmethacrylate (PMMA) substrate by addition of usnic acid (organic antibiotic) along with bone cement containing zirconium dioxide or barium sulphate for developing a biofilm resistive surface [ S. Nagarrajan and N. Rajendran demonstrated the coating of sol-gel derived zirconium dioxide on 316 L SS substrate using dip coating technique resulting in formation of porous, uniform and well crystalline substrate [ M. Meischel et al. investigated the in vivo performance of biodegradable bone implant material of poly-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) composite, majorly focusing on surface properties, adhesive strength, bone accumulation and degradation parameters of composite material [ Hanna Tiainen et al. demonstrated the effect of zirconium dioxide on titanium dioxide bone scaffolds, and properties required in the scaffolds ensuring it's utilization for diverse applications [ Takeshi Matsumoto et al. demonstrated quantitative three dimensional imaging of angiogenesis for bone repair using a contrasting agent (zirconium contrasting agent) established subtracted micro computed tomography utilizing synchrotron radiation [ Eun-Cheol Kim et al. demonstrated the effectiveness of zirconium dioxide for immobilization of biomolecules using click chemistry as well as oestoblastic differentiation of MC3T3-E1 cells on immobilized zirconium dioxide using bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) [ Solvig Diederichs et al. studied static and dynamic cultivation method for generation of three dimensional biocompatible scaffolds, utilized for regeneration of bone at the defected site [ M. P. Ginerba et al. studied the effect of various radiopacifying agents on static and dynamic mechanical properties of acrylic bone cement [ Vincenzo Sollazzo et al demonstrated the use of zirconium oxide coating to improve implant osseointegration in vivo, their study is focused on development of zirconium dioxide having vital application for in vivo bone growth. The zirconium dioxide utilized is manufactured by using 6.5 g of cyanuric chloride along with 81.46 ml of isopropanol, 0.2 ml of concentrated phosphoric acid, 1.88 ml of Triton X100 and 2.75 ml of deionized water in presence of continuous stirring. The zirconium tetraisopropilate is added drop wise to the resulting solution; obtaining a white precipitate from resulting solution. The coating of implants was performed by dip coating followed by heating at 700 °C in an oven for 1 h in presence of oxygen. Zirconium oxide coated ceramic biomaterials are widely used in prosthetic devices due to ameliorated mechanical and chemical properties; along with good biocompatibility has high affinity for bone tissue [ Kazuyuki Takamura et al investigated the carcinogenicity and chronic toxicity of orthopaedic implants in mice, the investigation was focused on performance of zirconia with 3% yttrium oxide containing implants compared with stainless steel alloy and Ti–6Al–4V alloy. The implants were incorporated in mice and specimens are prepared by autopsy considering all the pathological conditions. The death rate of specimens due to tumour development at the site of implantation was recorded to be 87% when implanted for 24 months, whereas the hamatopoietic malignancies were developed spontaneously around the implant site. The results concluded from the body weight gain and some kind of organ weights, blood analysis as well as survival rate did not possess chronic toxicity to mice. Hence the utilization of zirconia ceramics is highly recommended in orthopaedic implants as well as joint replacements [ There are bunch of materials available for functionalization of zirconium dioxide used in bone and tissue applications. The investigation is majorly focused on development of the damaged bone or tissue regeneration by implementing various functionalization techniques leading to significant impact of the ceramic material in biomedical applications. The biological and mechanical aspects of the modified regenerated bone and tissue have been discussed elaborately. On the contradictory part the bone resorption of implants has been thoroughly discussed, providing the complete overview of resorption process considering the responses to the resorbed products in vivo. Bone tissue regeneration on medical scaffolds has immense importance for providing bioactive surface, useful for cell growth and cell proliferation in medical implant utilized during replacement of bone tissue. The bone regeneration is accompanied with porosity of bone scaffold having crucial role in deciding cell growth, cell proliferation and tissue ingrowth on the bioactive material [ Zhingsong Lu et al. demonstrated a process to develop zirconium dioxide nano-arrays using zinc oxide rods on titanium surface [ Lu-Ning Wang et al. explained the capability of HA formation using zirconium dioxide nano-arrays by implementing effective dipping pre-treatment (pictorially illustrated in A similar study based on zirconia and hydroxyapatite based porous scaffolds has been investigated by Sang Hyunan et al., according to their investigation the 3 dimensional porous scaffolds exhibited better cell adhesion, proliferation as well as differentiation promoting the bone regeneration. Whereas fragility of the material is a huge concern limiting clinical application of scaffolds for large bone regeneration [ Arundhati Bhowmick et al investigated a nano-composite based on chitosan (CTS), nano-hydroxyapatite (HA), nano zirconium dioxide (ZrO K. Balagangadharan et al. demonstrated development of biocompatible composite containing chitosan, nano hydroxyapatite, zirconium dioxide scaffolds along with microRNA on mesenchymal stem cell for application in bone tissue engineering [ E. K. Papynov et al. demonstrated the generation of porous zirconium dioxide-phosphates material using in situ method, having potential utilization as implant during bone-tissue recovery [ Electrospinning is observed as an revolutionary technique for formation of biomedical scaffolds as well as industrial applications [ Yael Lupu-Haber et al. investigated the poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) doped zirconia ceramics for it's utilization in bone tissue engineering [ Xuanyong Liu et al. investigated the cytocompatibility and bioactivity of zirconium dioxide fabricated on silica wafers utilizing cathodic vacuum arc having applications in hard tissue replacements [ A similar study investigated by Y. Ramaswamy et al demonstrated the response of osteoblasts, osteoclasts and endothelial cells on zirconium modified calcium silicate based ceramic [ Yinglan Zhu et al evaluated in vivo cell proliferation of porous nano-zirconia scaffolds with different porosity for clinical use in bone repair and regeneration of weight bearing bones [ The phenomena of loosening in prosthetic implants are highly dependent upon wear debris as well as periprosthetic osteolysis of medical implants. Zirconium dioxide is conventional in controlling wear debris and inflammatory responses to wear product. Zirconia particles exhibit better performance of cell proliferation of osteoblasts, fibroblasts and macrophages compared to CoCrMo-alloy [ Y. Ramaswamy et al investigated bioceramic composition to modulate resorption of human osteoclasts, their study analysed the appearance of resorption lacunae and attachment of human osteoclast cultured in vitro on resorbable bioceramics having variable surface properties and chemical compositions. Sabokbar et al explained increment in tartrate resistant acid phosphate (TRAP) expression as well as bone resorption in system due to addition of zirconium dioxides nanoparticles using a mouse co-culture with osteoblast like cells on bone slices [ Utilization of zirconium dioxide in biomedical applications has provided solutions to various complications in orthopaedic implants and bone tissue engineering. Zirconium dioxide have good mechanical properties, adequate fracture strength, good biocompatibility, excellent radiopacifying properties and better opacity along with excellent cell culture and cell proliferation. In this review, various methodologies for development of properties in biomaterials using zirconium dioxide have been discussed elaborately along with characterization for performance as well as structural stability of medical implants. The investigation of ZrO The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to thank Dr. C. P. Ramanarayanan, Vice-Chancellor, DIAT (DU), Pune, and Prof. R. V. Adivarekar, Head of Department of Fibres and Textile Processing Technology, ICT Mumbai, for constant encouragement and support. The authors would also like to acknowledge Mr. Swaroop Gharde for technical discussions and support. First author dedicates this review paper to his father Mr. Avinash Bhagwan Patil for constant encouragement. The authors are thankful to anonymous reviewers, for their valuable suggestions and comments, which helped in improving the quality of the manuscript.