In this study, the effect of mechanical activation was evaluated on the leaching efficiency of copper sulphidic concentrate in 0.5M sulphuric acid medium. The mechanical activation of samples was performed by a high energy planetary ball mill under the atmospheric conditions. The results showed that there was an optimum time of MA, about 6h, in which the leaching efficiency reaches its maximum value (42% for 7h of leaching). The improvement of leaching efficiency due to mechanical activation can be attributed to the significant decrease of the size of particles and the intense structural disordering of particles.Up to now, many hydrometallurgical processes for copper producing from its sulphuric minerals have been emerged in the laboratory and pilot scales and a few of them are in industrial scale. The summary of these processes were reviewed by The chalcopyrite is known as the main core of researches in the field of copper extraction industry. The leaching of chalcopyrite, can be stated as follows ( The main limitation in the leaching of chalcopyrite is its low leachability due to the formation of passivating layer (some minerals, for example: bimetallic sulphides, polysulphides, elemental sulphur and jarosites) on the surface of this mineral. ( Mechanical activation (MA) before leaching is one of the well known methods that can improve the leaching efficiency of sulphides. In this regard, the positive effect of MA on the leaching of various sulphides has been widely studied ( Nevertheless, the effect of MA on the leaching efficiency of copper sulphides has not yet been evaluated deeply, except in few researches in which this effect has been investigated in chloride media ( The sulphidic flotation concentrate obtained from one of the domestic copper mines (in Iran). The average chemical composition, measured by XRF method (Bruker, S4 PIONEER), is as follows: Cu (31.2%), Fe (30.1%), S (29.5%), Si (3.0%), Al (1.6%), Zn (1.4%), K (0.68%), Mg (0.65%), Ca (0.36%), Na (0.34%), As (0.24%), Pb (0.19%), Ti (0.12%), Mo (0.08%), P (0.03%), Cl (0.03%), Co (0.02%), Mn (0.01%), undetected (0.45%). The particle size distribution of the concentrate, obtained by the laboratory sieves, is X-ray diffraction measurements were performed by Philips XPERD-MPD diffraction system under the following conditions: the radiation source was Cu Kα ( Morphology and particle size analyses of the activated and non-activated samples were carried out by Philips XL30 SERIES SEM set. The mechanical activation of copper sulphidic concentrate was done in a planetary ball mill (Sepahan 84D, Iran) consisting of a steel cup and a number of steel balls. The milling conditions were: milling rate, 400 The dissolution experiments were conducted in a baker of approximately 1 In order to evaluate the effect of MA on the morphology and size of particles, a specified range from 36 to 45 The XRD patterns of the samples of copper sulphidic concentrate for both conditions, i.e. before and after MA for different activation times are shown in The XRD pattern of the as-received concentrate shows that the main phases are chalcopyrite, pyrite, and quartz. The comparison of X-ray diffraction patterns of activated samples (numbers 2–5) with non-activated sample show that due to MA, the intensity of chalcopyrite peaks decreases, and the width of the peaks is broadened which is attributed to the reduction in crystalline phase and the rise in lattice strain (  The results of leaching shown in The reason for decreasing the leaching efficiency after reaching its maximum amount can be attributed to the agglomeration effect and some superficially agglomerated particles which activated partially. The retardation of formation of new surfaces due to agglomeration has been investigated on different sulphides on the basis of such methods as granulometric surface area and adsorption surface area ( The SEM images showed an obvious decrease in particle size, and for longer MA time, the agglomeration of the particles and incompletely activated lumps can be the reason for the gradual decrease of leaching efficiency after the optimum point. According to XRD, the maximum amount of structural disordering of mechanically activated samples occurs within 6 The authors would like to thank for the technical persons in some relevant labs in Departments of Materials Engineering and Chemistry at Isfahan University of Technology, Iran.