Cake filtration is a process of employing an agent consisting of energy (which causes the flow of suspension) and matter (filter media). The relative displacement between suspending liquid and suspended particles of a cake filtration process results from the particle-exclusion effect of the filter medium used. Cake filtration and deep bed filtration share a common feature of using the same kind of separating agent. However, the roles played by filter medium in these two processes are different. In cake filtration, the filter medium acts as a screen so that particles of the suspension to be treated are retained by the medium, resulting in the formation of filter cakes. In contrast, in deep bed filtration, separation is effected through particle deposition throughout the entire depth of the medium. Traditionally, cake filtration is carried out with the direction of the feed (suspension) flow coinciding with that of the filtrate flow and cake growth-taking place along the opposite direction. However, one may carry out cake filtration by passing the suspension to be treated along the filter medium such that the direction of the filtrate flow is normal to that of the suspension flow. This type of operation may therefore be referred to as “cross-flow filtration.” Actual operation of cake filtration equipment may be divided into several phases including filtration, consolidation, washing, deliquoring, and cake discharge. The exact number of the phases involved depends upon the type of the equipment used, the kind of suspension to be treated, and the specific purpose of the operation.empirical constant of empirical constant of time (s) cumulative filtrate volume (m)  The critical role of solid/liquid separation in industrial applications can be seen from the examples shown in A simple schematic representation illustrating the working of a separation process is shown in Over the years, a large number of solid/liquid separation processes have been developed and they are too numerous to be mentioned individually. Generally speaking, the most commonly used ones include cake filtration, depth (deep bed) filtration, cycloning, thickening, flocculation, and consolidation. The relationship among these processes can be seen from the classification scheme proposed by Cake filtration and deep bed filtration share a common feature of using the same kind of separating agent. However, the roles played by filter medium in these two processes are different. In cake filtration, the filter medium acts as a screen so that particles of the suspension to be treated are retained by the medium, resulting in the formation of filter cakes. In contrast, in deep bed filtration, separation is effected through particle deposition throughout the entire depth of the medium. In other words, the individual Qualitatively speaking, the most important factor in determining cake formation is the relative medium pore size to particle size. The empirical 1/3 law suggests that cake formation commences if the particle size is 1/3 of the size of the medium pore. While this law may not be exact, sufficient empirical evidence exists indicating the occurrence of cake formation if the particle size and the medium pore size are of the same order of magnitude. In terms of applications, cake filtration is used to treat suspensions of relatively high solid content while deep bed filtration is applied to clarify suspensions of low Over the years, investigators have speculated the mechanism and the manner of cake formation. Beginning with It was suggested that the value of Hermans of Bredee's formulation was based entirely on intuitive argument with some arbitrary assumptions. Both complete blocking and bridging lead to cake formation. Furthermore, since in practical situations, the medium pores and particles are likely not uniform in sizes, different types of deposition may take place simultaneously. On a more fundamental level, cake formation, in principle, can be examined in detail through simulation studies (see Traditionally, cake filtration is carried out with the direction of the feed (suspension) flow coinciding with that of the filtrate flow and cake growth taking place along the opposite direction. However, one may carry out cake filtration by passing the suspension to be treated along the filter medium such that the direction of the filtrate flow is normal to that of the suspension flow. This type of operation may therefore be referred to as cross-flow filtration. In contrast, the term “dead end filtration” is often used to describe the traditional operation in which both the suspension and filtrate flow along the same direction (see Significant and successful developments of membrane technology during the past three decades have made available classes of materials (polymeric, ceramic and metal) suitable  Actual operation of cake filtration equipment may be divided into several phases including filtration, consolidation, washing, deliquoring and cake discharge. The exact number of the phases involved depends upon the type of the equipment used, the kind of suspension to be treated and the specific purpose of the operation. Three examples of filter cycles given by The physics of these different phases of operation may be similar or different. The phenomena of filtration and consolidation can be described on a common basis embracing problems such as liquid flow through saturated porous medium undergoing growth (in filtration) or reduction (consolidation). They are different from cake washing, which is largely a problem of mass transfer (for example, to reduce the entrained liquid or other impurities). Similarly, deliquoring by air or compressed gas flow reduces filter cake from the saturated state to unsaturated state and is governed by laws different from those of filtration and consolidation. It is, however, safe to say that the filtration phase represents the essential part of the operation of all types of filtration cycles. It is this part of the operation which has occupied the major interest of investigators during the past several decades. The present monograph is intended to provide an introduction to the analysis and study of the formation and growth of filter cakes in cake filtration. Simple (conventional) and more exact (complex) analyses of cake growth are described and outlined in the first part As cake formation and growth are often present in various engineering processes, analyses of such processes require the combination and incorporation of theories governing