Postoperative infections are frequently caused by an initial bacterial attachment on the surfaces of the implants or surgical tools; the infections then spread when the bacteria proliferate in the body. The use of biomaterials with antibacterial properties is an appealing solution for avoiding these complications. In particular, the controlled release of antibiotics may prevent the initial stage of infection: bacterial adhesion on the biomaterial surface. Biodegradable polymers therefore play an important role as drug carriers, since their absorbability, which is related to their own degradation properties, allows the controlled release of the active principle. Among the latter, polyhydroxyalkanoates are particularly well suited for drug-delivery applications due to their excellent biocompatibility and biodegradability. Thus, in this chapter we propose two different infection prevention strategies, in which natural biopolyesters are used as absorbable matrices for the controlled release of bioactive agents. Bacteria repelling and antiadhesive surfaces, created by modifying the biomaterial surface chemistry or by changing the surface morphology/topography, have been reported. For example, the production of self-assembled mono- or multilayers ( In recent years, there has been growing interest in the development of drug-delivery systems (DDSs) for the treatment of such infections, as they permit controlled and localized release of a drug, thereby preventing bacterial adhesion on the surface of the implant, and simultaneously decreasing the side effects of the drug ( Optimal selection of the polymer is critical to controlling the release of a drug over time. Surface properties such as smoothness and surface energy determine biocompatibility with tissues and blood, in addition to influencing physical properties such as permeability and degradability ( In this chapter, we propose two different strategies for developing titanium (Ti) surfaces with antibacterial properties by using natural biodegradable polymers, polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs), as matrices including bioactive agents for preventing implant infections. The first strategy is based on combining the antibacterial properties of poly([R]-3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) micro- and nanospheres loaded with doxycycline (Doxy) together with the antifouling effect of poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) in order to obtain biomimetic Ti surfaces with antibacterial activity. The originality of this study is, first, the combination of both, antibiotic-loaded PHB particles and an antifouling agent, aiming to change the surface properties and, second, the development of an antibacterial system on Ti surfaces by functionalization via silanization for the adhesion of both drug-bearing PHB particles and PEG. In the second strategy, we established a DDS by the deposition of natural biodegradable polymer coatings [PHB and poly(3-hydroxybutyrate- Ti samples were prepared prior to their use to assure their uniformity. Mirror-like, smooth surfaces (roughness of around 40 Oxygen plasma and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) treatments modify and prepare the metallic surfaces for the subsequent processes. Both methods generate the attachment of functional groups to tailor surface properties. In particular, they remove organic contaminants and promote surface oxidation and hydroxylation, incorporating hydroxyl groups on the treated surface, thus increasing Ti surface wettability ( The NaOH treatment generates a homogeneous roughness on Ti surfaces with a very intricate and nanoporous morphology, while plasma treatment does not physically modify the surface (compare In our studies, we confirmed that both activation treatments, NaOH etching and plasma cleaning, are appropriate for the functionalization of Ti surfaces. In the case of the incorporation of antibiotic-loaded PHB spheres on Ti surfaces, oxygen plasma was considered the optimal treatment due to better functionalization. However, NaOH etching also exhibited good results, particularly with PHB spheres in the micro-size, since the roughness that the treatment generates offers physical anchoring and stability to these spheres. Also, in the case of PHA coatings, the roughness produced by NaOH etching provided the surfaces with greater specific surface area, thus promoting additional coating of the surface. The primary objective of a DDS is to release the active principle at the desired anatomical site, and to maintain its concentration within a therapeutic band for a desired duration, preventing the side effects of the drug. The ideal drug-release profile should show a constantly controlled dosage of the therapeutic agent, not exceeding a minimum toxic concentration but above an effective limit. For this purpose, polymers play an important role due to their ability to undergo physical or chemical change in response to an external stimulus ( Among biodegradable or compostable bioplastics, PHAs are a family of biopolyesters intracellularly synthesized by several microorganisms when nutrients such as nitrogen, phosphate, or oxygen are depleted, and there is an excess of carbon source. Due to their low solubility and high molecular mass, they function as the Among all the members of the PHA family, the homopolyester PHB is the simplest, most frequently produced, and best characterized representative. This aliphatic polyester was first discovered in 1925 by the French microbiologist Maurice Lemoigne, as a granular component in bacterial cells. He discovered that PHB can be produced by initially feeding bacteria on a nutrient-rich medium, and then removing the available glucose to which they respond by storing the biopolymer for further use as a carbon and energy source ( Regarding polymer degradability, PHB and PHBV are hydrolyzed in water with the usual universal acid–base catalysis for esters; the hydrolysis reaction proceeds very slowly in neutral pH at body temperature. Usually, the in vivo and in vitro degradation of aliphatic polyesters is catalyzed by carboxyl end groups formed by chain cleavage, and the amorphous regions are preferentially degraded. The first stage is characterized by the preferential attack of the ester linkages in the more accessible amorphous regions, while the second stage is characterized by the attack of the less accessible crystalline regions ( Compared to other natural polymers such as polyglycolic acid (PGA), polylactic acid (PLA), or poly(lactide- The biopolymers utilized in both studies were produced via bacterial fermentation from distinct sources, showing different characteristics. PHB from microbial fermentation with The controlled release of antibiotics is being studied as a way to avoid the first step of bacterial infection on a surface: bacterial attachment. Two antibiotics were used for the studies of DDS proposed here. Doxycycline hyclate (Doxy; doxycycline hydrochloride hemiethanolate hemihydrate, C The antibiotic utilized for the PHB and PHBV coating was gentamicin sulfate (Genta; C21H43N5O7, Poly(ethylene glycol) bis(3-aminopropil) ( The studies presented in this chapter were focused on the development of different methodologies for producing Ti surfaces with antibacterial properties. In the following sections, we explain how two different strategies for achieving this were carried out. We combined the antibacterial properties of Doxy-loaded PHB micro- and nanospheres together with the antifouling effect of PEG in order to obtain biomimetic Ti surfaces with antibacterial activity. Only a few works have been found in the literature that study the combination of these two macromolecules, and all of them are related to polymer blending ( The most commonly used process for the encapsulation of water-soluble drugs is the multiple (or double) emulsion technique (water-in-oil-in-water—W Silanization is a widely used methodology for the immobilization of biological molecules on representative surfaces ( APTES is a commonly used coupling agent adopted for various purposes. It has been used for the modification of silica surfaces to increase adhesion in fiberglass-epoxy composites, to promote adhesion of polymer films on glass, to stimulate protein adhesion and cell growth for biological implants, and to attach metallic nanoparticles to silica substrates ( Due to the presence of the chlorine group at the end of its chain, which acts as an electrophilic center, CPTES has the capability to bind nucleophiles such as amines directly under basic conditions. The free primary amine has a free pair of electrons to share, thus making it a center with an excess of electronic density. This allows CPTES to react with peptides and proteins ( The coupling reagent HBTU was used to esterify the carboxylic acids of the PHB spheres and to ensure the reaction with the primary amino group from both APTES and difunctionalized PEG. HBTU is a popular in situ activating reagent commonly used in solid-phase peptide synthesis. Activation with HBTU is cheap, much faster and more complete than carbodiimide-mediated reactions, and with shorter cycle times and increased coupling efficiency ( In the second study, we developed a novel strategy for the application and release of the antibiotic Genta by producing PHA coatings, which served as drug-bearing matrices. We particularly focused on maintaining suitable concentrations of antibiotics for long periods of time, in order to treat highly resistant infections. The originality of the study consists of the production of a Ti coating with PHAs as biodegradable matrices for antibiotic release, and the use of a dip-coating technique, which allows coatings to generate with different numbers of immersions. Initial evaluations of the coatings were carried out with the same quantity of active principle per layer (10% or 30% Genta with respect to the biopolymer mass). To better adjust the drug-release profiles, alternations of Genta quantities in the biopolymer coatings were studied. In order to obtain an optimal homogeneity of Genta in PHB and PHBV matrices, and due to their nonsolubility in the same solvent, water-in-oil (W/O) emulsions of the drug in biopolymer solutions were proposed as fluids for the metallic covering process. Previously, we reported a study for the preparation of PHA emulsion ( In order to characterize the emulsions, their viscosities were determined. Therefore, it was confirmed that both PHB and PHBV emulsion behaviors are non-Newtonian. The deposition methods for the production of thin films can be classified into two: gas phase (e.g., chemical vapor deposition, sputtering) or liquid phase (e.g., dip-coating, spin-coating, spray-coating) methods. Gas-phase methods continue to be important for deposition on glass and metals, while liquid-phase deposition methods are used for deposition onto polymeric and heat-sensitive substrates. Dip coating and spin coating are suitable methods for the application of uniform and thin films onto flat substrates ( The measurement of wettability by means of contact angle using a sessile-drop technique gives evidence of changes on a surface. In the case of the study of PHB spheres, this technique confirmed that the silanization reaction had taken place. In accordance with the literature ( In the case of the PHA coatings, the contact angle technique was used to evaluate the affinity of the biopolymers to the activated Ti surfaces. However, to carry out this study, a concentrated biopolymer solution was used instead of water. The results showed greater wettability of the biopolymer solutions on Ti surfaces with the activation treatment (plasma cleaning and NaOH). This improvement of the polymer-surface affinity could be explained due to the incorporation of OH groups on the Ti surfaces, which allow the link with the carboxylic groups at the end of the biopolymer chains through van der Waals bonds. Surfaces treated with NaOH show better affinity between biopolymer-Ti than when they are activated with oxygen plasma (Rodríguez-Contreras et al., 2017). The fact that Ti surfaces exhibit a greater degree of roughness ( In both studies, electron microscopy was an important technique for the characterization of the drug carriers produced. Regarding the first study, the results of the surface observation by field emission electron microscopy (FESEM) confirmed the presence of PHB spheres on Ti surfaces. For Ti samples activated with plasma, and then silanized with APTES for the covalent attachment of the PHB spheres, only nano-sized particles could be attached. However, it was possible for microspheres to become attached to the metallic surfaces activated with NaOH. This can most probably be explained by the increase in surface roughness, which provides Ti with more specific surface and anchoring points (electrostatic and covalent bounds), yielding the necessary stability for the attachment of the micro-sized spheres. When CPTES was used to react with difunctionalized PEG, both sphere sizes, micro and nano, were able to attach to the Ti surface. The coupling agent HBTU was studied in order to optimize the reaction between the carboxylic acids of the PHB spheres with the primary amino group from APTES and from the difunctionalized PEG. However, only a minor difference between the samples treated with HBTU and without was observed. The use of HBTU did not Concerning the PHA coatings, the covering level, the topography, and the morphology of the coatings were examined by FESEM. Different concentrations of antibiotic (10% and 30%) and biopolymer, and dip-coating processes varying the number of immersions (1, 3, and 6 immersions) were tested in order to study the covering of the Ti surfaces. More homogeneous coatings were obtained when the higher concentration of biopolymer (40 Perfilometry was used to study the roughness and thickness of PHA coatings. As expected, thicker coatings were obtained with a higher number of dip-coating immersions. PHBV surfaces show a greater degree of roughness than PHB surfaces, correlating with the observations of the surfaces in FESEM. This porous structure is able to promote the drug release, since its higher specific surface area exposes the polymer to greater degradation. Furthermore, these porosities or cavities (100–50 The chemical composition of the surfaces throughout the silanization treatments was analyzed by XPS. Evidence of the silanization reaction with APTES and CPTES was adduced from XPS results. A significant increase in silicon percentage content relative to the control sample (untreated), and the presence of the component corresponding to siloxane bond (O–Si–O at 103.3 Assays of drug delivery were made with the biopolymer coatings to characterize their release profiles. Special attention was given to obtain drug concentration levels above the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC), which for Genta is reported to be 0.0005 Results of drug release from PHB and PHBV coatings showed no remarkable differences between coatings made with three or six immersions, aside from the expected lower amount of drug released when the number of dip coatings was low. Regardless of the sort of PHAs used as a drug carrier, liberation of Genta throughout the first 24 For longer periods of time, PHBV coatings showed closer Genta released concentrations to the MIC value than Genta released from PHB coatings ( Given the drug-release profile of PHBV, and, in consideration of the results described above, it can be confirmed that PHBV coatings allow the release of sufficient quantity of drug (above the MIC value) to maintain antimicrobial properties for the periods of time studied. However, in order to optimize the drug profile for preventing the initial quick release of active principle, we benefited from the advantage of the dip-coating process to vary the active principle amounts in every immersion. Therefore, the strategy that we proposed was to intercalate PHBV emulsions with low and high Genta concentrations in every layer of dip coating. The quantity of Genta in the outer layer was the lowest to control the high initial release of the drug: 10%–30%–10% Genta for three immersions, and 10%–30%–10%–30%–10%–30% Genta for six immersions. In both cases, the release rate of Genta considerably decreased (around 40%) in the first hours of incubation compared to the release rate of the samples with uniform amounts of Genta ( Treated surfaces were tested in vitro with The in vitro antibacterial assay showed very appealing results, since all the surfaces tested with the attachment of antibiotic-loaded PHB spheres exhibited antibacterial activity. In general, the number of colony-forming units (CFUs) for On one hand, we studied the antibacterial effect of the attached PHB micro- and nanospheres loaded with antibiotic, by means of silanization reaction with APTES. These surfaces show excellent antibacterial properties, especially those previously activated with NaOH: bacterial growth inhibition was attained with a CFU decrease of 99.9% for On the other hand, the antifouling effect of PEG was confirmed in this study. The number of bacteria growing on Ti surfaces with PEG decreased by around 78.0% from the control with both microorganisms. This effect was enhanced by the presence of the antibiotic-loaded PHB spheres: a decrease of 98.0% for If the results of the antibacterial test from both cases are compared, Doxy-loaded PHB spheres have a greater antimicrobial effect than PEG. The strategy proposed by the addition of antibiotic-loaded PHB particles is more efficient than that proposed combining them with PEG, although in both cases the antibacterial capacities of the Ti surfaces improved considerably. Probably, a lower number of spheres were attached to the Ti surfaces in the chemical reaction of difunctionalized PEG with PHB spheres. As in the previous study, As mentioned before, it is also possible to vary the concentration of the antibiotic in each immersion carried out via dip coating to better tune the drug release of the delivery system. Thus, the alternation of two Genta concentrations was used in every immersion (10%–30%–10% Genta for three immersions, and 10%–30%–10%–30%–10%–30% Genta for six immersions) for the production of PHBV coatings. We tested the drug released and the bacterial growth inhibition after 1, 11, and 20 days of incubation in physiological conditions at 37°C. It was confirmed that after 20 days of incubation, the system still delivered antibiotic in the amount necessary to prevent bacterial growth (Rodríguez-Contreras et al., 2017). In this chapter, the authors provide examples of the application in biomedicine of two biopolymers from the PHAs family, which can be used as drug carriers due to their biocompatibility and biodegradability. Thus two original methods for titanium surfaces development with antibacterial properties are described here. In the first study, the covalent attachment of doxycycline-loaded PHB spheres on Ti surfaces was successfully achieved by two silanization processes. The chemical reaction with the alkoxylane APTES directly attached the spheres to the surface, while through the reaction with CPTES, the spheres linked to the surface by PEG. Finally, the antifouling effect of PEG together with the antibiotic-loaded PHB spheres acted in synergism. In vitro bacterial assays confirmed that both strategies lead to titanium surfaces with antimicrobial properties, by considerably reducing the bacterial adhesion. In the second work, a drug-delivery system for the controlled release of gentamicin was developed by using natural PHAs as polymer matrices. An emulsion of the biopolymers together with antibiotic was applied by dip-coating technique for complete covering of the metal surface. An optimum coating with antibacterial properties for titanium surfaces was achieved. The dip-coating process makes it possible to combine layers with different drug concentrations in order to attain a variation of coatings with different drug-release profiles. The system designed for drug release not only assures the elimination of the first stage of bacterial biofilm formation (bacterial adhesion), but also bacteria proliferation, since the biopolymer matrix containing the active principle is able to degrade with time under physiological conditions. With these studies, we confirmed that PHAs are excellent biopolymers to use as drug carriers, and different strategies are possible to achieve an antibacterial effect on medical device surfaces.