The nitrogen enrichment of active carbons is reported to be effective in enhancing the specific adsorbate–adsorbent interactions for CO2. In this work, nitrogen-enriched carbons were prepared by co-pyrolysis of sugar and a series of nitrogen compounds with different nitrogen functionalities. The results show that although the amount of nitrogen incorporated to the final adsorbent is important, the N-functionality seems to be more relevant for increasing CO2 uptake. Thus, the adsorbent obtained from urea co-pyrolysis presents the highest nitrogen content but the lowest CO2 adsorption capacity. However, the adsorbent obtained from carbazole co-pyrolysis, despite the lower amount of N incorporated, shows high CO2 uptake, up to 9wt.%, probably because the presence of more basic functionalities as determined by XPS analysis.Activated carbons are well known as adsorbents of gases and vapours The surface chemistry of activated carbon is governed by the presence of heteroatoms such as oxygen, nitrogen, etc. Their origin is in the chemical nature of the precursor and the method of carbon preparation and activation. The heteroatoms exist in the form of acidic, basic or neutral organic functional groups Sometimes, the original chemistry of the activated carbon surface is not sufficiently potent enough to enhance the specific adsorbate–adsorbent interactions or catalytic processes. In such cases, the surface chemistry can be modified by, for instance impregnation In this work, a series of nitrogen-enriched carbons were obtained by co-pyrolysis of different nitrogen compounds (i.e., acridine, proline, carbazole and urea) with sugar, the latter being the carbon matrix. The aims of this work was firstly preparing novel nitrogen-enriched carbons via pyrolysis and secondly to study the influence of the nitrogen nature on their CO In this work, common sugar was used as the carbon matrix for the prepared adsorbents. The nitrogen source used was a series of nitrogen compounds with different nitrogen functionalities namely acridine, proline, carbazole and urea (Fisher). As the first aim of this work was the fabrication of carbon materials from the co-pyrolysis of sugar and a N-source, it was essential to obtain the maximum possible char yield. To this end, and because of the high volatile content of the raw compounds used, a pre-treatment was performed before the carbonisation process. The hydrolysis of sugar itself and the mixtures at 50 All the samples studied were carbonised and activated under identical operating conditions. The carbonisation step was performed in a horizontal furnace. The sample was placed inside an stain steel reactor and a N The carbonisation products were subsequently activated with CO In addition, a urea resin supplied by Dynea Aycliffe Limited, UK and polyacrylonitrile supplied by Sigma–Aldrich (named as UR and PAN, respectively) were also carbonised and activated under the same operating conditions described above and the resulting adsorbents used as reference samples. In the case of UR, a curing step was necessary before carbonisation, performed at 120 Textural characterisation was carried out using N Characterisation of the surface chemistry of the nitrogen-containing carbons was carried out by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) on a Kratos AXIS ULTRA with a mono-chromated Al Kα X-ray source (energy 1486.6 The CO The effect of this pre-treatment with acid on the char yield of the samples can be observed in  All the chars obtained after the pyrolysis step were activated with CO The chemical characteristics of the activated samples studied are presented in According to the N-contents presented in It can be observed that while the CC sample has negligible nitrogen content, the other two reference samples, UR and PAN have high nitrogen contents, especially the UR sample (9.7  The adsorption capacities versus temperature of the adsorbents studied are presented in The influence of textural properties seems to be clear in the case of the S and ST series. Sample S has a higher surface area than any sample in the S series (i.e., SA, SC, SP and SU), and thus a higher CO There are many factors that influence CO In order to get a clearer analysis of the N effect, the adsorption capacities were normalised with respect to the BET surface area, taking into account the great influence of this parameter on CO This indicates that not only the amount of nitrogen in the adsorbent is going to be important, but also the nitrogen functionality, as it has already reported that N-functionalities can have different basicity Another normalisation was performed in order to determine if the adsorbents exhibit different N-functionalities with different activities. Thus, the weight uptake during the temperature-programmed CO As the profiles of In this work, four different N-sources were used to incorporate nitrogen to the adsorbents, acridine, carbazole, proline and urea. Acridine and carbazole are compounds with the nitrogen already present in a condensed structure. Amino acids like proline can react with reducing sugars such as glucose to form the so-called Amadori compounds. This is the first step in a complex series of reactions known as the Maillard reaction. The formation of Amadori compounds from amino acids and reducing sugars provides a low energy pathway for their decomposition, and the number of decomposition products observed far exceeds the decomposition products from the individual components Apparently, in materials obtained by carbonisation of a nitrogen containing organic precursor or co-carbonisation of carbon- and nitrogen-containing species, the nitrogen can be incorporated into the graphene structure either as a pyridine nitrogen in position at the edge of the polyaromatic structural entities, as a quaternary pyridinic nitrogen in the center of the graphene layer where it replaces a carbon atom and is common to three adjacent cycles, and/or a significant proportion of the heterocyclic nitrogen can be also pyridonic, i.e., in the α position of a phenolic C–OH (see It has been already reported X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy was used to investigate the fate of nitrogen functional forms present in the samples studied. According to the literature Apart from peaks arising from pyridine, pyridone, pyrrole and quaternary nitrogen functionalities, another peak in the XPS spectra of carbon materials can be found at high binding energies 402–405 Differences in the N 1s profiles for the MT series, the best performing samples studied in this work, are clearly seen in For MTA, MTC and MTP the main N-functionality present is pyridone and/or pyrrole (N–P/P in Sample MTU presented only N-pyridine contribution in 78%, the rest of the N 1s peak (i.e., 22%) appears centred at 396 According to the results obtained in this work it can be concluded that the nitrogen enrichment of carbon materials generally promotes the adsorption of CO Support for this work provided by the RFC-CR-03008 and AA grant from Secretaría de Estado de Educación y Universidades and Fondo Social Europeo are gratefully acknowledged. Furthermore, authors wish to thank Dynea Aycliffe Limited UK for supplying the raw urea resin and Emily Smith for the XPS measurements.