The paper focuses on studying experimentally the potential benefits (in terms of stiffness, strength, ductility) stemming from the use of different fibres on the flexural behaviour of concrete beam specimens. Different types of steel and polypropylene fibres were added into the concrete mix at volumetric contents of 0.5% and 1.0% either individually or in different combinations. Three-point bending tests were carried out to establish the behaviour exhibited by the fibre reinforced concrete specimens produced up to failure and determine the associated mechanical properties of the subject material. The residual mechanical properties of the same specimens were also established after exposing them to temperatures of 280°C. From the test data obtained it was observed that even though the use of hybrid fibres can result in the development of higher residual tensile strength and improved toughness, at elevated temperatures, the use of steel fibres appears to provide optimum post-cracking behaviour.In many cases fibre reinforced concrete is used in final linings. However, fires in tunnelling may severely impair their strength. Linings protected by coating may not exhibit temperatures larger than 280 Flexural strength after cracking has become a characteristic that is used at most to describe the fibre reinforced concrete (FRC). Therefore the knowledge, of how various types of fibres at different dosages prevent cracking, becomes of main interest. Many standards have been developed and they are being evolved continuously (ASTM Moreover, the additional advantages of hybridization like the weight reduction due to the low weight of the polypropylene fibres and the low production cost of FRC, as well as the increased strength and toughness of the hybrid FRC, even after its exposure to high temperatures, encouraged the researchers Toughness is used to describe the ductility of FRC beams, in terms of energy absorption, using flexural testing with deflection control which it is mostly carried out on un-notched beams. Instead of the absolute toughness, toughness indices are usually reported (e.g. according to ASTM For the characterization of the mechanical behaviour of FRC, an axial compressive test was used to determine compressive strength, chord modulus of elasticity and Poisson’s ratio (according to ASTM In total ten (10) different concrete mixtures were prepared. The heating rate and temperature were chosen based on the experimental results of the fire tests of Sakkas et al. A compression loading frame of 5000 The loading rate was set equal to 2000 The chord modulus of elasticity was also calculated as follows Axial strain during testing was evaluated by the longitudinal axial displacement, which was expressed as the mean value of the indications of three displacement transducers placed around the specimen at 120° angle, that were constantly measuring the variation of the distance between the two yokes as shown in In the present research, the 3-point bending test was used and the testing procedure of the EN 14651 standard was followed, by using prismatic specimens of 100 The flexural tensile strength is calculated from equation In From the axial stress – axial strain curves depicted in For the unheated specimens, the compressive strength of the FRC containing S and P1 fibres is higher than that of the plain concrete, irrespectively of the fibre percentage. Lower compressive strength was measured for the concrete mixture containing P2 fibres at 0.5% From      Regarding the single fibre reinforced concrete mixtures, it may be also observed that by doubling the fibre content, the highest increase in flexural strength was achieved by the P2 fibre mixture, where an increase of 18.1% at ambient and 16.7% at elevated temperatures is reported. The increase of flexural strength by doubling the steel fibres is limited to 3.4% and 3.9% at ambient and elevated temperatures, respectively. The doubling of P1 fibres contributed to a 12.9% increase at ambient temperature which however was turned into a 10.2% decrease at elevated temperatures ( The behaviour of the hybrid mixtures after heating is also demonstrated in Lastly, P2 fibres, either in single FRC mixtures or in hybrid FRC mixtures, achieved the higher flexural strength after exposure to 280 The energy absorption (EA) and the toughness index (I  Accordingly, using the slope of EA’s variation, the FRC mixtures could be sorted ( In conclusion, based on the slope of EA in relation to CMOD at both ambient and elevated temperatures, it can be said that at ambient temperatures, it is the length of the fibres the dominant factor that affects the FRC ductility, while at higher temperatures, the materials nature and the properties of the fibres become the dominant one. In order to classify the FRC mixtures as far as their ductility is concerned, four categories of ductility it could be proposed based on the slope of EA values, after the linear regression ( The synergy of the fibres in a hybrid mixture HyF1F2 can be characterized as successful, when the EA at all stages of CMOD of the hybrid mixture is greater than the sum of the EA of each single mixture of the same types ( Moreover, the synergy of the fibres in a hybrid mixture HyF1F2 can be characterized as adequate, when the EA at all stages of CMOD of the hybrid mixture is greater than the EA of each single fibre mixture. In contrast, it is characterized as unsuccessful, when the EA at all stages of CMOD of the hybrid mixture is less than the EA of one of the single fibre one. The same condition could be also established, exploiting the results presented in More analytically, at On the contrary, at high temperatures the hybridization does not provide satisfactory results for the hybrid mixtures. Since the polypropylene fibres are melted, the behaviour of the hybrid mixtures becomes worse to those of the single fibre mixtures. The extended gaps that they are created install porosity hence fragility and result in a decrease of the displacement absorption capacity of the FRC. Only the steel fibre mixtures present a similar EA, before and after heating, since steel fibres are not affected at this temperature level. This is also confirmed by the slope’s values of EA’s increasing rate, for all the FRC mixtures as shown in Experiments have been conducted in FRC specimens in order to examine the effectiveness of the FRC in elevated temperatures. These experiments concluded the following. Steel fibres provided to concrete high compressive strength, flexural strength and great ductility at both ambient and elevated temperature. Furthermore, the variation of energy absorption before and after heating is negligible. Even though the length of the long polypropylene fibres, such as P1, makes FRC having similar or improved flexural tensile strength and ductility, compared to the steel FRC at ambient temperature, after heating all the enhanced characteristics are lost. Short polypropylene fibres, such as P2, although they help FRC mixtures to preserve their strength after heating, they do not contribute to the development of competitive mechanical behaviour and adequate ductility, compared to the mixtures with other types of fibres. Amongst the hybrid FRC mixtures, the HyP1P2 presented the poorest mechanical behaviour as far as the strength and the ductility are concerned, for both temperature conditions. The presence of P1 fibres in HySP1 resulted in great ductility loss after heating, while the HySP2 seems to exploit the enhanced mechanical characteristics of steel fibres and the small variation after heating for which the small polypropylene fibres are characterized. Conclusively, even though hybridization can contribute to the increase of the ductility in some cases, the steel fibres are the only type that still provides stability and enhanced mechanical behaviour to FRC concrete mixtures before and after exposing to elevated temperatures. Moreover, regarding the post-cracking behaviour of the FRC, energy absorption seems to be the most suitable index to express the ductility behaviour providing with adequate data so that a classification of FRC can be established. Although the hybridization with polypropylene fibres leads to less ductility at high temperatures, it is well known that it protects concrete from spalling, at even more elevated temperatures. The preference of using polypropylene fibres or not, should consider the requirements of the application (tunnelling work, groundwork) and it should also depend on the existence of fire protection against the extreme thermal conditions that the FRC may encounter. This work was co-funded by Greece State Scholarships Foundation ( Panagiotis Choumanidis, Andreas Kacapari and Nikos Tzanetis are gratefully acknowledged for their help on the preparation of concrete mixtures. Dr. George Papantonopoulos, scientific staff of the Tunnelling Laboratory of School of Mining Engineering and Evgenia Papadimitriou student of School of Civil Engineering of the National Technical University of Athens, are also gratefully acknowledged for their help on the experimental work.