The treatment of isolated ulnar fractures remains controversial, with different authors recommending both surgical and non-surgical management. We undertook a systematic review of the current literature in order to assess whether any conclusions can be drawn. A total of 33 series involving 1876 patients were identified as suitable for analysis. Data from these papers were combined by method of treatment. The results of the non-operative treatment of minimally displaced ulnar fractures with a stable configuration were uniformly good. Below elbow plaster cast, functional brace and early mobilisation all produced similar results. An above elbow cast was unnecessarily restrictive. To preserve forearm rotation, widely displaced or unstable fractures are best treated by open reduction and internal fixation. Guidelines based on cadaveric and clinical studies exist to predict fracture stability and the extent of acceptable displacement. However, these have not been verified in clinical studies. Compression plate fixation gave reliable results in these cases. Other methods lacked sufficient published data to be recommended.Isolated fracture of the shaft of the ulna is a relatively uncommon injury with an estimated incidence of 0.2 cases per 1000 population in 1998 Most studies looking at the management of this injury exclude Monteggia fracture dislocations, olecranon fractures and coronoid process fractures. However, even when undisplaced and restricted to the diaphysis, the behaviour of this fracture is said to be unpredictable Some authors recommend open reduction and fixation with a dynamic compression plate In order to assess what conclusions can be drawn, we have undertaken a systematic review of the published literature on isolated ulnar diaphyseal fractures. An electronic literature search was undertaken using the Medline, BIDS, EMBASE and Cochrane controlled trials register data base systems from 1976 onwards. A broad search strategy using the key words ulnar fracture, radial fracture, forearm fracture and night-stick fracture, was employed to maximise the retrieval rate. No language or other restrictions were applied. These searches produced 852 titles. Analysis of the abstracts showed that many concerned olecranon fractures, combined radial and ulnar fractures, did not separate the outcome for isolated ulnar fractures, or dealt only with children. These were discarded. Eighty-seven articles reporting the outcome of treatment of adult ulnar shaft fractures were selected for retrieval of the full text. The references listed in these papers were similarly scrutinised for relevant studies. Following initial appraisal, only 38 of these papers proved relevant for full review. All reviews were undertaken by the first author using a standardised proforma based on that suggested by the Cochrane musculo–skeletal injuries group. Details of study design, including whether retrospective or prospective, patient inclusion criteria, randomisation and patient numbers were recorded. The exact treatment methods under test were scrutinised. The details of patient groups (age, sex, occupation); fracture classification (site, degree of displacement, comminution, number open) and mechanism of injury were all recorded. Definitions and means of assessing any outcome measures (time to union, non-union rate, functional outcome, residual deformity, complication rates) were checked. The method of assessment, any loss to follow-up or other biases were analysed. Five publications which did not define these parameters sufficiently to allow analysis, or were seriously flawed, were excluded. Where treatment and outcome measures were sufficiently standardised the results for different series were combined to give mean values. No further statistical analysis was deemed possible. Thirty three series involving 1876 patients were included in the overall analysis. The majority consisted of retrospective review of one treatment method. Thirteen trials were prospective but only five of these compared two or more treatments. Seven methods of treatment were identified. Eight papers looked at immobilisation in an AEPOP and nine in a BEPOP until union. Six series reported on functional bracing using a molded lightweight plastic brace. Five papers described early mobilisation. This entailed a maximum of 1–2 weeks in a BEPOP followed by complete freedom or an elastic compressive bandage. Ten series undertook internal fixation with a dynamic compression plate; one with a Mennen plate; three with intramedullary Rush pins or K wires; two with a locked intramedullary nail and one with an unlocked intramedullary nail. The protocols described by individual authors for the different treatments were remarkably consistent. All series excluded Monteggia fracture dislocations and proximal ulnar, olecranon and coronoid process fractures. The degree of fracture displacement in each series varies somewhat. Papers looking at surgical treatment included a high proportion of displaced, comminuted or open fractures. Series concerning non-surgical treatment generally restricted cases to less displaced fractures deemed to have a stable configuration. The age/sex distribution and the mechanisms of injury were similar in all series. Time to radiological union and non-union rates were measured in all papers. Although some minor differences in the exact definitions were found, all were largely similar. The assessment of functional outcome was more variable. The scoring systems described by Anderson et al. Residual deformity in terms of angulation at the fracture site was occasionally recorded.  It was felt that there was sufficient consistency in the treatment methods and outcome measures to allow some of the data from individual series to be combined as shown in For the non-surgical treatments the average time to union was 7.1 weeks for early mobilisation, 8.6 weeks for AEPOP, 9.1 weeks for BEPOP and 9.7 weeks for functional bracing. Non-union rates ranged from 2–4%. Excellent or good functional results were achieved in 88% of AEPOP, 90% of BEPOP, 95% of early mobilisation and 96% of functional bracing patients. In the surgical group time to union was 15.5 weeks for unlocked Küntscher nail and 10.4 weeks for locked Lefevre nails. Compression plates, Mennen plates and Rush pins had an average union time of 12.1–12.4 weeks. Non-union rates for the Lefevre nail and Mennen plate were 0%, compression plates 2%, unlocked Küntscher nail 5% and Rush pins 13%. Functional outcome was excellent or good in 72% following locked and 79% following unlocked intramedullary nailing. It was 83–86% following other forms of surgery. The question of the best treatment regime for isolated ulnar fractures has been addressed by a large number of authors in recent years. Unfortunately, there remains a lack of good quality randomised controlled trials. The majority of series involve a retrospective review of one method of treatment. Only five prospective trials testing two or more treatments were identified. These compared AEPOP with either BEPOP, functional brace or early mobilisation. All studies on surgical treatment were retrospective. No series comparing surgical and non-surgical treatments were found. We have found sufficient consistency in terms of the patient groups, treatment regimes and outcome measures between individual studies that several parameters could be meaningfully combined. The less robust nature of the functional outcome figures is accepted. Within the non-surgical group there was little difference between the four methods of treatment. Time to union was lowest for patients mobilised free or in an elasticated bandage soon after injury. The functional brace and BEPOP had slightly longer union times than for the AEPOP. Non-union rates were low for all treatment methods. Excellent or good functional results were highest for the functional brace and early mobilisation groups. AEPOP was marginally worse than BEPOP. These differences are slight and unlikely to be of clinical importance. The use of an AEPOP demonstrates no benefit compared with the treatment methods which leave the elbow free to mobilise. The risk of non-union or malunion feared in the early literature Among the surgical treatment options good data exists for compression plate fixation. Patient numbers for the other treatment options are low and each includes only one or two studies. The non-union rate for Rush pins and K wires was unacceptably high. Küntscher nails had a much longer time to union and poorer functional results than other treatment methods. The time to radiological union was about 1.6 weeks shorter for the locked intramedullary nail. However, functional results were also much poorer, casting doubt on this treatment option. Mennen plates gave results very similar to compression plate fixation, but are for only one series. Until the other surgical options are proven, compression plate fixation must still represent the method of choice for internal fixation of these fractures. The results for the surgical treatment group are poorer than for non-surgical treatment. This undoubtedly represents the more severe nature of fractures treated operatively, rather than any treatment advantage. The good results obtained from the non-surgical treatment of minimally displaced fractures is clearly demonstrated in this review. Conversely, the requirement to treat widely displaced ulnar fractures surgically to achieve anatomical reduction and thereby maintain forearm rotation is generally accepted Despite the existence of many papers dealing with isolated ulnar fractures, no consensus on the best form of treatment exists. From the present review we can only conclude that: Fractures with minimal displacement, which are judged to be stable, can be successfully treated in BEPOP, functional brace or mobilised early. An AEPOP is unnecessarily restrictive. Widely displaced or unstable fractures should be treated by open reduction and internal fixation using a compression plate. Other forms of surgical treatment remain unproven. The work of Brakenbury et al. We would like to thank the hospital librarians for their help in conducting the various literature searches.