In some sulphide mineral flotation operations, the process water contains high concentrations of calcium and sulphate ions that exceed the solubility limit of gypsum. It has been speculated that the gypsum supersaturated process water would lead to precipitation of gypsum which could coat on mineral surfaces by either nucleation or coagulation, resulting in reduced flotation recovery and selectivity. In this study, a laboratory prepared gypsum supersaturated solution is used to represent the gypsum supersaturated process water, the effect of gypsum supersaturated solution on the surface properties of silica and sphalerite minerals was investigated using zeta potential distribution measurements, scanning electron microscope (SEM), X-ray photon spectroscopy (XPS), Auger electron spectroscopy (AES), and quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation (QCM-D). Our results show that silica and sphalerite minerals carry identical surface charge (−10mV of zeta potential) in the gypsum supersaturated solution at pH 10 although they are charged differently in simple electrolyte solution at the same pH. Needle shape gypsum precipitates are found in both silica and sphalerite minerals systems conditioned with gypsum supersaturated solution. The gypsum precipitates do not grow on the minerals surfaces but form in the bulk gypsum supersaturated solution. The heterocoagulation between the examined minerals and gypsum particles is insignificant in the gypsum supersaturated solution. It is the high calcium concentration in the gypsum supersaturated solution that has significant effect on the surface properties of silica and sphalerite minerals. The zeta potentials of silica and sphalerite in a 800ppm calcium solution (similar to the calcium concentration in the gypsum supersaturated solution) are similar to those measured in the gypsum supersaturated solutions. Both silica and sphalerite minerals surfaces are indiscriminately coated with calcium. The surface coating of calcium results in the identical surfaces between silica and sphalerite minerals, and ultimately causes problems for the flotation separation of silica and sphalerite.Water quality is a critical parameter in mineral flotation ( In sulphide mineral flotation plants especially those practicing water recycling, the process water usually contains high concentrations of calcium and sulphate ions. In some operations, the calcium concentration in the process water can exceed 1000 The high concentrations of calcium and sulphate ions in the process water can cause problems in the sulphide mineral flotation practice. Problems in galena flotation recovery were noted when lime was used to adjust the pH to depress pyrite ( The adverse effect of high concentrations of calcium and sulphate ions on the flotation of sulphide minerals can be attributed to one or two mechanisms. One possible mechanism is the depression action of calcium ions. In sphalerite flotation, the presence of calcium ions might reduce the exchange rate of activation ions resulting in a deceased recovery ( In this study, we focus on the impact of process water of high calcium and sulphate ion concentrations on the surface properties of minerals. The aim of this study is to develop a fundamental understanding of the adverse effect of gypsum supersaturated process water on the flotation performance of sphalerite. An in-house prepared gypsum supersaturated solution is used to represent the gypsum supersaturated process water. Pure silica and single sphalerite minerals are used to represent the gangue mineral and valuable mineral of a zinc sulphide ore. The surface properties of silica and sphalerite minerals in the gypsum supersaturated solution are investigated using zeta potential distribution measurement, quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation (QCM-D), and surface analysis techniques such as X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and auger electron spectroscopy (AES). The results of this study answer the questions of whether gypsum precipitates form on mineral surfaces or in the bulk gypsum supersaturated solution, and whether the minerals heterocoagulate with gypsum particles in the gypsum supersaturated solution. The effects of gypsum supersaturated solution on the surface properties and flotation behaviors of silica and sphalerite minerals are discussed. The sphalerite mineral was obtained from Ward’s Natural Science Establishment. It contained 66.36% Zn, 32.27% S, and trace amounts of Fe (0.25%), Al (0.26%) and Si (0.06%). The sphalerite sample was crushed to −4.75 The following reagents were of A.C.S. reagent grade: sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and hydrochloric acid (HCl) from Fisher Scientific were used for pH adjustment; potassium chloride (KCl) and potassium sulphate (K In this research, laboratory gypsum saturated and supersaturated solutions were prepared using deionized water (Milli-Q water) from a Millipore Elix 5 purification system, and pH was adjusted using HCl and NaOH. A new solution was prepared for each day of testing. The gypsum saturated solution was prepared by dissolving 4 A similar procedure was used to prepare the gypsum supersaturated solution with calcium sulfate hemi-hydrate (CaSO Suspensions of silica and sphalerite were analyzed in supporting electrolyte solution (10 Zeta potential distribution measurements have been recently used to study the interactions between two different particles by comparing the zeta potential distribution of the mix of the two different components with that of the single material system ( The suspension for zeta potential distribution measurements was prepared to an optimal concentration on the order of 0.1–1 Silica and sphalerite samples (1 QCM-D was used for investigation of gypsum scaling or deposition on silica and sphalerite surfaces, and interactions between gypsum particles and SiO In order to study the gypsum scaling on silica and sphalerite surfaces and the interactions between gypsum particles and silica or sphalerite minerals, a freshly prepared gypsum supersaturated solution or gypsum suspension (0.1% of −265 It has been speculated that gypsum might coat on minerals surfaces by either nucleation or heterocoagulation in the gypsum supersaturated process water, which might be responsible for the poor recovery and selectivity of sphalerite flotation. In order to fundamentally understand the adverse effect of gypsum supersaturated process water on the flotation of sphalerite, the surface properties of silica and sphalerite minerals in the gypsum supersaturated solution were investigated using zeta potential distribution measurement, XPS, SEM, and AES analysis, and QCM-D experiments. In order to understand the effect of gypsum supersaturated solution on the surface charge properties of silica and sphalerite, zeta potential distributions of silica and sphalerite were measured in gypsum supersaturated solutions, and in simple supporting electrolyte solution (10 Zeta potential distribution of gypsum in its own supersaturated solution has a peak at around +3 The shifts of zeta potential distributions of silica and sphalerite in the gypsum supersaturated solution in comparison with those in 10 In comparison with the 10 The zeta potential distributions of silica and sphalerite in 25 In order to better understand the effect of gypsum supersaturated solution on silica and sphalerite mineral surfaces, zeta potential distributions of these minerals were measured in the electrolyte solution contains 800 Calcium sulphate scaling is a common problem in a wide range of industrial processes and applications, especially those involving heat exchange ( The XPS results of silica and sphalerite minerals with and without conditioning in the gypsum supersaturated solution, and the precipitates from the gypsum supersaturated solution are shown in The SEM micrograph of the precipitates from the gypsum supersaturated solution shows that the precipitates are needle shape gypsum crystals ( The surface analysis by Auger spot mapping on silica minerals conditioned in gypsum supersaturated solution further confirms the absence of gypsum precipitates on the mineral surface ( Gypsum scaling on mineral surfaces was also studied using QCM-D. As shown in Our results indicate that gypsum precipitates form in the bulk gypsum supersaturated solution. However, the gypsum precipitates could still coat on the minerals surfaces by heterocoagulation and hence interfere with mineral flotation. It is therefore interesting to study the interactions between gypsum precipitates and silica or sphalerite particles. In this study, zeta potential distributions of mineral mixtures were measured and the results are shown in The zeta potential distributions of silica–gypsum mixture and sphalerite–gypsum mixture show two distinct peaks. One peak centers at the position of the zeta potential of silica or sphalerite in the gypsum supersaturated solution while the other peak is at the zeta potential of gypsum particles in its own supersaturated solution. These zeta potential distributions results indicate a negligible heterocoagulation between silica or sphalerite minerals and gypsum particles in the gypsum supersaturated solution. The interactions between minerals and gypsum particles were also studied with QCM-D. The findings from the QCM-D results are in agreement with the zeta potential distribution measurements. As shown in It is well known that particles can coagulate at zero zeta-potentials due to the van der Waals force. However, both results from the zeta potential distribution measurements and QCM-D studies indicate that there is no heterocoagulation between silica–gypsum and sphalerite–gypsum, even though silica or sphalerite and gypsum carry opposite surface charge, This could be that the magnitudes of the positive and negative surface charge between silica or sphalerite and gypsum are not large enough to overcome the repulsive hydration force which has been reported between hydrophilic surfaces ( According to our results, silica and sphalerite minerals carry the same charge in the gypsum supersaturated solution and their surfaces are indiscriminately coated with calcium. Needle shape gypsum precipitates were found to form in the bulk gypsum supersaturated solution. The heterocoagulation between silica or sphalerite minerals and gypsum particles was found insignificant in the laboratory prepared gypsum saturated or supersaturated solution. However, one should note that the gypsum scaling is controlled by many factors; gypsum scaling on mineral surfaces can still be trigged in the real flotation process due to its much more complex system in comparison with the model gypsum supersaturated solution. For instance, the grinding process in the flotation plant would lead to the increase in mineral surface area and/or temperature. The increase of mineral surface area can introduce sites where surface precipitation of gypsum may occur. The increase of temperature can also result in the gypsum scaling on mineral surface since the solubility of the calcium suphates decreases with the increase of temperature. The results from this study are obtained from a model gypsum supersaturated solution system where the grinding factor and temperature factors are not evaluated. It would be interesting to further probe the surface properties of silica and sphalerite minerals in the cases of grinding in gypsum supersaturated solutions with the elevation of pulp temperature. Calcium in the gypsum supersaturated system plays a significant role on the minerals surface properties. The high calcium concentration in the gypsum supersaturated solution is responsible for the identical surface charges between silica and sphalerite. The identical surface properties of silica and sphalerite minerals in the gypsum supersaturated solution might be responsible for the poor flotation recovery and selectivity between those two minerals in real flotation system. First of all, the surface occupation by calcium may retard the exchange rate between activation ions and sphalerite and the subsequent uptake of xanthate collectors on the sphalerite as reported previously ( An effective approach to eliminate the detrimental effect of both calcium and gypsum precipitates on the flotation of sphalerite is by adding carbonate (e.g. soda ash) or bicarbonate to remove calcium ions and convert gypsum precipitates into calcium carbonate precipitates. In the case of Hilton concentrator, the addition of soda ash to the grinding circuit significantly improved the galena flotation ( The gypsum supersaturated solution has significant effects on the surface properties of silica and sphalerite minerals. Silica and sphalerite minerals carry identical surface charge in the gypsum supersaturated solution and the zeta potentials of the minerals shift to less negative value in comparison with those in the simple electrolyte solution. Gypsum precipitates are found on silica and sphalerite minerals in the gypsum supersaturated solution; however, the gypsum precipitates form in the bulk gypsum supersaturated solution. The heterocoagulation between gypsum particles and silica or sphalerite minerals is not significant. The changes of surface properties of silica and sphalerite minerals in the gypsum supersaturated solution are mainly attributed to the high concentrations of calcium in the gypsum supersaturated solution. The zeta potentials of silica and sphalerite minerals are identical in the presence of 800 Authors would like to thank the financial support from NSERC and Teck Resources Ltd.