This study is the first demonstration of a continuous culture bio-catalysed iron oxidation and jarosite precipitation reactor using thermophilic archaea, for use in hydrometallurgical process flow sheets to oxidize and partially remove iron from solution while minimizing valuable base metal (i.e. Ni and Cu) losses. A two-stage continuous stirred tank reactor (CSTR) system comprised of two CSTRs, each with its own settler, was operated to achieve biological iron oxidation and precipitation at 70°C. The two-stage reactor configuration was used to allow the growth of microorganisms that prefer different redox regimes. The bioreactors were inoculated with a mixed culture of extreme thermophilic iron oxidisers from genera Acidianus, Metallosphaera and Sulfolobus. The influent (pH1.5) contained (gL−1): 15 Fe2+, 1.5 Cu, 1.5 Ni (all as sulfates), nutrients and trace elements. The system demonstrated efficient iron oxidation and precipitation of the oxidised iron in the form of well settling jarosite with only minor losses of Cu and Ni via co-precipitation. At a total hydraulic retention time (HRT) of 13–14h in the two reactors, the overall iron oxidation rate was up to 1.0gL−1
                     h−1 and conversion extent of >95%. During this time, the pH values were 1.3–1.6 and 1.3–1.6, and redox potentials (Ag/AgCl reference) were 440–530mV and 510–610mV, in the first and second reactor, respectively. The extent of Fe and sulfate removal, was relatively high, 52 and 25% respectively, while valuable Cu and Ni losses were low, i.e. 0.46% and 0.03%, respectively. The precipitates were exclusively jarosite, with potassium jarosite being the dominant form (38–51%), followed by hydronium (30–35%), ammonium (13–18%) and sodium jarosites (6–9%). The precipitates had good settling properties facilitating effective solid–liquid separation. Bioreactor performance was, however, found to be sensitive to instantaneous exposure to high concentrations of typical contaminants in hydrometallurgical processing streams, when added simultaneously. The addition of (gL−1) 2.0 Al, 0.05 As, 0.05F, 0.2 Co, 5.0 Mg and 0.4 Mn to the influent solution decreased iron oxidation and jarosite content in precipitates.Biologically catalysed Fe Jarosite (AFe The rate of jarosite precipitation increases with increasing temperature ( A mixed culture of thermophilic iron-oxidising archaea was cultivated in a stirred tank reactor (1.5 A two-stage CSTR system comprised of two 0.7 At the start-up of the two-stage system, each of the CSTRs was filled with 700 The influent and CSTR solutions were sampled for pH, redox potential, Fe Cell counting on bioreactor samples was performed by detaching microorganisms from precipitates by sonicating the samples five times for 1 Influent and bioreactor solution pH was measured using a TPS smart-CHEM meter (with pH - TPS, plastic body pH sensor, double junction with porous teflon BNC plug, part # 121207) after removing precipitates by centrifugation at 21,800 For analysis of Fe Influent and bioreactor samples for soluble Fe, Ni, Cu, S, Mg, Al, Mn, Co, F, As and Cl analysis were filtered through PALL 25 Microbial cells in the sludge were harvested for scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a filtration method ( Precipitates were collected for SEM using double sided carbon tape method ( After dehydration, all samples were transferred into a sample holder filled with 100% ethanol for critical point drying with a 30 For elemental, mineralogical and particle size analysis precipitates collected from the settlers were centrifuged at 25,000 Another aliquot of the washed precipitates was submitted as suspension in DI water, to particle size analysis by Malvern Mastersizer 2000 at the Analytical Services laboratories of CSIRO Mineral Resources at Waterford, WA. Immediately prior to analysis the precipitates were resuspended in neutral pH water to prevent damaging the particle size analyser ( The mineralogy of the feed materials was examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) by the Analytical Services of CSIRO Mineral Resources at Clayton, Victoria, Australia. The XRD traces were obtained after addition of calcium fluoride internal standard at 10% w/w. A PANalytical Empyrean Series 2 diffractometer or PANalytical X'Pert Pro diffractometer with X'Celerator detector and Co Kα radiation (40 Settling characteristics of the precipitates removed from the settlers were analysed by determining sludge volume index (SVI) by the standard method 2710 D ( Sludge filterability was determined for sludge removed from the CSTR settlers by the standard method time-to-filter test 2710H ( The HRT of the two-stage archaeal CSTR system was decreased stepwise to the lowest HRT (7 and 6 Solution pH in the reactors of the present study varied between 1.2 and 1.8 during initial operation and averaged 1.3–1.6 during the operation at a total HRT of 13–14 The simultaneous and instantaneous shock exposure of the bioreactors to high concentrations of typical contaminants in hydrometallurgical processing streams (Al, As, F, Co, Mg and Mn) decreased the iron oxidation rate from 1.0 g L In addition to the shock addition of the contaminants, the high iron concentration in the influent may also have contributed to the inhibition effect under these conditions, as high ferrous and ferric iron concentrations are known to inhibit thermoacidophilic microorganisms. For example Based on the QXRD analysis, the precipitates formed in the archaeal CSTR system were predominantly jarosite with a general formula of (A)Fe Based on SEM imaging some of the precipitates were round or granular while others had sharp edges ( The addition of contaminants into the influent decreased the jarosite content in precipitates and the relative proportion of ammonium jarosite increased while that of hydronium jarosite decreased based on QXRD analysis ( The extent of Fe, S, Cu, Ni removed from the influent solution, in the form of precipitates in bleed from settlers, as calculated based on the TSS concentration in the settler underflow and concentrations of various elements in the removed solids, were 52%, 25%, 0.46% and 0.03%, respectively, when no additional contaminants were added into the influent. In the presence of added contaminants the corresponding extents of removal were 8.2%, 1.7%, 0.05% and 0.01% for Fe, S, Cu and Ni, respectively. The Cu content in the precipitates was very low, only 0.018–0.032% and Ni contents were below detection level (< The size distribution of the precipitated particles removed from the settlers of the CSTR system operated at 70 The settling characteristics of the sludge removed from the CSTR settlers were studied by determining the sludge volume index (SVI). The SVIs for the precipitates in the absence of additional contaminants were 5.8 The filterability of the sludge removed from the settlers of the CSTR system was characterised by a time-to-filter test. The sludge was easily filterable and the time to filter 25 Previous literature has reported somewhat contradictory information on the filterability of jarosites. While according to some ( Laboratory-scale experiments provided the first demonstration of the key process performance parameters for a two-stage CSTR system for archaea-catalysed biological iron oxidation and precipitation at elevated temperatures. The operation of the bioreactor at elevated temperature overcomes a cooling requirement, as would be required for bioreactors that rely on mesophilic microorganisms. This would be beneficial e.g. for biohydrometallurgical operations that bioleach chalcopyrite at elevated temperatures or where the upstream process results in a high temperature leach solution. The system enabled the removal of ferric iron as well settling and readily filterable jarosite with only minor loss of Cu and Ni via co-precipitation. Iron oxidation and removal from leach liquors in an external bioreactor has the distinct advantage that it avoids iron precipitate formation in leaching reactors, where it may impede mineral dissolution rates at particle surfaces or hydraulic flow characteristics. The iron oxidation rate and extent at 70 Financial support from