Although retired from NOAA/NMFS since 1995, I have remained involved with the several issues which bear upon the marine fisheries: (1) declining yields worldwide, (2) too many fishers pursuing too few fish and shellfish, (3) an ever growing market for seafoods, and (4) a seeming inability for scientists, managers, and politicians to do much to stop several downward trends. Concerns about these issues are no longer expressed solely in agency management memoranda and local newspapers; national journals of science, such as Science, regularly have articles expressing concern and outrage about the situation. It is almost a decade ago (1992) when I was invited to chair a special session on “marine habitats and their protection from degradation”. This session became part of the proceedings of the annual meeting of the Natural Areas Association, held at the University of Maine, Bangor ( Subsequently, there have been scores of journal and popularized articles about MPAs (see So, what is it that MPAs do? Basically, areas of varying sizes are set aside and closed to fishing or harvesting of other Living Marine Resources (LMRs). The MPAs then provide opportunities for reproduction, spawning, and recruitment of various LMRs. Moreover, the habitat of an MPA is not subjected to physical damages by fishing gear, or the noise, movements, and shadows resulting from docks, piers, vessel traffic, or transects. The MPAs in estuaries and coastal zones can preclude dredging, filling, dock construction, pollution, ocean mining, and other physical damages so common in many coastal areas. Such areas may then develop more robust stocks, capable of dissemination to other, unprotected, areas. Forage species, essential to fishes, other LMRs, and marine mammals, may grow and occur in far greater numbers, augmenting the diets of LMRs, and thus their growth and biomass. In many cases, the MPAs are designed to protect diversity and endangered species ( The volume by the MPAs (large quadrants, The NRC's summary ( Such antagonisms have made, and will make it near impossible to implement new techniques to manage LMRs, mineral extraction, and other uses of the seas. For instance, in the same issue of the magazine carrying Paige's article, the title “Reef madness: How Alabama fishermen are repopulating the sea” ( Use of the protected marine area is, without doubt, the only way to preserve certain reefs, coral heads, and associated fauna and these must be preserved. Reserves have been shown clearly to aid in the preservation of many tropical aquatic species; the Great Barrier Reefs of Australia come to mind in these regards, as well as the fringing reefs of Bermuda (see Areas closed to the harvesting of several marine species have been demonstrated to “grow” new spawning stock, and thus MPAs can be “rotated”, as are many agrarian fields, grazing areas, and forests. One must, however, be cognizant of when to turn on a use or turn off another use. Working scientists I have spoken with state that some four decades of resource assessments and research on individual species have yielded sufficient information and data to allow management by areas to begin. It is not a lack of science and scientific data that prevents the first step; rather it is a lack of political will and, perhaps, timid souls at the management helm. We live in times when one's neck must be extended if ever we are to manage effectively, the largesse of the World's oceans. The MPAs have been demonstrated in many ways to work and their use must be initiated if we are to conserve groundfish stocks, as well as endangered species and diversity and habitat stability. Finally, the MPAs may ultimately be linked to other schemes such as “corridors” (see As for future research, the larger MPAs protected for long, sometimes very long, periods will allow us to assess change as it occurs with long-term cycles (millennia) and shorter-term, man-induced change. Recent research using mitochondrial and nuclear sequence data allows us to evolve hypotheses as to how common marine species (