Glycosaminoglycans (GAG) are multifunctional components of the extracellular matrix (ECM) involved in different steps of the regulation of cellular differentiation. In this study artificial extracellular matrices (aECM) consisting of collagen (Col) I and different GAG derivatives were used as a substrate for human mesenchymal stromal cells (hMSC) to study osteogenic differentiation in vitro. hMSC were cultured on aECM containing col and hyaluronan sulfates (HyaS) with increasing degrees of sulfation (DSS) and were compared with aECM containing col and the natural GAG hyaluronan or chondroitin 4-sulfate. hMSC were analyzed for osteogenic differentiation markers such as calcium phosphate deposition, tissue non-specific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP) and expression of runt-related transcription factor 2 (runx2), osteocalcin (ocn) and bone sialoprotein II (bspII). Compared with aECM containing Col and natural GAG all Col/HyaS-containing aECM induced an increase in calcium phosphate deposition, TNAP activity and tnap expression. These effects were also seen in the absence of dexamethasone (an established osteogenic supplement). The expression of runx2 and ocn was not altered and the expression of bspII was diminished on the col/HyaS-containing aECM. The impact of the Col/HyaS-containing aECM on hMSC differentiation was independent of the DSS of the HyaS derivatives, indicating the importance of the primary (C-6) hydroxyl group of N-acetylglucosamine. These results suggest that Col/HyaS-containing aECM are able to stimulate hMSC to undergo osteogenic differentiation even in the absence of dexamethasone, which makes these matrices an interesting tool for hMSC-based tissue engineering applications and biomaterial functionalizations to enhance bone formation.Human mesenchymal stromal cells (hMSC) are widely used to study osteogenic differentiation and to gain an understanding of bone healing and for tissue engineering approaches In vitro osteogenic differentiation of hMSC involves three phases, (i) proliferation; (ii) matrix synthesis and maturation/differentiation (decreased proliferation rate, elevated endogenous ECM synthesis, induction of osteoblast-specific genes), and (iii) mineralization (controlled deposition of calcium phosphate, formation of mineralized nodules), and requires the osteogenic supplements dexamethasone (Dex), ascorbic acid and β-glycerophosphate Synthetically sulfated hyaluronan derivatives (HyaS) were at first characterized and described as anti-thrombogenic substances In the present study the influence of aECMs containing Col and defined HyaS derivatives or the natural GAG hyaluronan and C4S on the osteogenic differentiation of hMSC was investigated. In parallel, osteogenic differentiation of hMSC was induced by the established osteogenic supplements Dex, ascorbate and β-glycerophosphate. Osteogenic differentiation of hMSC was determined by analyzing osteoblast-specific gene expression, TNAP activity and deposition of calcium phosphate. Cell culture plastic material was obtained from Greiner (Frickenhausen, Germany) and Nunc (Wiesbaden, Germany). Dulbecco’s minimum essential medium (DMEM), trypsin, the antibiotics penicillin and streptomycin and phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) were purchased from Biochrom (Berlin, Germany). Fetal calf serum was from BioWest (via Th.Geyer, Hamburg, Germany). Biochemical reagents were from Sigma (Taufkirchen, Germany). The RotiQuant assay from Roth (Karlsruhe, Germany) was used to determine the protein concentration. Rat tail collagen I was from BD Bioscience (Heidelberg, Germany). C4S (CSA, from bovine trachea) was obtained from Sigma (see The low sulfation hyaluronan derivative (HyaS1, DS The average degree of sulfation per disaccharide repeating unit of the hyaluronan sulfates was determined by estimation of the sulfur content using an automatic elemental analyzer (CHNS-932, Leco, Mönchengladbach, Germany). Molecular weight determination was performed by gel permeation chromatography (GPC) using a Jasco PU 980 pump and a combination of three Suprema-Gel columns 8  aECMs containing Col and C4S, Hya, HyaS1 or HyaS3 were prepared as described by Hempel et al. To characterize the composition of the aECM both the Col and GAG content were determined as described in detail in Hempel et al. Bone marrow aspirates were collected from healthy donors (males, average age 33 For the experiments 7000 Calcium phosphate deposition was visualized by histochemical von Kossa and Alizarin Red S staining. For von Kossa staining the plates were thoroughly washed with PBS and incubated with 5% silver nitrate solution for 1 Calcium phosphate deposition was quantified using calcium and phosphorus kits (both from Greiner Diagnostics, Bahlingen, Germany) as previously described Cell-free aECM samples (control) were treated in the same way as aECMs with cultured cells and analzsed for calcium and phosphate. TNAP activity was determined by use of a commercial kit (86-R, Sigma). Images were taken with an inverse microscope (Axiovert 40CFL, Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) using AxioVision Software 4.6. TNAP activity was determined from cell lysates (TNAP lysis buffer, 1.5 For the analysis of gene expression RNA was prepared from cell lysates using an RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden Germany). cDNA was synthesized using the QuantiTect Reverse Transcription Kit (Qiagen) including a DNA digestion step. Real time PCR reactions were performed using a RotorGene PG-3000 PCR 854 machine (Corbett, Wasserburg, Germany) with the RotorGene SYBR Green PCR Kit (Qiagen). After an initial activation step at 95 All data were derived from three independent experiments using three different hMSC preparations (hMSC preparations from the individual donors were not pooled and were measured independently); each parameter was analyzed in triplicate. The results are presented as means Gradually sulfated hyaluronan derivatives were characterized by the average DS As indicated by The composition of the different aECMs was determined after in vitro fibrillogenesis. The resulting matrices were composed of 93–98% Col I and 2–7% GAG derivative, corresponding to Hempel et al. The deposition of calcium phosphate mineral is one feature of mature osteoblasts. When cultured on TCPS in OMDex calcium deposition by hMSC increased significantly between days 18 and 29, whereas in BM no calcium was deposited ( Calcium deposition of hMSC on aECM was quantified after 18, 22 and 25 Linear regression analysis of the measured calcium and phosphate contents ( The activity of TNAP is an important prerequisite for mineral accumulation by osteoblasts, since the enzyme catalyzes the release of phosphate from physiological phosphate donors in vivo or from added β-glycerophosphate in vitro. TNAP activity of hMSC on TCPS increased after addition of OMDex between days 8 and 18, slightly decreasing thereafter ( TNAP activity of hMSC cultured in OMDex on the different aECMs were compared on days 8, 11 and 15. Additionally, on day 11 the cells were cultured in BM and OM to determine the effect of the osteogenic supplements. In OMDex all three Col/HyaS-containing aECM showed significantly higher TNAP activity (about 6-fold) compared with Col, Col/C4S and Col/Hya ( hMSC were cultured on aECMs in BM and OMDex and stained on day 11 for active TNAP ( To determine whether the effect of aECM is restricted to calcium phosphate deposition and TNAP activity, gene expression of The effects of the different aECMs on the expression of these marker genes in OMDex on days 8, 11 and 15 are given in Bennett et al. TNAP expression and activity is an important prerequisite for adequate osteoblast-mediated mineral deposition, as demonstrated by Wennberg et al. It has been stated that in vitro the synthetic glucocorticoid Dex is essential for In our experiments We also showed that The GAGs used in this study also offer the possibility of addressing the effects of the degree of sulfation and the position of sulfate groups within the anhydrosugar repeating unit and/or sugar backbone on their biological activity. C4S was chosen as it can be used as a reference GAG for low sulfation hyaluronan, with a DS aECMs containing Col I and hyaluronan sulfates seem to be a suitable tool to induce osteogenic differentiation of hMSC. Col/HyaS-containing aECM induced an increase in The authors thank Carolin Preissler, Christine Kupke and Alina Miron for their excellent technical assistance. The authors are very grateful to Prof. Bornhäuser and colleagues in the stem cell laboratory of the University Hospital in Dresden for providing the human mesenchymal stromal cells. The authors thank Dr. Jürgen Schiller of the Biophysical Department Leipzig for discussing the NMR data. This work was supported by grants from the