Introduction
                  Adverse weather has been recognized as a significant threat to traffic safety. However, relationships between fatal crashes involving large numbers of vehicles and weather are rarely studied according to the low occurrence of crashes involving large numbers of vehicles.
               
                  Method
                  By using all 1,513,792 fatal crashes in the Fatality Analysis Reporting System (FARS) data, 1975–2014, we successfully described these relationships.
               
                  Results
                  We found: (a) fatal crashes involving more than 35 vehicles are most likely to occur in snow or fog; (b) fatal crashes in rain are three times as likely to involve 10 or more vehicles as fatal crashes in good weather; (c) fatal crashes in snow [or fog] are 24 times [35 times] as likely to involve 10 or more vehicles as fatal crashes in good weather. If the example had used 20 vehicles, the risk ratios would be 6 for rain, 158 for snow, and 171 for fog.
               
                  Conclusions
                  To reduce the risk of involvement in fatal crashes with large numbers of vehicles, drivers should slow down more than they currently do under adverse weather conditions. Driver deaths per fatal crash increase slowly with increasing numbers of involved vehicles when it is snowing or raining, but more steeply when clear or foggy.
               
                  Practical applications
                  We conclude that in order to reduce risk of involvement in crashes involving large numbers of vehicles, drivers must reduce speed in fog, and in snow or rain, reduce speed by even more than they already do.All 1,513,792 fatal crashes documented in the Fatality Analysis Reporting System [FARS] ( Nearly all (94%) fatal crashes in the United States involve, at most, two vehicles, so fatal crashes involving large numbers of vehicles are rare. There are eight crashes per year involving 10 or more vehicles, fewer than one involving 27 or more vehicles. In order to obtain enough cases for analysis, we accumulated data over the entire period for which FARS data are available, namely, the 40 The rare crashes studied here are not a major component of the overall harm caused by 30,000 annual U.S. fatal crashes. However, they cause numbers of deaths that would be considered an important national public health problem in any context other than traffic. Over the study period, more than a thousand people were killed in crashes involving eight or more vehicles. This provides sufficient reason to encourage their study. Additionally, the analyses presented here show that fatal crashes involving many vehicles can solidify understanding of the role of weather in fatal crashes in general, and encourage countermeasures. There is an extensive literature on weather effects on traffic safety. The investigation most similar in data source to the present is that of The atmospheric, or weather, conditions used in FARS are shown in The distribution of the fatal crashes into the weather conditions is shown in These same data according to the number of vehicles, An immediate observation from This example shows the need to focus not on the number of fatal crashes involving a specific number of vehicles, but rather the number involving Using The value  The raw numbers in The values of Taking as an example To examine more generally, let us introduce. The interpretation is that, given you are in a fatal crash, the probability it will involve 10 or more vehicles is three times as great if it is raining than if it is clear [ These comparisons show that given that a vehicle is involved in a fatal crash, the probability that it is multivehicle is larger for all the adverse environmental conditions than when weather is clear. Given that a vehicle is involved in a fatal crash, the probability that the crash involves a specified number of vehicles increases faster as the number of involved vehicles increases for all the adverse atmospheric than for the clear weather case. The increases are steep for RAIN and yet steeper for SNOW and FOG.  The literature justifies the following two conclusions. First, there is clear evidence that weather affects crash risk. Second, while effects are clear, they are not larger than, say, a factor of 2. If we make the assumption that weather does not affect fatal crash risk by more than a factor of 2, then So, for example, we conclude that From FARS defines a fatal crash as one involving a motorized vehicle in which at least one road user is killed. The average number of deaths per fatal crash, as is to be expected, increases with The increase is least for RAIN, for which the ratio exceeds one only when there are more than 17 vehicles involved in the crash, compared to 7 for CLEAR, 11 for SNOW, and 5 for FOG. This suggests drivers are reducing speeds when it is raining, which explains why Similar comments apply for snow. We interpret the slower increase for RAIN and SNOW in the number of drivers killed per fatal crash as the number of vehicles involved increases to reflect speed reductions. Although fatal crashes involving very large numbers of vehicles occur, fewer drivers are killed because traffic is traveling at lower speeds. The results for CLEAR and FOG are similar to each other, but very different from RAIN and SNOW. The similarity of the CLEAR and FOG results suggests that drivers are not slowing when it is foggy. There is evidence supporting this. Investigating the effect of fog in a simulator study, During the 40-year period covered by this study many changes occurred, including a reduction in fatal crashes in the United States from 38,594 in 1975 to 29,989 in 2014. This 22% decline is modest compared to the more than 80% declines reported in other countries ( Because the main focus of this paper is on what happens given that a fatal crash occurs, changes in absolute numbers do not materially affect conclusions. However, there is still much interest in examining how some characteristics have changed over four decades.  Given that a fatal crash occurs, the probability that it involves a large number of vehicles drifts in time erratically towards higher values. We have no explanations beyond the wildly speculative involving increasing speeds. We examined the percent of all fatal crashes that occurred under each of the adverse weather conditions. The percent of crashes that occurred in SNOW, (1.65 Prior to 1992 few new vehicles were equipped with antilock brakes (ABS), so only a much smaller proportion of ABS-equipped vehicles were on the roads. From the mid-1990s onwards ABS increasingly became standard equipment in nearly all new vehicles, although it was not required by NHTSA regulation until 2012. NHTSA's own research had concluded that “ABS has close to a zero net effect on fatal crash involvements” ( An interpretation of the findings in If ABS did reduce fatal crash risk when it is raining by 19%, but had no effect under other environmental conditions, the net effect on all fatal crashes would a reduction of 0.19 For fatal crashes in RAIN, we found no systematic or notable effects dependent on the number of involved vehicles. Examining effects for large numbers of involved vehicles were limited due to small numbers of cases. A major limitation of this study, in common with all such studies, is that we do not know the driving speed of the vehicles prior to any participation (such as speed reduction or brake application) in the crashes. Such information is recorded in an Electronic Data Recorder fitted to most vehicles. However, legal constraints prohibit access by the police coding the inputs to FARS data. Another limitation is that the collected data of 40  Crashes involving more than 35 vehicles are more likely to occur when it is snowing or in fog. If a vehicle is involved in a fatal crash when it is raining, the crash is three times as likely to involve 10 or more vehicles than when it is clear. If a vehicle is involved in a fatal crash when it is snowing, the crash is 24 times as likely to involve 10 or more vehicles than when it is clear. If a driver is involved in a fatal crash when there is fog, the crash is 35 times as likely to involve 10 or more vehicles compared than when it is clear. If instead of selecting crashes involving 10 or more vehicles we had chosen crashes involving 20 or more vehicles, the risk ratios would be 6 for rain, 158 for snow, and 171 for fog. These risk ratios are likely the largest reported in traffic safety research. Driver deaths per fatal crash increases slowly with increasing numbers of involved vehicles when it is snowing or raining, but more steeply when weather is clear or foggy. Drivers reduce speed when it is snowing or raining, but no indication of similar reductions when foggy. In order to reduce the risk of involvement in crashes involving large numbers of vehicles, drivers must reduce speed in fog, and in snow or rain, reduce speed by even more than they already do. Future works on exploring and validating more effective countermeasures to help drivers reduce their speed in adverse weather conditions are strongly suggested. Images of multi-vehicle crashes could be used in messages to encourage drivers to slow down, and expand the message to stress that speed is the most central factor in all types of crashes under any conditions. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of The