To investigate the effect of amide group at the α-C position of lauric acid on quartz flotation, a novel surfactant 2-(carbamoylamino) lauric acid (2-CLA) was synthesized and used as the flotation collector. The 2-CLA was characterized by element analysis, 1H NMR, and FT-IR. Quartz flotation tests showed that the 2-CLA was an anionic collector and flotation recovery was above 98% when the slurry temperature was as low as 10 °C. Zeta potential analysis combined with solution chemistry calculations and contact angle measurements indicated that electrostatic adsorption didn’t occur between collector 2-CLA and activated quartz. Computational simulation based on DFT showed that the adsorption probability of the main species in the pulp on quartz surface was in the order of Ca2+ > Ca(OH)+ > OH− > H2O > 2-CLA−, namely, activator was preferentially adsorbed. Also, it revealed that the strong chemisorption occurred between collector 2-CLA and activated quartz because 3s and 3d orbitals of the Ca2+ gained electrons from 2p orbital of the O atoms in 2-CLA. The CONH2 group containing special O and N atoms could strengthen the chemical bonding adsorption and hydrogen bonding synergy, which lead to the excellent flotation performance of collector 2-CLA even at 10 °C.Quartz, as an oxide mineral which has stable physical and chemical properties, mainly consists of SiO In order to obtain a better collectability and low-temperature adaptability, these long-chain fatty acids are usually modified by introducing various special groups by chemical reaction. For example, RA series collectors (RA-315, RA-515, RA-715, and RA-915) An amide group ( Recently, computational simulation methods have been widely used in the development of flotation reagents and exploring adsorption mechanism of reagents on mineral surface. Especially, the molecular simulation based on first-principles and density functional theory (DFT) makes it possible to quantify the energy change and electron transfer during adsorption, which allows us to observe flotation process in atomic scale and establish the favorable adsorption configurations directly. Murashov In this work, a new collector 2-CLA was synthesized via adding an amide group to the α-C position of lauric acid and the flotation performance was tested by quartz flotation. The species distribution of 2-CLA and CaCl In this study, the first-principles periodic calculations were performed based on density functional theory (DFT) using the Cambridge serial total energy package (CASTEP), to investigate the adsorption process and flotation mechanism of reagents’ molecules on a quartz surface. A developed exchange-correlation function Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof solids (PBESOL) under the framework of generalized gradient approximation (GGA) was used for geometry optimization and energy calculation, which had been proven to be reliable and accurate for quartz surface adsorption system According to the previous literatures The carefully hand-picked pure quartz samples from Sijiaying iron mine, Hebei Province, China, were first crushed to −1 mm with hammer, then grinded in a porcelain mill with agate balls, and wet-sieved to obtain the −0.150 mm size fractions for micro-flotation tests. The chemical compositions of the obtained quartz sample were presented in The new collector, 2-(carbamoylamino) lauric acid (2-CLA), was synthesized through α-halogenated and α-ammonolyzed reactions In the measurement of collector 2-CLA FTIR, spectral pure KBr was ground to below 0.002 mm and pressed into thin slices with a special mold. The collector 2-CLA was then dipped to the KBr slice by a glass rod to determine the infrared spectrum by Nicolet 740 FT-IR spectrometer. The micro-flotation tests were conducted in a 50 mL flotation cell of a XFG Zeta potentials were measured by Malvern Instruments Nano-ZS90 zeta potential analyzer. Before the measurement, the quartz sample was further ground to below 0.005 mm and configured as a 0.06 wt% suspension. The zeta potentials of samples surface were measured in the absence and presence of CaCl Hand-picked pure quartz ore were cut to a proper size approximately 2 × 1.5 × 1 cm. The cleaned quartz piece was put into the solution containing 50 mg/mL CaCl The molecular structure of 2-CLA was shown in The flotation performance of collector 2-CLA was investigated through quartz flotation. Effects of pulp pH, collector 2-CLA concentration, activator CaCl Zeta potential analyses and solution chemistry calculations of flotation regents were used to investigate the electrostatic interaction between the 2-CLA and the quartz surface. After treated with 50 mg/L (4.5 × 10  In this study, CASTEP module based on DFT in the Materials Studio 8.0 software was used to calculate the adsorption energy of different adsorbates on quartz surface. The total adsorption energy is regarded as an effective method to discriminate the affinity of different adsorbates on quartz surface. Usually, the negative adsorption energy means that the adsorption tends to occur, and the smaller the adsorption energy, the stronger the interaction. On the contrary, positive adsorption energy indicates that adsorbates are not easy or impossible to be adsorbed on the mineral surface. According to the solution chemistry analysis, there are five main species in aqueous solution at pH above 11.5, namely, H As shown in According to the solution chemistry analysis in The electronic properties analysis is a valuable method to understand and investigate the electron transfer and the chemical adsorption among interaction atoms It could be seen from  Similar changes in the DOSs of Ca To further understand the chemical adsorption process, the electron density difference Finally, the mechanism of how amide group The novel amide fatty acid collector 2-CLA was proven to be an anionic collector with excellent low-temperature flotation ability. Even when the pulp temperature was as low as 10 °C, the quartz recovery of 2-CLA flotation was above 98%. For 2-CLA flotation of quartz, a high pulp pH of 11.5 and 50 mg/L of activator CaCl The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors gratefully acknowledge and appreciate the financial supports provided by the