An in situ modified Hummers method (without the use of any surfactants) has been used for the deposition of bismuth (Bi) nanoparticles onto the surface of reduced graphene oxide (RGO) sheets. The as-synthesized nanocomposites were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, transmission electron microscopy (TEM), thermogravimetry (TG) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). The morphology of the RGO/Bi nanocomposites provides a better choice as an electrode material for detection of heavy metal ions due to its better functional properties over the Bi film electrode. Trace analysis of heavy metal ions like Cd+2, Pb+2, Cu+2 and Zn+2 in water is carried out by stripping voltammetric analysis using RGO/Bi nanocomposite as an electrode material. The sensitivity and detection limit of the electrode were quantitatively estimated from the analysis. The three sigma detection limits at different deposition potential for Cd2+, Pb2+, Zn2+ and Cu2+ were obtained as 2.8, 0.55, 17 and 26μgL−1, respectively. Copper detection using Bi-film electrode was a major challenge, which has been resolved using the RGO/Bi nanocomposite electrode.Graphene, a two-dimensional single layer of graphite, became the subject of significant research ( Metal ions and functional groups have been used to modify reduced graphene oxide (RGO) sheets. Metal nanoparticles are of great interest due to their unique optical ( In this paper, we demonstrate a simple and versatile Natural flake graphite was purchased from Sigma Aldrich with a particle size of <150 Graphite oxide (GO) was prepared from the natural flake graphite according to a modified Hummers method ( RGO/Bi nanocomposite prepared was used as an electrode material for the stripping voltammetric determination of heavy metal ions in water. RGO/Bi nanocomposite was dispersed in the methanol medium (dispersion solution). This dispersion was then drop-casted to form a uniform coating on to the carbon paste electrode surface. This modified electrode was immersed into a 10 The identification and purity of the phase was tested by X-ray diffraction (XRD) studies using a Philips powder diffractometer PW 3040/60 with Cu The XRD patterns of the RGO and RGO/Bi nanocomposite samples are shown in FTIR spectra of GO and RGO/Bi nanocomposite samples are compared in Raman spectra of GO and the RGO/Bi nanocomposite are shown in The thermal properties (TG–DSC) of GO and the RGO/Bi nanocomposite are shown in In the present study, the performance of the nanocomposite has been evaluated for the determination of Cd It is noteworthy to observe sharp stripping peaks due to Cd Determination of Zn Determination of copper using Bi film electrode was a major challenge to the analytical chemists as the Bi oxidation peak appeared before the copper stripping peak. There was a successful attempt made by The present studies have shed new and useful insights into the unique stripping behavior of RGO/Bi nanocomposite electrode having an edge over conventional mercury electrodes for electroanalysis of trace metals. The Bi nanoparticles are uniformly anchored on to the surfaces of individual graphene nanosheets which prevent restacking of graphene, resulting in good dispersion in solvents. RGO/Bi nanocomposite has been used as the electrode material for the ultrasensitive determination of heavy metal ions, namely Zn The authors are thankful to Nanomission of Department of Science and Technology (DST), Government of India for financial support. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 