Reduction behaviour of cold bonded self-reducing titaniferous magnetite ore (TMO) and lean grade coal briquettes have been investigated under isothermal condition. The reduction experiments of TMO-coal composite briquettes have been performed at varying temperatures ranging between 1273 and 1473K for 3–60min. The metallised briquettes are characterised by XRD and further FESEM. It can be inferred that the coal devolatisation and char gasification are solely responsible for the reduction process. The isothermal kinetic study has been performed considering the loss of oxygen fraction from the TMO which showed contracting geometry (CG3) to be the initial mechanism followed by diffusion controlled mechanism (Jander kinetic model; D4) in the later part of the reaction. The corresponding activation energies using Arrhenius Equation are evaluated as 93.42 and 179.80KJ/mol, respectively.Stringent environmental norms and concerns over the consumption of energy have forced the steel industries to find an alternative feeding burden for ironmaking process. In this perspective, iron oxide ore cold bonded-self reducing coal composites are gaining popularity due to increase of reduction kinetics even with decreasing reducing agent and specific energy consumption. Several researchers have investigated the use of this burden material in the blast furnace and for the alternative ironmaking route ( For the utilisation of TMO, new widespread utilisation process technologies have been studied such as chemical extraction, direct reduction (e.g., via a fluidized bed, rotary kiln, rotary hearth furnace) etc., but still these processes have not yet been employed industrially due to its high titania content and complex geo-chemical structure. Two step processes involving initial metallisation followed by rapid melting and liquid phase separation is one of the most sought after routes for the beneficiation of titanium bearing magnetite ore ( It is a well-known fact that due to the structural and geo-chemical complexity of TMO it becomes quite difficult to be treated. From the literature survey, it can be inferred that the carbothermal reduction of finer fraction gives rise to higher reducibility in comparison to lump size fractions due to larger surface area of fine fractions. TMO fines in the form of briquettes have been used in the present study for carbothermal reduction. An under-utilized lean grade coal is used as reductant for the carbothermal experiments. The present study puts forth an isothermal kinetic study for the reduction of TMO-coal composite briquettes along with calculation of the associated apparent activation energy. For the present investigation the vanadium bearing titaniferous magnetite ore (TMO) sample has been collected from a site which is situated in the eastern part of India near Shaltora area (23°33′N, 86°56′E), Bankura district, West Bengal. The collected lump ore is thereafter subjected to ore dressing process comprising of jaw crushing followed by roll crushing. The product from roll crusher has been passed through BSS Standard − The TMO sample has been analysed by using wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence (WDXRF; PAN analytical) and the result is summarised in Lean grade coal is used for carbothermal reduction purpose which has been supplied by the Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL), Vizag, India. The coal is first jaw crushed followed by roll crushing finally to obtain fine particles below 75 Thermo gravimetric-differential thermal analysis (TG/DTA; Perkin Elmer) of coal is also performed under nitrogen atmosphere (UHP Grade 99.99% N TMO fines of specified size are mixed homogeneously along with stoichiometric weight percentage of specified size of coal fines and binders (bentonite, molasses and water). Stoichiometrically for 10 The reduction experiments have been carried out in a PID controlled electrically heated tubular furnace with the temperature accuracy of ~ The briquettes are first dried in a hot air oven. The solid-solid direct reduction experiments of briquettes have been carried at temperatures 1273 In the above kinetic equations, the abbreviations like D, CG and R correspond to diffusion, contracting geometry and chemical reaction controlled mechanism, respectively. The equations represent the different mechanisms involved in the kinetics of reaction in the solid-solid and solid-gas interface. In order to identify the mechanism(s) of reduction, reduced time analysis is carried out. For a particular mechanism, Assuming, The analysis of coal has revealed that the coal contained around 30% of fixed carbon and 29% of volatile matter. The significant presence of volatile matter plays a crucial role in reduction experiments. In the present study, TMO-coal composite briquettes are subjected to reduction in the temperature range of 1273 At higher temperature, removal of H Loss of weights as a function of time at different temperatures is plotted in   FESEM micrographs of reduced briquette samples at temperatures 1323 At the very initial step of reduction, TMO is directly reduced by carbon with slow reduction rate and it is followed by fast indirect reduction reaction. As discussed earlier, due to coal volatisation and char gasification (Eqs. The observed phases during the carbothermic reduction of TMO-coal briquettes are shown in Isothermal kinetic studies on the reduction of iron oxide ores have attracted a lot of interest ( To determine the kinetic model and the rate controlling steps in the process of reduction, the experimental data are analysed by using reduced time plots of In order to calculate the activation energy Arrhenius equation has been used as mentioned below: Thus the plot of ln k vs 1/T would yield a straight line and from the slopes the activation energy can be evaluated. The plots of ln k vs 1/T for CG The complex geo-chemical characteristics are the main causes for structurally dense surface area and crystallographic multifaceted lattice of TMO which are responsible for low reducibility for lump ore. TMO fines in the form of briquettes have been taken and this increases the reducibility due to large in surface area of TMO. It can be concluded from the present investigation that the maximum reduction of TMO-coal composite briquettes is completed within 30 The authors would like to express their heartfelt gratitude to Mr. Arghya Majumder (Assistant General Manager, QA&TD, RINL, Vizag, India) and Mr. Santanu Chakraborty (Assistant General Manager, R&D, RINL, Vizag, India). Authors would also like to acknowledge Dr. Supratim Biswas, Post-Doctoral Researcher, Mineral Processing and Technology Research Center, University of Johannesburg, South Africa for his valuable suggestions and assistance. We would also like to thank Mr. Anirban Sur, Chemist, Geological Survey of India (Eastern Region), Kolkata, (India). One of the authors (Bitan Kumar Sarkar) acknowledges the financial support under the scheme “ Following are the % of phases, as determined by the WDXRF of the TMO.  Molecular weight of ilmenite (FeTiO 79.9 23.23  Now we would find out the contribution of Fe from ilmenite. Again, 151.7 44.105 Since the total content of Fe is 48.96% as determined by WDXRF, Therefore, Fe in magnetite and hercynite Similarly for hercynite, Molecular weight of hercynite (FeAl 102 3.8  Again, 173.8 6.47 Therefore, from (2), Fe in Magnetite Molecular weight of Magnetite (Fe 167.4 30.663  The 100 TMO From the above calculations, 100 54.96 92.96 51.09 Ti present in TMO & Al present in TMO Amount of oxygen present in TMO in briquettes Final weight after reduction at 1200 Therefore, weight loss From the last row of the above table, it is clearly shown that (0.81 Hence, weight loss of oxygen from TMO as well as fixed carbon of coal for a period of 60 On the contrary, total oxygen content in ilmenite, magnetite and hercynite in TMO as well as of fixed carbon of coal (M Therefore, fraction converted, α, is given by α This procedure is repeated for different isothermal temperature and time.