The piezoelectric charge coefficients d
                     33 of single BaTiO3 (BT) nanoparticles (NPs) were characterized using a transmission electron microscope (TEM) that is equipped with a precise charge meter and an in-situ TEM indentation holder that enables controlled compression experiments. An exceptionally high d
                     33 of 1775 pC/N was obtained in NPs that are smaller than the critical diameter (D; typically known as < 100 nm) that has been regarded as the lower limit to permit for ferroelectricity in BT. The mechanical conversion efficiency of piezoelectric BT nanogenerators enhanced as D of BT NPs was decreased; this result corresponds with the single-NP compression measurements of d
                     
                        33
                     . This quantification of the effect of D in ferroelectric materials may guide development of efficient and high-powered nanostructured piezoelectric energy devices such as piezoelectric nanogenerators.Ferroelectric materials have a spontaneous internal electric polarization that can be reversed by an electric field Piezoelectricity is induced by off-center atomic displacements from a delicate balance between Coulomb and covalent interactions BaTiO We report an exceptionally high The BT NPs, with diameters range of 10–1000 nm, were donated from Samsung Electro-Mechanics Co. Ltd. For the electromechanical coupling measurement, the NPs were dispersed in ethanol by ultra-sonication for 10 min, and then the solution was dropped onto a 1 μm-wide Si plateau that was coated with a 10 nm-thick Au layer. The measurements of charge generation from perovskite BT NPs were performed using a indenter holder in a TEM system (JEM-2100 LaB For direct observation of local polarization within BT NP, atomically resolved high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) STEM images were acquired at 200 kV accelerating voltage in a STEM (JEM-2100F, JEOL) equipped with a spherical aberration corrector (CESCOR, CEOS GmbH). The probe convergence angle of approximately 22 mrad was used. The inner and outer angles of the HAADF detector were 70 and 200 mrad, respectively. The obtained HAADF STEM images were filtered using 2-dimensional Wiener filter to reduce background noise (HREM Research Inc., Japan) Polarization was calculated under assumption that displacement of invisible oxygen atoms along Ti-O atomic column behaves identical to the other visible oxygen atoms in each unit cell. All of the atomic position calculation and polarization vector plot were performed by the hand-made scripts based on MATLAB (Math Works). To produce the piezoelectric nanogenerator, BT NPs with A square-wave load function was applied to a BT NP that had The force-dependent electromechanical charge responses from the various BT particles were examined by a series of indentation experiments on a BT NPs. Data points were calculated by averaging the height of the peaks ( The size effect on nanoscale ferroelectricity in the classic perovskite-structured ferroelectric BT has been a matter of debate. The inverse piezoelectric effect on a 10 nm ferroelectric BT nanousing piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) on a 10-nm ferroelectric BT nanocube detected A spontaneous distortion of the crystal lattice of piezoelectric BT arises from a relative displacement along the To determine whether this size-scaling effect of BT NPs can be exploited in practical electronic devices, we fabricated composite-structured piezoelectric nanogenerators that included various-sized BT particles as active electromechanical conversion elements To summarize, we report a remarkable piezoelectric constant This research work was mainly supported by the Global Frontier R&D Program on Center for Hybrid Interface Materials (HIM) funded by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at  