This paper presents an experimental and numerical study of the gouge formation related to burden distribution in a BF. Physical experiments are conducted using a simplified bell-less charging model. The results indicate that the burden distribution is affected by particle properties such as density and size, and geometry of experimental set-up such as chute angle and distance between bin and chute. The gouge area generated is related to the ratio of the input energy from the top layer to the inertial energy from the base layer for the cases with red wooden balls, large glass beads and large steel balls. Numerical experiments are performed by means of the discrete element method. It is shown that the simulation model can reproduce the experimental results well. The weight ratio distribution is found to be largely affected by the densities of materials. The force structures are also analyzed to understand the fundamentals of the formation of the burden profiles.Control of burden distribution at the top of a blast furnace (BF) is important for obtaining the preferred gas flow distribution and maintaining BF operation stability. The burden surface profile can be detected via profile meter installed at a BF ( The bulk behavior of a particle system depends on the collective interactions of individual particles. Hence, particle scale analysis plays a critical role to understand the mechanisms governing the particle flow in forming BF burden distributions. An important simulation approach of particle scale is the so-called discrete element method (DEM) originally developed by In this paper, an experimental study of solid flow under the conditions related to burden distribution of BF is conducted. The experiments involve both physical and numerical methods. The physical experiments are conducted by using a simplified bell-less charging model. The effects of variables, including particle density, particle size, distance between the bin and chute, and chute angle, are studied. The numerical experiments are performed by means of DEM. The results are compared with the physical experiments macroscopically for the verification of the applicability of the numerical approach, and analyzed microscopically for the fundamental understanding and quantitative descriptions. The physical experiments have been carried out using a simplified bell-less charging model, as schematically shown in An experiment involves two kinds of particles. They are alternately charged into the bin when the bin orifice is closed, discharged after the control plate is pulled leftwards, and then settle down under gravity in the lower part of the container. Thus, two dumps are generated. If repeating this process, four dumps would be created. The distance between the chute plate and container bottom is two square plates high (2 The numerical simulations are performed based on the DEM originally proposed by The simulation conditions, including the geometrical and operational conditions, are the same as those used in the physical experiment in order to validate the simulation method. Then, in the further numerical experiments for microscopic analysis, period boundary conditions are implemented to eliminate the influence of the front and rear walls. The properties of materials for the simulations are listed in An illustrative charging process is shown in To examine the effect of the manual operations on the results in an experiment, three repeated experiments of large glass beads charging onto blue wooden balls have also been carried out. For all runs, blue wooden balls move away from the impact point to both sides to create gouges with similar profiles. Some wooden balls rest on the surface of the glass beads. Although the numbers of wooden balls on the glass bead surface are different due to the different speeds pulling the control plate, overall, these experiments generate similar results. To investigate the effect of materials on the burden profile after impacted,  The burden profiles are also affected by the geometry of the set-up. The burden profiles with different distances between the bin and chute have also been investigated, as shown in The formation of gouges in BF burden distribution can be attributed to the rapid release of the kinetic energy during impact between two material particles. The impact process in such a particle system is very complicated. It often occurs in a short duration with relatively large impact forces, and involves many complicated physical characteristics such as stress waves propagating through the objects, local deformations produced in the vicinity of the contact area and dissipation of mechanical energy. Our previous numerical study showed that particle stream from a hopper (top layer) vertically impact onto a granular bed with flat surface (base layer) can create a crater ( Here, we would like to test the applicability of Eq. The DEM simulation is performed in a cuboid container, and blue wooden balls and large glass beads are used, same as the experimental conditions in  Further, three different cases have been carried to understand the effects of particle physical properties such as sliding and rolling frictions and damping force on the burden profile. The weight ratio of materials is a key variable to control the charge patterns in a BF, but is hard to obtain from physical experiments. The weight ratio can be readily obtained from the DEM simulations. The weight ratio is somewhat affected by the physical properties of particles as well, as shown in It has been known that interaction force between particles is an important variable to understanding the dynamic behavior of particle flow (   An experimental and numerical study has been conducted with the simplified bell-less charging model under conditions related to blast furnace. The experimental results indicate that burden distribution is affected by particle density, particle size, chute angle, and distance between the bin and chute. In particular, the larger the density of the charged material, the more particles are pushed towards the left wall of the container, and the greater the depth of the generated gouge. Particles move away to both sides from the impact point when the chute angle is 33°, but only move to one side (left) when the chute angle is 45°. The higher the distance between the bin and chute, the more particles are pushed to the left part of the container. Furthermore, it has been shown that the gouge area generated by the impact of the red wooden balls, large glass beads and large steel balls has a relationship with the input energy from the top layer to the inertial energy from the base layer. This relationship can be described by the formula obtained in our previous numerical study. However, this formula is not suitable for the cases of the impact of the small glass beads and small steel balls onto the blue wooden balls. Therefore, further study, especially, on the effect of particle size, is required to obtain a formula for general application. DEM simulation is shown to be able to reproduce the experimental results well, and have advantages when calculating the weight ratio distribution of materials and obtaining the microscopic information, compared with physical experiments. It has been shown that the weight ratio distribution is strongly affected by the density of materials. The force structures have also been analyzed to understand the fundamentals of the formation of the burden profiles. Future work will be focused on more complicated charging patterns related to blast furnace operations. The authors are grateful to the Australian Research Council and China Steel Corporation for the financial support of this project.