The rock mass on quarry and pit wall surfaces is usually fractured during production blasting. Quantitative investigations of the fractured zones are needed for stabilization of the rock walls. In this study, the principle of reversed vertical seismic profiling (RVSP) was applied. A set of seismic geophones were arranged on the horizontal bench surface and seismic signals were generated along the vertical rock wall using a free-swinging hammer. The travel times of seismic rays were recorded and the P-wave velocities of the rock mass were analyzed using the Simultaneous Iterative Reconstruction Technique (SIRT). A series of site tests have been carried out on the rock walls at a granite quarry that are characterized by fractures. The fracture depth at various locations on the wall surface is thereby determined. The results indicate that RVSP provides an easy and reliable method to quantitatively evaluate the blasting-induced fractures in the rock mass.Abandoned quarries or mine pits may be reconstructed to parks and water reservoirs for recreation or other purposes. However, the rock mass on the rock walls may be fractured to various extent due to the blasting effects during production and the further weathering effects. For the purpose of reuse, the fractured rock walls must be properly supported and stabilized. Scaling, shotcreting (with or without wiremesh) and rock bolting are known as the common measures for rock wall stabilization. The purposes are to reinforce the rock mass, to improve its integrity and to prevent the rock surface from weathering Obviously, application of the stabilization measures depends on the fracture states of the rock mass and the extent of the fractured zone beneath the wall surface. For example, estimation of the scaling work is based on the volume of the loose rocks on the wall surface to be scaled. The design of spacing and length of rock bolts is also related to the fracture state of the rock mass and the depth of the fractured zone. Therefore, the first step for rock wall stabilization is to quantitatively assess the rock quality on and beneath the wall surfaces. At present, rock core drilling is the most common technique to get rock samples and to assess the fractures inside the rock mass Efforts have been made to improve the situation by applying advanced geophysical techniques in site investigations. Seismic tomography has been rapidly applied in the geosciences since the pioneer works by One application of seismic tomography is the vertical seismic profiling (VSP) of boreholes. In geological investigations, VSP is widely used to correlate surface seismic data, to calibrate seismic reflectivity coefficients derived from well log data, and to detect geological abnormalities surrounding boreholes Based on the principles of VSP and seismic tomography, the authors have developed a reversed vertical seismic profiling (RVSP) technique to specifically investigate the blast-induced fracture of the rock mass on rock walls. The technique has been successfully implemented in a series of site tests. Since RVSP is based on the principles of VSP and seismic tomography, it is first necessary to briefly discuss these two techniques. The principle of VSP is illustrated in Using the principle of VSP, it is possible to investigate the fracture of rock mass behind walls. In this application, the seismic signal is generated along the rock walls and received on the horizontal bench surfaces The rock wall and bench surface enclose a triangular area of the rock mass behind the wall surface. When a seismic test is carried out on the rock wall, the triangular area receives a number of seismic rays that penetrate the rock mass. The first arrival times of the seismic rays can be detected at the sensor locations. The P-wave velocities in the rock mass can be estimated. From these velocities, the fracture state of the rock mass and the geometrical profile of the fractured zone can be identified. The principle of reconstructing the velocity field is illustrated in By replacing the reciprocal of velocity For the cells that the Suppose there are a set of observed travel times,  In linear tomography, In general, the iterative results from The two main iterative methods for linear tomography are the Algebra Reconstruction Technique (ART) and the Simultaneous Iterative Reconstruction Technique (SIRT) The procedure of iteration is illustrated in A series of site tests were carried out in an old granite quarry. The investigated rock walls were 12–40 m in height. The rocks on the wall surfaces were characterized by various fracture states, representing the initial fractures and the fractures induced by production blasting. For comparison, results were obtained from three different sites at the quarry: a heavily fractured wall, a moderately fractured wall, and a non-fractured wall (created by smooth wall blasting). The fresh granite at the quarry is of excellent quality. Its mechanical properties are summarized in A 24-channel seismometer (EG&G) was employed for the seismic tests. The geophones were arranged on the top bench surface at an interval of 1 m. Since the bench surface was covered with a thin layer (around 200 mm) aggregate, the geophones were mounted on the steel bars of 8 mm in diameter and 200 mm in length. The bars were hammered into the rock mass to ensure reliable contact with the base rock. Since the steel bar is very short in comparison with the path of seismic waves, its effect on the measured velocities is expected to be negligible. A 5-kg hammer was employed to generate seismic signals along the rock walls. The seismic source locations were 1 m apart vertically on the walls. In order to achieve reliable seismic signals, hammering at each spot was repeated a few times until the first arrival of P-waves could be clearly identified. The recorded data were analyzed using the SIRT method. A wave velocity contour map was reconstructed for each test site. Seismic data were collected over a heavily fractured rock wall. The wall was 12 m high, and the top bench was 11 m wide Seismic data were collected over a moderately fractured rock wall with a height of 12 m and a bench width of 10 m Seismic data were collected over a non-fractured rock wall, which was created by smooth wall blasting. In this case, a series of perimeter holes were drilled along the designed slope wall. The spacing of these holes was 1 m, only half of that of the production holes, and the charge density was around 1/10 of that of the fully loaded production holes. The perimeter holes were blasted after the production holes. On the test site, the rock wall was 9 m high and the bench was 10 m wide When an elastic wave propagates in a rock mass, there are two major groups of factors affecting the wave velocity, the intrinsic factors and the environmental factors. The intrinsic factors include density, porosity, permeability, homogeneity, weathering, joint sets and fracturing states. The environmental factors refer to pressure, temperature and moisture. The influence of these factors on the P-wave velocity are summarized in Within a quarry area, the rock mass can be approximated as being homogeneous and most of the above factors can be treated as constant, except for the states of fracture. The P-wave velocity is therefore largely related to the fracture status of the rock mass. For hard rock, the P-wave velocity is very sensitive to the fracturing state of the rock. From site measurements at 104 tunnels,  According to From The results from the site tests indicate that the rock walls created by production blasting normally have been fractured to various extents. The P-wave velocity near the rock surfaces is 1500–3500 m/s, which corresponds to the very poor or extremely poor quality rock mass and a fracture frequency of 8 to 65 per meter. The rock at the crest is normally completely fractured, and can be treated as loose rock. However, the rock mass behind the fractured zone is still of very good or excellent quality with the P-wave velocities between 5200 and 5500 m/s, depending on the blasting damage. If the wall surface is heavily fractured, there exists a relatively distinct boundary between the heavily fractured zone and the original rock mass behind the fractured zone. The depth of the fractured zone may reach 1–2 m with less fracture along the lower portion of the wall. At the crest, the fracture can extend more than 4 m inside the rock mass. The fracturing along the wall surfaces was induced by the production blasting on the level being investigated, while the fracturing on the horizontal bench surface was induced by the production blasting on the upper level. Being exposed to twice blasting, the crest is most heavily fractured and has the largest fracture depth. For the rock wall created by smooth wall blasting, there was hardly any detectable fracture on the surface. The wave velocity on the wall surface was as high as 5200 m/s, slightly lower than the velocity of competent wall rock. Obviously, smooth wall blasting has significantly reduced the blasting impact on the rock wall and minimized the fracturing effect. Smooth wall blasting is an effective way to prevent the rock wall from blast-induced fracture. Because of the variation of the rock quality and the blasting parameters, the fracture status and the depth of the fractured zone behind the rock wall may be quite different. Therefore, quantitative site investigations of the rock quality are necessary before any rock wall stabilization is conducted. As demonstrated above, RVSP provides a reliable method for this purpose. This technique has the advantage of easy implementation on site and is suitable for various wall heights. It has been successfully used on rock walls as high as 35 m. Prior to stabilization of heavily fractured rock walls, the loose rocks near the crest and on the wall surfaces have to be first scaled down. To prevent the rock mass from future weathering, the rock surfaces should be sprayed with a layer of shotcrete of proper thickness. The rock walls should be reinforced with rock bolts that must be longer than the depth of the fractured zone and must be fully grouted. Wire mesh, cable straps may also be used when necessary. Production blasting in quarries or mine pits induces fractures to various extents on the associated rock walls. For reuse of the retired quarries or mine pits for civil projects, the rock walls must be stabilized. This paper used the technique of Reversed Vertical Seismic Profiling (RVSP) for quantitative investigation of fracture zones at a field site. This technique employs a free-swinging hammer as a seismic signal generator, a series of geophones installed on bench surfaces as signal receivers, and the principles of linear tomography as the technique for velocity analysis. The RVSP method can be used to detect the fracture status of a rock mass and evaluate the rock quality on rock walls, and is suitable for various wall heights. In general, the P-wave velocity is very sensitive to the fracture status of a rock mass. With RVSP, the velocity distribution in a rock mass can be obtained from the P-wave arrival times. The fracture status of the rock mass and the extent of the fractured zone can be evaluated from the P-wave velocities. By qualitatively correlating the P-wave velocity, Based on a series of site tests carried out in a granite quarry, the results indicate that uncontrolled production blasting produced fractures on the rock walls. The depth of the fractured zone extended between 1 and 2 m behind the rock surfaces. The P-wave velocity in the fractured zone varied between 1500 and 3500 m/s, which corresponds to a fracture frequency of 8 to 65 per meter and represents very poor or extremely poor quality rock, respectively. At the crest, the rock mass was completely fractured. The lateral extent depth was as much as 4 m due to the effects of double blasting on the level under investigation and the upper level. On the other hand, on a rock wall created by smooth wall blasting, there were hardly any visible fractures. For this case, the P-wave velocity was around 5200 m/s, which was slightly lower than the velocity of the unfractured rock. Thus, smooth wall blasting appears to be an effective way to prevent the rock from fracturing.