Purpose
                  The aim of this study was to evaluate our experience and complication rate with the use of a 3-dimensional 2.0-mm curved angle strut plate for mandibular angle fracture fixation.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  This was a retrospective evaluation of 37 patients with noncomminuted mandibular angle fractures fixated with a transorally placed curved 2.0-mm strut plate. Postoperative intermaxillary fixation was used in 5 patients for a mean period of 22 days. A nonchewing diet was prescribed for 6 weeks. Records were reviewed for demographic information, medical history, fracture characteristics, operative management, and complications.
               
                  Results
                  Two patients developed infections requiring plate removal and reapplication of fixation. Both of these patients had a molar in the fracture line that was left in place during the first operation. One patient developed a mucosal wound dehiscence without consequence. After a mean follow-up period of 10 weeks, 39.4% of patients with a postinjury/pretreatment inferior alveolar nerve deficit reported a return to normal sensation. All patients who developed a sensory deficit as a result of surgery reported full recovery of sensation. A persistent sensory deficit appeared to be related to fracture displacement.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Fixation of noncomminuted mandibular angle fractures with a 2.0-mm curved angle strut plate was predictable. This plate is low in profile, strong yet malleable, facilitating reduction and stabilization at both the superior and inferior borders. Development of a postoperative infection appeared to be related to failure of removal of a molar in the fracture line. The infection rate of 5.4% found in this study compares favorably with that seen with reconstruction plates. Use of this plate did not appear to cause a permanent sensory deficit in this study.