Minimisation of waste to landfilling is recognised as a priority in waste management by European rules. In order to achieve this goal, developing suitable technologies for waste recycling is therefore of great importance. To achieve this aim the technologies utilised for mineral processing can be taken into consideration to develop recycling systems. In particular comminution and separation processes can be adopted to recover valuable materials from composite waste. In this work the possibility of recycling pharmaceutical blister packaging has been investigated. A suitable comminution process has been applied in order to obtain the liberation of the plastic and aluminium components. Experiments of electrical separation have been carried out in order to point out the influence of the process parameters on the selections of the different materials and to set up the optimum operating conditions.Collection and disposal processes for waste management are a significant concern in Western Europe. Traditional waste disposal, in fact, could lead to the release of hazardous substances either by weathering and natural drying or by incineration processes. Besides, the high quantity of waste produced and the environmental restrictions have resulted in a lack of suitable sites for landfilling. The European Community is oriented, in terms of waste management policy, towards the application of the so called the composition of the ore deposit is usually more valuable than the composition of waste that is uncertain and changes during the time; ore deposits are usually more homogeneous than waste materials that are frequently heterogeneous in size and in composition; the characteristic of the concentrates coming from mineral processing are well specified by market standards, while valuable materials that can be recovered from waste are usually more indefinite; secondary materials frequently present contamination due to associate materials or fillers. Characterisation of waste is thus a preliminary step necessary to set up the operations of liberation, separation and decontamination. Since waste is often composed by complex materials like composites or assembled materials, liberation has to be achieved with suitable comminution processes especially set up for each kind of association. The specific comminution process has to be chosen taking into consideration the strengths to apply in order to obtain the breakage, and the temperature of comminution in order to avoid melting in the case where there are softening materials. When separation processes are carried out, it has to consider the possible presence of contaminants on the surface of the shredded particles that can affect the physical and chemical properties of the materials to be separated. This work deals with a waste constituted by blisters for pharmaceutical packaging. Blisters are a composite material constituted by plastic films sealed to aluminium foils. Comminution and separation processes have been investigated in order to liberate and recovery the two components. In 1997, the market of pharmaceutical packages in the USA was worth 2.9 billion dollars and is expected to increase 7.9% annually up to 2003 ( Plastic films and aluminium foils constitute base materials for blister packaging. These materials need to offer a protection to drugs in terms of moisture, light and oxygen barrier ( When drugs need more protection, especially in terms of moisture, coldformed blister are preferred ( Different kinds of plastics are used for the thermoformed film. PVC (polyvinyl chloride), sometimes coated or laminated with additional components, is the most common plastic used both for its chemical-physical characteristics and for its low cost (     New materials have recently been developed, composed of Coldformed blister packages utilise an aluminium layer to enhance water-vapour barrier properties. They generally consist of multilayer materials such as Lidding material must be selected according to size, shape and weight of the product. The thickness generally is in the range of about 360–760 μm. The surface of lidding material has to be compatible with the heat-seal process. Clay coatings are added as support for the press of possible logos and marks of production. The lidding material most widely used is hard or soft aluminium. The thickness of the aluminium has to guarantee the break up for pressure (push-through) ( Waste thermoformed blister packages, coming from private consumers, have been collected after the removal of drug content. In order to assess a suitable recycling process, waste blisters have been characterised through optical microscope analysis and specific gravity analysis. The texture of the blisters has been analysed by optical microscopy. Blisters have been positioned in order to observe a cross section. By the images at different magnifications ( For specific gravity analysis of aluminium and plastic, waste blister have been comminuted under 8 mm. Shredded blisters have been then selected in order to separate plastic particles, aluminium particles and middling. To measure specific gravity two different methods have been adopted: a pycnometer have been used for plastic particles and middling; indirect measurement, considering the data on thickness, volume and weight provided by producers has been used to calculate specific gravity for aluminium particles. Ethylic alcohol has been adopted for the measures done by the pycnometer. The results of the specific gravity analyses are reported in In order to recover aluminium and plastic components from waste pharmaceutical blister packages, comminution tests, followed by electrical separation tests, have been carried out. To assess the results of the separation tests the non-conducting products (NC) and the conducting products (C) have been roasted in a muffle furnace in order to obtain aluminium as a solid residual. In the treatment of composite waste, such as pharmaceutical blister packages, comminution is a fundamental step to promote the liberation of components ( A blade mill RETCH—SM 2000 has been used. Besides, in order to avoid melting of plastics and to improve the efficiency of comminution, tests have been carried out under different operational temperatures. The different milling conditions tested are the following ( comminution at room temperature; comminution under CO comminution after pre-conditioning of the waste blisters by immersion in liquid nitrogen, so that a temperature of about −100 °C is attained for the items to be comminuted; comminution under liquid nitrogen flow after pre-conditioning of the waste blisters by immersion in liquid nitrogen, so that a temperature of almost-100 °C is attained for the items to be comminuted. For the same comminution conditions, mill grids of different sizes (8, 4 and 2 mm) have been adopted to control the size-distribution of the outlet. The temperature has been monitored by thermocouples placed in the milling chamber. The experimental conditions and the results of cryo-comminution tests are shown in The comminution products coming from each test have been sieved in the following size-classes: −8 +4 mm; −4 +2 mm; −2 +1.4 mm; −1.4 +1 mm; −1 +0.85 mm; −0.85 +0.5 mm and −0.5 mm. Separation tests have been carried out for each size-class obtained after comminution tests. Electrical separation can be used to concentrate materials of different conductivity as aluminium, which is a very good conductor, and plastics, which are non-conductors. In an electrostatic separation process, three distinct stages must be considered: the charging of the particles, the separation that occurs at a grounded surface and the separation caused by the trajectory of the particles. Particles can acquire a surface charge by contacting dissimilar particles, ion bombardment and induction. The electrostatic separation results from the combination of the electrical, centrifugal and gravity forces. When the particle is a poor conductor or a non-conductor, the attraction force between the particle and the grounded surface must be considered. Balancing the forces acting in a separator it is possible to evaluate the tendency of a particle to be pinned to the rotor surface. The charge on a particle is assumed to remain constant after it escapes the grounded surface. It is thus possible to calculate the trajectory of the particles by numerical integration ( Tests on shredded pharmaceutical blister packages have been conducted by a drum electrostatic separator Bomax Rapid HT6. The separator is equipped with a grounded rotating drum and an electrode producing an electric field ( Blister after comminution has been kept in a dryer for 48 h and then each size-class has been fed separately to the electric separator. In order to set up the optimum operating conditions, the drum angular speed ( Particles collected as non-conductors have been re-circulated twice before obtaining the final products. In order to assess the separation process, the non-conducting and the conducting products of each size-class have been roasted in muffle at 550 °C until constant weight has been reached. At 550 °C the organic fraction (plastic) volatises thus only the inorganic fraction (aluminium) and the fillers present in the plastics remain. The presence of inorganic fillers in plastic has been taken into account by roasting samples composed only of the plastic used for the production of pharmaceutical blister packages. The average filler content has been calculated to raise up to 1.6% of the total plastic weight. Results of the electrostatic separation tests are shown in The Selectivity Indexes for blister coming from electrostatic separation after the different comminution processes are reported in Collection of waste pharmaceutical blister packages should be encouraged. Recycling of this kind of waste can be economically carried out by cryo-comminution and electrostatic separation processes and plastic and aluminium components can be recovered. Liberation of components in blister is the key problem: it can be pursued by cryo-comminution under suitable conditions. Electrostatic separation process after cryo-comminution resulted in high plastic recovery in the non-conducting products and a good aluminium recovery in the conducting products. Selectivity indexes obtained in electrostatic separation as well as the relationship between recovery and material content in the two products of separation showed that a proper liberation of the components is obtained adopting a 8 mm grid after cryo-comminution with liquid nitrogen pre-conditioning and flow through a blade mill. It has to be pointed out that the cryo-comminution procedure adopted apparently involve more energy than other technologies, but it has to be taken in mind not only .the size reduction process but the whole treatment diagram considering the size distribution and the results in separation. In fact, cryo-comminution allows to achieve lower size classes and higher recoveries and quality of selected products.