Fractional calculus is a generalization of the traditional calculus approach. In this research, column leaching test results are modeled by using the rate equation obtained by fractional calculus and compared to the traditional mass transfer equation model. By analyzing the adjusted determination coefficient, it is demonstrated that the proposed fractional model describes the extracted recovery percentage better than traditional equations. This analysis supports the utilization of the new model without over-parameterization. The present work brings a new point of view in mass transfer modelling of column leach testing, and therefore reformulates the existing models based on classic transport phenomena, leading to better understanding of the mineral leaching process.The column leach test is frequently used for the simulation of the heap leaching and analysis of the metal recoveries ( During the last two decades, mathematical models for the diffusion controlled leaching kinetics of the column leaching were generated ( A mathematical model of the column leaching processes requires the consideration of all the physical phenomena present. However, from an operational point of view, simple models based on algebraic expressions have been preferred in the industry. This paper focuses on a lixiviant diffusion and mass transfer model during controlled cyanide leaching of a gold ore. Diffusion models for leaching kinetics are based on the Generalized Fick's law of diffusion Eq. The extracted metal amount models are based on the non-linear kinetics of the lixiviant diffusivity, leach time and particle sizes. For a diffusion controlled process the extracted fraction ( Eq. Fractional calculus corresponds to the use of a fractional derivative of a non-integer order. This involves a generalization of traditional calculus, in which the derivative order ( Fractional calculus can be used to describe the dynamic response of systems including transport phenomena, e.g., heat transfer, charge transport in nanostructured materials and diffusion in disordered media ( The fractional derivative order can be associated with the nature of the stochastic processes and is influenced by the structure of the percolation network of the ore micro-porosity. In the case of subdiffusion ( The effective kinetic parameter can be defined by The aim of this technical note is to use the fractional calculus to generalize and improve the mathematical description of anomalous diffusion. The metallurgical samples used throughout the experiments are of the Carlin Type low grade ore. They were obtained from channel samples of the heap leach dump. These samples were produced monthly for column leach tests at the site. Head and tailing samples were analyzed for gold content by fire assaying; and cyanide soluble gold by cyanide shake test. Particle size distribution analysis for the samples was completed at the mine laboratory. Approximately 90 The model parameters (Eqs. In the The experimental data and model graphs on The Fickian model cannot predict the overall experimental Au recovery percentage (F The fractional calculus approach improved the kinetic curve fitting and leading to more accurate gold recovery predictions than with using only the Fickian approach that overestimates the maximum recovery and effective kinetic parameter. Based on the experimental results, it can be confirmed that the fractional calculus kinetics model can describe the gold extraction process better than the Fickian model.