This paper surveys the natural resource curse. We review the mechanisms through which resource wealth might slow economic growth, and the empirical studies that test for an effect overall, or on factors associated with growth. We include more recent studies suggesting the resource curse reflects only empirical misspecification. After reflecting on this conflicting evidence, and the findings of other recent surveys, we argue the evidence that resource dependence negatively affects growth remains convincing, particularly working through factors closely associated with growth in developing countries. Recent contrarian studies demonstrate that future research should better address endogeneity of dependence measures, and expand the years of study and range of empirical methodologies used.Algeria, Angola, Australia, Bahrain, Bolivia, Botswana, Brunei, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Democratic Republic of Congo, Republic of Cyprus, Ecuador, Egypt, Gabon, Greenland, Guyana, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Lao PDR, Liberia, Libya, Malaysia, Mauritania, Mexico, Morocco, New Caledonia, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Suriname, Syria, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela, Virgin Islands, Yemen, Zambia. There has been a deep belief since Adam Smith and David Ricardo that countries blessed with natural resources such as oil and gas can base their development on these resources, and use them as a key path for sustained economic growth. At the same time, the role that energy plays in development today arguably differs from the role it played in the late 19th and early 20th century in the United States, Australia and Canada. In recent decades, economists have observed that resource-rich nations, especially in Africa, Latin America and the Middle East tend to grow at a slower rate than countries with fewer natural resources. These countries are said to suffer from what A sizable literature has thus emerged since the 1980's challenging the conventional view that natural resources are a blessing for developing countries. This literature has increased significantly over time. Economists and other social scientists have identified different causal channels by which a resource curse might operate, and different outcome variables related to economic growth that it might affect. A number of important survey studies have attempted to summarize and evaluate the resource curse literature as it has developed, including by Our paper extends these previous surveys by including more recent studies not found elsewhere, and focusing on the evolution of economists’ thinking about the resource curse, including recent critiques of its very existence. Overall, we argue that the lack of consensus in the literature, obvious counter examples, and recent methodological critiques caution against viewing the resource curse as inevitable. Nonetheless, the sheer weight of disparate studies finding poor growth records of most countries with high resource dependence leads us to argue that the resource curse has not been invalidated. Rather, future studies are required that more carefully address issues of endogeneity in measures of resource dependence in production and export, clearly distinguishing it from measures of resource abundance. Future studies also need to better vary the years of data studied, and the empirical methodologies used. The rest of this paper is organized as follows: the basic resource curse thesis is rehearsed in To begin, it is useful to clarify with the Oxford Dictionary that the term “natural resources” refers broadly to natural assets such as materials, minerals, forests, water, and fertile land that occur in nature and can be used for economic gain. Some natural assets such as oil, gas and minerals can be depleted or exhausted. These non-renewable assets have no alternative use that can yield a similar marginal revenue product. In contrast, fertile land can be used to cultivate alternate crops. In practice, the resource curse thesis tends to focus on non-renewable natural resources following the lead of case studies first used to illustrate it. To understand the proposed curse, we first need to distinguish how resource wealth differs from other types of wealth. In principle, such assets should offer three large benefits for poor economies. First, the income stream from resource extraction can boost real living standards by financing higher levels of public and private consumption. Second, resource extraction can finance higher levels of investment, both directly out of natural resource income, and indirectly from borrowing made possible by that income. Third, since resource income typically accrues largely to the public sector, and indeed to the public budget, it can obviate a huge barrier to development: the lack of fiscal resources needed to finance core public goods, including infrastructure ( However, for some decades, it has been observed that the possession of natural resources is neither necessary nor sufficient to confer economic success. Many countries in Africa and the Middle East are rich in oil and other natural resources, and yet their people continue to experience low per capita income and a low quality of life. As mentioned, this puzzling phenomenon was labelled a “natural resource curse” by As already observed, economists have held two divergent perspectives on the role of natural resources in an economy. The more positive perspective can be traced back to Adam Smith and David Ricardo, who asserted that natural resources play a beneficial role in the process of economic development. Many postwar economists supported this view well into the 1970s (see for example Although there was some opposition to this conventional wisdom (see The Dutch disease (to be explained shortly) can be considered an immediate predecessor of the resource curse thesis. In 1988, Alan Gelb first analyzed the economic effects of oil rents in his book Inspired by these findings and arguments, Jeffery Sachs and Andrew Warner launched a series of cross sectional studies ( After 2001, the resource curse literature incorporated and extended the works of an Icelandic economist, Thorvaldur Gylfason ( In studying the role of natural resources in economic growth, it is not enough to show evidence that a relationship exists between these two factors. It is important to investigate the mechanisms that link resource dependence to poor economic performance. These mechanisms can be divided into two distinct but overlapping categories: economic and political explanations. Economically, the main reasons why resource-based paths of development inhibit long run economic growth are traced to the Dutch disease phenomenon, the volatility of commodity prices, failures of economic policy, and the neglect of education. Politically, the main mechanisms are traced to rent seeking, weak institutions and corruption. Before we review these proposed causal mechanisms, it seems fair to ask whether they are truly factors that are uniquely present for resource based economies, or whether they are rather a common feature of poorer countries in general. For economic factors such as the Dutch disease and price volatility, we argue that they work only in resource based economies because they are related to international commodity prices. For political factors such as rent seeking and corruption, we somewhat agree with the sceptics’ arguments that these factors are endemic to many poor economies whether they have natural resources or not. However, the predominant view in “rentier state” theory is that natural resource economies experience a higher level of such factors than non-resource economies ( Nonetheless, the issue of “silent evidence,” With this caveat in mind, we now review the main proposed causal mechanisms of the resource curse.  In addition, internal domestic inputs such as labor and materials are shifted to the natural resource sector. The prices of these inputs rise in the domestic market. As a result, the production costs of other traditional export sectors such as manufacturing and agriculture increase, contracting these sectors. This adverse effect on non-resource sectors is called the resource “pull effect” ( The second economic channel through which the resource curse may operate is the volatile nature of natural resource prices in global markets. Economists have suggested that this volatility reduces economic growth, quite apart from trends in commodity prices ( Causal links between price volatility and growth are stressed by It is not only volatility in commodity prices that can lead to instability of growth.  On the demand side, natural resource dependence may also reduce people's incentives to accumulate human capital due to high levels of non-wage income or resource-based wages. Empirical evidence shows that school enrolment at all levels is inversely related to natural resource dependence ( Moving further along the spectrum from economic to political causal channels for the resource curse, we come to rent seeking, or the “Political Dutch Disease” as labelled by The role of institutions in determining how natural resources affect economic growth has been a point of divergence in the resource curse literature. Some emphasize that resource rents have a corrosive effect on the quality of a country's institutions or on its likelihood of transition to structures more conducive to economic growth. Others do not find a mediating role of institutions in the resource curse hypothesis. Yet others emphasize that it is the (exogenous) quality of institutions that determines whether resource rents pose a resource curse or blessing. In the first vein, resource rents are thought to bring not only conflict but also corruption and downward pressures on institutional quality ( Drawing distinctions by political system, A variant of the first vein attributes a causal effect of resource rents on the likelihood of a country's political institutions changing in ways that affect economic growth. For example, natural resource rents may hinder a country's transition to democracy, because they increase the incentive and ability of autocratic leaders to retain power. Such leaders are more prepared to use repression or other means to avoid having to democratize or to avoid losing power if they are compelled to hold elections. According to Several statistical analyses have confirmed such a link between natural resources and limited government democratic accountability ( In a second smaller vein regarding natural resources and institutions, authors such as In a third vein, researchers such as The empirical evidence regarding the resource curse overall or its specific causal channels is rather mixed, and can be categorized into three groups. The first group follows Sachs and Warner's cross-sectional specification, and varies the measures used to capture resource abundance or resource dependence. The second group focuses on various economic factors related to growth that might be affected by natural resource wealth. The third group tends to shed doubt on the validity of the resource curse hypothesis. Before surveying these studies, it is necessary to distinguish between two key measures of countries’ natural resources: resource Natural resource abundance tends to be measured by estimated natural resource capital per capita, while natural resource dependence tends to be measured by the ratio of natural resource exports relative to gross domestic product (GDP). See Empirical work on the natural resource thesis started with case studies by  Along similar lines, Focusing on abundance rather than dependence, Others such as In addition to these multi-country comparisons, resource curse relationships have been discussed in numerous single country studies. Early studies preceding Sachs and Warner tended to be descriptive, as in Several single country studies have also sought to learn lessons for avoiding the resource curse by focusing on resource abundant nations that have avoided it; e.g. Many studies also find evidence of a negative relationship between resource dependence and variables thought to be closely related to growth performance. This broader set of outcome variables include human capital development ( By the late 2000s, the theoretical and empirical literature investigating aspects of the resource curse thesis had almost begun to take for granted a negative impact of natural resource wealth on growth, particularly in developing countries. The issue became understanding the exact mechanisms through which it operated, or the institutional arrangements and policies that could forestall it. However, a new trend in the resource curse literature has emerged more recently. This trend is to challenge the entire curse thesis as, in the words of  While Brunnschweiler and Bulte's criticism of the endogeneity of a common resource dependence measure is well taken, their proposed remedy for endogeneity itself came under subsequent criticism for similar reasons. In particular, A different critical approach relates to the time samples used for resource curse investigations. A related recent criticism is that the time-sensitivity of curse findings points to other causal factors at work. Manzano and Rigobon (2002) argue that it is possible that the resource curse model of As mentioned at the outset of the paper, a number of survey studies have attempted to summarize and evaluate the resource curse literature. The most pioneering surveys are by For his part, Two other earlier attempts to survey the resource curse were conducted by A more recent survey that spans both economic and political approaches has been presented by A second important recent survey is by Finally, These newer studies exploit recent datasets on unforeseen events such as giant oil discoveries These varied attempts to survey the resource curse literature attest to its voluminous, multidimensional and cross disciplinary nature. They also illustrate the deficiencies to date in providing a definitive answer to whether resource extraction partially or more than fully crowds out non resource production and growth over time. We believe that this subject should continue to receive attention, and will continue to be relevant in years to come. For some decades, it has been observed that the possession of natural resources does not necessarily confer economic success for countries that base their development on those resources. To the contrary, their people continue to experience low per capita income and a low quality of life according to various indicators. This puzzling phenomenon is called the “natural resource curse.” It stands in contrast to the sunny optimism expressed by early economists about the advantages of resource wealth for spurring economic take off and sustained growth. This paper surveys the literature on the natural resource curse. Many studies have examined the relationship between natural resource dependence/abundance on the one hand, and economic growth or factors closely associated with economic growth on the other. The bulk of this literature confirms an inverse relationship between these variables, though a few studies have attempted to prove the opposite, particularly where resource abundance rather than dependence is the explanatory variable of interest. These later studies’ contradictory results can be attributed to different type of resources being examined, different economic backgrounds, and the choice of measure of key variables such as natural resource importance, economic growth, or years over which studies have been conducted. It is fair to say that as a general conclusion, there is currently no consensus regarding the existence of a natural resource curse. If the curse is a relevant concern, the disparate literature certainly indicates that its ubiquity should not be exaggerated. Obviously, not all resource rich countries are cursed with slow growth, even among developing countries. The experience of successful resource rich countries proves that the resource curse is not inevitable. Policymakers in resource-based countries seek efficient macro-economic management to avoid pro-cyclical resource policies and achieve better quality investments in human and physical capital. Many look for innovative policies to achieve diversification and economic transformation of their economies beyond extraction and export of single volatile commodities. To assist policy makers understand the urgency or lack of urgency of this undertaking, future empirical research should continue recent efforts to look for ways to better address the potential endogeneity of measures of resource dependence or abundance. Our own view is that the later empirical critiques cast legitimate doubt on the evidence amassed to date that claims to prove a causal, near universal ‘resource curse’. Yet the theoretical mechanisms proposed by which resource dependence can hamper growth directly or via key determinants of growth seem to us to remain plausibly valid until proven otherwise. For example, we believe that the causal theories of a natural resource curse introduced and tested by That is, in spite of the empirical critiques regarding endogeneity or unrepresentative sample period selection, we argue that a resource curse of some variety likely exists. However, we argue that it does not refer to a country's possession of natural resources, but rather its overwhelming dependence on one or two of them ( More work ultimately needs to be done in different countries, (and between regions of large federated countries), using different time periods and different growth determinants in order to be able to conclusively falsify the resource curse hypothesis. In particular, research is needed that studies the effect of resource dependence on key determinants of economic growth. Recent case studies argue convincingly that the resource curse may be operating via negative effects on productivity, financial sector development, and human capital development (see Yuxiang and Chen, 2011; In addition, in recent years some resource rich countries have experienced positive and rapid economic growth. Thus, the negative effect of natural resources on economic growth may disappear as cross sectional studies start to use greater periods of time after 2000. Beyond cross section, we also believe that the curse hypothesis needs to be studied more in time series and panel frameworks in order to have a clearer picture of its existence and robustness.