Several (U1-xPux)O2±δ powders with different morphologies and different plutonium contents were synthetized using a sol-gel route. All the powders were fully characterized to quantify their structural parameters. After understanding and verification of the morphological effects on mixed oxide dissolution, this study consists of quantification of effect of plutonium content on dissolution kinetics using nitric acid 8.5 M at 95 °C. Significant differences in dissolution kinetics were observed. Indeed, the plutonium content is a key parameter that has to be considered in studies of (U1-xPux)O2±δ dissolution kinetics. A kinetics law was established and validated for dissolutions within these particular experimental conditions.The dissolution of spent nuclear fuel in nitric acid is one of the main steps of nuclear fuel recycling by hydrometallurgical process. For this purpose, it is useful to fully understand and quantify the impact of fuel characteristics on dissolution kinetics. In this study, a focus on the impact of the plutonium content of the (U,Pu) oxide on dissolution kinetics was done. Only a few studies were focused on this effect, because of the high radioactivity of these materials and the difficulties to manipulate plutonium.  All these authors did not consider the effect of the morphology of the material on dissolution kinetics. Indeed, for UO In the first part of this work, a study using different morphologies at the same Pu content has been conducted to validate this morphological law on the dissolution rates whatever the Pu content. In a last part, tests on mixed oxides permit to define an empirical model describing perfectly the effect of the Pu content on the dissolution rates taking care of the morphology of the samples. This paper presents our contribution done recently in Atalante facility at CEA Marcoule to understand the phenomena occurring during the dissolution of actinide oxides in nitric acid. Synthesis of (U,Pu) oxides using sol-gel route require the use of low acidic and highly concentrated cationic solutions. A 2.9 M U(+VI) monometallic acid deficient uranyl nitrate (ADUN) solution was obtained in a glove-box under negative pressure through dissolution of uranium trioxide into uranyl nitrate solution till solubility limit was reached. After two weeks of stirring, the UO In parallel, a 2.14 M Pu (+IV) monometallic nitrate solution was prepared by concentration/denitration process of a 0.24 M Pu(+IV) monometallic nitrate solution. In order to concentrate a Pu nitrate solution without concentrating the free nitric acidity, a distillation column was used with frequent additions of nitric acid solution of low acidity. Ideally, water should be used but the addition of water would cause Pu hydrolysis locally prior to the mixing of the solution. As shown in Addition of nitric acid solution of concentration below 0.5 M causes Pu hydroxide colloids generation. Nitric acid of 0.5 M was therefore used. As described in Articles referring to the sol-gel method deal with the synthesis of microspheres ( Heat treatments were performed up to 850 °C with a rate of 20 °C.min XRD (X-Ray Diffraction) analyses of the synthesized powders were performed using a D8 Bruker Advance diffractometer (LynxEye detector) using Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å) especially equipped for radioactive material measurements. Gold was added as an internal standard to calibrate the angular positions of the observed XRD lines. Each powder pattern was recorded within an angular range from 5° to 80° in 2theta, with steps of 0.02° and a counting time of 0.6 s per step. The lattice parameters were determined by Le Bail refinement using the TOPAS software (TOtal Pattern Analysis Solutions) from BRUKER AXS ( N To determine precisely the An isotopic analysis was then performed by thermo-ionization to produce ion beams in the TIMS mass spectrometer. The spectrometer used is a Thermo Fisher Scientific Triton. The method involves the evaporation and ionization by heating a dilute solution to be analyzed deposited on a metal ribbon using a micro syringe. The solution is then dried and installed in the source of the instrument. The ribbon is then heated by vacuum Joule effect, allowing the evaporation and ionization of the sample, to form an ion beam which is then analyzed in the mass spectrometer. Ion collectors detect the different beams produced by mass separation. The results are presented as isotopic ratios, given by the measured relative intensities of the different beams. All the dissolutions described in this work were carried out in a glove box under negative pressure ( The Pu stoichiometry of the different samples determined by TIMS are reported on This deviation from Vegard's law can be explained by variation in oxygen. From the experimental lattice parameter, it is possible to calculate the oxygen stoichiometry of the oxide (U The oxides resulting from the same calcination temperature presents similar average crystallite sizes ( The specific surfaces obtained are all of the same order of magnitude and small, but are also in accordance with the values already obtained in the literature for actinide oxides (  The partial orders for the crystallite sizes and the specific surface area determined previously by the kinetic laws of CeO With y the dissolution kinetic rate in %dissolved.min The experimental conditions of dissolution of all samples of this study were kept constant (i.e. [HNO It is then possible to quantify the effect of the Pu content of the oxide on its dissolution kinetics rate in nitric acid of 8.5 M concentration at 95 °C using the determined k value for the different Pu contents studied from With %Pu the plutonium content of the oxide powder in percent and k in nm It may to be noticed that between the two limits of the tested interval (36% and 100% of Pu) the dissolution kinetics rate is multiplied by almost 7500. Looking at the validation point, the model k value for 57% of Pu, is 4.44 for an experiment value of 7.04, so a difference of only 37%. Considering k evolution with respect to Pu content, such little difference between model and experiment figures is acceptable as a slight uncertainty in Pu content could explain this result: a Pu content of 58% rather than 57% would induce a variation of k by 57% for example. Therefore, it is possible to conclude that the effect of the Pu content on the dissolution kinetics can be defined by a power function. As mentioned, the parameters of the function are valid for dissolution in nitric acid of 8.5 M concentration at 95 °C only. The future work of such study could be to look at the effect of acidity and temperature on the different parameters of the laws used, in order to define a general law modelling the dissolution of (U The characterization tools employed in this study were used to describe the Pu content and the morphology of the different powders. As the calcination temperature increases the crystallite size increases resulting in decrease in specific surface area, which is in agreement with literature data. For the different morphologies of same oxide U Present study indicates a decrease in dissolution kinetics with the increase in Pu content of (U,Pu) oxide. Despite a difference of a factor of about 7500 between the dissolution kinetics of U The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was partly funded by