We write in praise of Dr Zoizner et al for their publication on the effect of orthodontic treatment on the interdental alveolar crest level, published in the September 2018 issue (Zoizner R, Arbel Y, Yavnai N, Becker T, Birnboim-Blau G. Effect of orthodontic treatment and comorbidity risk factors on interdental alveolar crest level: a radiographic evaluation. Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 2018;154:375-81). We all know that without the periodontal ligament and its unique qualities, our profession could not exist. However, in the literature, the relationship between orthodontics and periodontics is almost abandoned. The number of randomized controlled trials published on that topic is negligible compared with other fields. Therefore, we were thrilled to explore this article, hoping that it will serve as a professional milestone to the knowledge in that field. As we know, abstracts and conclusions are the most readable and quotable parts of articles. Therefore we question the sentence that appears in the conclusion part of this publication (as well as in the abstract): “Therefore, comprehensive periodontal examination is necessary during orthodontic treatment, especially in adults.” Unfortunately, this sentence does not appear to meet the criterion that should stand in front of every reviewer before his decision whether to publish a new study, that is, “Are the conclusions based on the study results?” As we understand the material and methods and the results parts of this publication, there is no finding in the study that can serve as a positive answer to that important question. On the contrary, no statistically significant findings were reported, in any part that was studied, between the orthodontic patients and the control group. In addition, we do not know whether the patients (all? some?) were under comprehensive (meaning what?) periodontal examination during the treatment, and if so, how often they were examined or the most important parameter, whether there were differences between patients who underwent comprehensive periodontal examination compared with those who did not. In fact, we want to point out that this sentence, which was not even closely related to the study and its findings, positions our profession in danger from a legal point of view and in inferior status in relation to periodontics. Furthermore, this study, in trying to explain the findings of alveolar crest “build up” (decrease in the distance between the crest and the cementoenamel junction [CEJ]) ignores at least 3 important parameters: 1) the angular differences while taking the bitewing x-rays, which can affect the picture of crest and CEJ height; 2) the local inflammation during treatment on the mineralization and demineralization processes of the crest, because we know that as long as the bone matrix exists, this mineralization process can temporarily “change” every bone morphology as it appears on the x-ray film; and 3) the exposure time and amperage that modify the x-ray pictures such that slight changes in those parameters can easily burnout existing structures and affect the outcome of the study. We hope that our remarks will be implemented in further studies.