Rammed earth (RE) is a generic term for a number of construction materials that contain stabilised or non-stabilised earthen materials. RE materials are heterogeneous and their bulk performance depends on their mineralogical composition, physical texture, water content and mode of preparation. This category of building materials has recently been the subject of extensive studies, given the increasing interest in sustainable construction. This trend has highlighted not only the potential of RE, but also the lack of standards and guidelines that can promote its adoption by architects and builders. Predictive modelling techniques that faithfully forecast the mechanical behaviour of RE are also scarce. This study introduces a micromechanics approach and proposes a multi-scaling model to predict the mechanical behaviour of cement stabilised rammed earth (CSRE) in linear elasticity. The RE heterogeneity is addressed hierarchically at different scales separated by the sizes of their representative volume elements (RVE). Homogenisation procedures are applied to predict the material properties at each scale and investigate the overall macroscopic behaviour of earthen mixtures. The Mori-Tanaka homogenisation scheme is used to predict the linear elastic behaviour of CSRE by treating it as a porous composite. The theoretical results obtained by the application of various micro-mechanics-based models (Reuss-Voigt, Hashin-Strickman, Mori-Tanaka and Self-consistency) are assessed by comparison with the experimental data. The Mori-Tanaka homogenisation scheme proved to predict the material's macroscopic linear elastic behaviour fairly accurately while taking into account local heterogeneities.Rammed earth (RE) designates natural building materials that can contain stabilised or non-stabilised soils or crushed stone blends. Such category of building materials has been applied in construction for thousands of years in diverse environmental contexts and time waves ( Recent research has highlighted its potential of RE and its technical limitations ( A number of studies have recently focused on test procedures to determine the linear elastic behaviour and illustrate the failure mechanics of RE materials by applying continuum mechanics approaches ( Recent studies ( Studies on the micro-mechanics of RE are still extremely limited. To the best of the authors’ knowledge there is a single study that successfully applied micro-mechanics to the characterisation of earthen materials used for construction: ( The mathematical framework of micro-mechanical modelling can be applied to predict the mechanical properties both in the reversible (elastic) and irreversible (inelastic) regimes ( Despite the scarceness of multi-scaling models for RE, there are a number of studies that investigated the linear elastic behaviour of various heterogeneous materials. However, those materials have different micro-structures than RE. Relevant problems have been solved by addressing the effects of inclusions on the macroscopic behaviour using Eshelby's theory ( Rammed earth walls have a distinctive texture resulting from the compaction of consecutive layers, which may give the impression that they are highly anisotropic. However, experimental evidence based on the measurement of mechanical properties (strength and elasticity moduli) indicates that the behaviour is indifferent to the direction of loading ( The study firstly breaks down the material's heterogeneities into two different scales and defines the corresponding RVEs. At the first scale, there are three components of interest, which are the crushed limestone particles, the hydrated cement bridges between those particles and the pore spaces in between. At this scale, the aim is to obtain the homogeneous equivalent material that will subsequently represent the cementitious matrix. At the second scale, two components are considered which are the obtained cementitious matrix and the lightweight aggregates that play the role of inclusions. The study proposes a theoretical model in linear elasticity; the Mori-Tanaka homogenisation scheme is applied to define the elastic constants and the constitutive law, considering the scales of heterogeneity. RE is treated as a multi-phase material ( The proposed model is validated by comparing the predicted values of elastic constants and the experimental values obtained using unconfined compressive strength (UCS) tests conducted on CSRE specimens prepared as part of this study. At Scale II, the predictions of elastic constants of the porous RE materials is also validated by comparing the results obtained using the Mori-Tanaka homogenisation scheme with other available schemes (self-consistent, Reuss, Voigt, Hashin-Strickman). The main novelty of this study is in the development, validation, and fine-tuning of a micro-structural approach that describes the mechanical performance of RE materials. This is believed to be an essential step toward the standardisation and normalisation of this category of building materials which sustainability credentials are widely accepted. The RE blend used in this study contains general-purpose cement obtained from Cockburn Cement, used for stabilisation, and crushed limestone collected from the neighbourhood area of Perth (Western Australia), used as a raw material. The raw material was oven-dried to remove moisture and was sieved to remove fine grains below 75 μm and coarse grains above 4.75 mm. The original and modified particle size distributions (PSD) of limestone, evaluated according to the Australian Standard AS1289.3.6.1-2009, is shown in A few specimens for each volume fraction of lightweight aggregates were manufactured according to the procedure described in the Australian Standards AS5101.4 (2008). The manufactured specimens were of diameter 104 mm and height 200 mm and were comprised of 5 layers of 40 mm height. The apparatus used to manufacture the specimens includes a cylindrical steel mould of 200 mm high and 104 mm diameter, a spatula used to slightly scratch the surface of each layer after compaction to maximise the bonding between the layers and a jack hammer to compact the layers. The blends of limestone and cement were hand mixed firstly in their dry status to maximise uniformly before moisturising the mixture. The moisturised blends were allowed to cure for one hour at room temperature to promote the hydration of cement. The lightweight aggregates were mixed to the blends after one hour to avoid excessive segregation. Before pouring the mixture into the mould, lubrication was ensured by applying a film of hydraulic oil to avoid breaking the specimens during de-moulding. The specimens were compacted using a Bosh Jack hammer set at a frequency 5 Hz by taking one portion of material per pass such that five equal layers were rammed consecutively. Compaction was applied for a time span of 20 s per layer regardless of the mixture content to ensure repeatability. The specimens were cured for seven days under ambient conditions (to avoid any damage to their bottom surfaces, the specimens were placed on a wooden plate for the first 24h and then on a grid shelve to let the bottom surfaces cure properly). Finally, the specimens were subjected to UCS tests according to the ( UCS tests were conducted on a total of thirteen specimens by considering two or three tests for each composition. The tests were carried out in displacement control at a rate of 0.03 mm/s; uniaxial vertical displacement was applied while the corresponding force and the transversal strain were recorded up to failure. Upon failure, diagonal cracks (approximately 2 cm long) developed near the top and the bottom edges of the specimens and a predominant diagonal crack propagated along each specimen's height. The increase in the volume fraction of lightweight aggregates affected the failure mode and increased the number of cracks of limited length. In all specimens, the failure mechanism formed an hourglass-like core, which was more evident for those with no lightweight aggregates or with low volume fractions thereof.  From the test results, it is evident that the increase in the volume fraction of lightweight aggregates causes a dramatic drop in the maximum compressive strength, RE is a heterogeneous material with inclusions of various sizes and compositions. The solution to the scale-transition problem involves three main steps as described in To be representative, a material volume of size l should be small enough compared to the domain of interest of size L and large enough compared to the size of inclusions d. The separation condition is d ≪ l ≪ L (  At Scale I, the characteristic porosity was evaluated using microscopic observations and image processing. Fragments of UCS samples were collected, prepared (merged in resin and polished) and observed using a Leica DME optical microscope at a magnification of 250x. The pictures were collected using a Nikon camera D5600 attached to the microscope. In total, 30 pictures per sample were collected and processed using in-house python scripts to evaluate the pore size distribution. The main image processing steps are de-noising the image, applying digital masks to identify the pores, removing the non-representative voids and using mathematical morphology to estimate the pore dimensions. The output of the image processing of each picture is a vector containing the surface areas of the pores. We assume that the domain Ω The order n moment of the lognormal distribution is defined as In this study, we evaluate the characteristic porosity knowing the third moment of the PDF. The pore size distribution of the RVE at Scale I can be evaluated by assuming that the pores are of spherical shape such that the volume of a given pore of diameter x is The characteristic distribution of the limestone grains is evaluated knowing the PSD ( The elastic properties of the limestone grains are evaluated experimentally by conducting UCS tests on cored limestone cylindrical specimens. The cylindrical specimens were drilled out from a block of limestone according to the procedures described in the Australian Standard (AS 1433.5). As shown in The recorded values of compressive force and displacement are used to calculate the stress and strain and to illustrate their relationship in a curve for the two specimens. Those measurements are also used to evaluate Young's modulus We adopt an Eshelby-based model with ellipsoidal inclusions embedded in a homogenous reference matter given the arrangement of phases described in the previous subsections. The Mori-Tanaka homogenisation scheme prescribes the matrix to be the reference matter ( In Due to the morphology of the phases and inserting Therefore, From classic continuum mechanics the average strain in the RVE reads Combining According to the principles of classic continuum mechanics, the average stress in the RVE domain can be defined as: Inserting Inserting From the previous paragraph, it is clear that the elastic properties of the cementitious matrix are unknown. However, they are necessary to calculate the overall elastic properties expressed by The size distribution of embedded lightweight aggregates at Scale II were evaluated for Ply-0.1 Ply-0.2, Ply-0.3, Ply-0.4, knowing the nominal volume fractions and geometrical characteristics of inclusions in each case. We assume that the domain Ω corresponds to the above-mentioned RVEs and that the aggregates of different sizes are distributed randomly. The aggregate size distribution was described with a continuous lognormal probability function For simplicity, it is assumed that the different mixtures are consistent in term of size distribution of lightweight aggregates. At Scale II, the RVE shows a slightly simpler morphology representing the homogeneous isotropic solid matrix (rammed earth) and the inclusions (lightweight aggregates). The overall domain of the RVE is The fourth order tensors of Hill and Eshelby can be defined according to Finally, knowing the definition of the microscopic strain fields within the two phases and the link between the macroscopic strain in the RVE and the strain at the boundary, the stress tensor can be obtained ( At Scale II, the effective properties can be expressed according to Mori-Tanaka's formulation as follows: In the case of isotropic materials, it can be shown that d The stiffness tensor of the RVE at Scale I, A similar approach is applied to predict the mechanical properties of RVEs at Scale II. However, in this case, the focus is on the variation of macroscopic elastic properties with the increase in the volume fraction of lightweight aggregates. The stiffness tensor is predicted according to Mori-Tanaka's scheme as expressed by The theoretical values of the bulk and shear moduli are predicted according to the homogenisation schemes of Reuss, Voigt, Hashin-Shtrikman, Hashin-Shtrikman (modified) and self-consistency ( This study introduces a micro-mechanics approach to model the mechanical behaviour of cement stabilised rammed earth. The proposed model addresses the heterogeneous nature of rammed earth materials, which have been attracting interest in contemporary architecture given their sustainable character. The lack of predictive models has prevented the development of new guidelines and standards, which in turn has affected the industrial uptake of RE on a larger scale. This study validates the application of the principles of micromechanics, based on Eshelby's theory, in the characterisation of rammed earth. A mathematical formulation based on continuum micro-mechanics is proposed to describe the effective elastic behaviour of rammed earth. The Self-consistent, Mori-Tanaka, Hashin-Shtrikman and Hashin-Shtrikman (modified) homogenisation schemes are applied to predict the elastic constants of the materials at hand. The multi-scaled results are validated experimentally, which show that the obtained data are within the Reuss and Voigt bounds. In general, a good agreement has been obtained between our experimental and multi-scaling results. In particular, this study indicates that adopting a Mori-Tanaka scheme is advantageous given its simple implementation and acceptable accuracy. Our experimental results show that the inter-granular porosity, the pore-size distribution, and the grain size distribution of solid inclusions are key factors that influence the overall properties of rammed earth. It has been illustrated that the macroscopic behaviour is strongly dependent on the elasticity constants of solid inclusions and cementitious bridges; this result is confirmed by the experimental data obtained through the uniaxial loading of rammed earth specimens. The proposed model takes into account such key factors and gives fairly accurate results especially for low concentration of inclusions, as is the case of contemporary rammed earth materials. Being a promising construction material given its sustainability, rammed earth is expected to gain momentum in the future. The proposed model shows that rammed earth is fairly predictable in the reversible regime using multi-scaling. More research is recommended in the irreversible regime especially using multi-scaling techniques, which may offer new insight into the stability and reliability of RE.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 