During the classical production of phosphoric acid, the reaction between sulfuric acid and phosphate rock generates suspension. The latter is subsequently filtered and concentrated by evaporation process resulting in fluorine or acid gas. In this paper, we present a new procedure of phosphoric acid production by using recycled hexafluosilicic acid instead of sulfuric acid.
                  Fluorine recycling process involves several steps starting with the bubbling of the resulting acid gas through hexafluosilicic acid solutions followed by a pre-concentration step before attacking the natural phosphate rock. The advantages of such procedure lies in decreasing the sulfuric acid quantities needed for the phosphoric acid production as well as in the environmental benefits from the recycling process of the harmful fluorine gas.
                  In this work, phosphate rock was attacked by a mixture of hexafluosilicic acid (20% by weight) and recycled phosphoric acid (25% in P2O5). The cake obtained by vacuum filtration of the slurry was characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), Differential thermal analysis (DTA) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). The main peaks obtained by XRD were attributed to chukrovite (Ca4AlSiSO4F13·12H2O), gypsum, and silica quartz. However, the calcium content in the produced phosphoric acid has to be maintained lower than 3.5% in order to avoid the formation of cloudy phosphoric solutions by the formation of CaF2 which affects the filtration of the mixture.Phosphoric acid is considered as the second mineral acid produced after the sulfuric acid. The major part of phosphoric acid production (90%) is dedicated to chemical fertilizers ( Two basic processes for phosphoric acid manufacture were largely discussed in the literature ( The Wet process consists of mixing phosphate rock e.g. fluorapatite (Ca The nature of the by-product, phosphogypsum, depends on the temperature of the reactor as well as on the concentration of phosphoric acid produced. In conventional operating conditions (T In industrial practice, dihydrate is usually used with one or multi-stage reactor producing phosphoric acid between 26 and 28% in P In this study, the work was carried out on a pilot scale with a dihydrate single reactor. The dihydrate wet method is a sequence of three successive stages: attack, filtration and concentration. The attack of phosphate ore by the sulfuric acid with the presence of recycled phosphoric acid lasts from 2 to 8 The filtration is the second stage of the wet process enabling the separation of the solid cake and the produced phosphoric acid. This solid/liquid separation implies a vacuum filtration in which the morphology of crystals plays a major role for a better filterability. This is largely influenced by the nature and elementary composition of the phosphate ore. The content of the produced acid is 25% in P The concentration of phosphoric acid is the last stage in this wet process. During the concentration of phosphoric acid (at 54%) by evaporation, the gaseous fluorine is released in hydrofluoric acid and tetrafluosilicate forms. This fluorine originated from the phosphate which has the fluorapatite (Ca The recovery of the acid gas (fluorine) in aqueous solutions as hexafluosilicic acid (resulting from the reaction of HF The aim of this work is the optimization of a new procedure of phosphoric acid manufacture by using the recycled hexafluosilicic acid. This acid will be used to attack the natural phosphate ore, substituting in part the sulfuric acid ( The phosphate sample studied is of Syrian origin. Beside elemental analysis, The presence of the silica quartz (ICDD file: 01-078-1252) is in good agreement with the elementary analysis of the Syrian phosphate with a rate of SiO Implementation of raw materials for the production of phosphoric acid under hexafluosilicic attack is carried out in our laboratory pilot as shown in We carried out the attack phosphate/hexafluosilicic acid for the different contents in calcium and fluorine in phosphoric acid produced at 24% in P Preliminary tests showed that the phosphoric acid obtained by hexafluosilicic acid attack (FAA) presents a cloudy appearance depending on the residual content of calcium and fluoride in the produced phosphoric acid. By applying the procedure described in  The analysis of the white solid settled from the produced phosphoric acid (calcium content Therefore, the hexafluosilicic attack is carried out with optimal calcium content in the produced phosphoric acid ranging between 2.5 and 3.5%. We fixed the fluorine content at 5.5% in order to limit its presence as impurity in the produced phosphoric acid. The resulting suspension is then filtered; and with the aim of obtaining a clear solution at pilot scale, both calcium and fluorine contents are held by feeding 200 An elemental analysis of the filtered product and the cakes, presented in We notice that the phosphoric acid produced by hexafluosilicic attack presents on one hand, a strong decrease in sulfate percentage (% SO The cake obtained by hexafluosilicic attack presents a content of sulfate (SO The cake obtained by hexafluosilicic attack is washed and then analyzed by different methods such as X-ray, the optical microscopy and the thermal analysis.  The main peaks of the cake obtained by sulfuric attack are attributed to CaSO However in comparison, the main peaks of the cake obtained by the attack of the phosphate with the hexafluosilicic acid are attributed to the chukrovite which is fluorosulfate mixed with calcium, aluminum and silicon hydrated (Ca On the other hand, the main peaks of the cake obtained by hexafluosilicic attack with a calcium content higher than 3.5% in the produced phosphoric acid are attributed to CaF  With a content of calcium in the produced phosphoric acid higher than 3.5%, small crystals with an average length of 15 To conclude, the calcium content in the phosphoric acid has to be controlled and maintained lower than 3.5% in order to avoid cloudy phosphoric solutions by the formation of CaF The current process is carried out at 70 This analysis (DTA - TGA) allows the follow of thermal effect as well as the loss of weight in a controlled atmosphere, the air in our case. The principle involves heating a sample from 30 The weight loss observed between 100 and 105 In order to correlate the variations obtained by thermal analysis to the different formed structures, we analyzed the solid obtained by hexafluosilicic attack after heating at 100, 140, 200, 400 For the second endotherm (200 In order to explain the weight loss obtained at 400 Phosphoric acid obtained by hexafluosilicic attack presents a content of P Several methods have been investigated for the treatment of fluoride-containing solution such as adsorption, biosorption, ion-exchange, reverse osmosis, and recently the electrocoagulation/flotation method that is highly affected by the pH of the medium ( However, The advantage of this procedure lies in the quantitative decrease of the needed sulfuric acid in the production of the phosphoric acid, without forgetting the environmental aspect through a quantitative recycling of fluorine. This work presents a clean production in response to future challenges in the phosphate industry. A new production process for phosphoric acid is suggested by recycling the acid gas (HF, SiF The process consists of the optimization of the attack of phosphate by the hexafluosilicic acid instead of the sulfuric acid. This optimization is of major importance to reduce the raw material consumption (Sulfuric acid) and to recycling the acid gas (HF, SiF In this study, the optimal operating conditions of hexafluosilicic attack are developed. The formation of solid chukrovite with phosphogypsum in presence of silica quartz is confirmed by X-ray diffraction characterization. The chukrovite doesn't affect the filtration process of the mixture solid/liquid on the industrial scale while passing through the filter tissues. Nevertheless, the calcium content should be maintained lower than 3.5% in the produced phosphoric acid. The authors would like to thank Fr. Dr. Hady Mahfouz, President of USEK, for unfailing systematic support especially with regard to the priority given to applied sciences.