The destruction of the herbicide chloramben in 0.050 M Na2SO4 solutions at natural pH has been studied by photoelectro-Fenton with UVA light (PEF). The trials were carried out in a cell equipped with an air-diffusion cathode for H2O2 generation and different electrocatalytic anodes, namely active IrO2-based and RuO2-based electrodes and non-active boron-doped diamond (BDD) and PbO2 ones. Similar removal rates were found regardless of the anode nature because the herbicide was mainly oxidized by OH formed from Fenton's reaction, which was enhanced by UVA-induced photo-Fenton reaction. The use of an IrO2-based anode led to almost total mineralization at high current density, as also occurred with the powerful BDD anode, since photoactive intermediates originated from OH-mediated oxidation were degraded under irradiation with UVA light. The good performance of the IrO2-based anode in PEF was confirmed at different current densities and herbicide concentrations. The presence of Cl− in the medium caused a slight deceleration of herbicide removal as well as mineralization inhibition, owing to the production of active chlorine with consequent formation of persistent chloroderivatives. Seven aromatic products along with oxalic and oxamic acids were identified in sulfate medium. Five aromatic derivatives were detected in Cl−-containing matrix, corroborating the generation of organochlorine compounds. In secondary effluent, larger mineralization was achieved by PEF with a BDD anode due to its high oxidation ability to destroy the chloroderivatives, although an acceptable performance was also obtained using an IrO2-based anode.The concern about water pollution by persistent organic pollutants is growing in parallel to the development of more efficient advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) for their destruction ( The poor Fe Alternative electrochemical AOPs (EAOPs) such as electro-Fenton (EF) and photoelectro-Fenton with UVA light (PEF) have been more recently developed ( A key feature of Fenton-based electrochemical treatments is the continuous generation of H In an undivided cell, organic pollutants at pH 3 are destroyed by homogeneous Other oxidants can be produced depending on the dissolved salts. When the medium contains Cl The oxidation power of EO-H Chloramben (3-amino-2,5-dichlorobenzoic acid, C The aim of this article is to study the performance of PEF to degrade and mineralize chloramben solutions in order to show the viability of a DSA Chloramben (95% purity) was supplied by Sigma-Aldrich and used as received. Carboxylic acids were of analytical grade purchased from Panreac. The background electrolytes, Na Some electrolytic assays were carried out by spiking chloramben into urban wastewater. The fresh sample was collected from the secondary effluent of a wastewater treatment facility located in Gavà-Viladecans (Barcelona, Spain), preserved at 4 °C and filtered before use. The characteristics of this sample were: pH = 7.9, specific conductivity = 3.2 mS cm The electrolytic cell was a conventional undivided, cylindrical, double-jacketed tank reactor of 150 mL capacity. External thermostated water was recirculated through the double jacket to maintain the solution at 35 °C, which ensured insignificant water evaporation. A solution volume of 100 mL was treated in each assay under vigorous stirring at 800 rpm with a magnetic bar. One of the following four electrodes was used as the anode in each trial: (i) IrO The EF and PEF treatments were carried out in the presence of 0.50 mM Fe A Crison 2000 pH-meter was employed for pH measurement. Samples were withdrawn at regular time intervals from the treated solutions and microfiltered with 0.45 μm PTFE membrane filters from Whatman to be immediately analyzed. The herbicide concentration was determined by reversed-phase HPLC using a Waters system composed of a 600 LC and a photodiode array detector set at λ = 297 nm. The LC was fitted with a BDS Hypersil C18 6 μm, 250 mm × 4.6 mm (i.d.), column at 35 °C. Prior to do this analysis, the samples were diluted with methanol to stop the degradation process. The aliquots were injected into the LC under circulation of a 60:40 (v/v) acetonitrile/water (KH The solution TOC was determined on a Shimadzu VCSN TOC analyzer by injecting 50 μL samples. In this analysis, reproducible TOC values with ±1% accuracy were found. From the TOC abatement (△TOC, mg L The assays for assessing all decays were performed in triplicate, and average values are given along with the error bars corresponding to 95% confidence intervals in figures. Primary aromatic intermediates formed at short electrolysis time of PEF treatments of 1.19 mM chloramben solutions in 0.50 M Na A first series of assays was carried out to assess the importance of the anode in PEF process, using either BDD, PbO The abatement of the herbicide concentration in these trials is presented in More significant influence of the anode material on PEF performance was found from the TOC removal of the same chloramben solutions. From the above results, the MCE values for each experiment were calculated from Eq. Based on the similar PEF results obtained using the active IrO  This behavior was also confirmed from the corresponding TOC removal as depicted in First, the influence of Conversely, much smaller differences in TOC decay were found in these trials. The influence of the herbicide concentration on PEF process was studied under the same conditions by applying the lowest Regarding the corresponding TOC removals, an S-shape profile was obtained at the highest herbicide content. In this case, Since urban and industrial wastewater usually contain a large amount of Cl  Upon In the presence of chloride, the oxidation with Further evolution of the above aromatic intermediates involves the cleavage of the benzene moiety with the expected formation of final short-linear aliphatic carboxylic acids ( The study of the PEF treatment of chloramben was extended to urban wastewater as reaction matrix, which contains Cl   It has been shown that chloramben is degraded at similar rate either in synthetic media with sulfate and/or chloride ions, or urban wastewater, at pH near 3. Overall, the anode nature played a minor role. This is related to the pre-eminent degradation by The authors acknowledge financial support from project