The biogenic fraction of a simple solid recovered fuel (SRF) mixture (80 wt% printer paper/20 wt% high density polyethylene) is analyzed with the in-house developed adapted balance method (aBM). This fairly new approach is a combination of combustion elemental analysis (CHNS) and a data reconciliation algorithm based on successive linearisation for evaluation of the analysis results. This method shows a great potential as an alternative way to determine the biomass content in SRF. However, the employed analytical technique (CHNS elemental analysis) restricts the probed sample mass to low amounts in the range of a few hundred milligrams. This requires sample comminution to small grain sizes (<200μm) to generate representative SRF specimen. This is not easily accomplished for certain material mixtures (e.g. SRF with rubber content) by conventional means of sample size reduction.
                  This paper presents a proof of principle investigation of the sample preparation and analysis of an SRF model mixture with the use of cryogenic impact milling (final sample comminution) and the adapted balance method (determination of biomass content). The so derived sample preparation methodology (cutting mills and cryogenic impact milling) shows a better performance in accuracy and precision for the determination of the biomass content than one solely based on cutting mills. The results for the determination of the biogenic fraction are within 1–5% of the data obtained by the reference methods, selective dissolution method (SDM) and 14C-method (14C-M).The allocation and use of solid recovered fuels (SRF) has been a growing field within the resource market in the past decade. In order to comply with ever stricter CO In this context, the present study provides answers on The feasibility for the generation of representative SRF analysis samples as required for the aBM in general and especially using a cryogenic impact mill. The performance of the aBM in comparison to the standardized methods SDM and the Therefore, the following experimental approach is chosen: Selection and preparation of the model mixture. Sample partitioning and comminution. Combustion elemental (CHNS) analysis. Determination of biomass content. Comparison to other methods. The materials making up the model mixture, printer paper and laboratory grade high density polyethylene (HDPE) were chosen for several reasons: Perpetual availability of the comprising materials and reproducible synthesis of the model mixture. Presence of paper and polyethylene in real SRF materials. The difference in density and size reduction behaviour (e.g. cut resistance) between HDPE and paper is sufficient to be eventually confronted with de-mixing during sample preparation. Neither HDPE nor printer paper show problematic behaviour (e.g. clogging of cutting sieves, thermal alteration of the material) when treated with (high revolution) cutting mills which is a prerequisite to evaluate an alternate comminution strategy. 500  The whole sample of 500 Analysis of the dry samples (water free (wf) reference base) is carried out on an Elementar Macro instrument ( The biomass content is determined using the adapted Balance Method (aBM), which allows – unlike the original Balance Method ( Beside standard statistical parameters (e.g. mean value, standard deviation), additional statistical tests are conducted to validate the tested sample comminution procedure. These tests include on the one hand ANalysis Of VAriance (ANOVA) ( The disposition of the different components (layers) is outlined in  Finally the test parameter Regarding According to the results of the ANOVA performed on UCM finished samples vs. cryo-mill finished samples, as shown in The results for the calculation of the biomass content (stated as fraction of the total mass ( Nevertheless, it is also of interest to take a closer look on the steps (e.g. sample partitioning, analysis) of the whole process and their individual contribution on the statistical spread of the generated data. The results for the determination of variance components (based on the data set of aBM The total expected RSD can be derived from the RSD values of the individual layers according to the formula The result is equivalent to the calculation via It can also be seen from For the determination of the biomass content in a model mixture (paper/PE), the proposed sample preparation procedure (combination of cutting mills and a cryogenic impact milling) shows a better performance in accuracy and precision than a sample comminution procedure solely based on different cutting mills. Whether this result is based on a varying grain size distribution due to the different mills, needs to be checked in future experiments. Additionally, the analysis of variance components of the overall process (sample comminution and CHNS analysis) reveals, that the homogeneity of the analysis sample is crucial to achieve high precision and needs to be optimised in future experiments. The performance evaluation of the aBM against the standardized methods for the determination of the biomass content (BM, SDM and The authors like to thank the