Nanocrystalline Cu86Al12B2 alloy with an as-milled average grain size of ∼11 nm was synthesized by high-energy ball milling at cryogenic temperature. The alloy was then annealed up to 900 °C (or 0.87 Tm
                      of Cu). Microstructural changes with annealing were assessed by X-ray diffraction (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and microindentation. TEM investigation indicates that the newly-developed alloy retains its nanoscale grain size after annealing at 900 °C. The present investigation complements our previous findings of the thermal stability of cryomilled binary Cu88Al12 and Cu86Al14 alloys, where excellent thermal stability was observed and attributed to the in-situ formation of nanoscale Cu–Al precipitates and their Zener pinning effect. First principle calculation shows equilibrium in Al–Cu–B prefers segregation of B in the grain boundary of Cu–Al alloy. Superior thermal stability of the Cu86Al12B2 alloy was primarily ascribed to the synergistic grain boundary pinning of CuAl2 and AlB12 intermetallic phases. Moreover, the alloy maintains a higher hardness than both Cu88Al12 and Cu86Al14 alloy. The grain size dependent Hall–Petch strengthening was found to be the dominant mechanism with substantial contributions from solid solution strengthening and Orowan strengthening in annealed state.The microstructural refinement of metals and alloys to the nanocrystalline (nc) regime (average grain size is less than 100 nm at least in one dimension) results in significant improvements in their strength and hardness Where Proposed methods to thermally stabilize nc-microstructure conventionally follow two ( The thermal stability of nc-Cu-based alloys garnered significant academic research interest due to the improvement in mechanical and physical properties without much negotiation in its electrical and thermal conductivity The Cu–B equilibrium diagram indicates B has very low solubility in Cu (∼0.29 at.% at eutectic temperature, 1013 °C) Mechanical alloying (MA) is capable of transforming the material to a high-energy (∼30 kJ/mol. In the present work Cu The starting materials were elemental powders of Cu, Al, and B (purity >99.9%, average particle size <10 µm). These elemental powders, in determined quantity, were loaded into 440 stainless steel milling vials (SPEX Sample Prep, Metuchen, NJ). Milling was carried out with grade 25, 440 stainless steel balls (Salem Specialty Ball) with a ball-to-powder ratio 10:1. In total, 17 balls 7.94 mm (0.3125 inch) in diameter and 16 balls of 6.35 mm (0.250 inch) in diameter were used. For comparison, nanostructured Cu was prepared by ball milling under the same conditions. The powders were stored and prepared in an argon-containing glove box (O The constituent phases of both cryomilled and annealed powders were evaluated by X-ray diffraction (XRD). Diffraction data was collected using a Rigaku DMax/A X-ray diffractometer by Cu K Where, Microstructural investigation of both the as-synthesized and annealed alloy was carried out using a JEOL JEM 2000FX transmission electron microscope (TEM) at beam energy of 200 keV. TEM samples were prepared by uniaxial pressing of powders at room temperature under 2.6 GPa pressure in a 3 mm tungsten carbide die. The compacts were then thinned mechanically to 20 µm and electropolished by 30 vol.% nitric acid and methanol at −20 °C using a Tenupol-2 electropolisher. Hardness variation with annealing condition was evaluated using a Vickers microindentation tester (BuehlerMicromet II hardness tester, 25 g load and 12 s dwell time). During testing the particle diameter-to-indent depth was maintained at ∼10:1. At least 10 microhardness indents were taken for each condition and averaged to get corresponding hardness values, and error bars represent one standard deviation of the collected data. To study the stability of B in Al–Cu matrix we also performed the first principle calculation by positioning B atoms in the Al–Cu matrix in the interstitial sites and grain boundaries. The similar studies on the effect of B on Al and Cu have been done separately by Lozovoi and Paxton The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of Cu The variations in Scherrer grain size with respect to annealing temperature are shown in The variation in microhardness values with the annealing temperature are shown in TEM investigation confirms the stability of nc structure of Cu The microstructure was also observed after annealing at 700 °C. The TEM BF, DF and SAD are shown in In order to find the equilibrium energy, a series of total energy calculations was performed for B atoms in the interstitial and GB position while gradually incrementing the Cu–Al–B unit cell size. As shown in First principle calculation reveals that the addition of B to Cu–Al system tends to reduce total energy upon segregation. The simulated result is in line with the conceptualization of Hondros and Seah The improvement in microstructural stability of the present alloy has been primarily ascribed to the grain boundary pinning by nanoscale intermetallic particles (CuAl Where  Where Considering Zener–Smith criteria, Where In view of the above, the measured hardness values ( In this work, Where Where In the present alloy, both Al and B are expected to contribute to solid solution strengthening. The hardening contribution of individual alloying element based on Labusch model can be estimated as ɛ The combination of The respective contributions of  The salient conclusions of present work are as follows: Nanocrystalline single phase Cu A hybrid mechanism composed of kinetic pinning by nanoscale intermetallics (CuAl Addition of B significantly improves solid solution strengthening, which contributes ∼23% of the total hardness after annealing. The ratio of Authors are grateful to the The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.