Introduction
                  Supracondylar fracture malunion usually results in cubitus varus deformity. The long-standing unsightly deformity causes psychological stress to the child and his/her parents in addition to biomechanical disturbances and functional disorders in the affected elbow. The optimal timing of corrective osteotomy is not well-established in the literature. The present study aimed to report the results of early correction of cubitus varus deformity using a simple technique and to focus on the timing of early correction after supracondylar fracture malunion.
               
                  Patients and Methods
                  Thirty consecutive patients treated for recent cubitus varus deformity after malunited supracondylar fractures, in the period between January 2012 and August 2017, were retrospectively reviewed. All patients had early surgical correction of the deformity within one year after the initial injury. In patients who presented with maluniting supracondylar fracture, the fracture was splinted until union was achieved, then active exercises were encouraged until elbow ROM was regained. The deformity was then corrected with a lateral closing wedge (LCW) osteotomy and fixed with two lateral and one medial wire.
               
                  Results
                  All the osteotomies united. All the deformities were corrected. The humerus-elbow-wrist (HEW) angle significantly improved compared to the pre-operative values (p<0.001). All patients achieved satisfactory results at the final evaluation. Twenty-six patients (86.7%) achieved excellent results while four patients (13.3%) achieved good results.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Early correction of cubitus varus deformity avoids the psychological stress of the long-standing unsightly deformity to the young child and his/her family. It also avoids the delayed biomechanical and functional disturbances to the affected elbow. The LCW osteotomy and the three-wires fixation technique are simple and effective to correct the deformity and maintain the correction.Malunion of the paediatric supracondylar humerus fracture usually results in cubitus varus deformity. Its reported incidence is 3% to 57% Typically, the deformity is three dimensional with varus, extension, and internal rotation of the distal humeral fragment The long-held belief that cubitus varus is a merely cosmetic deformity is currently changing Despite that the patient's and parents' concern is almost always the unsightly deformity, the long-standing cubitus varus deformity results in other elbow disorders such as snapping of the medial border of the triceps, posterolateral rotatory instability (PLRI), tardy ulnar nerve palsy, and secondary fractures of the distal humerus Severe deformities cannot be tolerated by the child and the family for a long time due to the psychological stress of the unsightly deformity. Early surgical correction can avoid all the consequences of the long-standing deformity. Many authors recommended early correction of paediatric cubitus varus deformity The aim of the present study was to report the results of early correction of cubitus varus deformity using a simple technique and to focus on the timing of early correction after supracondylar fracture malunion. The study had ethical approval and the parents of all children included in the study gave informed consent. We retrospectively reviewed consecutive patients treated for cubitus varus deformity between January 2012 and August 2017 in a referral centre for paediatric orthopaedics and limb deformity correction. We included in the present study all children who presented with recent cubitus varus deformity due to supracondylar fracture malunion and treated within one year after initial injury with lateral closing wedge osteotomy (LCW) and fixation with three K-wires (two lateral and one medial), with a minimum follow-up of two years after surgery. We excluded from the present study children treated for cubitus varus deformity more than one year after the time of initial injury and children with cubitus varus deformity caused by elbow injuries other than supracondylar fracture. Children with a history of a contralateral elbow injury and children treated with other techniques were also excluded. During the study period, 68 patients who were treated for cubitus varus deformity were identified. After the application of the exclusion criteria, 30 patients were included in the study. They were inappropriately treated for their displaced supracondylar fracture in small district hospitals. They were referred to our outpatient department when the deformity became obvious during follow-up. All children included in the present study and their parents were complaining of the unsightly deformity. Children who presented with still uniting supracondylar fracture with evident cubitus varus deformity were treated with a long-arm posterior slab until pain and tenderness on the elbow disappeared and the x-rays showed healing of the fracture (usually 6–8 weeks after injury). After the splint was removed, active exercises were started until ROM of the elbow was recovered, then surgical correction of the deformity was done ( Pre-operatively, the child was assessed clinically for deformity, ROM of the elbow, pain, local tenderness, nerve injury, and joint instability. Pre-operative radiological assessment of both elbows was done and compared. The radiographs were evaluated for fracture healing, deformity, and the presence of soft-tissue calcification (myositis ossificans). The humerus-elbow-wrist (HEW) angle was measured on the anteroposterior (AP) view on both sides (the angle between the mid-longitudinal axis of the humerus and the mid-longitudinal axis of the forearm). The AP view of the elbow was done with the elbow extended and the forearm fully supinated The lateral prominence index (LPI) was measured on the AP view and compared to the unaffected side (the width of the lateral condyle - the width of the medial condyle divided by the inter-epicondylar distance) The operation was done under general anaesthesia without a tourniquet. The child was positioned supine, the elbow was flexed 90° and the forearm was placed across the chest. A straight incision was made on the distal humerus over the lateral supracondylar ridge. The plane between the brachioradialis and the triceps muscles was identified. The brachioradialis was retracted anteriorly and the triceps was retracted posteriorly. The periosteum of the lateral supracondylar ridge was sharply incised and then elevated at the site of the planned osteotomy. The size of the lateral wedge to be removed (the required correction angle) was pre-operatively planned by adding the varus HEW angle of the affected side to the valgus HEW angle of the normal side. The osteotomy site was marked (under image intensifier control) with two K-wires which were used as guide wires ( When there was marked prominence of the lateral condyle after the closure of the osteotomy, the distal fragment was medially translated before the fixation of the osteotomy. In children with a lack of full flexion due to hyperextension malunion, the distal limb of the osteotomy was made sloping in the sagittal plane to remove more bone from the anterior cortex to correct the hyperextension of the distal humerus. The wound was irrigated and closed in layers. The skin was closed by running subcuticular sutures. A long-arm posterior slab was applied with the elbow in 90° of flexion and the forearm in neutral rotation. During the early post-operative visits, the child was evaluated for wound healing, clinical signs of union, and the presence of any complications. The radiographs were evaluated for the progress of osteotomy healing, the stability of internal fixation, and the maintenance of correction. The K-wires were removed and the splint was discontinued at 4–6 weeks and then active exercises were started. The patients came for follow-up every two weeks until elbow ROM was regained. Afterward, they came every three months for one year, every six months for two years, and then yearly. At the final follow-up, the clinical assessment was done for the presence of pain, residual deformity, stiffness, instability, nerve injury, and hypertrophied scar. The range of motion of the elbow was measured and compared with the pre-operative values. The final radiographs were evaluated for elbow alignment and lateral condyle prominence. The HEW angle was measured and compared with the normal side and with the pre-operative values. The LPI was calculated and compared with the normal side. The child and the parents were asked about their satisfaction with the final result. The results were graded as excellent, good, and poor according to the modified criteria of Oppenheim et al. Two surgeons independently reviewed the medical records and the radiographs and evaluated the final results. Statistical presentation and analysis of the present study were conducted, using the mean, range, and the unpaired student The mean age of the patients at the time of presentation was 6.2 years (range, 5–8). There were 20 males and ten females. The left side was affected in 16 patients and the right side was affected in 14. All cases were inappropriately treated for displaced supracondylar fractures before referral due to the unavailability of the image intensifier or treatment by a surgeon who was not adequately experienced in the procedure. The mean time from injury to presentation to our outpatient department was 10.7 weeks (range, 4–40). The mean time from injury to surgical correction was 4.5 months (range, 3–12 months). The mean pre-operative arc of motion was 138.7° (range, 135–150°). The mean pre-operative HEW angle was −27.3° (range, −35 to −18°) ( All cases were treated by LCW supracondylar osteotomy and fixation with two lateral and one medial K-wire. A long-arm back slab was applied for five weeks (range, 4–6). All the osteotomies united. The mean time to union was six weeks (range, 4–8). The mean follow-up period was 42.5 months (range, 24–70). No patient was lost to follow-up. At the final evaluation, the mean elbow arc of motion was 140° (range, 135–145). The mean HEW angle was 10.9° (range, 6–15) and the mean LPI was −2.2% (range, −7 to 7.9). No patient had pain or neurological deficit. No patient had a loss of elbow ROM more than 10° in any plane compared to the contralateral side ( Four patients (13.3%) had hypertrophic scar which was considered a minor complication All patients achieved satisfactory final results. Twenty-six patients (86.7%) achieved excellent results while four patients (13.3%) achieved good results. All patients and their parents were satisfied with the final results. They all appreciated the marked improvement in cosmesis. The purpose of the present study was to report the outcomes of early correction of cubitus varus deformity after supracondylar fracture malunion by LCW osteotomy and fixation with three K-wires (two lateral and one medial) and to focus on the timing of early correction. The results of the present study showed that early correction of cubitus varus deformity within one year after injury (average 4.5 months) using this simple technique was associated with highly satisfactory results. All the osteotomies united. All the deformities were corrected. The HEW angle was significantly improved from mean −27.3° (range, −35 to −18°) preoperative to mean 10.9° (range, 6–15) postoperative. We achieved a high rate of good and excellent results compared to those described in the literature. In the present study, twenty-six patients (86.7%) achieved excellent results while four patients (13.3%) achieved good results. All the children who were included in the present study and their parents were satisfied with the final results. In a systematic review of the surgical treatment of cubitus varus deformity, the results of the meta-analysis estimated an 87.8% overall rate of good to excellent results throughout the literature The LCW osteotomy is simple and heals rapidly Although many authors believe that rigid fixation and maintenance of cubitus varus correction is difficult because the area is thin, wide, and the bony contact is inadequate Few studies in the literature addressed the treatment of late presenting supracondylar fractures up to three weeks after injury when the elbow was markedly swollen and stiff and the fracture callus was radiographically evident. They performed open reduction and internal fixation or gradual traction Many authors recommended against delayed surgical intervention on a swollen elbow because of increased risk of stiffness and myositis ossificans In the present series, the cause of cubitus varus deformity was either inappropriate initial reduction or an early loss of position after closed reduction and long-arm posterior slab immobilization of displaced supracondylar fractures (80% of cases) or percutaneous pinning (20% of cases). This is very different from reports from western countries where the cause of cubitus varus was the loss of reduction of initially reduced and fixed fractures due to significant medial cortex comminution Despite the long-term belief that cubitus varus is merely a cosmetic deformity, recent studies emphasized the long-term consequences of untreated cubitus varus deformity Cubitus varus deformity does not remodel with time in growing children. The deformity is not in the plane of joint motion In the present study, the correction of the deformity was performed within one year after injury. Children who presented early after fracture union were encouraged to do active exercises until the ROM was regained then they were scheduled for surgical correction. Six children presented with still uniting fractures with marked varus deformity. The elbow was swollen, tender, and ROM was limited. The fracture was splinted for two weeks until it became clinically united then active exercises were started until ROM of the elbow was regained. The ideal technique for cubitus varus correction remained controversial. Medial opening wedge, LCW, dome, step-cut, reverse V, and pentalateral osteotomies have been described Complications associated with these procedures are common. They include overcorrection or under-correction, prominence of the lateral condyle, delayed union, pin-tract infection, and neurological injury In the present study, all but four of the patients achieved excellent final results. The four cases (13%) that were evaluated as having a good rather than an excellent result, the reason was the presence of hypertrophic scarring. Considering that most of the patients and their parents are seeking surgical correction of cubitus varus for cosmetic reasons, we agree with Ippolito et al. The methods of osteotomy fixation varied widely. Smooth wires, Steinmann's pins, screws and wire loop, K-wires with tension band, plate(s) and screws, and external fixators were used to maintain correction while waiting for the union of the osteotomy Most authors agree that the correction of varus and hyperextension deformities gives excellent functional and cosmetic results Although lateral condyle prominence is a major concern after LCW osteotomy and it is the main cause of the S-shaped deformity Ippolito et al. In a recent study of the changes in bone density and stress distribution patterns in different regions of the elbow in patients with long-standing cubitus varus deformity, they found that the bone density is higher and the stress is more concentrated on the medial side of the humeroulnar joint. They concluded that long-term malalignment causes abnormal stress distribution across the joint that stimulates increased bone density in areas with higher stress concentration which is an early stage in the course of degeneration. They advised early correction of the deformity before osteoarthritis develops The limitations of the present study are the relatively small sample size, the absence of a control group, and the retrospective design. The medical records and the radiographs were reviewed by two surgeons independently to minimize bias. Although a prospective, multicenter, randomized controlled trial to compare the outcomes of early correction of cubitus varus deformity with that of late correction (near skeletal maturity) would be ideal, such a study might be ethically inappropriate especially after the recent evidence for the late consequences of the long-standing cubitus varus deformity. Furthermore, children with severe cubitus varus deformity may not wish to live with the deformity until they reach near skeletal maturity. Future research should aim to evaluate the opportunity, cost, and advantages of the use of three-dimensional printing in pre-operative planning and intra-operative correction of cubitus varus deformity especially in long-standing cases with severe multiplanar deformity. Early correction of cubitus varus avoids the consequences of the long-standing deformity and is associated with marked patient and parents' satisfaction and highly satisfactory cosmetic and functional outcomes. The LCW osteotomy is safe and effective in correcting the deformity. The two lateral and one medial K-wire fixation technique is rigid enough to maintain the correction during osteotomy healing. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.