Boride layers have potential industrial applications as abrasive and corrosion-resistant materials due to their high hardness values and chemical characteristics. In this study, boride layers are formed on the surface of St 14 steel samples using the plasma electrolyte method. The process was performed for a holding time of 10min at the preset temperature of around 900°C. The microstructure, hardness, and corrosion resistance characteristics of the boride layer are investigated by X-ray diffraction, hardness indentations and Tafel polarization. XRD results showed that boride layers are detectable on the surface of steel when the borax content of the solution is above 20wt.%. Moreover, there are no peaks of the boride phase in X-ray patterns when the borax content is below 20wt.%. Corrosion resistance characterization showed that layer created in 25% borax provides the best corrosion resistance. Maximum hardness values of samples processed with 10, 15, 20 and 25wt.% borax were 750, 915, 1100 and 1250HV, respectively.Coating processes based on the plasma technique have been increasingly developed in recent decades Boron atoms have relatively small size and high mobility; therefore, they can easily diffuse into ferrous alloys, forming FeB and Fe The thermo-chemical boriding process of steel allows FeB and Fe In plasma electrolysis saturation studies, the diffusion of nitrogen and carbon has been more attentively addressed The chemical composition of the St 14 steel used in this study is given in In this research, the auxiliary electrode of stainless steel 316 had a cylindrical shape and the workpiece was placed in the center of the auxiliary electrode. Plasma electrolysis processes were carried out while the specimen was in the cathodic polarity. The schematic layout of the system cell used in this study is shown in The ratio of workpiece surface area to auxiliary electrode surface area was, approximately, one to sixty. Power source used in the investigation consisted of two transformers which were connected to a control system. This control system had the capability of producing the DC regime. Voltage and current monitoring was performed by a TNM-DS2006 oscilloscope that was connected to a laptop. Electrolyte composition, conductivity of electrolyte and applied voltage used in this study are listed in For temperature measurement, two K type temperature sensors were used. Temperature measurements in this study were performed according to the method proposed by Tyurin The layers were analyzed by the TESCAN VEGA II Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) and Philips 1480 X-ray diffraction. Corrosion resistance measurements were carried out at electrolyte tap water, using a 273A potentiostat PAR EG&G. Corrosion current densities were obtained from the polarization curves by linear extrapolation of the Tafel curves at 50 In the plasma electrolysis method, initially, vapor is formed near the electrode surface. This vapor contains ingredients of electrolytes. If the electrolyte contains borax, the vapor contains boron compounds. After each discharge, in the vapor envelope, boron-containing compounds can decompose to form active boron atoms. These atoms, in a strong electrical field, are concentrated in the gaseous envelope If the condition of the steel surface temperature is appropriate for boron diffusion, boron can diffuse into the steel surface. Given that electrical discharge occurs randomly in different parts of the steel surface, boron diffusion also occurs in different parts of the steel. Thus, no single location has the potential for boron diffusion at all times. Existence of the turbulence in electrolyte impedes the boron diffusion into the steel surface. With the intensification of turbulence in electrolyte, vapor envelope around electrode disappears, leading to the direct contact of the electrolyte with the electrode surface, as a result of which, the electrode surface gets cooled. Therefore, the formation of the boride layer in the plasma electrolysis process is essentially different from the conventional techniques. In a study conducted by Béjar As mentioned above, in microscopic images, needle-like layer was not observed; however, by examining the XRD results in Increasing borax concentration, as is shown in Increasing the borax concentration raises boron content in the gaseous envelope and thereby increases the boriding potential. As can be seen in Due to their nature, layers produced by the plasma electrolysis process, usually have disputed corrosion resistance  In the plasma electrolysis process, hydrogen is developed at high temperatures. Hence, it is expected that oxides and carbon are removed from the steel surface Anodic polarization behaviors of steel in tap water are presented in One of the properties expected from the boride layer is high hardness. Hardness of boride layer changes usually between 700 and 1500 The hardness profile of the samples is shown in In the conventional methods, there are three zones on the hardness curve The mild steel surface was processed using the plasma electrolytic boronizing technique. The characteristics of the surface were studied using various methods. Important obtained results are as follows: When the boronizing process was performed in electrolyte containing 25 Just, the peaks of the Fe There are not any peaks of the boride phase in the X-ray pattern for samples treated in electrolytes containing less than 20 Corrosion resistance of sample with 25% borax is higher than that of the other samples. Maximum hardness values of samples containing 10, 15, 20 and 25