Background and objective
                  Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) and abdominal aortic calcification (AAC) are related to an increased cardiovascular risk. The aim of this study was to analyze a possible relationship between both entities and also the association between metabolic disorders and DISH.
               
                  Patients and method
                  Analytic cross-sectional study in a population-based cohort. DISH (with Resnick-Niwayama criteria) and AAC (with AAC-24 scale) were assessed on plain X-ray images. Interaction terms between DISH and forty clinical covariates were also investigated, through correlation analysis and multivariate regression.
               
                  Results
                  Nine hundred eighty-seven males aged ≥50 years, with a mean age=65.5±9 years, were evaluated. Prevalence rates of DISH and AAC were 21.6% and 58.7%, respectively. DISH+ subjects were older (68.1±9 vs. 63.8±9 years; p
                     =0.0001) and more likely to be affected by metabolic syndrome (MS) (55.6% vs. 36.6%; p
                     =0.0001). In DISH+ subjects, the AAC was 3.7±5 points, whereas in DISH− subjects it was 3.3±5 (p
                     =0.25). AAC was associated with an increased risk of prevalent DISH (unadjusted OR=1.4 [95% CI: 1.01–1.9]; p
                     =0.04), that disappeared when it was adjusted for age (adjusted OR=1.1 [95% CI: 0.8–1.5]; p
                     =0.47). No association was found between DISH and hypertension, diabetes or dyslipidemia; however, age (OR=2.2 [95% CI: 1.6–3]; p
                     =0.0001), BMI (OR=1.5 [95% CI: 1.1–2]; p
                     =0.007), waist circumference (OR=1.5 [95% CI: 1.04–2.3]; p
                     =0.03) and MS (OR=1.7 [95% CI: 1.1–2.4]; p
                     =0.005) showed a significant relationship with DISH after adjusting for confounders.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The study was not able to demonstrate a consistent association between DISH and AAC, proving only a weak and age-dependent relationship between them. DISH proved to be significantly associated with age, BMI, waist circumference and MS.Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) is a rheumatic disease characterized by ossification of ligaments, tendons and joint capsules, and was first described by Forestier and Rotés-Querol in 1950. It is observed more frequently in men and in advanced ages, On the other hand, abdominal aortic calcification (AAC) is considered an indicator of atherosclerotic load and cardiovascular risk (CVR), especially in advanced stages. Based on these observations, DISH and AAC present certain similarities: they are characterized by heterotopic calcification/ossification, are more prevalent in men and in advanced ages, are closely related to MS and associate an increase in CVR. It is therefore likely that the 2 processes are related. However, to our knowledge, there are no published papers specifically investigating this association and there are very few studies offering an approach to this hypothesis. For this reason, we have considered whether there is a relationship between DISH and AAC. On the other hand, and given the absence of a generalized consensus, a second aim has been to contribute with our results to the debate on the metabolic changes associated to DISH. The general design corresponds to an analytical cross-sectional study, within a cohort. The study population consisted of all males ≥50 years old included in a population-based prospective cohort, Cohorte Camargo, whose details have been previously published. Weight (in kg) and size (in m) were obtained from the subject in underwear and without shoes; abdominal girth (in cm) was measured with a tape measure around their body, at the level between the costal margin and the iliac crest. Body mass index (BMI) was measured in kg/m Blood samples were obtained from the ulnar vein after a 12-h fast, and the biochemical parameters were provided by an ADVIA-2400 Chemistry System MS was defined in accordance with the criteria of the National Cholesterol Education Program, Adult Treatment Panel III. Bone mineral density (BMD) was measured by DXA, with a Hologic Two evaluators, independently of each other and blinded from the clinical data of the subjects analyzed, evaluated DISH and AAC. In a previous stage, they were trained in interpreting the corresponding radiological imaging, supervised by a radiologist. It has been classified as a DISH case when the Resnick and Niwayama criteria were met on the lateral X-rays of the thoracic and lumbar spine The results of the quantitative variables were expressed as mean Of a total of 1081 men ≥50 years old included in the study, 72 were discarded for information loss and 22 for poor quality X-rays. Finally, 987 subjects were analyzed, with a mean age in the global sample of 65.5  The DISH prevalence, according to tertiles for age, was 14; 21.3 and 31.9%, respectively ( When analyzing the DISH correlations, the highest values were obtained with age ( In AAC subjects, the prevalence of DISH was 24%, compared to 18% in subjects without AAC ( The adjustment by BMI did not modify the result of the crude analysis between AAC and DISH. However, when adjusting for age, the difference observed in the crude analysis disappeared, with an adjusted OR = Although some variables showed an association with DISH in the crude analysis, when adjusting simultaneously for age and BMI only 2 of them had a significant relationship with DISH: MS and BMD-LS ( MS prevalence in the global sample was 41%. When analyzing the relationship between DISH and MS, there were significant differences in the frequency of MS (55% in subjects with DISH, compared to 36% in subjects without DISH), and an OR The study, aimed at analyzing a potential relationship between DISH and AAC, has not been able to demonstrate an independent association between both of them. Although the crude data showed a slight increase in the risk of DISH prevalence in any degree of AAC, this increased risk disappeared when adjusted for age. In fact, in every tertile for age, the degree of AAC was similar in subjects with and without DISH. However, an age-independent relationship has been observed between the DISH and the aortic valve calcification. Orden et al., The defining feature of DISH and AAC is heterotopic calcification. The current theories postulate that DISH is due to the influence of different mediators acting on the fibroblasts, chondrocytes and collagen fibers of the enthesis promoting the new bone formation. However, in spite of similarities with bone metabolism, some issues have not been sufficiently clarified in vascular calcification, such as the role of the We observed an increasing frequency of DISH according to tertiles for age, and an overall prevalence by 21.6%. As well as the association of DISH with advanced age has been well documented, After adjusting for confounders, a strong positive relationship between BMI and DISH has been observed, as well as between the abdominal girth and DISH. Associations of this disease with obesity or with a high abdominal girth have been known for a long time. We have also observed a significantly higher MS prevalence in subjects with DISH (55% vs 36%) and DISH has been shown to be a predictor of MS, after adjusting for confounders. This observation is consistent with what has already been published. Mader et al. We were unable to demonstrate a relationship between DISH and the presence of DM, fasting plasma sugar levels or having been prescribed antidiabetic treatment. Although hyperinsulinemia, common in obesity and DM and described in patients with DISH, can induce chondrogenesis and ossification of ligaments, Finally, it should be noted that subjects with DISH presented a BMD-LS value 8% higher than subjects without DISH, whereas in the other locations, no difference was observed. This result corroborates to what was observed by other authors. Diederichs et al., The study shows some weaknesses that must be considered. The first is its transversal design, which makes it difficult to establish temporal relationships and causality. Another limitation is to have performed part of the evaluation on conventional, non-digitized X-rays. We can assume a potential classification bias, insofar as the technical quality of some X-rays has been able to influence the evaluation of the DISH or the AAC score. However, we understand that the study also shows several points of interest. To our knowledge, it is the first study to specifically explore a potential relationship between DISH and AAC. For this purpose, a large sample of men belonging to the general population has been evaluated. In addition, the population analyzed belonged to a large prospective study, Cohorte Camargo, which has provided an added advantage in terms of reliability and overall quality of the data collected for this study. In conclusion, in males >50 years of age, a consistent association between DISH and AAC has not been proven, both of them with a weak age-dependent association. DISH has shown significant associations with age, BMI, abdominal girth and MS, which were maintained after adjusting for confounders. On the contrary, a relationship has not been proven with certain metabolic changes traditionally associated with this disease, such as dyslipidemia, DM, hypertension or hyperuricemia. Further studies of longitudinal design are required to confirm these observations. The study was funded in part by the Carlos III Health Institute (PI15/00521) and the Thematic Network for Cooperative Research on Aging and Fragility (RETICEF, RD12/0043/0009), which includes funds from the  Conception and design. EPR, GAS, JLH; Data collection: EPR, GAS, SFP, RLA; Analysis and interpretation: EPR, JMO, JLH; Drafting: EPR, GAS, SFP, JLH; Approval of the final document: EPR, GAS, JMO, SFP, RLA, JLH. No conflict has been declared.