Physical and chemical characteristics of the Adriatic Sea during 2001 are analyzed to better understand the influence of an exceptional flooding of the Po River (the largest river flowing into the Adriatic Sea) occurred in October 2000. Spatial and temporal distributions of water temperature, salinity, dissolved oxygen and nutrients over the basin are presented. To better understand the impact of river flood during 2001, an analysis of a data-set along a transect during the years 1999–2002 is carried out. Results confirmed that the Po River outflows strongly affect the physical and chemical characteristics of the basin. In particular, during 2001, a sharp decrease in salinity and an increase in nutrient and fluorescence concentrations occurred in the northwestern Adriatic Sea after the 2000 flood event. The amount of nutrients transported during the river flood into the northwestern part of the basin is depleted by phytoplankton uptake until April 2001. All the nutrients were consumed before they could enrich the eastern coast, even though the freshwater input extends towards the Croatian coast. The Po River discharge flowing into the North Adriatic Sea during October–November 2000 (about 5000m3/s) is twice the mean discharge of the 2-month period (about 2000m3/s) and diluting the basin sufficiently to influence the North Adriatic Deep Water formation, almost absent in winter 2001. The flood event contributed to modifying the physical and chemical dynamics of the Adriatic Sea and its influence is clearly visible even 5–6 months later.River plumes play an important role in the processing of nutrients discharged from the land into the sea. The degree to which nutrient modification proceeds is largely controlled by river flushing time ( The Adriatic Sea is a continental basin of the Mediterranean Sea, located between the Italian peninsula and the Slovenian–Croatian–Montenegro–Albanian coasts with its major axis (about 800 The Adriatic Sea is a continental basin and its circulation and water masses are strongly influenced by atmospheric conditions, mainly winds ( Main winds blowing over the Adriatic Sea are bora (a northeasterly wind) and scirocco (a southeasterly wind) ( River discharge is particularly strong in the northern basin and affects the circulation through buoyancy input and the ecosystem by introducing a large amount of nutrients ( The river water discharged into the northern Adriatic generally forms a coastal layer that flows cyclonically around the basin. Since the Po River is the main source of this water, the coastal layer is predominantly south of the Po River delta and it is named the Western Coastal Layer (WCL). It is associated with a strong near-surface current, WAC (Western Adriatic Current, According to The data-set of physical and chemical parameters in the northern (Senigallia–Susak Island transect) Adriatic Sea allow highlighting and a better understanding of the anomalies in physical processes such as seasonal and interannual changes in temperature, salinity, density, dissolved oxygen and nutrients. The Institute of Marine Sciences of the Italian National Research Council (ISMAR-CNR) monthly monitored the Senigallia transect from 1999 to 2002. Senigallia was chosen as a monitoring site because it is far enough away from Po Delta and it is in an area where the NAdDW, forming during winter in the North Adriatic, crosses the Senigallia transect (along the western side) as bottom current. The data-set along the Senigallia–Susak transect for 2001 shows low salinity surface water in nearly all the sections with respect to the other years. Furthermore, information about physical, chemical and biological parameters of the northern Adriatic Sea are available thanks to the studies on mucilage formation carried out during 1999–2002 ( The aim of this study is to examine the spatial and temporal distributions of physical and chemical parameters in the northern and central Adriatic Sea ( Data for this study were collected during the three oceanographic cruises in the central and northern Adriatic Sea. The first cruise was conducted aboard the R/V Alliance (NATO Undersea Research Center, La Spezia, Italy) during winter from January 28 to February 07 2001, the second oceanographic cruise during summer (June 22 to July 02, 2001) and the third during autumn (September 24 to October 03, 2001) aboard the R/V Urania (CNR, Italy). During the cruises, surface water samples were collected and analyzed for nutrient concentration and CTD casts were obtained for different depths. In situ temperature and salinity were measured by dual sensor CTD SBE 911-plus equipped with sensors measuring pressure, temperature, conductivity, fluorescence (Sea Tech Fluorimeter) and the SeaBird Carousel water sampler (Rosette). The CTD sampling frequencies were 24 Dissolved Inorganic Nitrogen (DIN) was calculated as the sum of the NH Surface salinity, surface fluorescence and bottom density along the Senigallia transect were very variable between 1999 and 2002 ( The space-time density trends highlight the formation of the dense water mass during winter from the North Adriatic along the Senigallia transects. During winter 2001 the bottom density shows lower values (28.8–29.1 In the winter cruise (28th January to 7th February 2001) the strong atmospheric forcing produced by the bora events were dominant and drove the distinct circulation patterns to the northern basin. The surface salinity and the satellite chlorophyll maps from NASA ( The nitrate map ( During the summer cruise (22nd June to 2nd July 2001), the wind forcing was quite weak and the river discharge was clearly a significant feature in the northern and western Adriatic Sea. Off the Po River Mouth, the water column was characterized by a low-salinity surface layer ( Maps relative to nitrate and orthosilicate distributions ( During autumn cruise (24th September to 3rd October 2001) the Po River discharge levels returned to those similar to the annual mean and the basin continued to be characterized by lower salinity along the Italian coast increasing from the western Adriatic coast to offshore waters ( At the end of summer, the surface orthosilicate concentrations increased ( In the present paragraph, vertical sections for three transects were present. With reference to The salinity distribution in front of the Po River indicated relatively stratified conditions mainly at the first four stations which are more influenced by the Po freshwater discharge. Nitrate and orthosilicate concentrations were high in the bottom sections at stations close to the western coast where nitrates ranged between 40 At these stations the mineralization process of continental origin organic matter was probably higher than in offshore waters as denoted by lowest oxygen saturation (90–95%). The Senigallia–Susak transect was characterized by a completely mixed water column, from the surface to the bottom. The influence of Po River discharge was evident on the left side of the section where low salinity values (30–35) were observed at the surface. Nutrient distributions appear mainly dominated by the nutrient-rich freshwater inputs, as pointed out by the clear river trace along the transect, and the mineralization process at the bottom. Furthermore, the water column appeared oxygen saturated due to the vertical mixing occurred in winter. The Jabuka transect showed a sharp freshwater input at the surface of first stations on the western side. At these stations the surface was characterized by low salinity (34–36) and high nutrient concentrations, especially nitrates (8–11 It is quite evident that all the sections show a significant depletion of nutrients with respect to the winter cruise. Under well defined stratification conditions, the nutrient concentration distributions along the Po transect showed high nitrate values mainly in the surface layer of the western stations (3–5 Under a progressively increasing stratification condition, a subsurface oxygen concentration maximum began to develop along the Senigallia transect. As highlighted by the summer distribution of the parameters, this oxygen maximum characterized almost the whole water column along the section. Nitrate and orthosilicate concentrations strongly decreased with respect to winter. Low nitrate and orthosilicate values may be determined by the development of phytoplankton populations dominated by diatoms in the previous months. At the first three stations in the Jabuka transect, the freshwater input was still present as in winter but the low nutrient concentrations imply a possible uptake by phytoplankton groups. The bottom layer of the deepest stations continued to have relatively high nitrates and low oxygen saturation values (62–67%). The transect located in front of the Po River mouth showed a horizontal stratification in September with a clear freshwater input on the western side. The salinity increased towards the western side of the transect and from the surface to the bottom layer. The nutrient concentrations at the bottom of the stations 2–5 showed high values as well as the surface of the first two stations in front of the Po River mouth. Low oxygen saturation levels at the bottom of these stations (50–60%) were detected. Senigallia transect showed a water mass rich in nutrients, in particular orthosilicates, and undersaturated (40–50%) at the bottom stations of the western side. The water column appeared stratified with less salty water [or do you mean: lower salinity?] along the Italian coast increasing towards offshore [the open sea]. [The Jabuka transect exhibited an enrichment in nitrate and orthosilicate at the bottom layer, in particular inside the mesoadriatic pits, with respect to the summer period.] The bottom layer along the Jabuka transect is enriched with nitrates and orthosilicates, in particular inside the meso-Adriatic pits, with respect to the summer period. The water column presented a well stratified condition with the surface layer over-saturated (110–115%) and the low salinity surface water (36–37) extended from the western coast to the middle of the basin. A less salty water mass was evident at about 100 It is well known that under aerobic conditions the assimilation and the regeneration of nutrients occur in constant ratios ( It was observed that the standard deviations associated with the Redfield ratios are high and in some cases close to the average value itself. This demonstrates the high variability of the data and of the biological and physical processes controlling the nutrient level in the Adriatic basin. The surface ratio of the NAd was 35:55:1 and the bottom ratio was 31:51:1 during winter cruise. This result indicates a higher phosphorus deficiency in the NAd and much larger N/P and Si/P values. The lowest values of Si:P (23:1) at the surface were found in June. In MWAd the N:Si:P ratios relative to the surface and the bottom are lower than the NAd. The highest values were observed in winter when the river discharge was maximum. During summer and autumn, N:P and Si:P ratios are quite similar to those found for NAd. In the MEAd the N:Si:P ratio is lower than the other sub basins. In particular, in June, the N:Si:P ratio relative to the surface, was 9:12:1. These results may indicate a nitrogen and silicate deficiency with respect to phosphorus. The nutrient levels in the northern Adriatic are clearly controlled by river inputs that induced intense phytoplankton development in winter and autumn. In all the seasons, the N:Si:P ratios calculated in the of NAd and the MWAd are larger than those found by  During summer and autumn N:P and Si:P ratios in MWAd are quite similar to those found in NAd. confirming the important role played by the amount of river discharge in the winter season ( In the MEAd, the Redfield ratio is lower than the open ocean standard values of 16:15:1 found by other authors ( The satellite chlorophyll images for the same cruise periods show lower chlorophyll values in MEAd, especially in June, confirming the less productivity of this sub-basin, more similar to the oligotrophic open ocean, with respect to the western and the northern Adriatic. The surface N/P values found in the other sub-basins are in good agreement with the satellite chlorophyll images confirming the use of these maps as a valuable tool for marine investigation. The sections point out a freshwater input until Pescara on the western coast. Furthermore, a quite intense WAC was present during the 2001 with respect to the period 1999–2002 (  The winter cooling occurring in the northern Adriatic Sea causes a strong densification resulting in the collapse of the water mass ( The seasonal changes in physical and chemical parameters from our analysis for 2001 points out the important role played by the exceptional Po River flood occurred at the end of 2000 and the way it affected the physical and biochemical characteristics of the basin. In particular, the Adriatic Sea shows a sharp decrease of salinity in the northern and western sides during 2001 after the flood events of October 2000 and an increase of nutrient and fluorescence concentrations. The Adriatic basin changed the physical and chemical characteristics through the seasons, showing also different regional characteristics. The northern and western Adriatic Sea are clearly more influenced by river floods. The amount of nutrients is depleted in few months during winter in the northern and western basins by the phytoplankton uptake. All nutrients are consumed before they can enrich the eastern coast, although the freshwater input extends towards the Croatian coast. In fact, the surface fluorescence observed in the Senigallia–Susak time-series shows that the high phytoplankton growth ends in April and is mostly confined to the western coast despite the visible freshwater input over the entire transect till October. The absence of nutrient-limitation conditions probably supported a rapid uptake. Consequently, poor nutrients and low phytoplankton abundance are found in summer with respect to the other years. The middle eastern coast is only partially affected by unusual river floods and continues to show similar biochemical characteristics to those observed during the other years. The fresh water flowing into the North Adriatic Sea is greater than twice the amount with respect to the mean discharge, diluting the basin sufficiently to influence the NAdDW formation, almost absent in winter 2001. The flood event and reduced cooling did contribute to partially modifying the physical dynamics of the Adriatic Sea, consequently the NAdDW may not have flushed old bottom waters and did not change the biogeochemical properties of the Jabuka depressions. Thanks to Captains and crews of R/V Alliance and R/V Urania for the collaboration during the cruises; thanks to Mr. Giuseppe Caccamo and Dr. Paola Fornasiero for collecting samples; thanks to Mrs. Jane Frankenfield for kindly reviewing of English language; thanks to two anonymous reviewers for the helpful suggestions on the earlier version of this paper.