Avulsion fractures of the perilunate ligaments occur in isolation, and multiple fractures are typically not seen in the same carpus. We present a case of a 15-year-old male who injured his wrist during football practice. He presented without wrist dislocation or deformity. Radiographs demonstrated avulsion fractures to the proximal pole of the scaphoid and proximal radial aspect of the triquetrum. The patient was immobilized with an upper extremity thumb spica cast; however, there was persistent non-union of both fractured segments. Magnetic resonance imaging confirmed avulsions at the site of the scapholunate and lunotriquetral ligaments, with both ligaments relatively intact. At the last follow-up, one year after the initial injury, the patient had a normal clinical exam, with no pain and full wrist range of motion despite fracture non-union at both locations. This is a unique injury with an unclear mechanism and complicated management.Avulsion fractures of the carpal bones are not uncommon. A 15-year-old, right-hand dominant male sustained an injury during football practice when another player fell on him, causing hyperextension of his left wrist. He presented 16 days after the date of injury with pain in his left wrist. Physical examination revealed tenderness to palpation over the anatomic snuffbox of the left hand and pain with flexion and extension of his wrist. Range of motion was restricted to approximately 45° of wrist flexion and extension. Otherwise, the neurovascular and motor exams were normal. Plain radiographs of the left hand demonstrated fractures of the proximal scaphoid and inferior triquetrum without dislocation or angulation ( The patient was followed in clinic for several visits after placement of the cast. Radiographs obtained in clinic failed to demonstrate union of either fracture at 6 weeks and 12 weeks after injury. During this 12-week period, the patient had full resolution of his pain, with improved range of motion to 80° of wrist flexion and 70° of wrist extension. Computer tomography (CT) was obtained 3 months after the date of injury to evaluate for non-union of both fractures. Imaging demonstrated avulsion of the proximal aspect of the triquetrum with slight volar displacement, as well as a comminuted avulsion fracture of the proximal pole of the scaphoid bone with 3 mm of displacement. Further evaluation with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was obtained 9 months after injury. MRI demonstrated fracture non-union and mild heterogeneity of both the SLL and LTL reflecting mild sprain, without full-thickness tear ( Fractures of the scaphoid and triquetrum are the first and third most common carpal fractures, respectively, and avulsion fractures of these bones are not uncommon. Avulsion fractures occur when there is a sudden application of tensile force through the insertion site of a tendon or ligament, which causes the bone to fracture. This force is often generated by sudden contraction of surrounding muscles in attempt to decelerate body mass during an injury. The scaphoid fracture in our case represented a proximal pole fracture associated with avulsion of the SLL. One study reviewing 108 pediatric scaphoid fracture presentations determined that avulsion fractures comprised 42.5% of all cases; however, the majority of these occurred at the distal pole and there was only one incident reported at the proximal pole. The second fracture in our case was an inferior triquetrum fracture secondary to avulsion of the LTL. The majority of avulsion fractures of the triquetrum are classified as chip fractures involving the dorsal cortex. Our case is a combination of two rare fracture patterns whose presentations have suggested a poor prognosis in previous reports. At presentation, initial clinical assessment and radiographic analysis were consistent with small, minimally displaced fractures of the triquetrum and the scaphoid. Due to the relative stability of each fracture pattern, the patient was initially treated non-operatively. Following continued radiograph-confirmed evidence of non-union, CT and MRI were obtained to further elucidate the etiology of the injury, confirming the diagnosis of avulsion fractures about the perilunate ligaments. Interestingly, there was only mild heterogeneity in the SLL and LTL reflecting sprain, without discrete tear. Though previous biomechanical studies have established that co-occurring SLL and LTL disruptions commonly result in perilunate dislocations, based on this presentation, simply spraining these ligaments do not contribute to additional instability. Cases of persistent fracture non-union in the carpal bones are typically treated with surgical fixation of the fractured segment, and results have been reassuring in cases involving the scaphoid and the triquetrum in particular. When presented with a case such as this one, it is therefore important to consider multiple factors prior to determining appropriate management for the patient. When a traumatic injury occurs, a clinician should consider ordering instability series radiographs to evaluate fractures that may seem benign at onset in order to monitor healing due to the injury mechanism. It is also important to consider further diagnostic imaging such as CT or MRI when non-union continues to remain before twelve weeks despite improving or resolution of symptoms, as waiting an extended period of time may reduce a window of opportunity to consider operative management. For example, despite the difficulty due to size K-wires may have been used to at least secure the scaphoid fragments. In this case, though we followed institutional policy regarding patient follow-up, by the time avulsion fractures were diagnosed, there was little point in offering surgical management when the patient was asymptomatic, yet leaving unrepaired avulsed fragments may cause instability, pain, or rapid development of degenerative osteoarthritis of the joint in the future. The reported case is a rare wrist injury that has not been previously described in the literature. Further investigation is required to understand the exact mechanism of injury and appropriate management for this unique fracture pattern. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The authors declare they have no conflict of interest.