The mineral sperrylite (PtAs2), unlike other Pt minerals, has shown to be resistant to cyanide leaching, even at elevated temperatures of 50°C. This has prevented further development of a two-stage heap leaching process, of which the second stage is cyanide leaching for a Platreef ore, due to a considerable portion of the Pt being present as sperrylite.
                  Through a comprehensive set of leaching tests, this study has shown that sperrylite leaches slowly in cyanide due to eventual passivation. The addition of ferricyanide to the cyanide solution results in significantly more Pt being leached (up to 16 times) than with cyanide only under identical process conditions. However, over time passivation occurred in this system also, but can be seemingly be overcome by filtering, rinsing and re-suspending the sperrylite. This was further investigated using a reactor system continuously fed with a ferricyanide-cyanide to leach a fixed bed of sperrylite mineral. Again, gradual passivation of the mineral phase was observed, which was fully reversible following a day of feeding with distilled water.
                  XPS analysis of fresh and leached mineral indicated a depletion of As on the mineral surface, which tallied with an observed preferential leaching of As during leaching, at least initially. As a result, it is postulated that a less cyanide-soluble compound of the form PtAs(X) forms, where x is <2. The ease with which the leaching process can be restarted after rinsing the mineral indicates that the adsorption of solution species is the key step in forming a passivating layer. This adsorption is potentially favoured by the gradual surface transformation.
                  Finally, an electrochemical study confirmed that the ferricyanide-cyanide system facilitated an electron transfer reaction at the sperrylite surface with the likely oxidation of As and reduction of the ferricyanide. Gradual passivation of the surface was also observed in this system.A two-stage heap leaching process was developed as an alternative to the conventional concentrate-smelt-refine process to treat Platreef ore ( Sperrylite is a chemically stable compound that does not readily decompose or alter through normal weathering processes such as those that affect base metal minerals like chalcopyrite. There is no information in literature that outright states the oxidation states of Pt or As in sperrylite. The most common valence states of As are − A study conducted on Platreef concentrate by The reduction potential for ferricyanide is slightly lower than oxygen in alkaline aqueous solutions (pH However, the oxidation capability of ferricyanide can be maintained at a relatively high level due to its high solubility in cyanide solution. Ferricyanide and ferrocyanide are stable over a wide pH range and will not react with cyanide ( This study, through leaching tests, surface analysis and electrochemical techniques, investigates and attempts to explain the slow leaching of sperrylite in cyanide solution. Furthermore, ferricyanide has been evaluated to determine if it can improve the Pt extractions by acting as an oxidant. From this investigation it can be determined if ferricyanide leaching is a viable option to explore for cyanide-based heap leaching of Pt from Platreef ore. Having postulated that the slow leaching of sperrylite in cyanide is due to the occurrence of a change at the surface of the mineral during leaching, X-ray photo-electron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis of leached samples has been identified as the most suitable method of investigation as demonstrated in other studies ( A sample of high purity sperrylite mineral was obtained from the Wallbridge Mining Company of Canada, courtesy of Lonmin Plc. The sample originated from the nickel ore deposit of the Sudbury Basin in Ontario Canada. Originally, the sample was in what appeared to be crystalline form of various sizes from 2 The tests were conducted in a batch stirred tank reactor (BSTR) configuration, using a 500 The cyanide solution was prepared from pure sodium cyanide supplied by Merck South Africa, and a combination of 1.01 A 500 The XPS equipment used was the PHI 5000 Scanning ESCA Microprobe located at the Department of Physics at the University of the Free State, Bloemfontein, South Africa. A 100 Samples of sperrylite, untreated and after specific leach tests were mounted onto a small holder cup of area 3 The equipment used in these experiments consisted of a glass reactor to hold the solution (cyanide and ferricyanide-cyanide) and a standard three-electrode set-up. The working electrode was a mineral electrode constructed from a large sperrylite crystal embedded in an epoxy resin block with one face of the crystal exposed. Using a high resolution image from a microscope, the surface area of the exposed face of the crystal was calculated to be 1.3 The mineral electrode was attached to an over-head stirrer to rotate the electrode for controlled mass transfer effects and agitation. The electrode was rotated at a speed of 1600 Curves for all the experiments are plotted as concentration in solution (mg/L) versus time. The percentage extractions were very low, in the range Looking at the cyanide-only system, For the ferricyanide-cyanide system ( The curves for arsenic (  The batch leach tests thus indicate that the cyanide leaching of sperrylite in the presence of ferricyanide follows a different reaction mechanism compared to the leaching in its absence. The cyanide-only system shows two reaction stages, with the first proceeding over the first day of leaching and becoming increasingly less significant with each repeat run. Significantly more As is leached during this phase than Pt, therefore this phase could relate to the dissolution of surface-oxidised As compounds. A secondary leach phase, which releases significantly more Pt, commences only after this initial day. In all cases leaching levels off or declines after 3–4 The batch leaching results in the ferricyanide-cyanide system do not indicate the same two-stage mechanism; or, given the much higher initial rates, it is not discernible from the measured data. Although similarly to the cyanide-only tests the leach curves level off after 3–4 It was initially assumed that the dissolution in the batch tests was either limited by a solubility constraint or by reagent supply, leading to the levelling off after each run. Either way, renewed leaching resulted after replacing the leach solution. Based on this assumption, it was decided to test the continuous leaching of a sperrylite sample in the same combined ferricyanide-cyanide solution as used in the batch tests, but continuously supplying fresh leach solution.  The effect of the wash with distilled water can be seen almost immediately. From 19th day of leaching the jump in the rate and extent of extraction is significant, compared to what it was from day 8 to day 18. This does add some credibility to the theory that passivation in the ferricyanide-cyanide system occurs due to the formation of unknown reaction products which deposit on the surface initially and not due to a change in the surface structure. These products hinder further leaching but can be washed off or re-dissolved to allow for continued and improved leaching. As can be seen in The leach test work has clearly identified the formation of surface layers or surface deposits that inhibit the progress of leaching. To further understand the mechanisms at play, various sperrylite samples were analysed using surface analysis techniques (EDS and XPS) as follows: EDS analysis of the different samples was attempted to see whether a difference in As:Pt atomic ratio between the different samples could be detected, more specifically that Sample 1 would have a ratio consistent with literature (  The analysis of sample 2 indicates the correct balance between As and Pt on the surface and slight As depletion in the subsurface. During the cyanide-only leaching experiment in run 1 ( Samples 3 and 4 show a slight surface depletion of As, which may be consistent with the slightly preferential leaching of As over Pt (Pt:As ratios in solution of around 0.4–0.5, i.e. slightly in favour of As) during most of the ferricyanide-cyanide experiment ( The Pt4f For the most part the As3d peaks (and corresponding binding energies) for all 4 samples ( From The cyanide-only leach after 3 runs, from which Sample 2 is taken, indicated an increasing degree of ‘passivation’ with less and less Pt and As leached in each run ( Unfortunately, no XPS analysis could be done on the residue sample for the continuous leach experiment. It would have been of considerable interest to understand why a single day of water washing was sufficient to reverse the ‘passivation’ of the sperrylite, if, as becoming clear from the above analysis, it is likely to relate to the formation of an As depleted surface layer. It is plausible, but unlikely, that the one-day ‘break’ would allow As to diffuse back from the bulk mineral into the depleted surface, thus to replenish it and allow again for rapid leaching as the ferricyanide-cyanide solution is re-introduced. The presence of ferricyanide significantly enhances the dissolution of sperrylite. The assumption is that it acts as an oxidant of arsenic species present in the mineral. Thus an electron transfer takes place at the mineral surface, which can be studied further with potentiometry tools. Open circuit potential (OCP) experiments were conducted with a mineral electrode made from a large piece of sperrylite as described in the Experimental section. The freshly polished probe was immersed in solutions of varying amounts of K The continuous decline of OCP over 17 In order to appreciate the response of the sperrylite mineral to an applied oxidation potential, cyclic voltammetry experiments were conducted in cyanide-only solution. This was done so to conduct all electrons released from the anodic dissolution reaction through the electrode wire rather than to the oxidant at the mineral surface and thus make the rate of electron exchange measurable as a current. In the present experiment the voltage was increased from the initial OCP (− It is now of interest to monitor the rate of leaching (through the current) at a fixed potential. Although the potential at which OCP was measured was around 205  Unfortunately, even after running for 2 The work presented here gives a clear indication that the slow leaching of sperrylite in cyanide can be attributed to a form of passivation. This was observed in tests in which fresh solution was applied after the leaching of Pt levelled off, and with each fresh application less Pt was leached. Without a suitable oxidant to oxidise As in sperrylite to a higher oxidation (and hence more soluble) state, an eventual build-up of As results at the surface of the mineral, which acts as a passivation layer causing slow leaching of Pt. XPS analysis further suggested that the As remaining behind was in an oxidation state closer to 0, suggesting that in a cyanide-only system the limited oxidant does not completely oxidise As but leaves it in an intermediate/transitional oxidation state. Further, this may change the entire sperrylite structure at the surface, forming a less cyanide soluble compound of the form PtAs Identical leaching tests conducted with the addition of ferricyanide as an oxidant conclusively showed that the presence of ferricyanide significantly improved the leaching Pt and As, leaching 12–16 times more than what was leached in the experiments that used only cyanide solution. It is believed that the ferricyanide oxidises the part of the As in sperrylite that is in a lower oxidation state to a higher oxidation state thus breaking the chemical bonds of the sperrylite to release Pt into solution to be complexed with cyanide. In doing so the ferricyanide is reduced to ferrocyanide, representing a cathodic reaction to the anodic reaction of the As oxidation. The part of the As that is in lower oxidation state is most likely in the − However, a phenomenon which is yet to be fully explained is the fact that washing and contacting the mineral with fresh solution can reverse the passivation, at least partially in the cyanide-only system, and fully in the ferricyanide-cyanide system. It is most probable that this washing step will allow desorption of an inhibiting species on the surface of the sperrylite rather than dissolution of a reaction product not soluble in the cyanide solutions. This needs to be investigated further, as any suggestion as to what adsorbs and onto what phase would be entirely speculative at this stage. What is peculiar to note, however, is that this adsorption occurs only very gradually (as opposed to the apparent desorption during water washing), and may in fact be linked to the gradual alteration of the surface during leaching, i.e. a phase conducive to the postulated adsorption reaction is formed only gradually as the reaction proceeds. There is a tentative indication that this phase this could be an altered and possibly more metallic mineral species of the form PtAs Regardless of the mechanisms, the results from this study clearly show that a combination of ferricyanide-cyanide is a potential solution to the low Pt extractions using cyanide-only in Platreef ore heap leaching. It should be evaluated further using laboratory column and pilot scale test work.