A range of methods have been described for treating fractures of the proximal neck of the humerus. These have included both intramedullary and extracortical devices. This report describes the failure of such a plate, which occurred shortly after its introduction into clinical use at our hospital. A 29-year-old professional violinist had a closed, comminuted 4-part fracture of the proximal humerus. She underwent open reduction–internal fixation with the Philos plate (Stratec) ( The retrieved implant was examined visually for manufacturing defects and its thickness measured by use of a digital vernier caliper. It was further subjected to scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of the fractured surfaces of the plate, incorporating the remaining parts of the screw holes. Visual examination showed that the fracture in vivo had linked across the narrow bridges between the angled screw holes and spread from these screw holes to the edges of the plate. It was noted that the screw holes were inclined to the surface so that the screws were angled both proximally and divergently. Because of this inclination, there was a serrated edge where the screw threads within the holes had reached the surface of the plate. There was no obvious deformation of the screw holes or visible evidence of pitting of their surfaces. The plate had not deformed grossly (eg, by plastic bending) near the fracture site but had fractured transversely in a brittle manner ( Visual examination suggested that the fracture may have initiated immediately adjacent to the anterior screw hole (the reference anterior and posterior relate to their position when implanted in the right humerus) ( SEM showed that the fracture surfaces were predominantly transgranular and that the alloy did not contain visible voids or other defects. At low magnification, there were zones that were smooth, at the corners of the fracture surfaces near the threaded screw holes ( The postoperative anteroposterior radiograph shows that the humeral fracture surfaces were not opposed at the medial cortex ( When the cross section of the plate was measured at the level of the fracture, it was found that the holes left only approximately 9 mm of width by a maximum overall depth (allowing for the curved cross section) of 4 mm. At 90° of unloaded abduction of the arm, Poppen and Walker Although it is obviously desirable to have a fracture fixation plate with as low a profile as possible, to avoid irritation of overlying tissues, it is also essential that it has sufficient fatigue strength to resist the loads imposed by rehabilitation after surgery, even in cases in which the plate alone has to do this in the absence of support from the bone ends. It may, therefore, be appropriate for the Philos plate to be strengthened by, for example, altering the positions of some of the screw holes to avoid weak spots at certain positions along the plate where they coincide at present. An alternative would be to increase the thickness of the plate, because the bending strength is proportional to the thickness cubed, so a small increment would have a large effect. These comments have been communicated to the manufacturer, and we have learned that a strengthened design, which takes into account the factors noted previously, is being made available. We do not believe that there was any defect in the material of the fractured plate; there was no porosity on SEM, and in the laboratory, the distal fragment of the plate was bent sharply to 90° without cracking, so the brittle nature of the failure, with negligible deformation, points to fatigue failure. Any plate design is a compromise between conflicting surgical, anatomic, and engineering factors. It is clear that a lack of medial support, as a result of comminution or compaction, will leave the lateral plate exposed to large bending effects. The plate that failed incorporated threaded holes for the screws so that they could lock into place and provide enhanced support for the bone fragments. That is a useful feature in multifragmented or comminuted fractures of the proximal humerus because, unlike conventional plates, this allows secure fixation without the need for a large compressive force between the plate and the bone. It should be noted, however, that this difference will not affect the overall loading configuration of the proximal humerus, so the bending loads in the situation that occurred in this case will not be altered by the use of locking screws. Thus, this novel plate design will still be vulnerable to bending loads in the absence of adequate medial support as a result of bone loss or comminution. Osteosynthesis is always a race between bone healing and implant breakage, and postoperative rehabilitation requires special care in cases with deficient bony support, even beyond the first 6 weeks.