The overflow particle size of cyclone is one of the most significant performance indices in the process of ore grinding. Given the measuring difficulty under the current industrial conditions, a hybrid method, which combines community finding (CF) of a complex network with case-based reasoning (CBR) is proposed in this study. The CF method with a new evaluation criterion for the vertex combination degree is designed to select the typical cases from the constructed communities, and a k-nearest neighbors (k-NN) based strategy with multi-similarity threshold is proposed in the case retrieval process. To verify the effectiveness of the proposed method, a number of comparative simulations by using the real-world data coming from a copper–molybdenum concentration plant are carried out, and the results indicate that the proposed method can provide a good measure quality for the industrial application.The overflow particle size is one of the most significant quality targets in grinding process, which has to be strictly controlled to ensure the performance of the subsequent production processes such as magnetic separation, flotation, etc. However, in concentration plants, the overflow particle size is rather difficult to be directly measured by generic instruments or devices, since the particle size analyzers used to be largely impacted by industrial noises or instrumental failures Soft computing method, regarded as an effective tool for supervising and controlling the industrial processes, could be a positive attempt for the industrial variables measurement. At present, a series of soft computing approaches have been successfully applied to data prediction, fault diagnosis, error estimation, condition monitoring and so on It was noticeable that case based reasoning (CBR) using the operational experiences only needs to add new cases to the case base instead of updating the model construction, and provides a class of feasible approach In this study, combining the community finding of complex network with CBR, a hybrid soft computing for the overflow particle size is proposed. Firstly, in the process of case base construction, the community is found by using the industrial data based on the network modularity. By the proposed concept of the vertex combination degree (the evaluating indicator), the case base is constructed via selecting the typical samples from each community. Secondly, in the case retrieval process, a k-NN based strategy with multi-similarity threshold is designed to ensure a reasonable number of the cases similar to the current operational condition. Finally, in the case reuse process, the community distribution of the searched cases is taken into account so as to improve the modeling accuracy. To illustrate the effectiveness of this method, a number of comparative experiments for a typical grinding process were conducted, and the practical application in a concentration plant indicate that the proposed method provides a higher accuracy and lower computational complexity. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section This section presents a typical grinding process to clarify the technical background of the proposed soft computing study. The mineral bearing ore are transported to the crushing process to form the suitable size of ore particle, then are passed into the grinding process for the fine size. During grinding, water is added to create “slurry”. A typical grinding circuit can be illustrated as In the production practice, it is extremely difficult to measure the value of the overflow particle size online. Although the particle size analyzers are equipped in some plants, they are often affected by a number of factors such as noise, large deviations from true values, etc. Therefore, it is incapable to satisfy the practical requirements on-site. Case-based reasoning (CBR) is an important knowledge-based method, which solves the problem by reusing and modifying the previous similar circumstances In a CBR model, the samples in case base should be representative and cover the typical operational conditions as many as possible. The generalization ability of the model could be limitative if a series of continuous samples are directly selected to be the case base. On the other side, if a large amount of data that might cover all the conditions becomes the case base samples, then a high-level data redundancy might appear. Besides, the model precision might be negatively impacted if the anomaly data are added into the case base The community is a common feature of a complex network, and the individuals in a same community have common characteristics The greater values of When the value of Δ To improve the accuracy of the CBR modeling for the industrial application, a hybrid method combining community finding (CF) with CBR is proposed in this section for measuring the overflow particle size of the grinding process. In this study, the practical industrial data are employed to construct the complex network model and each sample is regarded as a vertex. Here, one can adopt the Euclidean distance to calculate the distance between the vertices, see the distance matrix between the sample vertices, From the analysis in Ref. Given that the computing accuracy will be affected by the anomaly samples in the case base, this study proposes a new method for removing the anomaly samples. One can first divide the samples with different operational conditions into a number of communities (community finding), and the connection levels of the normal samples and the anomaly ones are rather different. In this study, the communities with few vertices are regarded as the anomaly samples, where a threshold In this paper, the combination degree of each vertex in a community is computed and arrayed in descending order. And, the vertices with higher combination degrees are selected to construct the case base, which makes the samples in the base be with low redundancy and high level typicality. The procedure of the base construction based on CF reads as follows.       The k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) is a popular case retrieval method within the existing ones Assuming that the primary variable set is denoted as And this study defines the similarity function of the current condition If one defines the maximal value of similarity as SIM (1) Static similarity threshold (2) Dynamic similarity threshold In general, there are few cases which can completely match with the current condition (1) Case reuse based on the static similarity threshold (2) Case reuse based on the dynamic similarity threshold To verify the effectiveness of the proposed method, the practical data coming from a copper–molybdenum concentration plant in China is employed in this study. The dominant variable is the overflow particle size, while the overflow concentration, the feeding flow rate, the feeding pressure and the feeding concentration are as the auxiliary variables. We can empirically set the feature weight values as 0.2, 0.25, 0.25 and 0.3 respectively. Considering the variation range of the auxiliary variables, 10,000 groups of data are randomly selected from the practical real-time database as the initial samples, and the results of the community finding can be listed as There are totally 22 communities generated in where In addition, to verify the performance of the proposed combination degree of the vertices, two groups of experiments are carried out in this section. First, as for the community data that deleted the anomaly data, 800 samples are selected on average from 16 communities according to the combination degree (50 samples from each one). Second, the data samples are randomly selected from the generated 16 communities. The comparative results for the two experiments are illustrated as For a further validation of the proposed sample selection, the additive comparative experiments are also conducted here by using the continuous sample selection and the K-means clustering method. In the experiments, we still designate the number of the data sample as 800, and the cluster number of the alternative K-means clustering based method is set to be 20. The validation data are taken from the dataset of the practical database of this plant, and the computing results are illustrated in In the perspective of practical application, the developed software based on the proposed approach has been successfully applied to the control center of a copper–molybdenum concentration plant in China, in which C++ programming language is adopted as the development language and the platform runs on an IBM P_SERIES server. The graphic user interfaces are developed using C# language, and the industrial data in PLC (Programmable Logic Controller) are acquired via OPC (Object Linking and Embedding for Process Control) protocol. The original sampling interval is 10 This study proposes a hybrid soft computing method based on community finding of complex network and case based reasoning. The community finding method serves to select the typical samples from each community of the complex network established by the practical industrial data. In the reasoning process, a multi-similarity threshold based k-NN strategy is proposed and the case reuse method is also designed here. The hybrid method has been successfully applied to a copper–molybdenum ore concentration plant, and the application results indicate that the proposed soft computing method is remarkable and effective. This work is supported by the We would also like to thank the Associate Editor and the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and constructive suggestions, which have improved the presentation of the paper.