The inverse Electron Demand Diels-Alder (IEDDA) reaction between tetrazine and trans-cyclooctenol (TCO) is a fast and effective method employed to connect two or more molecules. In this study, an efficient and fast methodology based on tetrazine/trans-cyclooctene IEDDA reaction was developed for preparation of star-shaped block copolymers. Three-arm star polylactide-b-poly(ethylene glycol) (PLA-b-PEG) was chosen as a model system to show efficiency of the approach. First, three-arm PLAs with two different molecular masses were synthesized in a typical ring opening polymerization and functionalized with tetrazine end functionalities. while TCO end functionalized PEGs in two different molecular masses were perpared. Exact stoichiometric IEDDA click reaction between tetrazine moieties on three ends of the star polymer (s-3PLA-Tz) in the core and trans-cyclooctene (TCO) moieties of the periphery polymer (PEG-TCO) was performed in high click efficiency (up to 95.8%) in a short period (after 50–75 min). Ligation of PEG was confirmed by UV–vis, NMR and FT-IR spectroscopies, and size exclusion chromatography (SEC) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) analyses. In this way, various copolymers of desired architectures can be prepared in a short time and in high efficiency.Click chemistry has been considered as a class of revolutionary chemical reactions since Sharpless and his coworkers first introduced this term in 2001 Amongst the Diels-Alder reactions, inverse electron demand Diels-Alder (IEDDA) has a great advantage over others due to its extraordinary kinetics, in addition to bioorthogonality, compatibility aqueous systems and mutual orthogonality with other click chemistries Because of its super-fast kinetics, tetrazine-TCO ligation was employed in interfacial polymerization to fabricate meter-long multiblock copolymer microfibers In recent years, multi-branched amphiphilic block copolymers have been highly preferred, especially in the biomedical field. Star-shaped polymers like all other branched polymers get attention from various fields because of their compact and globular shape, which results in lower viscosity compared to their linear analogues. Therefore, they are considered as the most suitable materials for certain applications such as drug delivery since such materials have a well-defined structure, enables high multivalency and controllable surface functionality with a low hydrodynamic radius Polylactides (PLA) are biodegradable and biocampatible polymers, and their use was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as a biomedical material. Synthesis and physical properties of linear and star-shaped block copolymers of PLAs have been extensively studied. Mostly, poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) has been chosen as the hydrophilic segment of amphiphilic block copolymers since PEG is another FDA-approved polymer for biomedical applications. PLA- As mentioned, click chemistry is a powerful approach for fabrication of macromolecules in different architectures, and star-shaped amphiphilic polymers as well The synthetic approaches followed in the current work are summarized in The To attach tetrazine moieties to three ends of these three-arm polymers, the terminal hydroxyl groups were transformed to carboxylic acid by a straightforward approach involving a reaction with succinic anhydride. Briefly, s-3PLA-OH (3 eq. of –OH) was reacted with excess amount of succinic anhydride (7.5 eq.), in the presence of triethylamine and 4-dimethylaminopyridine (DMAP) at 50 °C overnight. After purification, the modified polymer (s-3PLA  Finally, tetrazine end-functionalized three-arm star PLA (pink polymer) was simply mixed with TCO end functionalized PEG (colorless) for IEDDA click reaction yielding star shaped PLA- where According to the fraction of remaining tetrazine groups, the IEDDA reaction between s-3PLA NMR spectroscopy was employed in confirmation of IEDDA reaction and formation of the star-shaped block copolymers. Comparisons of The block copolymer formation was further examined by SEC analysis. For instance, the absolute molecular masses of s-3PLA FT-IR spectroscopy was also employed for evaluation of the reaction yielding the block copolymers. The characteristic band of s-3PLA Moreover, differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was used for further examination of the ligation of PEG chains. The thermograms shown in As a conclusion, an efficient and fast approach has been developed for preparation of star shaped block copolymers which has been exemplified on the synthesis of three-arm star PLA-  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was financially supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: