The intrinsic problem of formation and accumulation of atmospheric ice on structures, such as power electric transmission lines and communication equipment, has in recent years resurrected much interest. However, the mechanical properties of the accreted atmospheric ice are not abundantly recognized and, therefore, analytical modeling of circumstantial material is not conceivable. For this purpose, an experimental investigation into the mechanical behavior of atmospheric ice in uniaxial tension has been conducted using conditions generally favorable to brittle fracture and microcracking. The atmospheric ice is grown from supercooled water droplets impinging on an aluminum cylinder rotating at 1rpm in the test section of the closed-loop wind tunnel. Ice tensile strength was measured as a function of test temperature varying from −5 to −15°C, wind speed during accumulation varying from 10 to 20m/s, and strain rate ranging from 2.22×10−6 to 1.67×10−3
                     s−1. The details of specimen preparation, testing procedure and strength test results are discussed. The fracture mechanism for atmospheric ice is also discussed, and the test results are compared with data reported by previous investigators. A mathematical model was developed using Minitab-15 software to predict the effect of ice accumulation conditions on the tensile strength. Detailed analysis indicates that the interaction coefficients of these variables do not appear to contribute significantly to the tensile strength of atmospheric ice.Atmospheric icing is a meteorological hazard that may affect many human activities such as power transmission lines, communication equipment, aircraft, railroads, wind-turbines, and ship operations in cold regions. Atmospheric icing is a complex phenomenon that results either from precipitation icing or from in-cloud icing ( The mechanical properties of atmospheric ice depend mainly on temperature, wind velocity, the liquid water content (LWC) of the air, and the mean volume droplet diameter (MVD) of the supercooled droplets during ice accretion. These parameters also depend on the ambient temperature, ice structure, density, grain size, specimen size, loading rate and failure mode. The study of ice tensile strength has been difficult because of its brittle nature and the significant variation in geometry with temperature. There is a relatively wide range of scatter of tensile ice strength, from 0.7 to 3.1 For other types of ice, however, particularly fresh water polycrystalline ice, there are some published studies. In general, two main types of tests have been used to determine the tensile strength of ice. These are the direct tensile test and the ring tensile test. Until now the uniaxial tensile test is considered the best way to determine unambiguously the tensile strength of ice. The uniaxial tensile strength of ice is typically about one-fourth the compressive strength ( Other tensile tests have been also used which involve indirect methods. Depending on the ambient temperature, loading conditions, and strain level, ice can be interpreted either as elastic, inelastic and ductile or as almost linear elastic until brittle fracture. The behavior of ice under load has led to great difficulties in quantifying the maximum loads it might exert on a structure. Thus its behavior is dependent on the rate of deformation and deformation history ( In short, the mechanical properties of atmospheric ice and its failure modes under various loading conditions are of interest in many projects including de-icing by mechanical breaking and ice shedding. It should be taken into account that ice shows higher strength at colder temperatures and that de-icing techniques with rapid loading producing high strain rates yield better results in ice removal projects. Thus, in an effort to better understand the mechanical behavior of ice, the present study aims to evaluate the effects of wind speed, air temperature, as well as strain rate on the uniaxial tensile strength of atmospheric ice. The atmospheric ice used in this study had a bulk density of 0.92 The ice accumulations conditions for this study were created in the CIGELE atmospheric icing research wind tunnel. The technique used in this wind tunnel to simulate atmospheric icing processes is to inject warm water into a cold air stream through nozzles located at the trailing edge of the horizontal spray bar. Water and air are supplied to the three nozzles on the spray-bar through the three independent water and air supply lines. The air/water-nozzle servo-valves were computer controlled to keep the mean volume droplet diameter (MVD) at 40 Dumbbell tensile specimens were tacked to aluminum end cups by freezing a few drops of water between the specimen and the base of the cup, as shown in All of the tensile samples were performed on a closed-loop electro-hydraulic testing machine. The test machine was an MTS model 810.0 MultiPurpose TestWare of 250 Statistical technique may be considered a powerful approach for discovering a set of processes or design variables which are most important to the process and then determine at what level these variables must be kept to optimize the response or quality characteristic of interest. Some of the previously developed design of experiment (DOE) techniques were the random blocks, the Latin squares, the Greco-Latin squares and the Hyper-Greco-Latin squares, limited to investigating a small number of variables (  The influence of wind speed on the tensile strength of atmospheric ice is shown in From data shown in The strain rate dependence of the strength of ice is important because of its role in determining the forces that ice can exert on structures. For many engineering problems ice is considered as an elastic-perfectly plastic material. Strength and mode of deformation of atmospheric ice depend on the applied rate of strain.  The data for tensile strength was analyzed using Minitab software version 15 as shown in The residual versus fitted values are randomly scattered and it is not dependent on any variable. It means that it does not need any data transformation. The fitted or predicted values are the average response of the UTS taken from Tables ( The main effects are assessed by level average response analysis of the raw data. This analysis was done by averaging the raw data at each level of each parameter and plotting the values in graphical form. The level average responses from the raw data help in the analysis of the trend of the performance characteristic with respect to the variation in the factor under study. Based on results from the current study, the following main conclusions may be drawn: The conventional tensile test technique provides useful information on the strength of atmospheric ice, and also helps to establish the influence of extrinsic factors on the tensile strength of ice. At − Under the same wind speed and temperature test conditions, the tensile strength of atmospheric ice increases significantly with increasing strain-rate up to 4.4 Statistical analysis showed that the variation of strain rate has a more pronounced effect on the tensile strength of atmospheric ice than the variation of other studied conditions. The authors would like to express their grateful acknowledgement for financial and in-kind support received from the