Objective
                  The purpose of this retrospective case series was to examine the AO Foundation and Orthopaedic Trauma Association (AO/OTA) 13-C3 distal humeral fractures treated with open reduction–internal fixation (ORIF) in patients older than 70 years.
               
                  Methods
                  During an 8-year period, 21 patients older than 70 years with AO/OTA 13-C3 distal humeral fractures were treated with ORIF performed by 2 senior upper extremity traumatologists. There were 16 patients with >1 year of follow-up, with a mean age of 78 (70-84) years.
               
                  Results
                  At a mean follow-up of 4 years (1-8 years), all 16 patients demonstrated radiographic signs of bone union. Three patients underwent reoperations, including irrigation and débridement for postoperative infections (n = 2) and removal of implant for symptomatic olecranon intramedullary screw (n = 1). The mean postoperative total arc of ulnohumeral motion was 97° (80°-145°), including a mean flexion of 117° (106°-126°) and flexion contracture of 20° (14°-26°). The mean pronation was 69° (55°-85°), and supination was 78° (74°-9°0). The mean Quick Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand score was 19 (standard deviation, 6.9; confidence interval, 15.4-22.8), and the mean Mayo Elbow Performance Score was 91 (standard deviation, 8.2; confidence interval, 86-95).
               
                  Conclusions
                  ORIF remains a reliable option for treatment of AO/OTA 13-C3 distal humeral fractures in elderly patients. Excellent clinical outcomes can be achieved with preservation of motion and arm function through anatomic reduction, rigid internal fixation, and early mobilization.Distal humeral fractures are relatively common injuries in the elderly population. Historically, osteosynthesis of distal humeral fractures in the elderly has been proven to be one of the technically most difficult operations in orthopedics, especially in the setting of osteoporosis. This is often due to the presence of significant metaphyseal comminution in osteoporotic bone, which has led to variable outcomes in performing ORIF. Previous studies examining this population of patients have only looked at patients aged 60 years and older or 65 years and older and did not use precontoured, anatomic locking plates. The purpose of this study was to examine the clinical outcomes and complications of our elderly patients with AO/OTA 13-C3 distal humeral fractures surgically treated with osteosynthesis. In this retrospective case series, we reviewed the records of all patients sustaining an AO/OTA 13-C3 fracture during a 7-year period (2007-2014) treated surgically at our institution. There were 256 patients identified, of whom 22 patients were 70 years of age or older. All patients were treated with ORIF involving at least single-column plating osteosynthesis except for 1 patient with a nondisplaced AO/OTA 13-C3.1 fracture, who was treated nonoperatively. Operative indications included open fractures and any displaced AO/OTA 13-C3 fracture. The indication for TEA was any fracture that was found to be unreconstructable intraoperatively. Of the fractures treated operatively (n = 21), the majority of fractures (n = 9 [56%]) were observed to be AO/OTA 13-C3.3; the remaining fractures included AO/OTA 13-C3.2 (n = 4 [25%]) and AO/OTA 13-C3.1 (n = 3 [19%]). Minimum follow-up was 1 year. Three patients died before 1-year follow-up, 2 patients were lost to follow-up, and 16 patients were available for follow-up beyond 1 year, with a mean of 4 years (range, 1-8 years). The mean age of the patients was 78 years (70-84 years), and there was an equal distribution of women (n = 8) and men (n = 8); all 16 patients were right hand dominant. Primary outcomes included fracture healing, defined as bridging cortical bone on 3 of 4 cortices on orthogonal radiographs; Quick Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand (QuickDASH) score; Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS); and complications ( Postoperative rehabilitation protocol was uniform in all patients. Patients were not permitted to weight bear on the affected arm (crutch, transfer, or platform) for 12 weeks after surgery, or until definite union occurred, as our institution requires weight bearing orders for every extremity, secondary to the frequency of concomitant lower extremity and pelvic injury. Patients received a sling and began full active assisted range of motion on postoperative day 1 or 2; there were no range of motion limitations, and an elastic wrap or stocking was used for edema control. The decision for formal inpatient or outpatient therapy was made on an individualized patient basis. No patients received indomethacin or radiation therapy for heterotopic ossification prophylaxis. All patients demonstrated radiographic signs of bone union ( Before the presenting injury, 100% of patients were living independently; 69% of patients (n = 11) were community ambulators without gait aids, and the remaining 31% (n = 5) were community ambulators with the use of gait aids (cane, n = 5; walker, n = 1). After index surgery, 8 patients (50%) were discharged to home and received outpatient-based therapy for 5 weeks; 8 patients (50%) received initial subacute therapy for a mean of 5.5 days and continued outpatient therapy for a total of 5 weeks after discharge from the rehabilitation facility. At final follow-up, 100% of the patients were still living independently as community ambulators and were not requiring additional therapy or any in-home assistance. After the surgical procedure, infectious complications occurred in 2 (13%) patients, neither of whom initially had an open fracture. Patient 7, an 84-year-old nonsmoker with a history of hypertension and dyslipidemia, presented at 31 months with clinical, radiographic, and laboratory findings of chronic osteomyelitis ( Patient 8, a 76-year-old nonsmoker with a history of hypertension, presented with partial wound dehiscence at 2 weeks and underwent irrigation, débridement, and primary closure with no removal of hardware and was discharged home the same day ( Including the 2 patients who experienced a postoperative infection, a total of 3 (18%) patients underwent reoperation. The additional patient underwent removal of a symptomatic olecranon screw with tension band wire at 6 months from initial surgery. No patients experienced heterotopic ossification or ulnar neuropathy and no patients were converted to TEA within the follow-up period. Osteosynthesis of displaced, comminuted, intra-articular distal humeral fractures in the elderly remains challenging. Typically, these injuries are referred to specialty centers for definitive management secondary to the technical difficulties with fixation and the comorbidities in the elderly requiring tertiary-level care. Currently, there remains controversy in the published literature as to whether osteosynthesis should be attempted in this population of patients. We were able to demonstrate that good and excellent clinical outcomes can still be achieved with anatomic articular reduction and early, aggressive postoperative rehabilitation. Prior studies have delineated clinical outcomes of displaced, intra-articular distal humeral fractures in the elderly treated with either ORIF or TEA. In their randomized controlled trial, McKee et al examined AO/OTA 13-C1.3 distal humeral fractures in elderly patients, demonstrating varied differences in clinical outcomes at 2 years between ORIF and TEA in patients with a mean age of 77 years and 78 years. Previous literature has shown that distal humerus fractures in the elderly are fraught with postoperative complications, including malunion, nonunion, failure of fixation, infection, ulnar neuropathy, and elbow stiffness, with rates from 18% to 35% being reported. The overall fixation strategy employed in this series is similar to that in prior work, with the important possible exception of precontoured, anatomic locked plating constructs and the routine use of long intramedullary ulnar screw with endosteal thread purchase for repair of the osteotomy, allowing unrestricted active range of motion immediately. The evolution of precontoured, anatomic distal humeral locking plates has allowed increased locking screw density in the articular block, which is critical in maintaining rigid fixation in severely comminuted osteoporotic distal humeral fractures and promoting early, aggressive range of motion. The studies mentioned before did not use precontoured, anatomic distal humeral locking plates in their fixation constructs. The need for reoperation after surgical treatment of these fractures is well documented in the literature. McKee et al demonstrated no significant difference in reoperation rates between ORIF (25%) and TEA (12%) cohorts. The possible explanation for the excellent and good clinical outcomes in our patients is likely twofold: the uniformity of 2 senior upper extremity traumatologists caring for elderly patients with these fracture patterns, with extensive experience in performing a large volume of high-energy intra-articular distal humeral fracture osteosyntheses because of the nature of our institution; and consistent use of precontoured, anatomic distal humeral locking plate constructs. This may explain why none of our patients were found to have unreconstructable fracture patterns. We acknowledge that situations may arise in which the fracture may be unreconstructable and necessitate intraoperative conversion to TEA as McKee et al demonstrated; 5 of their patients randomized to ORIF were converted to TEA intraoperatively. One aspect our study not touched on but important to consider is the cost associated with ORIF and TEA. Rajaee et al found an increasing rate of TEA for distal humeral fractures between 2002 and 2012, with the average hospital charge for TEA being significantly costlier than ORIF by $16,358. Multiple limitations exist in this study, mainly because of its retrospective nature, limiting the amount of data we were able to collect and therefore the analysis we were able to perform. As mentioned, these results may be expected only at a high-volume trauma center with experienced traumatologists. Another potential weakness is that there were no preoperative scores to compare and no comparative TEA or nonoperative cohort in this single-institution study with a relatively small number of patients, which limits our ability to perform multivariate analyses. This study represents the largest series of osteosynthesis using precontoured, anatomic locking plates for the treatment of AO/OTA 13-C3 fractures in patients older than 70 years. The complication rate (18%) and reoperation rate (13%) reported in this series are lower than those previously reported in the literature. Likewise, the results of this study demonstrated better clinical evaluation scores (MEPS, 91; QuickDASH, 19) than previously reported in elderly patients with ORIF of AO/OTA 13-C3 fractures. After osteosynthesis of AO/OTA 13-C3 distal humeral fractures in patients older than 70 years, good and excellent clinical outcomes, fracture healing, and preservation of motion can still be achieved with meticulous articular reduction and early, aggressive postoperative rehabilitation. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.