This work examines the dissolution kinetics of an iron–rich zinc sulphide concentrate in acid ferric sulphate medium. The effects of temperature, ferric ion and sulphuric acid concentrations, agitation speed and particle size on the leaching kinetics were investigated. The leaching process could be separated into two stages. Initially, the dissolution kinetics was controlled by the chemical reaction at the surface of the zinc sulphide particles followed by a second step where the reaction was controlled by diffusion of the reagents or products through the elemental sulphur (ash) layer. The activation energy of the chemical controlled step was 27.5 kJ/mol and the value determined for the diffusion controlled step was 19.6 kJ/mol. The reaction order with respect to ferric ion and sulphuric acid concentrations were approximately 0.50 and 1.00, respectively. Analysis of the unreacted and reacted sulphide particles by SEM-EDS showed a progressive increase of the thickness of the elemental sulphur layer on the solid surface. The development of this sulphur layer is further evidence of the change on the rate-controlling step as the reaction progress.The Over the last few years, several innovative leaching processes have been proposed, such as bioleaching and chemical leaching as an integrated process ( Regarding chemical leaching, two similar routes were proposed in the 1970s to produce zinc as a substitute for the RLE process: (i) The kinetics of ferric ion leaching of sphalerite concentrates has been described by several authors ( The objective of this work was to assess the effects of some parameters such as temperature (40–90 °C), ferric ion concentration (0.10–1.00 mol/L), particle size, sulphuric acid concentration (0.25–1.00 mol/L) and agitation speed (240–600 min The leaching of zinc sulphide in ferric sulphate solutions includes a heterogeneous reaction represented by A major feature of this system is that the chemical reaction step and mass transport are coupled in series. Besides, one may assume that the solid particle retains its initial shape and that the chemical reaction occurs in a sharp interface between the original solid and the reaction product. Further assuming that the zinc sulphide particles have a spherical geometry and the chemical reaction is the rate-controlling step, the following expression of the shrinking core model can be used to describe the dissolution kinetics of the process ( Similarly, when the diffusion of ferric ion through the elemental sulphur layer is the rate-controlling step, the following expression of the shrinking core model can be used to describe the dissolution kinetics ( When the chemical reaction is the rate controlling-step a plot of 1–(1–α) In order to compare the values of activation energy and reaction order obtained from The initial dissolution rate is the slope of  The mineralogical analyses of the concentrate were carried out by SEM-EDS. The samples were coated with graphite by electro-deposition, using a Jeol JEE 4C instrument and observed in a JEOL JSM 5510 scanning electron microscope (SEM) with an accelerating voltage 0.5–30 kV. It was equipped with a spectrometer for microanalysis based on a energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy system (EDS). Sphalerite is the main mineral phase and pyrite, quartz and galena were also present in minor quantities.  The chemical leaching experiments were carried out batch-wise in a closed water-jacketed glass reactor using a solution volume of 500 mL and a solid concentration 0.5% (w/ Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used to examine the morphology of the leaching residues-as above for the concentrate. Initial experiments established that an increase of stirring speed in the range of 240–600 min    If acid played a key role during the zinc sulphide dissolution, elemental sulphur was not produced at the particle surface. In contrast, the SEM/EDS analysis showed the existence of an elemental sulphur layer covering the ZnS particles during the leaching process and indicates that acid attack has a minor effect as compared to the presence of Fe(III). Similarly,  Ferric ion is a strong oxidant used in the leaching of several metallic sulphides such as: chalcopyrite, covellite, bornite, sphalerite, etc. The leaching reaction directly involves ferric ions, and it would be expected that the ferric sulphate concentration would have an important role in the zinc sulphide dissolution process. The morphology of the zinc sulphide concentrate before and after leaching was examined by SEM-EDS (   A different approach was used by The approach used  Temperature has an important effect on the dissolution rate of sphalerite and, as expected, an increase in the temperature causes an elevation in the dissolution rate. The reaction rate dependence on the temperature follows the Arrhenius equation ( The activation energy regarding the initial step of dissolution is higher than that observed for the final stages of leaching, which is in agreement with a chemical reaction controlling step followed by a product diffusion controlling step, as presented in From the analysis through the shrinking core model with chemical reaction control ( The results of the experiments carried out with different ferric ion concentrations were also fitted to the shrinking core model with chemical reaction control ( In the present study, the dissolution kinetics of sphalerite in acidic ferric sulphate solution was studied. It was found that the zinc extraction increases with the increase in ferric ion concentration, temperature and sulphuric acid concentration. The decrease in the particle size enhanced zinc dissolution, but played only a marginal role in the leaching processes. This is probably due to the porosity and natural cracks of the solid, which increased surface area even at higher particle size. The shrinking core model with reaction control fitted the experimental data in the initial part of leaching (up to 40% zinc extraction) and the shrinking core model with diffusion control fitted the experimental results in the final stages of leaching. The analysis of the zinc sulphide particles before and after leaching carried out by SEM-EDS supported the observed change of control. The particles presented a surface completely covered by an elemental sulphur layer after 40–50% zinc extraction. The observed reaction orders were 1.00 and 0.50 with respect to sulphuric acid and ferric ion concentrations, respectively. The apparent activation energy determined in the chemical reaction controlled step was 27.5 kJ/mol and the value obtained for the diffusion-controlled step was 19.6 kJ/mol. As the activation energy found in the initial phase of dissolution process is higher than the value observed in the final stages of leaching it reinforces that the process is chemically controlled during the initial stage and diffusion controlled at the final stage of leaching. This work was supported by Votorantim Metais Zinc, “FINANCIADORA DE ESTUDOS E PROJETOS — FINEP”, and Universidade Federal de Ouro Preto — UFOP. The CNPq and CAPES, scholarship to P. S. Pina and the assistance of José Antônio Magalhães in the experimental work are gratefully acknowledged.