In rock blasting, there are different constraint conditions such as a free surface, a partial free surface and a free surface with a barrier nearby. These conditions were modelled by three groups of blasting tests in this study: (1) A cylindrical granite specimen was blasted with complete free surfaces to model the free surface condition. (2) A cylindrical granite specimen was placed in a steel tube larger than the specimen to model the free surface with a barrier. In this case, the gap between the specimen and the tube was empty. (3) A cylindrical granite specimen was placed in a steel tube larger than the specimen and the gap between the specimen and the tube was filled with pebbles to model the partial free surface. A high-speed camera was used in some model blasts. After blasting the fragments including fines were collected, weighed, and sieved. The results showed that: (1) The specimens with a free surface and a barrier yielded the best (finest) fragmentation. (2) The specimens with a partial free surface produced the worst (coarsest) fragmentation. (3) The specimens with a complete free surface gave a fragmentation result in the between.Rock fragmentation by blasting plays an extremely important role in hard rock mining since it influences not only the cost of down-stream operations such as crushing and grinding but also the ore recovery. The research related to Case 1 has been performed for many decades. In particular, previous studies Case 2 has been investigated for many years. In one of earliest studies, model blasts against compacted rock masses were carried out. Compared with the first two cases, Case 3 has been studied only in a few publications. The aforementioned description indicates that even though many previous studies have investigated the three cases so far, a quantitative study focusing on rock fragmentation is still needed. Therefore, this study is to investigate how constraint condition on the rock to be blasted affects fragmentation by means of model blasts. The rock specimens used in this study came from a granite quarry owned by Anhui Laoshiren Stone Co. Ltd, China. All rock specimens were cylinders with a diameter of 240 mm and a length of 300 mm. Every specimen had a blasthole with a diameter of 20 mm at its center. One of the rock specimens, S4, is shown in The explosive RDX (research department explosive) with a critical diameter of 1–1.5 mm The model blasts in this study dealt with three constraint conditions: (1) A rock specimen was placed inside a steel tube with a 14-mm air gap between the specimen and the tube, as shown in To mitigate the effect of reflection wave from the bottom of rock specimen on blasting results, each rock specimen with a specific charge of 0.2 kg/m During each blast on the granite block, a high-speed camera named Memrecam HX-3 was used to record the process of blasting. To synchronize the detonation initiation with the high-speed camera as precisely as possible, two enamelled wires were fixed on the detonator and their other ends connected to a cable from the trigger of the camera. This group consists of three specimens S3, S6 and S23. S3 was placed inside a steel tube with air gap, S6 in the steel tube with pebbles in the gap, and S23 without steel tube. In other words, S3 had a free surface and a barrier in front of the free surface, S6 had a partial free surface confined by pebbles inside the steel tube, and S23 had a free surface but without barrier outside the specimen. The results from these three specimens are shown in  Because S3 had steel tube but S23 did not, the finer fragmentation of S3 mainly resulted from the collision between the fragments and the steel tube during blasting. Note that the second picture of S23 was taken just after blasting, i.e. the two halves of S23 were thrown to the floor during blasting, meaning that the two halves of S23 brought a certain kinetic energy during blasting. We will see similar result from S4 and S24 later. Because S23 had a free surface but S6 did a partial free surface, the finer fragmentation of S23 was mainly due to that the free surface in S23 resulted in tensile waves from complete wave reflection. Such tensile waves play an important role in rock fracture and fragmentation. In S6, however, the blast-induced compressive waves could not be completely reflected into tensile waves since part of the compressive waves propagated to the pebbles and further to the steel tube. In brief, S6 with a partial free surface produces coarser fragmentation than S23 with a complete free surface. This group includes three specimens with stemming. S4 was placed inside a steel tube with air gap, S7 in the steel tube filled with pebbles, and S24 without the steel tube. In other words, S4 had a free surface and a barrier in front of the free surface; S7 had a partial free surface confined by pebbles inside the steel tube; S24 had a free surface but without barrier outside the specimen. The results from these three specimens are shown in This group includes two specimens with stemming and higher specific charge. S17 was placed inside a steel tube with an air gap, and S20 in the steel tube filled with pebbles. In other words, S17 had a free surface and a barrier in front of the free surface, and S20 had a partial free surface. The results from these two specimens are shown in Comparing the particle sizes at 1%, 5% and 10% mass passing from both specimens, we can find that S17 has a much smaller particle (fragment) size at each mass passing than S20 does. Bearing in mind that both specimens have the same specific charge, we can conclude that the free surface and the barrier in S17 makes a great contribution to rock fragmentation, while the constrained or confined surface in S20 results in worse (coarser) fragmentation. This conclusion is similar to those from Groups A and B. In brief, it can be concluded from all three groups—A, B and C—that the free surface and the barrier of steel tube results in the best fragmentation, the partial free surface gives rise to the worst fragmentation, and the free surface without any barrier produces the fragmentation in the between. Under the condition without stemming, the major difference between S3 and S23 is that S3 has steel tube but S23 does not. Similarly, under the condition with stemming, the major difference between S4 and S24 is that S4 has the tube but S24 does not. Evidently, under both conditions, the blasts with steel tube yield much better (finer) fragmentation than the blasts without the tube, as shown in To compare the effect of specific charge with that of constraint condition on fragmentation, the sieved results of all specimens with stemming are presented in To investigate the effect of constraint condition on fragmentation, we compare the accumulated mass passing percentages of S17 and S20 that have equal specific charge. Taking 2 mm particle size in The high-speed photographs shown in   The impact experiments To briefly explain the effect of constraint condition on blasting results in this study, we simplify the three constraint cases into simplest models based on one dimensional stress wave theory,   Note that in this formula The experiments in this study demonstrate that rock fragmentation can be greatly improved by the barrier outside a free surface, compared with no barrier outside a free surface. This is a validation to the proposal on creating a barrier in mining production blasting, especially in open pit blasting. This experimental study includes eight blasts and the study is limited to single-hole blasting. More single-hole blasts and multi-hole blasts are necessary to study the effects of constraint conditions on rock fragmentation further. In addition, shock pressure measurement, as did by Chi et al., The selection of the gap between the steel tube and the rock specimen was based on the experiments by Chi et al. Pebbles, 30–50 cm long and 5–10 mm thick, were used as filling material in this study since the pebbles were black and very hard. The black color made it very easy to pick up the pebbles from all fragments after each blast. In the blasts with the low specific charge, the hard pebbles were not broken; in the blasts with the high specific charge, the pebbles were broken into smaller particles. In this case, the broken pebbles were mixed with the fragments from the rock specimen. During sieving the fragments, the broken pebble particles equal to or larger than 2 mm were subtracted manually, while the weight equal to pebble particles smaller than 2 mm were removed by following a ratio of the pebble particle weight to total particle weight (including both rock and pebble particles) obtained at the particle size of about 2 mm. This is an approximate treatment since it is difficult to find a better filling material to simulate the partial free surface occurring in mining engineering. Note that the mechanical properties and size distribution of the filling material certainly affect rock fragmentation and this deserves further investigation. Because specific charge is one of important factors influencing rock fragmentation, two specific charges were tested in this study. Due to limited quantity of blasts in this study, it is better to test a wider range of specific charges in the future. In addition, the collision between fragments during blasting might exist more or less, depending on the constraint conditions. This also needs further investigation. Based on the model blasts in this study, the following conclusions can be drawn: The blasts with a free surface and a steel barrier nearby result in the best fragmentation, compared with the ones with a partial free surface and the ones with only free surface. The major reason is that the barrier makes a collision happen between flying fragments and the barrier. The blasts with a partial free surface gives rise to the worst fragmentation, compared with the ones with a free surface plus a steel barrier and the ones only with free surface. The main reason is that a complete free surface is lacking, resulting in less reflection wave. The blasts with a free surface but without any barrier yields a fragmentation that is better than the fragmentation from a partial surface but worse than the fragmentation from a free surface plus a barrier. Compared with the blasts with a partial surface, the blasts with only a free surface can make a complete wave reflection, causing efficient tensile fracture like spalling. Compared with the blasts with a free surface plus a barrier, the blasts with only a free surface make it difficult for a flying fragment to be broken again. None. This research was supported by K. H. Renlund Foundation in Finland. Anhui Laoshiren Stone Co. Ltd, China provided free of charge rock specimens for this study. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at