Chitosan has been used as a base material for the preparation of platinum and palladium sorbents. Chitosan derivatives were obtained by glutaraldehyde cross-linking (GA), by poly(ethyleneimine) grafting (PEI), and by thiourea grafting (TDC). These sorbents were tested for the recovery of platinum group metals (PGMs) in batch systems and column systems from bicomponent mixtures at the optimum pH (ca. pH 2). Sorption isotherms were determined in batch systems, considering the impact of the excess of one metal on the sorption of the second. The sorbents have a marked preference for palladium over platinum. In most cases, the total sorption capacity (taking into account both Pd and Pt sorption) was comparable to that of each metal individually, indicating that the metals compete for the same sorption sites, regardless of the type of sorbent. In fixed-bed systems, similar effects were observed, with typical profiles driven by the displacement of platinum by palladium, attributed to the greater affinity of the sorbents for palladium. The sorbents (especially GA and TDC) have a greater selectivity for Pd than for Pt, compared to PEI, which has greater sorption capacities. Metal desorption was tested using several eluants, none of which allowed the complete removal of the metals from loaded sorbent, nor the selective desorption of either. A complete separation of the metals was not obtained, but by combination of sorption and desorption conditions, a concentration of Pd of 10- to 20-fold was achieved.The increasing demand for platinum group metals (PGMs) in industry (e.g., chemical catalysis, automotive catalysts) has prompted the research into new methods for their recovery from spent materials ( The protonation of amine groups leads to total or partial dissolving of chitosan in acidic solutions (except in sulfuric acid solutions). In this case, it is necessary to reinforce its chemical stability by a chemical cross-linking using, for example, glutaraldehyde ( Another important advantage of chitosan is related to its chemical versatility. New chelating and reactive functional groups can readily be-grafted onto the chitosan backbone (on amine and/or hydroxyl groups; The present work focuses on the sorption of Pd and Pt from bicomponent solutions in order to evaluate the selectivity of the sorption process. Sorption isotherms were established in batch systems with different initial molar ratios Pd/Pt, and breakthrough curves were also determined under comparable experimental conditions. This study also focuses on the study of Pt and Pd desorption, and the possibility to increase the separation factor is investigated. Rather than a modeling of sorption performance in bicomponent solutions, the main objective of the present paper is to determine if the combination of sorption/desorption processes (on the different sorbents) can be used for an efficient separation of these metals. Chitosan was supplied by Aber Technologies (France) as a flaked material with a deacetylation percentage of about 87% and a molecular weight of 125,000 g mol Chitosan gel beads were prepared using a process consisting of a two-step procedure ( Chemical cross-linking of chitosan was performed by reacting 5 g of chitosan beads (dry mass) with 1.5 g of glutaraldehyde dissolved in 100 mL of demineralized water (24 h). For synthesis of poly(ethyleneimine)-grafted chitosan beads (PEI-GA), poly(ethyleneimine) (PEI) was dissolved in dimethylacetamide (DMA), and the beads were mixed with DMA in order to exchange water with DMA and to favor the diffusion of PEI in the beads: chitosan beads (5 g dry mass) were added to 5 g of PEI dissolved in 100 mL of DMA (24 h). The chitosan beads were then rinsed with 30 mL of DMA, and reacted (6 h) with 1.5 g of glutaraldehyde dissolved in 50 mL of DMA. The size of chitosan gel beads was not substantially modified after cross-linking treatment and PEI grafting (final diameter was 0.92±0.12 mm). Grafting of sulfur groups using epichlorohydrin as a cross-linking agent was carried out according to the procedure described by The pH of the solutions was controlled using HCl and NaOH. For sorption isotherms, known volumes of metal ion solution (150 mL) at fixed concentrations were contacted with varying sorbent quantities (3 to 35 mg wet mass) with agitation (20 °C; 3 days) and filtered through 1.2 ìm membranes. Filtrates were analyzed using ICP-AES (Jobin-Yvon JY2000, France), and the amount of metal adsorbed per unit of sorbent mass calculated by the mass balance equation. Sorption kinetics were also studied in bicomponent solutions using GA, PEI, and TDC materials. Experiments were performed in a jar test apparatus at fixed agitation speed (i.e., 300 rpm) at 20 °C (±1 °C). Sorbents (100 mg L For experiments using fixed-bed reactors, the columns (diameter: 10 mm; height: 135 mm for GA and 100 mm for PEI) were filled with wet beads (the amount of beads was adjusted to the same dry mass of sorbent, i.e., 0.5 g). With TDC, the flakes were filled in a smaller size column (diameter: 7 mm; height: 20 mm) using the same dry mass of sorbent. In the case of TDC flakes, experimental conditions typically corresponded to shallow bed conditions. With the solution (initial concentration: Co) pumped upwards using a peristaltic pump, samples were collected at the outlet for determination of residual metal contents (Cs). The concentration of palladium was fixed at 50 mg Pd L Metal desorption was operated using selected eluants: HCl (5 M), NH The ability of sorbent to be recycled was tested over three sorption/desorption cycles using GA material. A column was filled with GA wet beads (corresponding to 0.5 g dry weight), and the solution concentration of Pd and Pt was close to 50 and 100 mg metal L In HCl media, platinum and palladium form chloro-complexes, whose distribution depends on pH, chloride concentration, and metal concentration ( Experiments were performed using bicomponent solutions with different molar ratios of Pd/Pt at pH 2, with the objective to determine if any of the selected materials has a marked preference for one of the target metals. While the Pd sorption isotherm was only slightly influenced by the Pd/Pt ratio and was characterized by the formation of a plateau (the typical shape of the Langmuir Type I model used for the description of sorption isotherms for single-component solutions), Pt sorption isotherm was strongly influenced by the excess of Pd (over Pt). In the case of GA and TDC derivatives, a nontypical isotherm shape was observed; sorption capacity decreases with increasing Pt concentration, regardless of palladium excess. This is in strong contrast with previous results obtained for molybdate and vanadate sorption in bicomponent solutions ( In competition tests, it was apparent that the sorption capacity for one metal was strongly decreased in the presence of the competitor metal (  Sorption kinetics were investigated in bicomponent solutions with different Pd/Pt molar ratios in order to investigate whether selectivity can be obtained by playing on kinetics and sorption rates. At a given Pt concentration, increasing the Pd concentration gave a pronounced diminution of sorption efficiency, and altered kinetics, especially in the case of TDC and GA and a more limited effect in the case of PEI, probably due to the excess of sorption sites. The right panels on These experiments have not been used here for the identification of rate-controlling step. This point has been addressed in several previous papers using chitosan materials in the form of flakes or chitosan gel beads with Pd and Pt ( The direct comparison of kinetic profiles with those obtained with other systems is difficult, since they are strictly controlled by the sorbent dosage; in these experiments, the sorbent dosage was set at a very low value (ca. 100 mg sorbent L The order of magnitude of the intraparticle diffusion coefficients was in the range 5 10 Before considering the sorption of Pd and Pt in fixed-bed columns in bicomponent solutions, breakthrough curves were determined with single-component solutions, under similar experimental conditions with objective to check whether or not the sorption capacities obtained in dynamic systems are consistent with results obtained in batch systems. It was also of interest to evaluate the influence of diffusion on the shape of the breakthrough curves (slope of the breakthrough curve) and to measure the impact of sorbent conditioning (beads for GA and PEI; flakes for TDC sorbents) and chemical modification (PEI and thiourea grafting) on sorption performance in a dynamic system. The shape of the curves (and more particularly their curvatures) helps in identifying the rate-limiting mechanism. The sigmoid trend confirms that the sorption of both Pd and Pt is highly favorable; a step curve (ideal case) would indicate that the mass transfer is not controlled by diffusion. In the present case, the slope of the curve indicates that diffusion mechanisms contribute to the control of sorbent saturation profile. The main characteristics are summarized in The breakthrough volume (expressed as true volumes, mL) shown on Comparing breakthrough and saturation volumes shows that diffusion limitations probably restrict sorption performance for TDC sorbent: passing a large volume of solution after breakthrough was required to saturate the sorbent. Since the geometries of the columns for TDC versus GA and PEI are completely different, it is difficult to compare the results; in the case of TDC, the system can be described as a shallow bed reactor. Average resin loadings for Pd and Pt at breakthrough for TDC were strictly lower than those obtained at exhaustion of the sorbent but were comparable for other sorbents. Additionally, chitosan flakes (the conditioning of TDC material) reveal poorly efficient performance in fixed-bed system, causing head loss and column blockage. This is an important criterion since this hydrodynamic performance will be depreciated while increasing the size of sorbent particles. Increasing the diameter of sorbent does not affect significantly the bed capacity ( Experimental conditions were similar to those used for preceding experiments (hydrodynamic parameters); the initial palladium concentration was fixed to 50 mg Pd L  These results confirm the batch-tests using bicomponent solutions. Although the presence of platinum interferes with palladium sorption, the sorbent has a greater affinity for Pd than for Pt. Chloro-platinate and chloro-palladate ions were simultaneously sorbed on the sorbent but progressively palladium displaced platinum: the outlet platinum concentration exceeded the inlet concentration. For GA, the loading varied for Pd between 1.1 and 1.3 mmol Pd g The preferential sorption of palladium progressively displaced platinum initially sorbed; as a consequence, the Pd/Pt molar ratio increased with the volume of the solution passed through the column and proportionally to the excess of palladium over platinum. When the Pd/Pt ratios in both the solid phase (sorbent) and the liquid phase (metal concentrations in the outlet solutions) were compared versus the bed volumes (not shown), it was seen that the Pd/Pt ratio in the sorbent (at large volume) was approximately four times the Pd/Pt ratio in the inlet solution. However, this did not allow the selective separation of the metals in a simple sorption step, therefore the potential of selective desorption was investigated. Using sorbents loaded with Pd and Pt (from single-component solutions), metal desorption was attempted using various eluants as shown in The same eluants have been used for the recovery of Pt and Pd from bimetallic-loaded sorbents (with different Pd/Pt molar ratios on the sorbent). Two objectives may be set: (a) the complete (but nonselective) recovery of the metals from loaded sorbents; (b) the selective recovery of the metals by single (or successive combination of) eluting treatments.  The highest selectivity was observed with ammonia. Hence, the molar ratio of Pd/Pt in the eluate varied between 8 and 25, far above the molar ratio of Pd/Pt on the sorbent. The easier desorption of Pd allowed improving the separation of Pd from Pt, compared to the sorption step. Another interesting parameter is the enrichment factor that compares molar ratios of Pd/Pt in the eluate to the ratio of Pd/Pt in the sorbent. The highest enrichment was also achieved using ammonium hydroxide. Actually, none of these eluants was able to separate Pd and Pt, the highest selectivity was reached with NH The combination of several successive treatments involving acidic treatment (HCl), complexation treatment (thiourea), and alkaline treatment (NH GA columns were loaded with Pd and Pt and desorbed using 0.5 M thiourea as described in The direct comparison of breakthrough profiles is made difficult, especially between first cycle and the following sorption steps due, for example, to channeling phenomena that change hydrodynamic behavior and impact other experimental conditions (flow rate, superficial velocity, axial dispersion). The breakthrough curves were almost identical for Pd uptake over the three cycles, while in the case of Pt, the breakthrough volumes clearly decreased with an increase in the number of operating cycles. Moreover, the fraction of platinum displaced after the beginning of the breakthrough for this metal was greater (the relative outlet concentration exceeded 1.5), indicating that Pd displaced Pt more effectively in the second and third steps. This may be explained by (a) the stronger affinity of the sorbent for Pd than for Pt (see earlier), and (b) an incomplete desorption of Pt at the first cycle (with the following sorption cycles removing an additional fraction of Pt). This was confirmed by the comparison of average resin loadings (obtained by mass balance) for Pd and Pt at the different sorption steps. For Pd, the average resin loadings varied from 140 mg Pd g The peak concentration at desorption was shifted towards greater BVs by increasing the number of cycles while the width of the peak increased indicating a greater dispersion. However, more than 90% of total metal desorption was achieved within the first three BVs, indicating a good concentration, especially for Pd. Collecting the first three BVs separately from the other effluents would allow solution concentrations of 2.15 g Pd L Cross-linked chitosan and derivative sorbents have a marked preference for Pd compared to Pt, in pure and bicomponent solutions. Pd and Pt compete for the same sorption sites: the total sorption of Pd and Pt from bicomponent solutions does not exceed the sorption levels reached in the sorption of both Pd and Pt from single-component solutions. Decreasing the number of available sorption sites may partly explain this result. The sorption of Pd and Pt by fixed-bed columns also confirmed results obtained from batch tests; Pd breakthrough curves were hardly influenced by the presence of Pt, but the sorption of Pt was strongly reduced in the presence of Pd as a competing agent. Both metals were simultaneously sorbed in a first step of the sorption process, while in the later stages, palladium displaced platinum from the sorbent and the Pt outlet concentration significantly exceeded the inlet concentration. Despite a marked concentrating effect for Pd, none of the sorbents were efficient for a completely selective separation of Pd. The concentrating effect may be reinforced by the desorption step with an appropriate selection of eluant and of its concentration. However, in no case was a complete separation of the metals obtained, and it was only possible to enrich the concentration of palladium by >5-fold, using ammonium hydroxide. The difficulty in achieving separation of Pd and Pt is attributable to their similar chemistry in solution, but combining the sorption and desorption steps concentrated the palladium by a factor ranging between 10 and 20 depending on the experimental conditions. Palladium and platinum desorption from loaded GA sorbent using thiourea was sufficiently efficient to allow reuse of the sorbent for at least three sorption/desorption cycles. Increasing the number of sorption/desorption cycles allowed the fixed-bed columns to increase its affinity for Pd over Pt. The authors thank the European Union for financial support (Sustainable Growth Program, 3SPM project, EU Contract N° GRD-CT-2000-00300).