Hydrothermal technique is about 180 years old. The early interest in hydrothermal research was merely in the synthesis of minerals by simulating the natural conditions or processes responsible for the formation of rocks, minerals and ores. The apparatus used in the early hydrothermal experiments were very simple mostly made up of glass autoclaves. Today the technique has advanced so much both in terms of the equipment and in understanding the hydrothermal mechanism involved in the formation of materials. This chapter reviews early works on hydrothermal research in detail with appropriate examples. It gives a systematic understanding of the evolution of the hydrothermal technology with time and geographic extensions.KeywordsEarly history of hydrothermal research; Autoclaves; Evolution of hydrothermal technology; Synthesis of minerals;Hydrothermal technique is about 180 years old. The early interest in hydrothermal research was merely in the synthesis of minerals by simulating the natural conditions or processes responsible for the formation of rocks, minerals and ores. The apparatus used in the early hydrothermal experiments were very simple mostly made up of glass autoclaves. Today the technique has advanced so much both in terms of the equipment and in understanding the hydrothermal mechanism involved in the formation of materials. This chapter reviews early works on hydrothermal research in detail with appropriate examples. It gives a systematic understanding of the evolution of the hydrothermal technology with time and geographic extensions. Keywords Early history of hydrothermal research; Autoclaves; Evolution of hydrothermal technology; Synthesis of minerals;  As mentioned earlier, Sir Roderick Murchison, a British geologist, was the first to use the term The majority of the early hydrothermal experiments carried out during the 1840s to early 1900s mainly dealt with the nanocrystalline products, which were Most of the work on hydrothermal research during the nineteenth century was confined only to Europe, especially to the Mineralogy, Petrology, and Geochemistry laboratories in Germany, France, Switzerland, and Italy. Bunsen Daurree’s other significant contribution was his attempt to use natural hot spring water from Plombieres as a mineralizer and this led to the deposition of a small quantity of quartz over 2 days. In addition, he treated kaolin with Plombieres water under hydrothermal conditions and obtained feldspar and a small amount of quartz. Here, it is interesting to note that, after the discovery of hydrothermal activity in the deep sea on the Galapagos during the 1970s, active research is going on using the natural submarine hydrothermal vent fluid to study the origin of life (organic synthesis). This led to the establishment of the relation between the submarine hydrothermal activity and rich mineralization of a very wide spectrum from native elements to sulfides, oxides, and so on With the introduction of steel autoclaves along with noble metal linings, the tendency to reach higher pressure–temperature conditions than the usual 5–10 Followed by this work, Hannay For the sake of convenience, the authors describe the further development of the hydrothermal research in coherence with the autoclave design, development, and pressure–temperature range. It is well known that the study of hydrothermal processes is merely the study of certain aqueous systems at high temperature, usually near to and often above the critical temperature of pure water; therefore, considerable amounts of pressure are developed at these temperatures by water or aqueous solutions. The experimental difficulties of such a study are many but are largely connected with the choice and control of working conditions and the Toward the end of the nineteenth century, Spezia During the nineteenth century, much work was done on the geological side of hydrothermal research and the entire work was confined to Europe, particularly Germany, France, Italy, and Switzerland. It was only toward the turn of the nineteenth century that the science of hydrothermal technology moved to North America, which was assisted by the American Industrial Revolution. Further, the establishment of the Geophysical Laboratory at the Carnegie Institute of Washington, USA, in 1907, probably marked the most important milestone in the history of hydrothermal technology. Although a great deal of research was carried out on hydrothermal technology in the nineteenth century, the facilities for With the establishment of the Geophysical Laboratory at the Carnegie Institute of Washington, USA, Bowen These ideas of Bowen have been, without question, one of the rare landmarks in the history of petrology. The main opposition for this principle was that the extrapolation of experimental phase equilibrium results was based on the data he obtained from systems made from relatively few and chemically pure components to natural systems. Subsequently, Bowen continued his research in this field, worked on several complex systems, and revised his earlier proposed reaction series slightly. While Bowen was working on the petrologic problems, Morey, Niggli, and Fenner were actively studying the silicate systems with water as one of the components. Morey During this time, hydrothermal research began in Eastern Europe and Asia on a small scale, and much later in China and India—maybe after World War II. Here, the reader should observe that the hydrometallurgy was quite an established field of research in many countries in Europe, North America, Eastern Europe, and Asia, particularly after the discovery of bauxite leaching by Karl Josef Bayer (1871−1908) Pioneers like Bridgman, Cohen, Morey, Niggli, Fenner, and Bowen in the early twentieth century changed the scenario of hydrothermal research. They carried out an impressive amount of basic research along with their European counterparts, especially Tammann. Much of this early work was concerned with the setting up the pressure scale and testing. The results were predicted from thermodynamics. However, the total research effort was small and the study passed into a period of dormancy except for phase equilibria studies in some systems relevant to the natural systems. This was connected with the need for materials with a combination of high strength and corrosion resistance at high temperatures. Thus, the interest was again mostly geological, and the bulk of research is from the geological science perspective. Most of the early geological workers appreciated the necessity for considering very simple chemical systems before there was any hope of understanding the complexities of natural chemical systems. Thus, the early work of the Geophysical Laboratory of the Carnegie Institute of Washington was heavily biased toward pure chemistry Here, it is appropriate to discuss one or two important systems studied in the early twentieth century. Perhaps, the first systematic and pioneering study of the hydrothermal system began with the publication of the work on the ternary system H This work gives a more precise account of the pressure and temperature conditions throughout the experiment. Besides, nutrient materials were prepared from highly pure substances and consequently the composition of the charges used in each experiment was precisely known. The paper carried great significance to geological science as it demonstrated clearly the possibility of a complete solubility between anhydrous silicate phases and water, which in turn assisted in framing a mechanism for pegmatite crystallization in the presence of a volatile. Morey and Fenner The most significant aspect of this work is that a new trend can be observed here with reference to the theoretical relations governing the equilibrium in binary and ternary systems containing a volatile component, and a short discussion of the proper application of the term Hitherto, the hydrothermal researchers were quite satisfied with the synthesis of inorganic compounds that resemble or are similar to natural minerals. They did not bother much about the size of the crystals obtained. The growth rate was extremely low because of the lack of accurate knowledge on the proper solvent, and with such slow growth rates, the hydrothermal research was less promising. Only a few people were engaged in this research studying the phase relations in various systems including that of water, and the interest was mainly on Geoscience. However, when Brazil imposed an embargo on the supply of high-purity quartz which was a strategic material for the telecommunications purpose during World War II, hydrothermal researchers began to think seriously about the growth rate of crystals. At that time, Brazil was the only source country in the world for electronic grade natural quartz, and even today, the situation is the same. Thus, the crisis, owing to the shortage of pure quartz, forced many researchers to jump into the field of hydrothermal research with a sole objective of growing large-size single crystals of quartz. Many countries like the United States of America, United Kingdom, Germany, and the erstwhile Soviet Union were in the field and the success achieved was immense. Therefore, the period from the late 1930s to 1940s is referred to as the “golden period” in the hydrothermal research, not only because of the enhanced research activity, but also because of the many new discoveries with reference to autoclave designs and other important technological materials. The authors feel that it is highly appropriate to discuss briefly the historical contribution made by the German hydrothermal researchers with reference to the increased growth rate and growth of large-size single crystals of quartz. In contrast Later, Rustom Roy Many laboratories throughout the world have this apparatus for studies concerning phase equilibria, materials synthesis, crystal growth, particles preparation, materials processing, diamond synthesis, and so on. The recent modifications of these test-tube bombs have been extended further for higher pressure and higher temperature conditions. The credit goes to the pioneers of this apparatus, Tuttle, Roy, and Licastro, who could set up a Tem-Press Company to manufacture these autoclaves at Penn State University. Thus, during the 1950s, the trend in hydrothermal research was toward the development of new designs, again to attain higher pressure and higher temperature limits with the better alloys available. This also led to the study of phase relations in several systems within a broader pressure–temperature range. In this regard, the contribution of Kennedy  The study of ternary and other more complex systems during the 1950s was very important, not only from the point of view of geological science, but also from the inorganic chemistry point of view, as several new compounds which were hitherto unknown or not found in nature could be crystallized. Some of the important systems studied under this category are: MgO At one time, in the erstwhile Soviet Union there were more than 1000 researchers in this field. During the 1960s, an intensive study of the hydrothermal process of synthesis and growth of single crystals which did not have the analogues in nature began. During the 1970s, there was a quest for the search and the growth of hitherto unknown compounds of photosemiconductors, ferromagnets, lasers, piezoelectrics, and ferroelectrics and, in this regard, hydrothermal technology attracted a great attention. Many other nations, including China and India, got into the field of hydrothermal growth of crystals. Several established laboratories in the world began to study systematically various aspects of the hydrothermal growth of crystals such as the physicochemical principles, kinetics, designing new apparatus, and growing new compounds. This marks a significant change in the trend of hydrothermal research. Specific aspects of the hydrothermal method as a modeling tool Toward the end of the 1970s, on the whole, the hydrothermal field experienced a declining trend for two reasons: There was no scope for further work on the growth of large-size single crystals of quartz on the one hand, and on the other hand, large-scale attempts to grow bigger crystals of other compounds investigated during the 1960s and 1970s failed. It was unanimously decided that the hydrothermal technique is not suitable for the growth of large crystals other than quartz. The focus at this time was on Czechrolskii, metal-organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD), and molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). This is largely connected to the general approach of the hydrothermal researchers to grow large single crystals without looking into the hydrothermal solvent chemistry and kinetics of the crystallization process. Although Franck started working on the study of the behavior of electrolytic solutions with temperature and pressure conditions way back in the 1950s Today, the hydrothermal technique is being applied widely by various specialists from different branches of science including organic chemistry, biochemistry, biotechnology, food and nutrition, environmental safety, nanotechnology, and nanobiotechnology as shown in