In this study, the mechanism which underpins the different interactions of chalcopyrite, a primary copper sulfide mineral, and chalcocite, a secondary copper sulfide mineral, with bentonite, a clay mineral, during the grinding with stainless steel media was investigated by a range of techniques including XPS (X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy) analysis, electrokinetic studies and Cryo-SEM (Scanning Electron Microscope) measurements. It was found that during grinding chalcocite was heavily oxidized but chalcopyrite was slightly oxidized. As a result of the different extent of mineral surface oxidation, chalcopyrite remained negatively charged but chalcocite became positively charged after grinding leading to the different interactions with bentonite particles. This study provides a guideline to improve the extraction of copper sulfide minerals in the presence of clay minerals, an important issue in mineral processing.In mineral processing, grinding not only reduces the particle size and liberates minerals, but also provides differential surface properties on valuable and gangue minerals allowing effective separation of them in the subsequent separation process such as flotation which exploits the difference in surface wettability on valuable and gangue minerals. During grinding of base metal minerals, a number of chemical mechanisms including oxidation of minerals and media, oxygen reduction and galvanic coupling occur and govern the surface properties of minerals With the depletion of high-grade ores without diminished demand by society for metals, more and more low-grade and difficult ores are processed, which requires fine grinding and the handling of problematic gangue minerals such as clay minerals. Clay minerals which are often associated with copper, gold, coal, bitumen and other valuable minerals have a deleterious effect on the mineral flotation process. They are naturally fine-grained with particles of colloidal sizes and may coat the mineral surface in a way similar to iron oxidation species emanating from steel media It is interesting to find that bentonite, a clay mineral with montmorillonite being the main constituent, significantly hinders the flotation of chalcocite, a secondary copper sulfide mineral, but had little effect on the flotation of chalcopyrite, a primary copper sulfide mineral after grinding The oxidation of copper sulfide minerals is an important aspect in mineral processing. The surface of copper sulfide minerals starts to oxidize as soon as they are in contact with air. Mild oxidation results in a surface that is rich in hydrophobic polysulfides with some metal hydroxides present at the surface, due to the dissolution of metal ions from the surface and near surface layers, as observed in ambient air, acidic and alkaline conditions by X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) A number of studies show that only a small amount of copper ions are dissolved from chalcopyrite even with oxygen purging In this study, the oxidation of chalcopyrite representing the primary copper sulfide mineral, and chalcocite representing the secondary copper sulfide mineral during grinding was investigated. The mechanism which underpins the interaction of oxidized chalcopyrite and chalcocite with bentonite representing the clay mineral was explored. Outcomes of this study will guide the industry to implement grinding strategies to improve the extraction of copper minerals in the presence of clay minerals. Chalcopyrite, chalcocite and bentonite minerals were obtained from Ward's Natural Science Establishment (US). All of them have more than 98 The chalcopyrite or chalcocite sample for the measurement by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy was taken after grinding without bentonite. The sample was frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored in a freezer until immediately prior to the analysis. This procedure has been shown to inhibit significant surface speciation alteration The zeta potential of ground chalcopyrite and chalcocite, as well as bentonite was measured by a Rank Brothers Micro electrophoresis Mark II apparatus. The detailed procedure was described elsewhere To detect slime coating on the mineral surface, the cryo-transfer method of sample preparation was used to avoid a structural change caused by surface tension during oven or freeze drying. In the cryo-vitrification SEM analysis, the sample was taken by a large-aperture (> The electrochemical potential after grinding of chalcopyrite and chalcocite was about 310   The XPS Cu 2p spectra ( The XPS Fe 2p spectrum of the ground chalcopyrite is shown in The XPS analysis indicated that both chalcopyrite and chalcocite surfaces were oxidized after grinding. While the majority of the chalcocite surface was oxidized, only a small proportion of the chalcopyrite surface was oxidized. This is consistent with Lascelles and Finch [ The interaction of oxidized chalcopyrite and chalcocite with bentonite was first studied by electrokinetic measurements. The details were discussed in the previous study The chalcopyrite mineral ground in the presence of bentonite particles was examined by Cryo-SEM first. Both the BSE image (top) and EDS elemental analysis on the randomly chosen chalcopyrite particle (bottom) are shown in  It is demonstrated by other researchers that chalcocite is more electrochemically active than chalcopyrite based on the zeta potential measurement Oxidation alters the surface properties of minerals. The iso-electric point of non-oxidized sulfide minerals is similar to that of elemental sulfur at pH between 1 and 2 The zeta potential of clay minerals is negative in alkaline solutions In this study, the oxidation of chalcopyrite and chalcocite and their interaction with bentonite were investigated under an oxidizing grinding condition by using stainless steel media. However, in mineral processing, mild steel media is also used and produces a reducing grinding condition and a great amount of iron oxidation species Grinding alters the surface properties of chalcopyrite and chalcocite through surface oxidation. Chalcocite is strongly oxidized while chalcopyrite is slightly oxidized after the grinding with stainless steel media. The different extent of surface oxidation results in the different electrical property of chalcopyrite and chalcocite surfaces. The slightly oxidized chalcopyrite surface remains negatively charged after grinding at pH 9.0 and electrostatically repulsive from bentonite slime particles. In contrast, the strongly oxidized chalcocite surface becomes positively charged after grinding at the same pH and electrostatically attractive to bentonite particles. The first author gratefully acknowledges financial support of this work from the