The petrogenesis and tectonic setting of the Triassic granitoids, and their relationship with the coeval Au and Pb–Zn polymetallic mineralization in the Western Qinling Orogen (WQO) in central China remain debated. The Fengxian–Taibai Ore Cluster (FTOC) in the eastern part of the WQO hosts large-scale Triassic granitoids and numerous polymetallic deposits, providing an excellent opportunity to constrain the controversies mentioned above. In this work, we choose the Huahongshuping granodiorite pluton, Guji biotite monzogranite pluton, Taoerling biotite monzogranite dike, Dongtangzi granite porphyry dike and Dagou dioritic dikes in the FTOC for a combined study on the zircon U–Pb geochronology, whole-rock major, trace elements and Sr–Nd isotopes. LA–ICP–MS zircon U–Pb dating yields ages of ~225 Ma, ~224 Ma and 227–217 Ma for the Huahongshuping pluton, Guji pluton and granitoid dikes, respectively. All these granitoids have metaluminous and high-K calc-alkaline series affinities, and are enriched in large ion lithophile elements (LILE), light rare earth elements (LREE) and depleted in high field-strength elements (HFSE) with a marked LREE/HREE fractionation ((La/Yb)N = 10.66–32.42), fractionation of LREE ((La/Sm)N = 2.72–6.60), and negative Eu anomalies (δEu = 0.45–0.99). They have initial Sr isotopic ratios of 0.7062–0.7082, and negative εNd(t) values of –9.42 to –8.09. The above features indicate that the FTOC granitoids were mainly derived from the partial melting of the Neoproterozoic meta-volcanic rocks induced by the decrease in pressure and the addition of water dehydrated from biotite, with direct contribution of mantle materials. Combined with previous data on sedimentation, deformation and metamorphism, and tectonics, we suggest that the WQO underwent the Early Mesozoic tectonic evolution from the subduction at 248–235 Ma, through syn-collision at 235–225 Ma, to post-collision at 225–195 Ma. Integrating with the ore geology, geochronology, mineralogy, and quartz and carbonate H–O, and in-situ S isotope data of sulfides from different mineralization stages at representative Au and Pb–Zn deposits in literatures, we propose a conceptive model that the post-collision process and granitic magmatic activity played an important role in the polymetallic mineralization within the FTOC.The Qinling Orogen in central China, located between the North China Craton (NCC) and the Yangtze Craton (YC), links with the Dabie Orogen in the east, and the Qilian and Kunlun Orogens in the west. It was formed by the convergence and collision between NCC and YC along the Shangdan Suture in Middle Paleozoic and Mianlue Suture in Early Mesozoic ( The Western Qinling Orogen is also one of the most important metallogenetic belts in China ( The Fengxian–Taibai Ore Cluster (FTOC), located in the eastern part of WQO ( In this contribution, we present new geological, geochronological, and geochemical data of systemically collected granitoid samples in the FTOC, aiming at a better understanding of their petrogenesis and tectonic setting. Combined with previous researches on regional granitoids, sedimentation, deformation and metamorphism, tectonics and metallogeny, we propose a three-stage model of the overall tectonic evolution during the Early Mesozoic in the WQO and further discuss their implication for Au and Pb–Zn polymetallic mineralization in the FTOC. The Qinling Orogen is bound by the Luonan–Luanchuan Fault in the north and the Mianlue Suture in the south ( It is widely accepted that the Shangdan Suture resulted from the Middle Paleozoic closure of the Shangdan Ocean and subsequent collision between the NQB and SQB (e.g., Generally, the easternmost extent of the Triassic strata of Songpan-Ganzi remnant ocean basin is regarded as the boundary between the WQO and the Eastern Qinling Orogen, which roughly extends through the narrow down part (so-called “wasp waist”) along the strike of the Qinling Orogen ( The Fengxian–Taibai Ore Cluster is a large tectonic lens bound by the NWW-trending Xiangzihe-Huangbaiyuan Fault (part of the Shangdan Suture) to the north, and the NW-trending Jiudianliang-Jiangkou Fault to the south ( Strata exposed in the FTOC are mainly Devonian low-metamorphosed fine-grained clastic and carbonate rocks ( Granitic rocks are widespread in the FTOC. The Xiba pluton with an exposure area of 150 km Many Au and Pb–Zn deposits have been discovered in the FTOC ( Eight granitoid samples were collected, including two of the Huahongshuping pluton, one of the Guji pluton, and five of the granitoid dikes in the FTOC. Their locations are shown in The Huahongshuping granodiorite (Samples C-35-3 and C-35-4) is gray to white in color with medium-grained texture ( The Guji biotite monzogranite (sample C-33) is mainly composed of quartz (~35 vol%), plagioclase (25–30 vol%), potassium feldspar (20–25 vol%), and biotite (~10 vol%) with subhedral medium- to fine-grained granular texture ( The NWW-trending Taoerling biotite monzogranite dike (sample C-29-2) comprises quartz (~25 vol%), plagioclase (~30 vol%), potassium feldspar (~35 vol%), biotite (~6 vol%), and minor muscovite (~4 vol%) ( Samples DG-2 (Dagou diorite dike) and DG-3 (Dagou quartz diorite dike) are collected from the mine dump of the Dagou Au deposit, which is an abandoned mine. Therefore, the occurrences of these dikes and their contact relation with surrounding rocks are unknown. Sample DG-2 has medium-grained subhedral to anhedral texture, and mainly comprises plagioclase (40–50 vol%), hornblende (25–30 vol%), biotite (15–20 vol%), and quartz (5–10 vol%) ( LA–ICP–MS zircon U–Pb dating were conducted upon a total of eight granitoid samples mentioned above. Six of these samples (C-35-3, C-35-4, C-29-2, C-33, DG-2 and DG-3) were selected for major and trace elements, and Sr–Nd isotopes analyses, while samples D-42 and D-60 of the Dongtangzi granite porphyry dike are not analyzed due to their intensive alteration ( Zircons from the granitoid samples were separated using conventional density and magnetic separation techniques, and then handpicked under a binocular microscope. The zircon crystals were mounted in epoxy for polishing. Cathodoluminescence (CL) images were acquired at Beijing GeoAnalysis Co. LTD to examine their internal structure prior to the U–Pb dating. Zircon U–Pb dating was conducted using an Finnigan Neptune ICP–MS coupled with a Newwave UP 213 Laser–Ablation System at the Institute of Mineral Resources, Chinese Academy of Geological Sciences (CAGS), Beijing, China. Detailed analytical procedures are similar to those described by Major and trace element analyses of the samples were performed at the Laboratory of Mineralization Process and Dynamics, Chang'an University, Xi’an, China. Major elements were determined on flux glass discs by X-ray Fluorescence (XRF), following the procedures described by Sr and Nd isotopic analyses of the samples were carried out at the Analytical Laboratory of the Beijing Research Institute of Uranium Geology, Beijing, China, using an ISOPROBE-T multi-collector thermal ionization mass spectrometer (TIMS). The measurement accuracy of Rb/Sr ratio is better than 0.1%. Mass fractionations of Sr and Nd isotopes were corrected using The results of LA–ICP–MS zircon U–Pb dating are listed in the Electronic Supplementary Table 2. Most of the zircon grains collected from these granitoid samples are euhedral and prismatic with diameters of 50–200 μm and length to width ratios varying from 1:1 to 1:3. The CL images ( Twenty-four and 22 zircon U–Pb isotopic analyses were acquired from samples C-35-3 and C-35-4 of the Huahongshuping pluton, respectively. After filtering out several slightly discordant data points, twenty data points from sample C-35-3 and 19 data points from sample C-35-4 are plotted on the concordant curves, respectively. The Twenty-eight zircon spots were analyzed for sample C-33 of the Guji pluton. After filtering out several slightly discordant data points, twenty-two data points fall on the concordant curve. The For sample C-29-2 of the Taoerling dike, twenty-six zircon spots were analyzed, among which nineteen data points fall on the concordant curve after filtering several slightly discordant ones. The Twenty-six zircon spots were analyzed for sample D-42 of the Dongtangzi granite porphyry dike. After filtering out several slightly discordant data points, nineteen data points fall on the concordant curves, and the Nineteen and 18 zircon U–Pb isotopic analyses were acquired from samples DG-2 and DG-3 of the Dagou dikes, respectively. After filtering out several slightly discordant data points, fifteen data points from sample DG-2 and 14 data points from sample DG-3 fall on the concordant curves, respectively. The The major and trace element compositions of the granitoids in the FTOC are listed in Electronic Supplementary Table 3. SiO SiO SiO SiO Granitoids from the Huahongshuping pluton, Guji pluton, Taoerling, and Dagou dikes in the FTOC are metaluminous ( The total contents of rare earth elements (∑REE) of the granitoids from the Huahongshuping pluton, Guji pluton, Taoerling, and Dagou dikes in the FTOC are in the ranges of 72.82–446.27 ppm, with light rare earth elements (LREE)/heavy rare earth elements (HREE) ratios of 7.52–13.64, (La/Yb) The Sr–Nd isotopic compositions of the granitoids in the FTOC are listed in Electronic Supplementary Table 4. The Huahongshuping pluton in the FTOC have age-corrected initial ( Granitoids are generally divided into I-, S-, M- and A-types according to the nature of their protolith, and petrographical and geochemical features ( Potential magma sources of calc-alkaline I-type granitoids include (1) mantle materials ( The Huahongshuping pluton displays enrichment in LREE relative to HREE with negative Eu anomalies ( I-type granitoids are commonly considered to be derived from (1) fractional crystallization of mantle-derived melts ( Major factors resulting in partial melting of the source rocks include rise in temperature, drop in pressure, and addition of fluids ( In sum, the Huahongshuping pluton was derived from the dehydration melting of the source rocks (i.e., the Neoproterozoic Bikou Group) triggered by decrease in pressure with addition of water dehydrated from biotite, with a certain amount of mantle-derived melt mixed in. The Early Mesozoic granitoids in the WQO formed during 248–195 Ma (Electronic Supplementary Table 1; A magmatic flare-up event took place at 248–235 Ma in the WQO ( Regional volcanic, paleomagnetic, sedimentological and metamorphic data provide further constraints on the timing of the Mianlue Ocean subduction. Firstly, the subduction of the Mianlue Ocean is indicated by the Nanping arc-type andesite with the LA–ICP–MS zircon U–Pb age of 246 ± 3 Ma ( The granitoids with the zircon U–Pb ages of 235–225 Ma mainly occur in the middle and northern part of the SQB, but they are very limited in volume, probably because large volumes of granitic magmas cannot be formed due to no sufficient heat, decompression and water addition at the Nonmarine molasse was deposited in the foreland basins during the Norian, indicating that the Mianlue Ocean should have closed before the ca. 227 Ma ( Another magmatic flare-up event took place at 225–195 Ma ( In the FTOC, the Xiba pluton (219–215 Ma, As mentioned previously, recent geochronological data from the sericite and quartz The Baguamiao and Shuangwang deposits are two large Au deposits in the FTOC. At Baguamiao, the H and O isotopic compositions of quartz from different mineralization stages show large variations in δ The ages of 220–216 Ma obtained by the At the Bafangshan–Erlihe large Pb–Zn deposit in the FTOC, quartz from different mineralization stages show δ  The granitoid plutons and dikes in the FTOC, WQO, are high-K calc-alkaline, metaluminous I-type granites. They were emplaced between 226.7 ± 1.2 Ma and 217.4 ± 2.3 Ma. They were produced by the partial melting of the Neoproterozoic Combined with regional volcanic, paleomagnetic, sedimentological, deformation and metamorphic, and tectonic data, we propose that the WQO underwent the Early Mesozoic overall tectonic evolution from subduction of the Mianlue Ocean at 248–235 Ma, through The granitoids in a post-collision setting played an important role in the formation of the Au and Pb–Zn deposits in the FTOC, WQO. We are grateful to Dr. Kejun Hou for his assistance in the LA–ICP–MS analysis and Prof. Xinfu Zhao for his correction and polishment of our manuscript. We thank the editor and three reviewers for their constructive comments that greatly improve our manuscript. This study is jointly supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article:   