An alternative non-cyanide lixiviant, namely sodium hypochlorite, has been used for the selective extraction of gold and silver from a copper concentrate. Hypochlorite leaching of the as-received, as well as aqueous pressure-oxidized copper concentrate was carried out. Direct hypochlorite leaching yielded gold and silver recoveries of 42.7% and 45.0%, respectively. With aqueous pressure oxidation followed by hypochlorite leaching, it was possible to selectively recover 90.0% of gold and 92.5% of silver from the copper concentrate.Copper concentrates often contain precious metals like gold and silver. When copper is produced by pyrometallurgical techniques, these precious metals join the blister copper, from where they are recovered subsequently during the electrolysis through the anode slimes. However, small copper mine owners, who do not have their own smelters, sell their concentrates to bigger smelters, without being paid for the contained precious metal values. In such cases, it will be advantageous to selectively recover gold and silver from the copper concentrates, before selling them to the smelters. Gold and silver ores that do not respond to direct leaching by cyanide or any other lixiviant like thiourea are known as refractory ores. A broad classification of gold-bearing ores based on their response to cyanidation was described by LaBrooy et al. In the pressure oxidation treatment of refractory sulphidic gold ores, the base metal sulphides are oxidised to yield a porous structure, which provides access to leach solutions. During this process, various iron sulphides are oxidised to hematite. The reactions involved in the pressure oxidation of pyrite may be represented as follows The search for suitable alternative lixiviants to replace the conventional cyanide for the extraction of gold and silver has received considerable attention in recent years. The prime motivation behind this interest is the increased awareness towards environmental pollution, coupled with the rapid rates of leaching demonstrated by some of the non-cyanide leaching agents such as thiourea Based on the thermodynamic and mass balance calculations conducted by the authors at 1.27×10 In the kinetic studies conducted by Vinals et al. Studies conducted by Li et al. In the present study, the application of sodium hypochlorite as a lixiviant in the presence of NaCl and HCl for the selective recovery of gold and silver from a chalcopyrite concentrate is investigated with and without aqueous pressure pre-oxidation. All the reagents used for the leaching experiments such as HCl, NaCl and NaOCl were of analytical grade. A copper concentrate obtained from a beneficiation plant located in southern India was used in this investigation. Laboratory grade glassware was used for experimentation and solution sampling was conducted through sampling ports using pipettes. Standard laboratory size stirrers were used for leaching. A 2.0-L Parr autoclave was used for the aqueous pressure oxidation of copper concentrate. X-ray diffraction measurements of the as-received, as well as aqueous pressure-oxidized copper concentrate, were made using Siemens X-ray diffractometer (model D-500). Leaching experiments were conducted using a laboratory-size stirrer in a 1.0-L glass beaker after adding all the required reagents and 100 g of the as-received or pressure-oxidized chalcopyrite concentrate. The solid–liquid ratio was maintained at 1:4. Samples at different time intervals were withdrawn, filtered and the filtrate was analysed for gold and silver after suitable dilution with distilled water, and the residue collected was transferred back to the leach system. Solution analysis was conducted using Shimadzu's inductively coupled plasma spectrophotometer. Estimation of gold and silver in all the solid samples was carried out by fire assay. Aqueous pressure oxidation of the copper concentrate was carried out in a 2.0-L capacity autoclave under oxygen pressure at 150°C with variations in time and pressure. The as-received and aqueous pressure-oxidized copper concentrate samples were characterized by X-ray diffraction analysis and by chemical methods to find out the different phases that are present and to quantify the various elements. Mineralogical studies were also conducted on the as-received concentrate. The phases that are present in the as-received concentrate were found to be CuFeS Sodium hypochlorite leaching of the as-received chalcopyrite concentrate was conducted at 25, 50 and 75 mL/L of NaOCl in a background of 25 g/L NaCl and 0.35 M HCl using 100 g of the concentrate at a solid–liquid ratio of 1:4, for 4 h at room temperature. At 25 mL/L of NaOCl, the dissolution of gold was found to increase steadily with time, whereas, at 50 and 75 mL/L of NaOCl concentrations, the dissolution of gold was found to be faster during the first hour of leaching. Gold recoveries of around 30% were achieved in all the three experiments. In the case of silver, a steady increase in the dissolution was obtained starting from 14.5% in 30 min to 22.5% in 4 h in all the three experiments. These results are presented in Experiments were conducted at different NaCl concentrations of 25, 50, 100 and 200 g/L in a background solution of 25 mL/L NaOCl and 0.35 M HCl at a solid–liquid ratio of 1:4 at room temperature. During the first hour of leaching, the dissolution of gold was found to increase from 14.5% to 38.2% by increasing the concentration of NaCl from 25 to 200 g/L. Higher levels of NaCl concentration were found to significantly enhance the rate of gold dissolution. At the end of 4 h of leaching, the gold extraction was found to be at a maximum of 30% at 25 g/L NaCl, and 40% at 200 g/L NaCl. The recovery of silver was also found to increase from 20% to 45% when the NaCl concentration was varied from 25 to 200 g/L at the end of 4 h of leaching. Aqueous pressure oxidation of the chalcopyrite was carried out at a temperature of 150°C and oxygen pressures varying from 10 to 25 atm for different durations of time. After the leaching, the solid and liquid were separated by filtration and the leach liquor was analysed for dissolved copper. These results are presented in As can be seen from the results shown in Leaching of the pressure-oxidized copper concentrate was conducted at an NaOCl concentration of 25 mL/L, 200 g/L of NaCl and 0.35 M HCl for 1 h during which improved gold and silver recoveries of around 90% and 92.5%, respectively, have been achieved. There was a very good agreement between the recoveries of gold and silver calculated on the basis of the solution analysis and the fire assay of the leach residue. While the copper dissolution during aqueous pressure oxidation was negligible (0.004%), it was at around 1.0% during the subsequent NaOCl leaching. The concentration of the copper in the sodium hypochlorite leach liquor was of the order of 0.048 g/L. However, after recovering the gold and silver from the leach liquors, copper can also be recovered by cementation or some other suitable technique. The bulk of the copper present in the original concentrate remains intact. In the final precious metal-depleted copper concentrate, the assay values of copper, gold and silver were 19.0%, 1.1 and 10.5 ppm, as against 19.2%, 11 and 140 ppm in the original concentrate. Sodium hypochlorite leaching of the as-received and aqueous pressure-oxidized chalcopyrite concentrate was studied for the selective extraction of gold and silver. The initial studies were conducted on the as-received concentrate, using different NaOCl and NaCl concentrations. It was observed that increased concentration of NaOCl increased the initial rates of gold dissolution during the first hour. The final recoveries, however, were found to be very similar in all the three levels of NaOCl concentrations, with a maximum of 32.7%. The dissolution of silver at all levels of NaOCl increased steadily and attained a maximum recovery of 22.8%. Varying the NaCl concentration during leaching resulted in an increase in the rate as well as the extent of gold and silver extractions. The final recoveries of gold and silver at the end of 4 h of leaching increased from 32.7% to 42.7% and 21.1% to 45.0%, respectively, by increasing the NaCl concentration from 25 to 200 g/L. Leaching of the aqueous pressure-oxidized copper concentrate with 25 mL/L NaOCl, 200 g/L NaCl and 0.35 M HCl resulted in enhanced gold and silver recoveries of 90.0% and 92.5%, respectively, in 1 h. After the selective extraction of gold and silver, the copper concentrates could be sent to the smelters with advantage. The authors are thankful to Prof. P. Ramachandra Rao, Director, National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur for his permission to publish this paper.