The presence of water in a biofilter is critical in keeping microorganisms active and abating pollutants. In addition, the amount of water retained in a biofilter may drastically affect the physical properties of packing materials and packed beds. In this study, the influence of water on the pressure drop and sorption capacities of 10 different packing materials were experimentally studied and compared. Pressure drop was characterized as a function of dynamic hold-up, porosity and gas flow rate. Experimental data were fitted to a mathematical expression based on a modified Ergun correlation. Sorption capacities for toluene were determined for both wet and dry materials to obtain information about the nature of interactions between the contaminant, the packing materials and the aqueous phase. The experimental sorption capacities of materials were fitted to different isotherm models for gas adsorption in porous materials. The corresponding confidence interval was determined by the Fisher information matrix. The results quantified the dynamic hold-up effect resulting from the significant increase in the pressure drop throughout the bed, i.e. the financial cost of driving air, and the negative effect of this air on the total amount of hydrophobic pollutant that can be adsorbed by the supports. Furthermore, the results provided equations for ascertaining water presence and sorption capacities that could be widely used in the mathematical modeling of biofilters.Biological treatments have become an effective and economical alternative to traditional systems of gas treatment based on physical–chemical techniques. Several packing materials have been used in biofiltration to treat a wide range of pollutants such as volatile organic compounds (VOCs), sulfurous compounds and ammonia, among others Several authors have reported that packing materials must store considerable amounts of water to keep microorganisms immobilized on the active support media (high water holding capacities) and make water readily available during periods of drying (high water retentivity). Auria et al. In addition, in the biofiltration of some common pollutants such as ammonia, optimal water irrigation control is necessary to prevent the excessive accumulation of nitrogen species in the reactor bed, which may have inhibitory effects on nitrifying bacteria and thus diminish the bioreactor's efficiency There is scarce mention in the literature of the impact of water on biofilter characteristics such as pressure drop and sorption capacities. Morgan-Sagstume et al. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of water on the pressure drop and sorption capacity of common biofiltration packing materials, to characterize these phenomena under usual conditions of operation in biofiltration and to obtain equations that may be useful in modeling the biofiltration process. Pressure drop was evaluated in relation to the gas flow rate, the bed porosity and the dynamic water hold-up of the packing material, in order to find a mathematical expression that reflected the effects of the factors studied. Toluene adsorption was determined for both wet and dry materials to obtain information about the nature of the interactions between the contaminant, the packing materials and the aqueous phase. The sorption capacities of the packing materials were characterized using isotherm models for gas adsorption in porous materials. The characterization of the packing materials was carried out according to standard methods The effects of water on pressure drop and sorption capacities were evaluated in a total of 10 common packing materials used in biofiltration. The organic packing materials analyzed were coconut fiber, pine leaves, a mixture of peat and heather, and compost made from the sludge of a wastewater treatment plant. The inorganic or synthetic packing materials studied were polyurethane foam (PUF), lignite from mines in Mequinenza (Spain), lava rock and a hybrid material composed of a thin layer of compost on a clay pellet. Moreover, the pressure drop and sorption capacities of the packing materials were compared with two adsorbent carbons, a commercial activated carbon (CAC) supplied by Chemviron Carbon (UK) and a sludge-based carbon (SBC) provided by the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Imperial College, London. The physical–chemical characteristics of the packing materials used in this study can be found elsewhere Pressure drop assessment experiments were carried out in a lab-scale plant consisting of a PVC column with an inner diameter of 4.6 For the sorption assessment experiments, the inlet pollutant concentration was achieved by dispensing toluene (Panreac 99.5%) by means of a peristaltic pump (Masterflex) into the inlet air stream. The air flow was controlled and measured by a mass flow controller (Bronhorst F-201CV). Toluene concentration was measured by an online photo ionization detector (Photovac 2020) placed at the inlet and outlet of the bed and connected to a computer for continuous data collection. Support materials were previously sterilized using sodium azide (Sharlau) in a 10% (w/w) ratio to prevent the interference of biological activity in the adsorption measurements The sorption capacities of the packing materials were evaluated by frontal analysis of the toluene measurements at the inlet and outlet of a fixed bed, following the staircase method Experimental data were also fitted to adsorption isotherms models available in the literature. Since many isotherms can be used to describe sorption behavior in a wide range of adsorbents and with an extensive list of adsorbates, the most well known of these were used in this study, including two-parameter isotherms (Langmuir, Freundlich and Dubinin–Radushkevich), three-parameter isotherms (Radke–Prausnitz, Brunauer–Emmett–Teller and Redlich–Peterson) and a combination of the two. Detailed information about the abovementioned isotherms is provided in The parameter estimation was performed using a MATLAB algorithm based on a multidimensional unconstrained non-linear minimization (Nelder–Mead). This is a direct search method that does not use numerical or analytical gradients. The confidence intervals of the estimated parameters were assessed using a numerical method based on the Fisher information matrix (FIM) The results of the pressure drop tests were expressed as surface plots to simultaneously observe the influence of gas velocity, dynamic hold-up and bed porosity on pressure drop. In organic materials, the results revealed small differences for all packing materials at the various possible porosities and, in general, the pressure drop was well below 250 Regarding non-organic materials, pressure drops are greater in the range of study than those determined in organic materials. Materials showed significant differences for the various bed porosities tested. The dependence on dynamic hold-up is more pronounced at high flow rates, when resistance to the flow towards the bed increases. The lowest pressure drop among the non-organic and organic packing materials was found in the CAC (below 100 In order to parameterize the experimental data, the pressure drop in a fixed bed was described through several semi-empirical mathematical expressions. In most works, the pressure drop is described by the well-known Ergun equation Parameters In this study, parameters  The results show which materials are most affected by the presence of water and therefore in which ones the accurate control of watering is critical to prevent the high energy consumption that results from circulating air through the bed Adsorption phenomena in biofilters are poorly understood but play a major role in the operation of biofilters By way of example, the experimental quantities of toluene adsorbed on wet and dry materials are shown in The most relevant observation in  In general, parameter estimation is based on achieving the minimal value of the OF but without considering the error associated with the estimation. However, this study also incorporates an estimation of the confidence interval of parameters associated with the fitting of the isotherm. Although several isotherms make it possible to accurately predict the experimental data (low OF), the huge confidence intervals determined in most cases show that problems of identifiability of parameters are occurring Regarding the Freundlich parameters, the estimated values of The Dubinin–Radushkevich isotherm also gives an accurate estimation of parameters in a wide range of materials (confidence intervals lower than 7%). The determination of parameter Previous results are partially improved by means of the Redlich–Peterson isotherm. According to the interpretation of the parameters, The influence of water on the pressure drop and sorption capacities of 10 common packing materials used in biofiltration were evaluated. Coconut fiber, pine leaves, peat and heather, compost, polyurethane foam, immature coal, lava rock, a hybrid material, commercial activated carbon and sludge-based carbon were studied in wet and dry conditions. Pressure drop was determined for each packing material as a function of flow rate, dynamic water hold-up and bed porosity so that all of the effects could be represented simultaneously and a mathematical expression could be obtained that would allow the phenomena to be included in classic biofilter models. A further aim was to calculate the financial cost of blowing air through a bed in any possible situation. A dependence on dynamic hold-up was found through a modified Ergun equation for several packing materials. The financial assessment predicted a substantial increase in the cost of energy for driving air through a biofilter due to the presence of the water needed to maintain the conditions that keep the biomass active. Regarding the sorption capacities of materials, the adsorption capacity of those parts of materials covered with water during a biofilter's normal operations is considerably depleted, especially for hydrophobic pollutants such as toluene. Isotherm interpretation shows that the presence of water in a bed weakens the interaction bond between a contaminant and the surface of materials. Although moisture content generally improves the performance of a biofilter, too much water seriously affects bed compaction and the sorption capacities of materials. Moreover, since water is a scare resource, especially in dry areas of Spain, the water supply in a biofilter must be optimized. The results show that a detailed characterization of materials in wet conditions must be performed to avoid overestimating the adsorbed properties of the carrier materials or underestimating the energy consumption requirements of a plant. This work was supported by the Spanish CICYT project CTQ2006 (14997-C02-02) and by the European Commission (REMOVALS project, Contract FP6-018525). A.D. Dorado received a predoctoral fellowship from the Spanish Ministry of Education and Science (Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia). Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 