From January 2003 and February 2006, 31 displaced acetabular fractures were treated by open reduction and internal fixation. The fractures were managed using a single approach, involving a straight lateral incision centered over the greater trochanter, trochanteric osteotomy and dislocation of the femoral head. The mean age of the patients was 48 (range 20–74 years) with a mean follow up 24 months (range from 20 to 42 months). Ten fractures were classified as simple, and 21 as complex fractures. The mean time to surgery was 4.5 days (range from 0 to 14 days). Mean operating time was 118min (range 52–168). Five patients presented with posterior dislocation of the hip joint at the time of initial presentation. The trochanteric fragment was fixed with three 3.5mm cortical screws. Congruent reduction was achieved in all patients and all osteotomies healed within 5 months. Clinical evaluation was based on the modified Merle d’Aubigne and Postel scoring. Motor strength of abduction was evaluated according to the Medical Research Council grading. Clinical scoring was excellent to good in 24%. The strength of the abductors was grade 0/5 in a patient with Brooker's class IV heterotopic ossification, and 3/5 in the two patients with necrosis of the femoral head. There were five patients with grade 4/5 and the 5/5 in the rest. Complications included two segmental femoral head necrosis, one of them combined with necrosis of the weight bearing acetabular dome area. These patients required total hip replacement. Mild heterotopic ossification grade II was seen in one patient and significant (grade IV), in another patient. Two patients developed superficial wound infection over the trochanteric area and another two patients persistent pain due to irritation caused by the screws. One patient developed peroneal nerve palsy which resolved 3 months after the surgery.
                  The trochanteric slide osteotomy can enhance the exposure of the whole acetabulum and the femoral head. This allows better evaluation of any osteochondral lesions, intra-articular bony fragments and fracture steps, providing a more accurate reduction and easier fixation of the acetabular fracture.Current principles of acetabular fractures management are largely based on the classification and the surgical approach to the fracture. Good long term joint function depends on achieving an anatomic reduction of the weight bearing articular surface. The so called trochanteric ‘slide’ which involves osteotomy of the trochanter was first described by Mercati in 1972 and popularized by Glassman. The present study reports the results of a retrospective study of patients with displaced fractures of the acetabulum that involve at least one column of the acetabulum. In whom we used the trochanteric osteotomy. We reviewed retrospectively the management of 41 closed acetabular fractures seen consecutively in our regional trauma centre from January 2003 to February 2006. All the fractures were displaced and required surgical stabilisation, all by the same surgeon (FWT). Inclusion in this study group required the use of trochanteric slide osteotomy for approach and fracture treatment. Ten fractures, were isolated posterior wall fractures, and were managed with the Kocher-Langenbeck approach. Therefore thirty-one patients were included in our study. Patients presenting with a hip dislocation were treated with emergency reduction of the dislocation. The success of the reduction was documented by plain radiography and tomography. Our indications for internal fixation of the fractures of the acetabulum are: (1) an intra-articular fracture that is displaced more than 3 Thirty-one patients (22 men and 9 women, mean age 48 years, range 20–74 years) were treated for acetabular fracture using the trochanteric osteotomy with a straight lateral incision centred over the greater trochanter. The weight of the patients ranged from 62 to 125 The most common fracture was the complete both column fracture followed by associated transverse and posterior wall fracture. The acetabular fractures were classified into following. Posterior column, anterior column (simple fractures). Complex fractures were those: involving two columns, transverse, T-shaped, transverse/posterior wall, T-shaped/posterior wall, anterior wall, anterior column/posterior hemitransverse and both column ( In all the cases a cell saver was used. A foley catheter was inserted for the operation and all patients received preoperative antibiotics (cefuroxime). Deep vein thrombosis prophylaxis was used preoperatively and postoperatively in all patients. Following operation, AP and oblique views were examined for the quality of reduction, and fracture displacement was measured at the subchondral bone level. The quality of fracture reduction as measured on the three standard plain radiographs of the pelvis was graded anatomic in all the patients. Satisfactory anatomic reduction was accepted when there was no intra-articular step off >2 All the patients had an anteroposterior radiograph, then two Judet oblique views and a CT scan, which allowed the fracture to be classified. Surgical treatment was performed as soon the patient's general medical condition allowed, sometimes resulting in delays in treatment. The patient must be afebrile and all peripheral wounds must be completely dry. The patient is positioned in the lateral decubitus position on the fracture table on the uninjured side. Anterior and posterior supportive pads are used to fix the pelvis in a true lateral position. The limb is draped free to allow mobilisation of the leg during the operative procedure. A pillow is placed between the knees. A straight lateral twenty-cm incision centred on the trochanter is carried through the fascial layer between the gluteus maximus and the tensor fascia latae to expose the whole of the trochanter, with the gluteal and vastus attachment. The trochanter is divided from the posterior aspect of the greater trochanter with an oscillating saw, rotated 25° to the sagital plane ( In all cases, immediate bleeding after drilling with a 2.0 Fracture fixation was performed with a combination of screws (3.5 The mean operative time was 118 Prophylactic medication against heterotopic ossification was given in all patients after surgery (Indomethacin 25 Postoperatively, the operated leg is put in slight adduction until the drains are removed and the wounds are dry. A program of active and passive range-of-motion exercises for the hip is begun immediately after the wounds are dry. After removal of the drains, a 20 After the discharge from the hospital, routine evaluation (including the three standard radiographs of the pelvis) was scheduled at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months and 1 year and annually thereafter. Data, including all complications, were recorded at each visit, the last of which provided information used for this study. At follow-up the patients were evaluated for pain when walking and pattern of gait. Patients were evaluated clinically for abduction power according to the Medical Research Council (MRC) scale ( Radiographs that had been made during the period of study were examined for evidence of union of the osteotomy of the trochanter, union of other fractures or loss of fixation, or heterotopic ossification. Clinical grading was based on Merle d’Aubigne and Postel scoring which was modified by Matta. Heterotopic ossification was classified according to the Brooker classes on an AP radiograph. The length of follow-up ranged from 12 to 36 months, with a mean of 18 months. According to the modified Merle d’ Aubigne and Postel scoring system, fourteen patients had an excellent outcome, and six patients had a very good outcome. Four patients had a good outcome and six patients poor outcome ( A preoperative neurological injury was present in one patient who sustained brachial plexus palsy. Operative findings included intra-articular osteochondral free fragment in five patients, injury to the femoral head in three, acetabular articular impaction injury to two and extensive fracture comminution (defined as three or more fragments) in nine patients. Radiographic union of the greater trochanter occurred in all patients in a mean of 5 months, as determined by the loss of the line of osteotomy ( In total, five patients underwent a second operation (two total hip replacement, two implant removal and one removal of the heterotopic ossification-grade IV). Two patients developed segmental necrosis (grade II) of the femoral head 2 and 4 months after surgery and had total hip replacements. One of these patients had an additional necrosis of the weight bearing acetabular-dome segment. This was possibly due to an osteochondral fragment which was fixed. Both patients had a both column fracture, with posterior dislocation of the femoral head. One patient developed a peroneal nerve palsy which resolved 3 months following the operation. There were no iatrogenic nerve injuries. One patient developed a class II, and another class IV heterotopic ossification of the hip, with significant loss hip motion (flexion 30° and no rotation). The patients with class II heterotopic ossification had a transverse posterior wall fracture. The class IV patient was a polytrauma, with closed head trauma who stayed in the ICU for 4 weeks. Two patients developed severe pain over the greater trochanter due to irritation caused by the screws. Two patients developed superficial wound infection over the trochanteric area. One patient was treated with associated transverse and posterior wall and the second with posterior wall fracture. The two surgical wound infections were not intra-articular and all resolved while the patients were still in hospital, following treatment with wound debridement and antibiotic therapy. No malreduction or sliding of the greater trochanter was observed. All osteotomies healed within 5 months after the operation. No single surgical approach can be used successfully to reduce all the fracture types, therefore it is necessary that the surgeon has an accurate preoperative assessment of the fracture configuration and knowledge of the anatomic limitations of each surgical approach. The primary aim of the management of the acetabular fracture is to obtain an adequate exposure, anatomical reduction and sufficient stability of the articular surface especially in the weight bearing area. Operative time, minimal soft tissue stripping and blood loss are important parameters for a surgical approach. The trochanteric slide osteotomy seems to improve the exposure of the articular surface of the acetabulum for reduction and fixation. In our study, we did not have any non-union of the trochanter. All trochanters were radiographically and clinically united 5 months after the operation. Most of our patients were young with good quality bone, and the screw fixation system proved to be effective. An increased blood loss and operating time have also been reported with this method. Heterotopic ossification is a problem associated with extensile exposure of the acetabulum. A disadvantage of the trochanteric osteotomy, may be the increased blood loss and the longer operating time. The trochanteric slide osteotomy of the femur, provides an alternative approach to acetabular fractures. This method allows access to the superior and anterior fracture lines as well as the posterior fracture extension. Both the acetabulum and the femoral head can be visualised for any osteochondral lesions or loose bodies (bony fragments). The direct visualisation and palpation of the articular surface provides an additional confirmation of the fracture reduction. With this method, all types of acetabular fractures can be reduced and internally fixed, provided the there is a good operative approach, and careful preoperative plan. The surgical team must have a good understanding of the three dimensional anatomy of the acetabulum and pelvis.