In the Na2SO4–Al2O3 system, the variation in electrical conductivity with composition and dispersoid size stands in stark contrast to that of most other reported composite systems. Two maxima, instead of one, are observed in the conductivity vs. composition plot, at 5.5 and 35 mol% Al2O3. Maximum conductivity enhancement is observed for 35 mol% Al2O3. The increase is about 20 times at 400°C and 450 times at 200°C. Possible conductivity enhancement mechanisms operating in this system are suggested. Surprisingly, the reduction in alumina particle size from 0.5 to 0.004 μm does not bring about any further enhancement in conductivity.Na Keester et al. While considerable work on Na The starting materials were procured from Loba Chemie (India), Aldrich Chemicals (USA), and Condea Chemie (Germany). Fine-size Al The impedance was measured during the cooling cycle, at frequencies ranging from 1 Hz to 32 MHz using a Solartron impedance analyzer (model Schlumberger SI1260). The DSC measurements were made with a DSC V2.2A DuPont 9900 calorimeter. XRD patterns were recorded with a Philips PW1820 diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation. Most of the composite systems studied so far depict a more or less uniform type of conductivity dependence on composition Unlike any other composite studied so far, the Na All the conductivity enhancement mechanisms Upon increasing the alumina content further, σ decreases marginally, perhaps due to the blocking effect of alumina. Nevertheless, it again increases gradually to reach another flat maxima at 35 mol%. In composite electrolyte systems, the σ peaks at ∼40 mol% of the second phase are usually characteristic of dispersoid-induced changes in the bulk conductivity It has been reported that the particle size of the dispersed phase plays a crucial role in the conductivity enhancement process. It is widely known and accepted that σ increases as the second phase particle size decreases. In our study, enhancement by more than two orders of magnitude is observed at 200°C when alumina of initial particle size 0.5 μm is used. However, similar enhancement in conductivity was observed even when the initial particle size of alumina was reduced to 40 Å. The log σT vs. 10 Our SEM investigations present further interesting aspects. The dispersed alumina was found to be highly agglomerated for certain compositions. Also, from the SEM studies, it can be concluded that the final alumina particle size is much larger than the initial dispersoid size. The final dispersoid sizes do not appear to be much different for the 40 Å or 0.5 μm starting powders. A more detailed investigation into the relationship between the second phase particle size and matrix grain size would be appropriate, to obtain a better understanding of the conductivity enhancement processes. In effect, the preparative parameters may hold the key to obtaining larger enhancements in conductivity. A wide range of compositions between 1 and 50 mol% Al We are thankful to Dr. V.R. Palkar and Sumit Bhandari for providing us with 40 Å alumina.