The purpose of the study was to investigate the relationship between comminution and amorphisation of α-lactose monohydrate particles during ball milling under different milling conditions, including ball-to-powder mass ratio, milling time and ball diameter. The results revealed that at a constant ball filling ratio, ball-to-powder mass ratio of 25:1 resulted in the lowest minimum particle diameter of ∼5μm and the highest degree of apparent amorphous content of 82%. The rate of comminution was high during early stage of milling whereas the degree of apparent amorphous content increased gradually at a slow rate. An increased ball-to-powder mass ratio during milling increased both the rate of comminution and the rate of amorphisation. Using a given ball-to-powder mass ratio, the ball diameter affected the degree of apparent amorphous content of the particles while the particle diameter remained unchanged. The relationship between comminution and amorphisation could be described as consisting of two stages, i.e. comminution dominated and amorphisation dominated stage. It was proposed that the rate constant of comminution and amorphisation are controlled by stress energy distribution in the milling jar and the stress energy distribution is regulated by the ball motion pattern that can be affected by the process parameter used.In the formulation of complex solid chemical systems, the control of the nature of the solid state of the ingredients is important. Since the amorphous state sometimes possesses valuable formulation properties compared to the crystalline state, such as increased particle dissolution rate ( Milling of powders is commonly used in chemical and pharmaceutical manufacturing and a frequently used milling apparatus is the planetary ball mill. An obvious and frequent use of ball milling is the size reduction (comminution) of particles into a suitable particle size distribution, e.g. to improve dissolution properties of a drug ( A single particle is considered ( The milling conditions inside a planetary ball mill are complex and depend on the material properties and on the processing parameters used. According to the literature, important examples of process parameters affecting the milling process are the size and mass of the balls, the ball-to-powder mass ratio (charge ratio), the ball filling ratio, the mill velocity, and the milling time ( A critical aspect on the translation of the conception of sequential steps of comminution and disordering from the single particle scale to the powder scale is the rate constants of the respective process. It is reported ( We conclude that in order to understand how milling operations should be designed to reach the desired purpose of the process, there is a need to increase our knowledge on the kinetics of comminution and amorphisation and how the rate constants of the processes can be controlled by the energy conditions. The objective of this paper is to investigate the relationship between particle comminution and amorphisation during ball milling under different milling conditions, i.e. ball-to-powder mass ratio, milling time and ball size, which are expected to give different ball motion patterns and stress energy conditions in the milling jar. α-lactose monohydrate, a commonly used pharmaceutical excipient in solid formulations, was used as model material. Two qualities of α-lactose monohydrate with different labelled particle size, Pharmatose Ball milling of lactose powders was performed in a planetary ball mill (PM 100 CM, Retsch, Germany). The milling operation was carried out in a stainless steel milling jar with a constant volume of 12 Three milling experiments with different set-ups were done, summarized in The particle size distributions of the original crystalline and the milled lactose powders milled in the first set-up of milling experiment were measured using a laser diffraction instrument (Malvern Mastersizer, long bed instrument, Malvern, U.K.) equipped with a 300 From the volume distributions thus obtained, the median particle diameter and the span in diameter (defined as (d As an indication of the reduction in particle size with time, a comminution rate constant ( The degree of apparent amorphous content in the milled samples were determined using Raman spectroscopy (Enwave Optronics Inc., SLSR-ProTT analyser, Irvine, U.S.A.) equipped with TE cooled CCD detector and a laser source with an excitation wavelength of 785 Briefly, to construct a standard curve, Raman spectrum measurements were performed on a set of physical mixtures of crystalline and amorphous lactose. A straight baseline approach was used to subtract the background from the measured Raman spectra, whereafter the spectra were normalized to the integrated area. PCA was made on this set of background corrected and normalized spectra giving the first principal component (1:st PC) explaining more than 99% of the variance. With the scores for the 1:st PC for the different mixtures, a standard curve equation, relating score values to fractions amorphous lactose, was established. To quantify the apparent amorphous content in the milled samples, the scores from background corrected and normalized Raman spectra of milled samples were put in the standard curve equation. The scores, in turn, were obtained by multiplying (dot product) the spectral values vector with the 1:st PC loadings vector obtained from the set of standard samples. The loadings and standard curve equation for 200M lactose was taken from ( As an indication of the increase in apparent amorphous content with time, an amorphisation rate constant ( Small amounts of samples of crystalline and milled lactose were attached to metal stubs by double-adhesive carbon tape and then sputter-coated with a thin layer of Au/Pd under argon in a sputter coater (Polaron, Quorum Technologies Ltd., Newhaven, U.K.). Particle images were prepared by Scanning Electron Microscopy (Leo (Zeiss), 1550 Schottky, Germany, equipped with SmartSEM software) at magnifications of 1.0 kX, 5.0 kX and 10 kX using an accelerating voltage of 2–3 The lactose powders as received from the manufacturer and here referred to as original powders, consisted of slightly elongated crystals of markedly varying particle size ( In Particle size distributions of original lactose powders and the powders milled for different time and various BPM ratios were determined. The distributions were generally unsymmetric and could not generally be described with a defined type of distribution, such as a log-normal distribution. More on, both unimodal and bimodal distributions were obtained. As statistical measures of central tendency and spread, the median diameter and the span were consequently calculated ( In Representative examples of the effect of milling time (up to 60 The median particle diameter reduced due to milling for all BPM ratios used but in some cases, the median particle diameter increased at the longer milling times used (Tables 2 and 3). This is explained by the formation of particle agglomerates that was not disintegrated during the preparation of the suspension to be used in the particle size analysis, i.e. erroneous values of the particle size of the primary particles were obtained. As stated above, the SEM images supported the existence of small agglomerates. Ignoring the particle diameter data explained by agglomeration, approximately unchanged median particle diameters (here referred to as the minimum particle diameter) were obtained for powders milled at BPM ratios of 25:1 and 13:1 in relatively short milling times, i.e. below 1 The rate of reduction in median particle diameter was dependent on the BPM ratio. For the BPM ratio of 25:1, the particle diameter of milled lactose powders decreased to about ∼5–6 The measured particle diameters scattered around the theoretical curve making it difficult to calculate highly reproducible values of the rate constant The The two original powders were considered to be fully crystalline and the process induced change in solid state properties was expressed in terms of the apparent amorphous content of the milled powders. The apparent amorphous content (AAC) was determined for powders sampled from the first set-up of milling experiments. The precision, expressed by the standard deviations of the pentaplicates of determined amorphicity, was around 1% (average of standard deviations over the 42 milling conditions was 0.91% The AAC increased with milling time for all BPM ratios used ( Both the rate of amorphisation and the final AAC was highly dependent on the BPM ratio. For the BPM ratio of 25:1, detectable levels of AAC was reached within 10 A rate constant was also calculated for the amorphisation process ( The steady state value of the apparent amorphous content ( In addition to study the effect of BPM ratio on the comminution and amorphisation processes, the effect of ball size on the median particle diameter and the AAC after milling of 200M lactose for 300 The median particle diameter ( For the balls of 1 The understanding of the relationship between the reduction in particle diameter and the increase in apparent amorphous content (AAC) of the particles during milling is important in the design of an effective ball milling operation. In this paper, this relationship has been investigated during ball milling of powders of α-lactose monohydrate. It was found that the ball milling gave a powder of a complex structure consisting of particle clusters of different character and of free particles ( The ball motion pattern in a ball mill during processing has been categorized as of three types; cascading, cataracting and centrifugation or rolling [15,24]. The ball motion pattern is affected by the choice of milling parameters, among which the ball filling ratio, the mill velocity and the charge ratio (BPM ratio) are critical. The different categories of ball motion patterns are associated with different energy conditions and it is suggested ( The energy condition in the milling jar can be described by stress models based on two parameters, i.e. the frequency of stress events and the stress energy. The latter is defined as the energy supplied by the mill to the powder at a single collision event ( As a means to derive an indication of the stress energy transferred to the powder during milling, the comminution rate constant The diameter of a particle affects its strength and fragmentation propensity and it is proposed ( Under a given BPM, the stress energy distribution may be more or less constant during milling after an initial mixing phase, i.e. the stress energy distribution of the collisions is approximately independent of milling time. In Since an increased BPM ratio gave a gradual decrease in the minimum particle diameter, i.e. an increased degree of comminution, it is reasonable that an increased BPM ratio corresponded to an increased maximum stress energy provided by the mill, as indicated in the hypothetical distributions ( The increase in BPM ratio affected also the amorphisation process, i.e. the increased stress energy provided by the mill, as indicated by The rates of amorphisation were considerably lower than the rates of comminution for BPM ratios of 25:1 and 13:1 ( An understanding of the relationship between comminution and amorphisation may be important in the design of a milling operation. In Also for a BPM ratio of 13:1, a relationship that could be described as of two stages was obtained. However, a small increase in AAC was obtained before the minimum median particle diameter was reached, i.e. comminution and disordering occurred to some degree in parallel. For the BPM ratio of 6:1, comminution dominated the relationship, i.e. milling occurred predominately in stage 1, but some disordering occurred in parallel to comminution. Thus, the collective response of the lactose powders used in this study during the milling can be described as of two stages but some amorphisation of the particles seemed to occur in parallel to the first comminution dominated stage. In generalized terms, it is proposed that a comminution-amorphisation relationship for a powder depends on the rate constants of the respective process that depend on the stress energy distribution during milling and the properties of the material. The underlying causes of the lower rate of amorphisation compared to the rate of comminution were discussed above, i.e. controlled by the total stress energy or the effective stress frequency. Implicit for this discussion is that the same type of collisions and contact events between balls and particles causes both fragmentation and disordering, i.e. the same stress energy distributions provide energy to the particles. It is however possible that different types of collisions and contact events cause fragmentation and amorphisation. The terms collision or stress event denote collectively different types of contact events between balls and particles during ball milling, including impact, rotation and sliding. Fundamentally, these represent the application of compression and shearing forces to the particles. The stress energy transferred to the particles may differ dependent on the type of contact process and one may theoretically differentiate between a stress energy distribution due to compression and a stress energy distribution due to shearing. It seems natural that compression due to impact and rolling is the dominating force application mode causing fracturing and comminution of particles ( A change in BPM ratio may give different stress energy distributions also for the stress events by shearing in a similar way as illustrated in After loading the balls and the powder into the milling jar, the initial milling phase involves the mixing of powder with the balls. This mixing will distribute the powder into sub-populations of particles, i.e. a portion of the powder may adhere to the surface of the balls, another portion to the inner surface of the jar and the remaining portion may exist as a free powder. The particles residing in the milling jar can thus be divided into three sub-populations, a free portion and two adhered portions. Visual examination of the contents of the milling jar after milling confirmed the existence of these three sub-populations of particles. The examination also indicated that the distribution between the sub-populations was affected by milling conditions. In addition, the distribution varied with milling time, indicating a redistribution of particles between the sub-populations during milling. It is earlier shown ( In order to shed further light on the importance of milling condition and the aspect of compression and shearing contact events for the comminution and amorphisation processes, additional milling trials were conducted using balls of different diameter but with the same filling ratio and BPM ratio. It was assumed that a change in ball diameter will affect the stress energy distributions in the milling jar, i.e. for a constant ball filling ratio, a reduction in ball diameter will increase the frequency of stress events ( Irrespective of the ball diameter used, milling over a long period of time (300 and 1200 The question which type of contact event that causes amorphisation may depend on the type of mechanism of disordering that is relevant for a certain powder. Based on earlier spectroscopic analysis is has been suggested that milling of lactose particles gives predominantly a particle consisting of two phases, a crystalline and an amorphous phase, i.e. a type 1 disordering ( The relationship between comminution and amorphisation during powder milling in a ball mill could be described as consisting of two stages, a first stage where comminution dominates the relationship and a second where amorphisation dominates. The two stage relationship is partly caused by the marked difference in rate constants for the comminution and amorphisation processes. The different rate constants are proposed to be controlled by a combination of the properties of the material, i.e. their fragmentation and amorphisation propensity, and the stress energy distribution in the milling jar. The stress energy distribution is regulated by the ball motion pattern that can be affected by a series of process parameters, including the ball-to-powder mass ratio and ball diameter. The process parameters used will thus regulate if milling occurs in stage 1 or will proceed into stage 2. Different types of collisions in a ball mill may give rise to two types of stress energy distributions, i.e. one involving compression stresses caused by impact and rolling, and one involving shearing stresses caused by sliding. It is further hypothesized that for lactose the dominating response to compression stresses is particle fragmentation while the dominating response to shearing stresses is amorphisation by vitrification. The technological implication of such a conception is that if the purpose of the milling is effective comminution without inadvertent amorphisation, a mill characterized by high compression stresses but minute shearing stresses should be selected. If extensive amorphisation in the objective, a mill operating with high shearing stresses should consequently be selected. Recipharm Pharmaceutical Development AB, Solna, Sweden is gratefully acknowledged for funding. The authors sincerely thank Adroit Science AB, Lund, Sweden for performing the particle size measurements with Malvern. The authors wish to thank Lucia Lazorova, Department of Pharmacy, Uppsala University, Sweden, for help with SEM images. The authors are grateful to Prof. Peter Lazor, Department of Earth Sciences, Mineralogy Petrology and Tectonics, Uppsala University, Sweden, for providing the Raman instrument.