The solvent extraction of cadmium(II) from chloride solutions using 1-(2-pyridyl)-tridecane-1-one (2PC12), 1-(2-pyridyl)-pentadecane-1-one (2PC14), 1-(4-pyridyl)-tridecane-1-one (4PC12) and 1-(4-pyridyl)-pentadecane-1-one (4PC14) oximes has been investigated. The influence of extractant concentration, metal concentration, chloride ion concentrations and of various polar and non-polar diluents was studied. The results indicate that only 2-pyridyl ketoximes extract cadmium(II) from chloride solutions as a solvating dimer complex (CdCl2(2PC12 or 14)2) and the extraction depends on the diluent, reagent concentration and chloride ion concentration. Cadmium(II) was effectively extracted using a chloroform and hydrocarbons mixed with decan-1-ol as diluents and stripped from the loaded organic phase with water and ammonia aqueous solutions.Because of the wide application of cadmium in various industrial facilities, simultaneous toxic properties for organisms the removal of cadmium from wastewater has been investigated by many researchers. One of the many methods applied to remove cadmium from chloride, sulfate or phosphate solution is a solvent extraction technology. For the separation of cadmium ions many compounds have been used which belong to acidic, basic or solvating extractants. Organo-phosphorous derivatives can remove cadmium from hydrochloric solutions, e.g. TOPO (   Pyridine-carboxamides were also proposed for the recovery of cadmium(II) from chloride solutions ( Pyridyl aldo and ketoximes were studied as compounds in the chemistry of metal complexes ( The extraction of copper(II) from chloride solution by model hydrophobic pyridyl ketoximes has been studied and the results have shown the impact of the extractant structure (i.e. the position of substituents in the pyridine ring), the type of diluents and the concentration of chloride ions in the aqueous feed on the extraction ( The molar fraction of chloro-complexes of cadmium(II) in aqueous solutions depends both on the chloride ion concentrations and on the ionic strength, as was exemplified by Cadmium(II) obviously forms stronger complexes with chloride ions than with nitrate ions, as described by The results of the synthesis of model hydrophobic extractants and the extraction of cadmium(II) from chloride solutions by synthesised pyridyl ketoximes are presented in this paper. The effect of the position of the oxime groups in the pyridine ring on cadmium(II) extraction from the chloride media and the influence of extraction parameters are discussed. Hydrophobic 2- and 4-alkyl pyridyl ketoximes as individual model extractants were used. Synthesis of 1-(2-pyiridyl)-tridecane-1-one and 1-(4-pyridyl)-tridecane-1-one oximes and their characteristics have been described in previous papers ( The yields of oximes were 70% and 63% for 2PC14 and 4PC14, respectively. Purities of ketones and oximes were 98.9% (LC/MS). IR and NMR (   Extraction was carried out in a test tube at room temperature for 30 at constant water activity a at a Nitrates were selected as they form very weak complexes with cadmium ions (for Cd(NO The concentration of the metal ions in the organic phase was calculated from the difference between the metal ion concentrations in the aqueous phase before and after extraction. The distribution coefficient (D) was taken as the ratio of the cadmium(II) concentrations in the organic phase to the concentration in the aqueous phase after reaching of equilibrium. The solubility of pyridyl ketoximes in different organic diluents (chloroform, toluene, heptane, hexane, isooctane and Exssol 220/230) was studied. 2- and 4-pyridyl ketoximes display good solubility in chloroform. In toluene, 2-pyridyl ketoximes have good solubility, but 4-pyridyl ketoximes display limited solubility. In turn the solubility of pyridyl ketoximes in other diluents (heptane, hexane, isooctane and Exssol 220/230) is limited. The use of 10% (v/v) addition of decan-1-ol increases the solubility of these compounds in isooctane and heptane, but not in Exssol 220/230. Cadmium(II) could be removed only by 1-(2-pyridyl)-tridecane-1-one or 1-(2-pyridyl)-pentadecane-1-one oximes, because 1-(4-pyridyl)-tridecane-1-one and 1-(4-pyridyl)-pentadecane-1-one oximes did not transport complexes with Cd(II) to organic phases. The extraction of cadmium(II) with 2-pyridyl ketoximes in solutions of varying polarity of diluents was also studied ( The extraction of cadmium(II) using 2-pyridyl ketoximes in iso-octane with 10% (v/v) addition of decan-1-ol and in heptane with 10% (v/v) addition of decan-1-ol were the highest (close to 90% and 80%, respectively), but complexes precipitated in the organic phase. Positive results were not observed when modifier was added to hexane and Exssol 220/230. The extraction of cadmium(II) by 2-pyridyl ketoximes in Exssol 220/230 with 10% (v/v) addition of decan-1-ol did not occur and for hexane solutions were about 80%, but complexes also precipitated ( For the further experiments, chloroform and toluene with 10% (v/v) addition of decan-1-ol were used as diluents because in these diluents the complexes did not precipitate and the extraction occurred readily. Extraction studies were carried out at constant water activity (a  The increase of chloride ion concentration affected negatively the extraction by 2-pyridyl ketoximes in toluene with 10% (v/v) addition of decan-1-ol. At chloride ion concentration above 1.0 When the extraction is carried out at constant water activity from chloride/nitrate solutions, at low chloride concentration (< Similar effects were observed for extraction of cadmium(II) from the chloride–perchlorate solutions with an ionic strength of I  The results of the influence of the hydrochloric acid concentration on cadmium(II) extraction from chloride solutions by pyridyl ketoximes show a significant effect in chloroform ( The study of cadmium(II) extraction from solutions with hydrochloric acid, by 4-pyridyl ketoximes was also investigated. The 4-pyridyl ketoxime extractants did not indicate interesting extraction properties in terms of cadmium(II). For example, when 4PC14 in toluene with 10% (v/v) addition of decan-1-ol was used, an emulsion was formed (  The compositions of the extracted species were ascertained from the graph of log D The relationships between the cadmium(II) distribution ratio (D) and the equilibrium 1-(2-pyridyl)-tridecane-1-one and 1-(2-pyridyl)-pentadecane-1-one oximes concentration are presented in Cadmium(II) loading isotherms were obtained from organic solutions which contained a constant concentration of oximes (0.1 The results for loading of cadmium(II) by 1-(2-pyridyl)-pentadecane-1-one oxime approach 0.37 Water and ammonia solutions were tested for the stripping of cadmium(II) from the organic phase. In these experiments cadmium(II) was effectively stripped by all proposed reagents. The stripping by water and ammonia solutions was carried out in a two-stage process. In the first stage, the stripping was close to about 90% and the second stage allowed for the recovery of the rest of the metal (10%) for both diluents. After stripping, both reagents extracted cadmium(II) equally effectively as before stripping. The extraction properties of pyridyl ketoximes depend on the position of the oxime group in the pyridine ring, the aqueous chloride ion concentration and the solvating properties of the diluents. Only the 2-pyridyl ketoximes extracted cadmium(II) from chloride solutions whereas the 4-pyridyl ketoximes did not. The extraction of cadmium(II) was highest using chloroform as diluent and did not depend on the chloride ion concentration. But cadmium(II) extraction using toluene with 10% (v/v) addition of decan-1-ol modifier as diluents, depended on the chloride ion concentration and reached a maximum with 1.0 Plotting the effect of the varying concentrations of 1-(2-pyridyl)-tridecane-1-one and 1-(2-pyridyl)-pentadecane-1-one oximes (0.01–0.1 The work was supported by the