In this work, we propose a new way of measuring the volume fraction of ε martensite in Fe–Mn based alloys. Since the specific volume of ε, depending on alloy composition, is smaller than that of ɣ, volume expansion (VE) takes place on ε → ɣ reverse transformation. The amount of the volume expansion is proportional to the product of specific volume difference times the volume fraction of ε martensite, therefore, the measurement of two former values leads to the volume fraction. Two Fe–Mn based alloys are taken as examples, an Fe–21Mn and an Fe–32Mn–6Si alloys which undergo ɣ → ε on cooling and by cold rolling, respectively. Thus, former alloy has isotropic ε, the latter has anisotropic ε.Fe–Mn based alloys have drawn much attention due to shape memory effect (SME) Thermoelastic martensitic alloys like Ni–Ti undergo the complete transformation when they are cooled below The volume fraction of ε martensite is usually measured by comparing the intensities of ɣ and ε peaks in X-ray diffraction An Fe–21Mn and an Fe–32Mn–6Si alloys were prepared by melting in a magnesia crucible in a vacuum induction furnace. The ingots were homogenized at 1000 Fe–21Mn alloy was subjected to 30% cold rolling before heat treatment at 700–1200 The Fe–32Mn–6Si alloy was cold rolled by 1–15% to change the amount of stress-induced ε martensite which is anisotropic. The length change on heating was measured with a thermo-mechanical analyzer (TMA). The reference samples used were a quartz rod for the Fe–21Mn alloy and 0% cold rolled Fe–32Mn–6Si alloy which has no ε for the Fe–32Mn–6Si to eliminate length change due to thermal expansion, respectively. X-ray diffraction experiment is carried out on a monochrometer-attached diffractometer with radiation from Cu Kα. The specimens for TEM are taken so that transverse direction (TD) is parallel to electron beam direction. Electropolishing is carried out by twin-jet in 10% HClO  Shown in  The Fe–21Mn alloy heated at 1000    One is volume expansion caused by the difference in specific volume between ɣ and ε Both factors act for a large expansion in the ND while in the RD the remarkable contraction is a result of VE and SME with the latter determining the overall behavior for its overriding magnitude. As the degree of cold rolling increases, volume fraction of martensite increases. This should raise the magnitude of both VE and SME contribution which may give rise to more distinctive shape change, a rule obviously followed by increasing the cold rolling rate from 1% up to 3%. With further increase in the cold rolling rate, however, SME deteriorates so that shape change decreases remarkably in both the ND and RD, a fact pointing out the existence of amnesia with excessive deformation which is also observed by other authors Volume change, i.e. the sum of the strain in the directions, with temperature during heating is shown in As shown in  In the stage of rolling up to 3%, the deformation is mainly caused by induced martensite which has a preferred orientation. Thus, the volume fraction of martensite increases almost linearly with the degree of cold rolling. Since there are no dislocations, good recovery is observed as the reversible movement of partial dislocation takes place without hindrance. In the 5% cold rolled alloy, nucleation and growth of martensite with the favorable variant become more difficult, resulting in slip deformation and formation of martensite with another variant. Slip deformation decreases the rate of formation with a higher degree of cold rolling and deteriorates shape memory effect despite the increases in the amount of martensite. Dislocations seem to be responsible for the two-step recovery because no other phase exists in this alloy. It is well known that dislocations increase the reverse transformation temperature, but the reason why it happens in such a distinctive two-step manner is not clear yet.  A new way of measuring the volume fraction of both isotropic and anisotropic ε martensite is proposed in Fe–Mn based alloys. In the Fe–21Mn alloy, as heat treatment increases grain size becomes bigger, resulting in increase in volume fraction of ε martensite. As for the Fe–32Mn–6Si alloy, the volume fraction of martensite induced by cold rolling increases linearly with the degree of rolling in the early stage. The rate of increase, however, is reduced as the degree of rolling increase, which is attributed to slip deformation. Dislocation slip also aggravates recovery and increases reverse transformation temperature.