Purpose:
                  Our aim was to determine the outcome of arthroscopic-assisted reduction with bilateral buttress plate fixation for the treatment of closed complex tibial plateau fractures.
               
                  Type of Study:
                  Case series.
               
                  Methods:
                  18 consecutive patients (12 men, 6 women) with complex tibial plateau fractures were enrolled in this prospective study. All patients underwent arthroscopic-assisted bilateral buttress plate fixation of closed complex tibial plateau fractures. The average age at operation was 35 years (range, 23 to 45 years). The follow-up period ranged from 39 to 69 months, with an average of 48 months. Using the Schatzker classification, there were 11 type V and 7 type VI fractures. The clinical and radiological outcomes were determined according to Rasmussen’s system.
               
                  Results:
                  All of the 18 fractures united. Overall, 4 (22%) patients were rated as excellent, 12 (67%) good, and 2 (11%) fair. Secondary osteoarthritis appeared in 3 injured knees (16.7%). One patient had a wound dehiscence (3 cm long) of the medial incision. Condylar joint surface depression was noted in 3 patients without functional instability. Two patients had valgus alignment between 10° and 15°. Two patients had the paresthesia over the lateral calf. There were no complications directly associated with arthroscopy in any of the 18 patients. No deep vein thrombosis, infection, or knee stiffness was found at final follow-up.
               
                  Conclusions:
                  Arthroscopic-assisted reduction with bilateral buttress plate fixation for complex tibial plateau fractures allows accurate fracture reduction, diagnosis, and treatment of associated intra-articular lesions, and less dissection than open reduction internal fixation.Complex or bicondylar tibial plateau fractures (Schatzker type V and VI) are usually the result of high-energy trauma and are associated with significant soft-tissue injury, bony comminution, and articular incongruity. The advantages of arthroscopic reduction and internal fixation for tibial plateau fractures are that it provides direct visualization of intra-articular fracture, more accurate reduction of the fracture, Between March 1996 and September 1998, there were 95 patients with closed tibial plateau fractures (Schatzker type I to VI) treated in the authors’ hospital. Among these 95 patients, the 18 patients with closed complex tibial plateau fractures were enrolled in this prospective study. All the patients underwent the same treatment protocol of arthroscopic-assisted surgery with bilateral buttress plate fixation for closed complex tibial plateau fractures. Data were gathered prospectively on these 18 (12 men, 6 women) consecutive patients. The average age at operation was 35 years (range, 23 to 45 years). The follow-up period ranged from 39 to 69 months, with an average of 48 months. None of the patients was lost to follow-up in this consecutive case series. Using the Schatzker classification, All 18 patients had significant soft-tissue trauma (swelling, ecchymosis, blistering, or abrasion). A calcaneus traction was first placed to allow the soft tissue time to stabilize. Initial assessment of the neurovascular status of the limb is imperative to rule out compartment syndrome or vascular embarrassment. In each case, preoperative and postoperative articular depression were measured from the anteroposterior nd lateral radiographs using the fibular head as a reference. The amount of articular depression was measured from the opposite remaining articular surface. A line was drawn at the level of the normal articular surface and extended across the depressed area. A measurement was made from this line to the point of maximum depression. This was as reproducible a measurement as that described by Kumar and Whittle The patients were placed supine on the operating table, where they were given general endotracheal anesthesia. A pneumatic tourniquet was applied to the thigh and a leg holder was not used. The anterolateral and anteromedial portals were prepared for arthroscope insertion and instrument introduction alternately. First, arthroscopic inspection of the joint permitted evacuation of hematoma and loose particles, along with probing of the capsuloligamentous structures, and evaluation of associated intra-articular lesions The clinical and radiological scales were recorded according to Rasmussen’s system. A radiographic evaluation, including weight-bearing bipedal and long-leg standing films (standing scanogram for the measurement of tibiofemoral angle) of the both knees, was done preoperatively and at 3 months, 6 months, and 1 year, and thereafter annually. Union was defined as the presence of bridging callus on 2 radiographic views. The mean postoperative Rasmussen score was 26.6 (range, 18–29). Walking, motion, and stability were good or excellent in all cases, and pain and extension were good or excellent in 89% The results of the radiological assessment are shown in Thirteen of 18 patients (72%) in our series had associated intra-articular lesions Cancellous bone grafts and cortical bone struts taken from the iliac crest were used in all of the 18 cases (100%). However, no donor-site morbidity of bone grafting was found. There were no complications directly associated with arthroscopy in any of the 18 patients. One patient (case 18, The objective of treatment of tibial plateau fracture is precise reconstruction of the articular surface, stable fragment fixation allowing early motion, and repair of all concomitant lesions. Traditionally, the methods of treatment for bicondylar fractures, including skeletal traction with cast bracing, Biomechanically, the best method of fixation for bicondylar tibial plateau fractures is dual buttress plates fixation. To assess the bone injury, anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the involved tibia and fibula including the knee, and an anteroposterior radiograph of the opposite knee are obtained to document the normal tibiofemoral angle. CT in anteroposterior and lateral planes produces excellent images from which to make depression and displacement measurements. Radiologically, 16.7% of the 18 knees reviewed showed secondary osteoarthritis on standing films at a mean follow-up of 4 years. This change was mild in the 2 knees and moderate in 1 knee. This is less than the 42% reported by Rasmussen after wire loop fixation at an average follow-up period of 7.3 years, Scheerlinck et al. Corticocancellous bone grafts taken from the iliac crest were used in all of the 18 cases because all the patients had severely depressed bicondylar fractures (range, 10 to 21 mm; average, 14.2 mm) with the resulting large metaphyseal defects below the elevated fragments. Corticocancellous autografts have the properties of osteogenesis, osteoconductive and osteoinductive, to achieve rapid bone healing. In structural terms, these occupy an intermediate position and combine the favorable properties of cancellous bone with the mechanical firmness afforded by the cortical layer. Although there are warnings as to the theoretical danger of compartment syndrome complicating arthroscopy for tibial plateau fracture, there is only 1 case report of compartment syndrome of the leg after arthroscopic examination of a tibial plateau fracture. Complex tibial plateau fracture is fraught with difficulty in that the articular surface and supporting metaphysis of a major weight-bearing joint are involved.