The orthogonal array design has been used to determine the optimum conditions for the cementation of cadmium from a synthetic zinc sulfate solution and hence to achieve the highest cementation efficiency and the best robustness of the quantitation from the least number of trials in a laboratory scale. Cementation was performed using zinc powder. The orthogonal array L9 (34) that comprises four parameters at three levels was chosen. The parameters and their levels were as: zinc powder quantity (Z): 1, 1.2 and 1.5 times of stoichiometric quantity of cadmium; time (t): 4, 8 and 12min; temperature (T): 25, 35 and 45°C and zinc powder particle size distribution (R): nos. 1–3. The ultimate optimum cementation conditions were found to be Z
                     1 (equal to stoichiometric quantity of cadmium), T
                     1 (25°C), R
                     3 (no. 3) and t
                     1 (4min). Under these conditions, cementation percentages for cadmium and nickel were 95.83% and 6.63%, respectively.In the cementation process, the electromotive force series are used to selectively cement out the more electronegative element using electropositive element, thus the cadmium and copper are removed from the solution with use of zinc metal in sulfate solution. Precipitating impurities such as copper, nickel or cobalt with zinc powder occurs according to the reaction given below In non-SX methods for the recovery of cadmium, it is recovered generally by adding zinc powder and purification of spongy cadmium is carried out by melting or releaching followed by EW. For example, the raw material for cadmium production in “Zorka-Sabac” electrolytic zinc and cadmium plant is a zinc sulfate solution purification cake from a zinc calcine leaching plant. Purification of the zinc sulfate solution is done by zinc powder, whereby the metals that are electrically more positive than zinc fell as cement cakes. The average composition of that cake is as follows: Zn Depending on the source of zinc concentrate, this composition may vary. For example, the average composition of such a filtercake in Iranian zinc plants is as follows: Zn Obtaining cadmium from zinc sulfate purification cake from zinc calcine leaching plant consists of a few operations Copper and lead present in the cake are not dissolved and are separated by filtration. Cadmium in sponge form is precipitated from cadmium solution by zinc powder: Then, the spongy cadmium is leached by sulfuric acid and cathodic cadmium is attained by EW In some filtercakes, namely a great deal of them in Iran, the main associating metal in the cadmium cement is nickel, which dissolves during the leaching of the filtercake. The problem is just here, because the nickel is also cemented to some extent during the process for precipitating cadmium, therefore the attained sponge is not pure enough to be treated via releaching and EW or melting and refining. This is the main deficiency of this method, which has been resulted in some limitations in some plants. However, this is not problematic when the main associating metal is copper, because it can be easily removed from the solution to an acceptable level, since it is the most precious metal present in the cement ( The aim of the present study is to determine the optimum working conditions which provided maximum cementation for cadmium and minimum cementation for nickel from a synthetic leach liquor with zinc powder by using the Taguchi method and then adjusting the experimental conditions such as zinc powder quantity, time, temperature and zinc powder particle size distribution, so that the least content of nickel is cemented. Experiments were carried out in a glass beaker of 2 A synthetic leach solution was prepared using sulfates of zinc, cadmium and nickel (Merck grades), to make a solution similar to the solution obtaining from the leaching of the Cd–Ni purification filtercake at optimum conditions. The chemical composition of the solution used in the experiments is given in An industrial grade zinc powder (99.7% purity) was used for cementation. In order to determine the effects of different particle size distributions on the efficiency of cementation, 500 Taguchi method recommends the use of the loss function to measure the performance characteristics deviating from the desired value Regardless of the category of the performance characteristics, the larger S/N ratio corresponds to the better performance characteristic. Therefore, the optimal level of the process parameters is the level with the highest S/N ratio. Orthogonal array (OA), L  The order of the experiments was obtained by inserting parameters into columns of OA, L The two performance characteristics were evaluated using the following equations: The lower, the better: The higher, the better: In Taguchi method the experiment corresponding to optimum working conditions might not have been done during the whole period of the experimental stage. In such cases the performance value corresponding to optimum working conditions can be predicted by utilizing the following equation The confidence interval at chosen error level may be calculated by Using of the S/N ratio of the results, instead of the average values, introduces some minor changes in the analysis as follows: Degrees of freedom of the entire experiments are reduced: DOF with S/N ratio S/N ratio must be converted back into meaningful terms When the S/N ratio is used, the results of the analysis such as estimated performance from the main effects or confidence intervals are expressed in terms of S/N. To express the analysis in terms of experimental results, the ratio must be converted back into the original units of measurements Experimental parameters and their levels were determined by preliminary tests. The preliminary tests were carried out in the pH range of 1–4.5. Since the effect of pH on cementation of cadmium was not significant, cemented nickel increased with increasing pH. Furthermore, pH was not a controllable factor during experiments. For these reasons, the pH was not taken into consideration as a parameter. Indeed, pH was a noise factor. Noise factors are those parameters which are either uncontrollable or are too expensive to control such as variation of environmental operating conditions. Noise factors may have a negative impact on system performance or may not. So according to the literature and our preliminary tests, an initial pH of 2 was selected in all experiments. The effect of stirring speed on the cementation efficiency was evaluated in preliminary tests as well and 50, 100, 150 and 200 Based on our previous experience in related works and those experimental conditions reported by other researchers for the cementation of cadmium: (a) zinc powder quantity, (b) time, (c) temperature and (d) zinc powder size distribution were chosen as the four factors to be investigated and three levels are the exclusory set for each of our four factors. Low, medium and high levels of the factors are given in The three-level L As seen, entry no. 8 tops all the other eight entries with regard to the cementation of cadmium. Also, entry no. 1 have minimum values between all the other eight entries with regard to the cementation of nickel, therefore leading to selection of entry nos. 8 and 1 level as optimal conditions. This manner of selection of optimal conditions and hence the achievement of optimum recovery has been also justified by preliminary processes. The data obtained from the experiments may now be analyzed. Taguchi recommends analyzing the mean response for each run and also suggests analyzing variation using an appropriately chosen signal-to-noise ratio (S/N). In these experiments the system is optimized when the response is as large as possible for cadmium, so we deal with the S/N The Taguchi method uses graphs of the marginal means of each factor, as shown in In But for the nickel the situation is absolutely different. In According to these figures, increasing of temperature and zinc powder quantity decrease the S/N Taguchi oriented practitioners often use analysis of variance (ANOVA) to determine the factors that influence the average response and the factors that influence the signal-to-noise ratio. Statistical analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed to see whether the process parameters are statistically significant. The Finally, using these findings and modeling significant effects by the Taguchi method, results for all combination of levels could be predicted. Then these predictions should be confirmed by some experiments. The confidence intervals for 5% risk are 1.28 and 1.46 for cadmium and nickel, respectively. So with spending less time and cost, acceptable results can be derived.  Under economical considerations, it is desired that the added amount of zinc powder be kept low. The results showed that maximum cadmium and minimum nickel content occurred in the conditions: The effect of operating conditions such as zinc powder quantity ( Based on the present work the following points may be highlighted: The most effective parameter for maximum cementation of cadmium and minimum cementation of nickel is found to be zinc powder quantity. The effect of temperature on cementation of the cadmium was more significant, but not stirring speed (observed in preliminary tests), suggesting that the cementation of the cadmium from the sulfate solution is most likely controlled by chemical reaction. Increasing the temperature decreases cementation of cadmium as a consequence of redissolution of cadmium cemented. However, this effect is different for nickel and cementation of nickel increases with increasing the temperature. According to these data, more selective cementation condition was obtained at a low reaction temperature and time. Thus, it should be noted that the cementation percentages given in The authors express sincere thanks to Mr. Ali Ghanbari, Managing Director of Iranian Zinc Mines Development Company, Zanjan, for his encouragements, interest and ideas during the project and to colleagues for their invaluable proposals.