This study evaluates the influence that modification and refinement have on the mechanical properties of the eutectic Al–Si alloy and on the quantitative and qualitative correlations with the microstructure. A general improvement in the mechanical properties of the alloys was observed after the additions. The best mechanical values were obtained when both Ti and Sr were present, in particular for the experimental composition with the higher Ti/Sr ratio. The results also indicate the development of a ductility trough for the alloy with lower Ti/Sr ratio, indicating a poisoning effect of Ti over Sr.Binary eutectic aluminum–silicon alloys exhibit excellent castability and corrosion resistance These alloys are classified as extremely light materials with low ductility and low yield stress (YS In adequately modified structures, the eutectic silicon with an acicular morphology is converted into thin fibers Grain refinement of the α-Al phase in Al–Si alloys by means of the addition of elements such as Ti and/or B leads to a marked increase in the mechanical properties of these alloys. The yield stress and toughness are increased, and the development of a uniform distribution of the secondary phases in the microstructure is favored The tensile properties of cast Al–Si components also depend on processing variables that are interrelated, such as the rate of solidification, dissolved gases and subsequent level of porosity, alloying elements, etc. When determining the effect of modification with Sr, all these variables must be controlled The present study describes the results obtained after the tensile testing of specimens of a commercial Al–12Si alloy to which varying amounts of Ti and/or Sr had been added. The industrial processing route and the sample-taking method that served to provide the starting material to be characterized are shown in After the aforementioned manufacturing process, two test samples were cast in metallic molds for each compositional design. The molds were made of gray cast iron and were preheated to 340 °C prior to pouring the molten metal. After the solidification process was concluded, cylindrically shaped ingots were extracted from the mold. Standard round tensile specimens of diameter 9 mm, length 62 mm, and gauge length 50 mm were machined from the ingots (per ASTM B557-02 (M-84) standard test methods of tensile testing of wrought and cast aluminum and magnesium alloy products). The machining process also aimed for an optimum surface finish (see Tensile tests were carried out in accordance with ASTM B557-02 standard using an INSTRON universal testing machine equipped with a 10-kN load cell. The tests involved a constant crosshead speed of 6 mm/minute, with a 50 mm length calibrated extensometer attached to the specimen. The YS (at 0.2% offset strain), UTS and % Samples of each experimental composition were extracted for metallographic inspection. These were prepared by conventional mechanical means and were etched with an aqueous solution of 0.5% HF in order to reveal the phases present in their microstructures. The observation was conducted using a Nikon Epiphot light optical microscope connected to a KAPPA ImageBase image analyzer.  The mechanical properties determined for all five experimental compositions are somewhat similar to that of the 413.0 grade, showing better ductility at the expense of a low yield (proof) stress and tensile strength. It can be seen that the addition of 0.03 wt.% Ti led to a general improvement in the mechanical properties of the alloy, in that the YS at a 0.2% offset strain, the UTS and the % The microstructures of the five compositional designs are presented at two magnifications in The microstructure of the Al–12Si alloys falls in the category of the two-phase aggregate structured type. The continuous phase in the commercial alloy is the eutectic which displays a lamellar habit of alternating Si and α-Al platelets ( When discussing the interaction between the mechanical properties and the microstructure, many factors must be considered for a complete understanding of the strengthening mechanisms and the mechanical response observed after tensile testing. Each of them has a specific effect on the overall properties, but some general factors correlating the microstructure with the mechanical properties require consideration in the interpretation of the results: The softer ductile phase is the α-Al. It is present as a primary constituent and also forms part of the eutectic in all the compositions studied. Si is the harder constituent. It is present in the microstructure as primary cuboids and also in the eutectic, the size and volume fraction of which are presented in Because α-Al is the softer phase and Si the harder and less ductile one, stresses cause anisotropic distribution of the plastic deformation, which is greater in the softer phase. The local plastic constraint in the softer phase leads to a rapid strengthening of the alloy, with dislocations piling up at the α-Al/Si interfaces. This in-service scenario can lead to the formation of cleavage microcracks at these ductile–brittle sites. The bonding energy between Si and α-Al is very low and, therefore, no precipitation hardening effect in the α-Al phase by the harder silicon particles should be expected. This low value encountered for the interfacial energy also favors the growth of cracks, which progress easily along a path between the hard and the soft phases. The acicular morphology of the Si platelets in the eutectic (see The modification of the alloy structure through the addition of Sr leads to the elimination of Si cuboids and the development of a granular eutectic structure (see The modification of Al–12Si by Sr also accomplishes the development of more diluted eutectics (see On adding Ti and Sr simultaneously at the higher Ti/Sr ratio studied, the eutectic constituent loses part of its continuity in favor of the α-Al phase, which occasionally develops in a necklace-type fashion ( Based on the above-mentioned factors, the following relationships between the microstructure and the mechanical properties of the different alloys studied can be explained: The refinement of the commercial alloy with 0.03 wt.% Ti increases the flow stress, tensile strength and total ductility of the alloy (see On adding 0.04 wt.% Sr, all the measured tensile properties improve with respect to the Al–12Si commercial alloy ( The addition of 0.03 wt.% Ti and 0.05 wt.% Sr enhances the favorable effects of both elements in the microstructure and thus leads to a general improvement of the tensile properties when compared to the Al–12Si commercial alloy. The data in When the Al–12Si alloy has 0.05 wt.% Ti and 0.05 wt.% Sr added, the tensile properties are optimized with respect to all former alloy conditions. The quality index is the highest among all (see The following conclusions may be drawn from the present study as regards mechanical properties and their correlation with microstructure: Additions of Ti or Sr in the percentages studied to the Al–12Si commercial alloy improve the 0.2% yield stress. A similar improvement is observed when both elements are added, with optimum results being obtained for the alloy with the higher Ti/Sr ratio. The UTS is increased by the addition of Ti or Sr. The total elongation is increased both by refining with Ti as well as by modification with Sr. When added in conjunction, the highest values correspond to the alloy with the higher Ti/Sr ratio. However, a ductility trough is observed for the alloy with lower Ti/Sr ratio, indicating that the addition of Ti at this level has a negative effect the ductility of the alloy modified by Sr alone. A general improvement in mechanical properties is observed when the additions are evaluated by means of the The authors wish to express their thanks to Dr. Juan Jose del Campo, Professor of Materials Science at The University of Oviedo, and former manager of the Thyssen-Krupp Guss foundry for his help in designing the chemical compositions at a full-size scale, and for having granted the access to all the existing facilities at the foundry labs and elsewhere in the factory. We likewise wish to express our gratitude to the Vice-Rectorate for Research of The University of Oviedo for economic support and for editing in English the first draft of this paper.