The paper presents a new static method for separating metallic particles (2–3 mm) from metal–plastic mixtures. The method makes use of the force which acts on a conductive particle when this is situated in the magnetic field of a coil run by the discharging current of a capacitor. This effect is studied both theoretically and experimentally. In the final part of the paper, the installation and a number of experimental results (R=R(G), R-recovery, G-grade) are presented.We shall study the interaction between an alternating magnetic field of decreasing amplitude along a conductive loop in the particular case of axial symmetry, having the The magnetic field is produced by a coil by the discharging through it of a capacitor charged previously at high voltage. The produced magnetic induction is given by ( The interaction force between the magnetic field and the loop is The axial symmetry requires that the direction of this force should coincide with the symmetry axis We specify that the cause which explains the nature of the force which is exerted upon the conductive particles in the non-uniform magnetic field of the coil is the same as the one shown in the simplified case of the conductive loop previously presented. We have to point out the fact that the force exerted upon the particles (along the loop, respectively) occurs only when the particles are situated in a magnetic field with a gradient. The device uses a flat rectangular coil ( One can see that in To increase the productivity of the device, four such slanting surfaces (  The recovery of the particles from the mixture can reach high value (∼90%) as can be seen in Our results confirm that the new method for separating of the metallic particles from a mixture containing metallic and dielectric particles, is very efficient, the grade and recovery being very close to 100%. It is also possible to separate both ferro and non-ferro magnetic particles from dielectrics. At the same time, the new device presents many advantages in comparison with the separators having moving parts, as with the drum E.C. separators.