In the present work, thermal behavior of Al86Ni8Y6 and Al86Ni6Y4.5Co2La1.5 as-cast amorphous ribbons, corresponding milled ribbon particles and spark plasma sintered samples has been studied. Activation energies of crystallization at all transition temperatures of the samples were determined by Kissinger, Ozawa and Augis-Bennett equations. The first stage of crystallization for both the as-cast ribbons, related to formation of nanocrystalline FCC Al disappeared completely in case of the milled ribbon particles and consolidated samples. In comparison to as-cast ribbons, the onset of second stage crystallization with corresponding activation energies shifted to lower values in the milled ribbon particles; whereas the onset and peak temperatures of third stage crystallization and related activation energies shifted to higher values. Formation of higher amount of crystalline phases during sintering led to decrease in all transition temperatures and corresponding activation energies of bulk samples compared to that of the milled ribbon particles.Aluminum based bulk metallic glasses (BMGs) have drawn significant attention, attributed to more than twice specific strength in comparison to its crystalline counterparts, which make this class of materials viable for aerospace and automobile applications [ In recent time, higher dimension (10 mm diameter and 3−4 mm thickness) Al-based amorphous alloys have been synthesized by consolidating amorphous powders via spark plasma sintering (SPS) technique [ Thermal stability of amorphous materials can be studied by evaluating activation energy which acts as a thermodynamic barrier to crystallization [ In this research work, two different Al-based compositions with three and five components, respectively (Al Master alloys of compositions Al Phase evolution in the as-cast ribbons, milled ribbon particles and consolidated samples was studied by X-ray diffraction (Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer, Germany) using CuK     The transition temperatures of the present melt spun ribbons are lower than that of fully amorphous ribbons of the two present compositions, synthesized by Yang et al. and Guo et al. [ It can be observed that there is no strict relation between the transition temperatures with respect to composition of the two as-cast ribbons. The onset crystallization temperature    The activation energies related to the first two stages are more important compared to that of third stage of crystallization ( In case of Al  It can also be observed that the activation energies required for the last stage of crystallization ( In case of both the sintered bulk samples, it was observed that the activation energies of crystallization at all transition temperatures decreased compared to that of the corresponding milled ribbon particles. The decrease in the activation energy values compared to the milled ribbon particles can be attributed to the formation of higher amount of various complex crystalline phases during sintering. The crystalline phases acted as nucleation sites and promoted the devitrification of residual amorphous phases, which led to decrease in activation energy. The Ozawa and Augis-Bennett plots of the milled ribbon particles and consolidated samples and the activation energies estimated from these plots at each transition temperature are provided in the supplementary data. It can be observed that the values obtained followed the same trend as that obtained by Kissinger equation. Summarily, the thermal behavior of as-cast ribbons, milled ribbon particles and SPS consolidated bulk samples of two Al-based amorphous compositions (Al The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The author, T. Laha thankfully acknowledges the financial support obtained from the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: