Experiments to prepare activated carbon by microwave heating indicated that microwave energy can decrease reaction temperature, save the energy and shorten processing time remarkably compared to conventional heating, owing to its internal and volumetric heating effects. The above results were based on the laboratory-scale experiments. It is desirable to develop a pilot-scale microwave heating equipment and investigate the parameters with the aim of technological industrialization. In the present study, the components and features of the self-invented equipment were introduced. The temperature rise curves of the chars were obtained. Iodine numbers of the activated carbons all exceed the state standard of China under the following conditions: 25kg/h charging rate, 0.42rev/min turning rate of ceramic tube, flow rate of steam at pressure of 0.01MPa and 40kW microwave heating power after 60kW pre-activation for 30min. Pore structure of the sample obtained at a time point of 46h, which contained BET surface area, and pore size distributions of micropores and total pores, was tested by nitrogen adsorption at 77K.Activated carbons are widely used in many industrial fields including medical treatment, energy storage, and water purification and also in the military field owing to their large surface area, controllable pore structure, thermostability and low acid/base reactivity. It is well known that activated carbons can be prepared from a large variety of raw materials with high carbon content and low levels of inorganic compounds. Various carbonaceous materials such as coal, lignite, nutshells, wood, and peat are used in the production of commercial activated carbon. However, abundance and availability of agricultural by-products make them good sources of raw materials for activated carbons. Harvesting and processing of various agricultural crops result in considerable quantities of agricultural by-products. Such agricultural by-products are usually inexpensive, and their effective utilization is a desired outcome. Many research studies have been performed to prepare activated carbons from agricultural by-products such as sugarcane bagasse and nutshells ( However, in some cases, the thermal process may take several hours, even up to a week to reach the desired level of activation with the conventional heating systems so that the process incurs extra processing costs. Another problem lies in the furnace such that the surface heating from the hearth wall does not ensure a uniform temperature for different shapes and sizes of samples. This generates a thermal gradient from the hot surface of the sample particle to its interior and impedes the effective removal of gaseous products to its surroundings, thereby resulting in a detrimental effect on the quality of the activated carbons prepared. Microwaves are now being used in various technological and scientific fields in order to heat dielectric materials. The main advantage of using microwave heating is that the treatment time can be considerably reduced, which in many cases represents a reduction in the energy consumption as well. In addition, the consumption of gases used in the treatment can also be reduced. Microwave-induced chemical reactions can be used to solve the above problems associated with conventional surface heating because microwave heating is both internal and volumetric heating ( In this study, we invented a pilot-scale microwave heating apparatus for the preparation of activated carbons from coconut shell chars with saturated steam activation. The components and features of the equipment are described. The temperature rise curves of the chars and in the presence of steam in a microwave field were investigated. The iodine number of the activated carbons varying with activation time was researched. Coconut shells used as raw materials to produce activated carbon in this study were obtained from Vietnam. The starting materials were manually chosen, cleaned with deionized water, dried at 110 A microwave system typically consists of a generator to produce the microwaves, a waveguide to transport the microwaves, an applicator (usually a cavity) to manipulate microwaves for a specific purpose, and a control system (tuning, temperature, power, etc.). A schematic diagram of the pilot-scale microwave heating equipment is shown in Microwave can be generated by either thermionic devices such as magnetron, klystron, back wave tube (BWT), and gyrotron; or solid-state devices such as microwave transistors and diodes. Among these generators the magnetron is most widely used for the industrial applications due to their availability and low cost. The main components of the magnetron include filament, inside cylindrical cathode, outside tubular anode, magnet, exit passage, antenna, vane, and strip ring. Power conversion and control are realized by power regulator. The main components in the power regulator are power switches. The first component is the power unit where microwaves are generated at the required frequency band. Magnetron tubes are used to generate microwave power. The energy is coupled into the applicator (cavity) through a slot, an array of resonant slots, where the material is subjected to intense microwave fields, and to which any additional ancillary process equipment such as pumps for operation under moderate vacuum conditions, steam or hot air injection, must be connected. The power supply for the microwave heating equipment was made of 60 magnetrons at 2.45 Raw materials were charged into a special ceramic tube inclining in the reactor cavity by a screw feeder, and those products were discharged by turning of the tube. The rate of charge varying from 0 to 70 Steam was introduced into a stainless steel pipe at the bottom of the ceramic tube and distributed through many proportionally spacing holes, which can uniformly activate raw materials. The flow rate of steam was controlled by adjusting the pressure of the steam between 0 and 0.3 The temperature measurement system consisted of a temperature indicator and thermocouple fixed in middle of the stainless steel pipe. The thermocouple provides feedback information to the control panel that controls the power to the magnetron. The input power of the microwave, rate of charging and discharging, flow rate of steam and the atmosphere were controlled by a control system, which is an on-line automatic control system. Coconut shells were loaded on a ceramics boat, which was placed inside a stainless steel tubular reactor. The coconut shells were heated up to a carbonization temperature of 723 Coconut shell chars were placed into the ceramic tube by turning the screw and ceramic tube. The charging and discharging processes were stopped when the tube held 100 Characterization of the carbons produced included adsorption properties and pore structures. The test method of the iodine number of the activated carbons was according to GB/T12496.8-1999 (testing standard of activated carbon of China). The N According to the interaction with microwave, materials can be categorized into three principal groups: transparent which are low loss materials, where microwaves pass through without any losses; conductors where microwaves are reflected and cannot penetrate; and absorbing which are high loss materials, where microwaves are absorbed depending on the value of the dielectric loss factor. We investigated the relationship between temperature and microwave heating time in order to know if the coconut shell chars can be heated by microwave heating. The temperature rise curve of coconut shell chars in microwave heating fields is illustrated in After steam activation for 30 In conclusion, preparing activated carbon from coconut shell chars with steam activation in pilot-scale microwave heating equipment proved feasible. The optimum conditions were obtained as follows: 25 The activated carbon sample obtained at a time point of 46 The N The isotherm indicated that the sample was of mesoporous structure which contained plenty of mesopores, micropores and few macropores. The pore size distribution was broad. The change in slope at the point Analysis of the nitrogen adsorption isotherm results yielded a BET surface area and total pore volume of the carbon of 891 According to the IUPAC definitions, adsorbent pores are classified into three groups: micropore (size The micropore size distribution for the activated carbon according to the Horvath–Kawazoe method (1983) is shown in The PSD obtained by DFT analysis of the nitrogen adsorption isotherm is shown in Four merits of the pilot-scale microwave heating equipment are as follows: It has preferable thermal efficiency because heating is based on the interior heating and selective heating caused by microwave heating that assures a high heating rate. Consequently, it can shorten the time and improve the performances of the object product. The ceramic tube is a sort of special reactor tube used in microwave fields. It has many advantages, including high resistance to elevated temperatures and thermal shock, transparency to microwave radiation for good penetration and a large diameter. Furthermore, the ceramic tube remains stable during the process of preparing activated carbons and is suitable for a pilot-scale processing of microwave heating. The cost of a ceramic tube is half that of a quartz glass tube of the same diameter. For the purposes of cost reduction, a power supply adapted to the complex mode of 60 low power magnetrons was designed instead of using expensive large power magnetrons. The pilot-scale equipment can be continually charged and discharged in a high temperature, controlled reaction atmosphere with variable microwave power without microwave radiation leakage. Moreover, by optimizing operating parameters, activated carbons that high adsorption capacity and quality were produced at lower cost. This study confirmed that preparation of activated carbon from coconut shell chars in the pilot-scale microwave heating equipment was feasible. The advantages of microwave heating as a thermal resource for manufacturing activated carbon were demonstrated in pilot-scale equipment. Experimental results showed that microwave heating could shorten processing time remarkably, and could achieve a high-quality product presumably due to its interior and volumetric heating. The support of Key Project of Yunnan Province (Grant No: 2002NG19) and the Teaching & Research Award Program for Outstanding Young Teachers in Higher Education Institutions of MOE are gratefully acknowledged.