We describe artificial neural networks used to predict the velocity and frequency of ground vibrations caused by blasting in an open-pit mine. The aim was to predict peak particle velocity and frequency of ground vibrations from information on the physical and mechanical properties of the rock mass, the characteristics of the explosive and blasting design. Some the parameters that could possibly have a bearing on the prediction were considered. A distinction was drawn between two kinds of parameters: those defining the surroundings in which the wave is propagated (rock type, rock mass, distance to be covered by the wave and significant subsoil discontinuities) and those defining the energy of the wave (the kind of explosive, explosive charge and blasting geometry and sequence).
                  Vibrations were monitored using seismographs capable of capturing vibration data and transforming them into acceleration and frequency terms. To validate this methodology, the predictions obtained were compared with those obtained using conventional statistical methods. The correlation coefficients obtained for our methodology was 0.98 for peak particle velocity and 0.95 for frequency, compared to 0.50 and 0.15, respectively, for Multiple Linear Regression.The growth in open-pit mining, motivated by a growing demand for minerals (especially aggregates, fuel and ornamental stone), has led to a considerable increase in the use of explosives for blasting purposes. Explosives are an efficient source of energy for breaking up and excavating rock. An explosive detonated inside a blasthole immediately releases a massive amount of energy in the form of pressure and temperature. Although there have been important advances in explosive technology Ground vibration is an undulating movement propagated from the detonation point, similar to the ripple effect produced by a stone thrown into a pond. The shock wave passing through structures located on the ground surface transmits vibration to these structures that makes them resonate if the vibration frequency of the terrain coincides with the natural frequency of the structure. Consequently, the amplitude of the vibration may grow to become larger than the inducing vibration Frequency ( Artificial neural networks (ANN) is a branch of science that has developed rapidly since the 1980s and which is nowadays used to provide insights into complex problems Given their multidisciplinary nature, ANNs are widely used by researchers, designers, planners, etc. and are being successfully used in many sectors of industry and research The study zone is located close to the town of Langreo, near the city of Oviedo in northern Spain, in a quarry operated by the Bahoto Mining Company. The mine is accessed from kilometre 9 of the AS-243 (Oviedo–Frieres) road. Bahoto quarry is over a limestone mountain in the Valdeteja formation. The carboniferous materials are the most important in the area. They include the Olloniego and Naranco carboniferous formations and the mountain limestone formation. This consists of a massive series, some 2500 to 3000 This carboniferous sequence, characterized by detrital-slate monotone sequences of thicknesses of up to about 1200 This series is composed of the Barcaliente and Valdeteja formations. The Barcaliente formation, up to 500 Within the Silurian materials, the Furada sandstone formation located northwest of the mine is of note because of its proximity to the quarry. This mainly detrital formation is formed by the superimposition of layers of quartzite and sandstone. Dolomites also feature in the area, although this lithology is not characteristic of the formation. The materials in the area are affected by two deformation stages, originating various structures in relation to the Variscan orogeny. The structure of the Palaeozoic materials is determined by a series of thrusts and folds. The thrust laminates are perhaps the most remarkable of the cartographic structures, with a ladder geometry, large platforms and small ramps and significantly thick sediment overlays. Northwest of the study zone is the Aramo thrust, which branches off east of the concession. The thrust front, which runs NE–SW, consists of Silurian materials that overlay the carboniferous materials and especially the Barcaliente formation. The same thrust, which maintains an E–W orientation north of the quarry, brings the Barcaliente and Naranco formations into contact. Southeast of the concession area is the Veguín thrust, running NW–SE, which forces the thrust consisting of the Valdeteja formation to overlay the materials of the upper carboniferous Olloniego formation. These broadly include the Veguín synform, containing in its core the slate of the Naranco carboniferous formation, flanked by the Barcaliente formation to the north and Valdeteja formation to the south. The Barcaliente formation, as it progresses N–S, contains a sequence of folding synform-antiform folds with axial traces parallel to the thrusts. The Nalón river forms an alluvial plain with remarkably thick deposits playing an important role in the hydrogeological and aquifer underflow. Although this type of plain has potential for subterranean water extraction, it typically has a fairly low storage coefficient. Besides the river, smaller streams and surface springs in the area indicate the piezometric level in the area. Running near the quarry are the Ricao, close to the quarry entrance by the pilot mine, and the Figarona. During the Quaternary, important karst processes occurred that affected the coal formations and especially the mountain limestone. These modelling phenomena have resulted in a morphology characteristic of fields of sinkholes and blind valleys. All this, coupled with high rainfall, makes for optimal conditions for the formation of caves through which water circulates. Our aim was to study how the vibrations transmitted by blasting in an open-pit mine were transmitted in different directions, so as to determine, in turn, how the vibrations affected the different structures located in the quarry, immediately outside the quarry limits and in nearby villages. We selected four zones, depicted in This location, which consists of abandoned workings constructed in cement and steel, enabled study of wave transmission in the southerly direction. This location, consisting of the Bahoto company premises, enabled study of directions towards the villages of Alperi and El Castiellu. This was the location of an accelerograph on one of the highest points in the quarry zone. Covering the direction towards the village of El Llamargu, it is at a relatively short distance from the quarry zone where the tests were performed. This is the location of a pilot project for underground limestone mining using the room-and-pillar method. It covers the direction towards the village of La Braña. Detected in the northeastern corner of the study zone was a fairly large fault filled with clay that was likely to affect the transmission of vibration waves. Vibrations were monitored using specially constructed seismographs which captured vibrations and represented them in terms of velocity (or acceleration) and frequency. There is no consensus regarding the most accurate and appropriate type of vibration measuring equipment to use, especially for vibrations measured in structures, which are the result of interaction between the blast and the structure. In this research we used an Etna Strong Motion Accelerograph based on Kinemetrics’ Altus technology: triaxial stations with a high dynamic range and an internal memory to store data. To ensure correct data capture for the vibrations it is recommended to follow the guidelines of the International Society of Explosive Engineers (ISEE) The sensor should be placed on or in the ground on the side of the structure (i.e., the element to be protected) towards the blast. Sensor placement should ensure that the data obtained adequately represent the ground-borne vibration levels received at the structure to be protected. The longitudinal channel should point directly at the blast and the direction should be recorded (azimuth). If the acceleration experienced in the ground as a consequence of vibration exceeds 0.2 times gravity, the sensor may be decoupled. Depending on the anticipated acceleration levels, fixing the seismograph to the ground may be appropriate. For our research, we bolted the sensors to the ground as they were located on rocky surfaces and cement. Initially it was planned to leave the different devices permanently installed in their locations; however, to avoid electrical, weather and security problems, it was decided to only install them during the testing period. The accelerographs were thus installed for each test and removed once data capture was complete. For each test, it was ensured that the reference axes for each measuring device were pointing in the same direction. For convenience sake, the The nature and intensity of the vibrations and the induced frequency in the blasting terrain depend on many factors One group defines the characteristics of the surroundings. (a) The type of rock and rock mass (rock mass rating, RMR), as each terrain has a dominant transmission velocity and frequency that favours wave propagation for that frequency The second group of factors defines wave energy and are related to its source, in this case, blasting. (a) The type of explosive All of these parameters are interdependent, so if one parameter changes, all the others will also change. The input parameters considered initially were the following. First, RMR, which uses six parameters to classify a rock mass: uniaxial compressive strength of rock material, Rock Quality Designation (RQD), Spacing of discontinuities, condition of discontinuities, groundwater conditions, and orientation of discontinuities. Other parameters include relative arrangement of the blast and the control point, distance between the blast and control point, blasthole diameter, blasthole length, spacing between blastholes, burden, instantaneous charge, total charge, number of blastholes, and explosive detonation velocity. In defining the output parameters of most interest for the ANN, vibration control parameters as established by international standards should be taken into account. These include peak velocity, understood as the maximum modulus of the vector corresponding to particle velocity, and dominant ground frequency.  A neural network can be considered as an intelligent cube with the capacity to predict output behaviour when it recognizes input behaviour. It is trained by processing a large number of input behaviour patterns and shows the output behaviour patterns for each. Following suitable training, when presented with a new input model the neural network is capable of recognizing similar behaviours; the result is a prediction of outputs. Neural networks are capable of recognizing similarities in inputs even when a particular input may never previously have been introduced. This property equips it with an excellent interpretative capacity, especially when the input data contain noise (i.e., they are not exact). Neural networks can be used as a direct substitute for autocorrelation, multivariable regression, linear regression, non-linear regression and other statistical analysis techniques. When data are analysed using a neural network it is possible to predict important behaviours that may not detected by experts. In other words, the neural network acts as an expert. A particular neural network can be defined using three fundamental components: the activation function, the network architecture and the learning law. The definition of these components depends on the type of problem to be resolved For the predictive analysis of vibrations in the Bahoto quarry, we used a feedforward backpropagation (FFBP) network as the most suitable model for resolving an identification problem. Generating a solution is a problem of successively generating input/output relationships until an optimum is found. In engineering it is customary to use only one hidden layer for this type of network (FFBP). The number of neurons in the hidden layer, Bearing in mind the aim of the project, we designed a network to predict two outputs ( It was necessary to conduct fieldwork in the Bahoto quarry to pre-select the parameters. This research is described below. Detonated in each test were five isolated blastholes, each with a different charge of approximately 15 In each test, five blastholes were perforated and loaded with 25 The tests were the same as the previous tests, except that 15 rather than 5 blastholes were detonated. Four tests were performed, involving the detonation of 60 blastholes and the perforation of 1800 Selected following these tests were eleven input parameters, whose description, measurement units, variation ranges and means are summarized in ANNs need to be trained before they interpret information. Of the many neural network training algorithms available, the most versatile and robust algorithm is the FFBP algorithm, which is especially effective for networks with several layers. FFBP algorithms are especially capable of resolving prediction problems, for which reason they are particularly useful for identification problems. The FFBP neural network is always formed of an input layer, a hidden layer and an output layer Each layer is composed of a number of elementary processing units, called neurons. Each neuron is connected to the next layer by means of weights, i.e., the neurons in the input layer send their outputs as inputs to the neutrons in the hidden layer. The connection between the hidden and output layers is made in the same way. The number of hidden layers and the number of neurons in each hidden layer change according to the problem in hand. The number of neurons in the input layer is the same as the number of input data or parameters; and the number of neurons in the output layer is the same as the number of variables to be predicted To distinguish between the different processing units, bias values are included in the activation functions. The bias values are associated with the neuron temperature. Except for the input layer, all the neurons in a FFBP network are associated with a bias value and an activation function. Bias is similar to weight, except that its constant value is equal to 1, whereas the activation function filters the sum of signals received from its neuron. Activation functions, which are designed to be applied to the real output of a network neuron or layer, are simple linear or non-linear jump functions. The application of these activation functions depends on the purpose of the neural network. The output layer produces the calculated output values corresponding to the solution In training a network, the data are processed from the input layer through the hidden layer until they reach the output layer (forward propagation). In this layer, the output values are compared with the measured values for error estimation purposes. The difference between both (error) is backpropagated in the network, with the individual weights of the connections and bias of the individual neurons adapted accordingly The input and output data are represented as vectors called training pairs. The process is repeated for all the training pairs until the network error converges to a threshold value corresponding to the minimum of a cost function, normally the mean squared error (MSE) or the sum of squared error (SSE)  The net input value in this hidden layer neuron is as follows: In this way, the net output of the network in said neuron of the hidden layer is calculated using the sigmoidal activation function The net total input to unit In the learning process the network is presented with a pair of input data and the corresponding output values or solution. The network calculates its own solution using weight and threshold values and compares this solution to the true or desired solution. Hence, the error in any output layer unit is as follows Training a neural network consists essentially of optimizing the space of the weights in the network. The steepest descent method minimized the error by making use of the following rule An analogous logic is applied to the connections between the hidden and output layers. The procedure is repeated with each pair of training values (set of input data and desired output values) allocated to network training. Each run through all the sets of pairs is called an epoch. The process is repeated for as many epochs as necessary until the error falls below a threshold set by the user. This quantity is a reflection of how the network has learned Our network was trained using a training function that updates weight and bias values according to gradient descent momentum (0.9 constant) and an adaptive learning rate (0.01 initial value). The hidden layer consisting of five neurons and the network was trained with 100 training epochs. We used a series of 50 data corresponding to the initial measurement campaign implemented over 10 months. The data are those from the 15 tests summarized in To test and validate the ANN methodology, we selected sets of new input–output data. These data were not used in training the network. They thus validate use of the ANN methodology in a more versatile way. The set of twenty data items used were from the five validation tests summarized in Our results demonstrate the quality of prediction using the ANN methodology The correlation coefficients between the ANN-predicted and measured values were 0.98 for Using Bayesian interpolation and an optimum number of hidden layer neurons, the mean relative errors for the prediction of The prediction made using multiple linear regression produced mean relative errors of 2.77 for The analysis results could possibly be improved if other techniques were used. Multiple linear regression could be complemented with principal components analysis and by eliminating variables the approximation could be improved. It would also be possible to improve the approximation using potential or even exponential non-linear multiple regression.