The separation of post-consumer plastics of different polymeric compositions is becoming an important topic for the reduction of waste and promotion of recycling. The comminution of plastics creates variable particle shapes which cause difficulties in the separation by a cyclone. To study the influence of particle shape, tests have been performed to determine how the partition curve changes with particle shape in cylindrical cyclones. The test results give a complete picture on the influence of particle shape and size on the cut density d
                     50 and the probable error E
                     p. Coupled with a mathematical description of the partition curve, these parameters can assist in process simulation, selection and design of dense medium separation (DMS) systems devoted to plastic recycling.Many research laboratories are studying the separation of post-consumer plastics for obtaining polymers suitable for recycling. Different techniques are used for the separation, with one of the most important being density separation. Static baths could be used only for treating large particles because the density difference involved in the separation is small and problems exist with the surface tension and the low plastics wettability. In addition, difficulties are encountered in this separation when the different phases are not liberated and the particles are in the form of convex hulls. To treat small particles (say under 10–15 mm) a dynamic separator rather than a static separator should be used in order to increase the ratio between mass and surface forces. However, the deleterious effect of variable particle shapes on the separation arise in dynamic separation. The shape variability (deriving from size reduction of plastic scraps) depends on the type of mill; for example, it has been shown that the cutter mills produce thin wires of plastics that are more difficult to treat ( In any case, regardless of mill type, the size reduction of beverage bottles produces particles of variable shape, particularly flat or elongated particles. In conventional conical cyclones, this difference in shape hinders or significantly degrades the density separation, as a consequence of the complex flow patterns inside the cyclones and the high centripetal flow that preferentially drags flat and elongated particles to the overflow independently of their density. For this reason, conical cyclones have been abandoned for this application in Germany and major efforts have been devoted in developing a special centrifuge for plastics where a high centrifugal acceleration can be produced with no centripetal flow, enabling plastic particles of different shapes to be easily separated according to their density ( In contrast to the German results with conical cyclones, preliminary tests carried out in the Chemical, Environmental and Raw Materials Department of the University of Trieste using cylindrical cyclones have shown that density separation of particles of different shape is possible ( Consequently, it was decided to study the behaviour of different-shaped particles in cyclones by measuring the partition curves and determining their related parameters. Initially, considering the favourable preliminary results obtained, the study was confined to the cylindrical Tri-Flo cyclone, with the intention of extending the study to the conical cyclone. Though in plastics there is no continuous frequency distribution of middlings as in minerals, the partition curve is equally important, as Determining the partition curve for plastics separation, while also accounting for different particle shape, should be very difficult using the standard tracers procedure. In fact, tracers of different densities in a range between 0.9 and 1.4 g/cm Therefore, a new methodology has been studied that consists of using tracers of different shapes and sizes, but with a fixed density. The partition curve is then measured by modifying the medium density at each test, instead of using a fixed medium density and using tracers of different densities at each test. This way, a limited number of tracers are necessary, the testing procedure is easy and the density difference between two tests for obtaining a partition curve can be as small as necessary. Using this methodology, the results (the partition numbers, i.e., fractions reported to the sink) are given in the partition curve as a function of the density difference the partition curves are defined under free-settling conditions; the variation of the medium viscosity is low in the density range where the partition curve is defined. The first condition is generally verified in the DMS systems, where only above a certain solids concentration of the treated material a modification of the partition curve may be observed. The second condition required more attention. Since the medium selected was a solution of sodium chloride in water, the viscosity of NaCl solutions from 1.00 to 1.20 g/cm The partition curve expressed as a function of the density difference between the solid and medium, The value of  The use of the transformed partition curve (versus An equation which is considered generally valid for dense medium separations was used to represent the partition curve ( A large number of tracers of different shapes and sizes have been prepared using ABS (acrylonitrile butadiene styrene), a polymer with a density in the range of 1.05–1.07 g/cm The particle shapes produced were cubes, elongated prisms and flat particles. A two-stage Tri-Flo with a 100 mm internal diameter was used ( The tests were performed using water and solutions of sodium chloride in water with a density up to 1.12 g/cm Solutions of decreasing density obtained through dilution were used to feed the separator in closed circuit. When stable conditions were reached, the tracers (at least 100 tracers) were fed and recovered using sieves at the sink and float discharges. The test was repeated three times to ascertain the reproducibility of the results. This enabled the proportion of particles that report to the sink discharge to be calculated, i.e., the partition number for the particular tracer and for the particular operating conditions. As the Tri-Flo has two sink discharges (sinks 1 and 2), the particles reporting to these discharges were collected separately. However, for the sake of simplicity in presenting the results, the sum of sink 1 and sink 2 was considered for calculating the partition curve. The results will be presented separately for different shapes in order to make it easier to understand their behaviour in the separator. Later, a mix of different shapes and sizes, as normally occurs in the product of plastics comminution, will be considered.   The partition curves in The partition curves of plates have been represented together in The partition curves of prisms with square basis of different sizes and with different lengths have been represented together in  (a) As a general rule the partition curves of individual sizes and shapes indicate that very sharp separations are obtained, with (b) In contrast, it has been found that there is a large variation in the offset (c) (d) The mix of all particles gives a partition curve having an offset (e) This research program is to be extended to the conical cyclones. Initial preliminary results show that in conical cyclones the offset is much larger than in the cylindrical cyclone Tri-Flo. This fact could be a disadvantage because, even with equally sharp single partition curves, their composition for different sizes and shapes would give worse combined partition curves. 1. A new methodology has been developed for determining the partition curves in dense medium separation of plastics, consisting in using tracers of different shapes and sizes having a fixed density and modifying the medium density at each test. This procedure is preferred to the more common approach of using a fixed medium density and tracers of different densities in each test. The new technique only requires a limited number of tracers, the testing procedure is easy and the density difference between two tests for obtaining a partition curve can be as small as necessary. 2. Using this new methodology, for the first time the partition curves in dense medium separation of plastics have been determined for particles of different sizes and shapes, including compact shapes such as cubes, elongated and flat particles. With the partition curves, calculated data include the values of the sharpness of separation 3. It has been found that single particle sizes and shapes are separated with high sharpness in the Tri-Flo using salt solutions as a medium, with limited variations of the 4. In contrast, the offset 5. As a consequence of the large variation in the offset, the partition curve for a mixture of particle sizes and shapes becomes worse and can be easily calculated for a given size and shape distribution, which may reflect the real size and shape distribution as derived from comminution of plastic scraps. The results of such calculations are presented in the paper, and the figures obtained for the 6. By means of these results, given a problem of separation of plastic scraps of given polymeric composition and knowing the density, size and shape composition of the material to be treated, it is possible to predict the results obtainable using dynamic dense medium systems, using single or multiple separation stages and for different and more complex circuits. 