A microsensor array with the highly sensitive porous tin oxide thin films employing the noble metal catalysts of Pt and Au on a new microhotplate, dangled in air by Pt bonding wires, has been designed and fabricated. The microhot plate was made of N/O/N Si diaphragm with area of 1.9
                        mm×2.1
                     mm. Power consumption was reduced by decreasing the thickness of substrate. The sensor array was applied to recognizing the explosive gases within the range of threshold limit values (TLVs), employing principal component analysis. The result showed that the micro sensor array was qualified for classifying obviously the kinds and quantities of the explosive gases.There has been a growing tendency that many sensors are to be prepared by using the microtechnology As for microgas sensor with the sensing membrane of metal oxides, there are two different structures, i.e. the closed-membrane-type and suspended-membrane-type gas sensor Therefore, a new microsensor array with the highly sensitive porous tin oxide thin films employing the noble metal catalysts on a new microhotplate, dangled in air by Pt bonding wires, has been designed and fabricated. We analyzed the mcirostructure of SnO The microsensor was fabricated on a n-type (1 Many researchers have reported many kinds of microhotplates to enhance mechanical strength and reduce power consumption at the elevated temperature, using a variety of silicon micromachining techniques The dependency of temperature on the microhotplate to consumption power was shown in The microstructure of thin film sensing materials was investigated for its adaptability, such as the differentiating sensitivities of sensors in array, the fast response to gases to be detected, and the high sensitivity to low concentrations of gases within the ranges of LELs and TLVs. G.H. Noh reported that in the system SnO, SnO Due to their difference in surface morphology and the direction of the electrical current, which flows parallel to the depletion layer of the surface, thin film semiconducting gas sensors are known to show lower sensitivities than a sintered bulk or a thick-film sensor To determine the operating temperature of sensor array, sheet resistance of thin films in array was measured as shown in The sensitivity of SnO The response of SnO The four porous sensors on microhotplate showed the good sensitivities and the speedy response and recovery to the tested explosive gases, i.e. butane, propane, liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) and CO within the range of TLVs, as an environmental standard values in workplace. As examples, the sensitivity of sensors to the propane and the CO gases was shown in According to the added catalysts, the sensors in array show the differentiated sensitivities to the tested explosive gases even to the level of TLVs. In order to evaluate the performance of sensor array in classifying the explosive gases, therefore, the data with 250, 500, 1000, and 3000 We designed and fabricated a novel microsensor array with the porous tin oxide thin films utilizing the combination of noble metal catalysts of Pt and Au on a microhotplate, dangled in air by Pt bonding wires. The microhotplate for 4 sensors in array showed a mechanically and thermally stable property at the elevated temperature of 400 The porous tin oxides were prepared by evaporation of metal tin, sputtering of catalysts oxidation and following oxidation in air atmosphere. When annealed at 700