Titanium is a lightweight metal with an outstanding combination of properties which make it the material of choice for many different applications. Nonetheless, its employment at industrial level is not widespread due to higher production costs with respect to competitor metals like steel and aluminium. In this work the production of low-cost titanium alloys is attempted by combining the utilisation of a powder metallurgy process and cheap alloying elements (i.e. commercial 430 stainless steel powder optimised for the powder metallurgy industry). Low-cost titanium alloys are fabricated by blending elemental titanium with stainless steel. The behaviour of the powders as well as that of the sintered materials are analysed and compared to that of a master alloy addition Ti6Al4V alloy. The produced low-cost titanium alloys show comparable properties to both wrought and powder metallurgy titanium alloys and, therefore, they are proposed as an alternative to obtain structural component made out of titanium alloys.Titanium and its alloys have an excellent combination of specific mechanical properties and corrosion resistance higher than both steels and aluminium alloys but they are currently barely used in industrial application rather than in highly demanding sectors (i.e. aeronautical, military and biomedical) The implementation of powder metallurgy (PM) techniques for the production of titanium products would provide various advantages over the conventional metallurgy of titanium which can be summarised in four points. (1) PM are near-net-shape methods and, therefore, characterised by higher yield of materials and limited machining operations which results in avoiding looses of the high-priced metal. (2) The temperatures at which titanium and its alloys are sintered are lower than the melting point of the metal and this leads to a significantly reduction of the reaction between titanium and production tools such as crucibles and moulds and limits interstitials pick-up. (3) Alloy composition limitation dictated by density difference (segregation) between the alloying elements and titanium, which is a typical feature of melted and solidified alloys, is prevented by using PM techniques. (4) A lot of attention and a great effort have been placed by the scientific community in the development of new extraction processes whose main product is metal titanium powder which could be directly used by the existing titanium powder metallurgy industry. Summarising, the success on the development of low-cost titanium alloys seems to be related to the right selection of the PM process, the proper selection of the processing conditions and also to a good choice of the alloying elements. On the one side, iron will be an ideal candidate for the development of less expensive titanium alloys because its cost is significantly lower in comparison to other alloying elements such as vanadium, niobium, or tantalum used to stabilise the beta phase In this work low-cost titanium alloys are targeted and developed by the simultaneous employment of the simplest PM method (i.e. cold uniaxial pressing and vacuum sintering) in combination with cheaper alloying elements with respect to vanadium, a typical element used in titanium alloy to stabilise the body-centred cubic titanium phase (β). Specifically, a commercially available iron and steel PM industry optimised 430 stainless steel powder is used to add iron and chromium (beta stabilisers) to elemental titanium. The staring materials for the development and production of low-cost titanium alloys were a hydride–dehydride (HDH) elemental titanium powder supplied by GfE GmbH and a gas atomised AISI 430 LHC ferritic stainless steel powder bought from Sandvik. Basic characteristics such as density, particle size and chemical analysis of these starting powders are reported in From the data shown in The design of the low-cost titanium alloys was done based on a previous work Initially, the compressibility (ASTM: B331) study for each of the two powders prepared was carried out by shaping rectangular samples (ASTM: B528) applying a uniaxial pressure in the range between 300 The quantification of the effect of the sintering step on the geometry of the samples was done by considering the dimensional change. The density of the sintered specimens ( As indicated in the experimental procedure, the low-cost titanium alloys powders were produced by mixing elemental titanium powder and 430 LHC stainless steel powder in the proper ratio to obtain the final equivalent composition of Ti–5Fe and Ti–7Fe. The features (density, particle size distribution and interstitials contents) of these two powders are shown in As it can be seen in The results of the compressibility study and the variation of the green strength vs. the compaction pressure are presented in From Green parts pressed at 700 From the analysis of the DTA heating curves shown in  As it can be seen from the volume variation ( The variation of the relative density of the sintered samples as a function of the processing temperature is displayed in As it could have been expected from the trends of the volume variation and of the densification, the relative density ( The results of the microstructural analysis carried out to study the diffusion of the alloying elements towards the titanium matrix and to characterise the phases that compose the alloy are shown in As it can be seen from Looking at the data shown in To confirm the microconstituents (phases) of the low-cost titanium alloys XRD analysis was done and the results are summarised in As it can be seen from the XRD pattern reported in The results of the chemical analysis carried out to measure the amount of interstitials (i.e. oxygen and nitrogen contents) are reported in As it can be seen from the data of the chemical analysis shown in Representative examples of the load–deflection curves determined by means of three-point bending test are shown in From the load–deflection curves reported in The mean value of the transverse rupture strength and deflection to fracture of the low-cost titanium alloys sintered at 1200 From the results of the transverse rupture strength of the low-cost titanium alloys measured by means of three-point bending tests ( The variation of the Vickers hardness with the sintering temperature is presented in As it can be seen from the data of the Vickers hardness displayed in From the study about the production of low-cost titanium alloys by means of addition of commercially available AISI 430 LHC ferritic stainless steel powder optimised for powder metallurgy processing it can be concluded that, generally, these low-cost titanium alloys have comparable behaviour to well-developed Ti6Al4V alloy produced by master alloy addition process. Specifically, the addition of the spherical stainless steel powder to titanium does not decrease significantly the compressibility and the handling of the green parts is guarantee. Moreover, the employment of this stainless steel powder prevents the formation of TiFe intermetallics which normally form on the base of the thermodynamic of the binary phase diagram. The final relative density and mechanical performances of the low-cost titanium alloys is directly comparable to that of the titanium workhorse alloy Ti6Al4V despite the higher amount of interstitials dissolved and, thus, these materials are promising candidates for producing cheaper titanium alloys for structural applications. The authors want to acknowledge the financial support from the