There is a still growing interest in the recovery of rare earth elements due to their manifold industrial and technological applications. We present here a simple and effective method for the enrichment of micrometer sized La2O3 particles via microparticle stabilized foams. By using the short chain amphiphile (1-hexyl)trimethylammonium bromide (C6TAB) foam that is generated by surface modified particles only can be generated. This technique allows a more selective and specific particle transport mechanism. The results are discussed in terms of surface charges and transport mechanisms. Furthermore, the effects of particle concentration, pH and amphiphile concentration are studied and evaluated.Colloidal structures in a nonequilibrium state, i.e. systems that are kinetically hindered to minimize their surface energy, are nowadays implemented in manifold applications It is well-known that the combination of surfactant molecules with solid particles, which results in an adsorption at solid/liquid interfaces, can be used to either stabilize or destabilize foams A very important case in applications is the case of mineral flotation. As reviewed by Fürstenau and Pradip, the most important parameter is the zeta potential and coverage of the particle by the adsorbed surfactant layer Further attempts have been made by surface lyophobization of colloidal particles (e.g. Al In froth flotation science and industry one generally distinguishes between ion flotation Rare earth elements in general and lanthanum oxide (La Surface charges of mineral oxide surfaces in aqueous solution generally arise from the protonation or deprotonation of the surface hydroxyl groups. Hence, both sign and magnitude of the surface charge depend on the pH of the solution. The pH value, at which charge neutrality is reached, i.e. the relative population of positively and negatively charged sites on the metal oxide surface is equal, is termed the point of zero charge (PZC). The PZC is therefore one key parameter for the flotation of oxide minerals since the surface charge delimits the adsorption of a collector and hence the flotation efficiency Upon exposure of a hydrophilic metal oxide surface to a solution containing amphiphilic molecules, the amphiphile adsorbs at the oppositely charged surface. The degree of adsorption depends on the mineral surface being oppositely charged with respect to the charge of the amphiphile head-group. There are two main factors that make such an adsorption favorable: first, an electrostatic attraction between the charged amphiphile headgroup combined with the entropic effect of counter-ion release and second, a hydrophobic effect, i.e. hydrophobic attraction between the hydrocarbon chains of the amphiphile used. We have chosen the cationic short-chain amphiphile (1-hexyl)trimethylammonium bromide (C The dispersion of La This enrichment in the foam phase forms the basis of an efficient particle separation from the bulk solution, the foam phase is collected, until stable foam is no longer maintained indicating that the maximum amount of particles for a given experimental setup has been collected. This approach is an additional advantage of the exertion of a short-chain amphiphile with low foaming properties compared to the application of long-chain surfactants, where the endpoint of a flotation experiment is difficult to be determined. After having shown the ability to form microparticle stabilized foams their efficiency for a flotation experiment remains to be discussed. Van Hee et al. have recently demonstrated that the flotation efficiency of protein coated polystyrene is significantly influenced by particle size and particle aggregation In In Note that at high initial mass concentrations of La (1-Hexyl)trimethylammonium bromide (Alfa Aesar, 98%) and lanthanum(III) nitrate hexahydrate (Alfa Aesar, 99.9%) were used without further purification. La pH values were adjusted by the addition of diluted NaOH (1N TitriPUR, Merck) under stirring, the pH was measured using a pH meter (WTW microprocessor pH meter). The The flotation experiments have been performed using a home-built flotation vessel as visualized in In conclusion, we demonstrated that adsorption of short-chain amphiphiles to oppositely charged metal oxide surfaces yields microparticle stabilized foams, which are appropriate for an effective froth flotation of these particles. Furthermore, it was exemplified that the flotation efficiency and the maximum particle packing density are a function of initial concentration. The main advantage of flotation via these microparticle stabilized foams is that no additional foaming agent is necessary that may affect both efficiency and selectivity. It should be stressed that La The authors thank A. Praast (MPI, Potsdam) for help with the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: