Commercially pure titanium was produced using laser engineered net shaping (LENS) and selective laser melting (SLM) processes. The SLM and LENS processing parameters as well as critical aspects including densification and balling effect were investigated. The resulting properties were studied and compared with those from traditional casting. Investigation of the processing parameters showed that significantly higher laser power and energy density is required in LENS compared to SLM in order to obtain near full density (99.5%). The microstructural investigations revealed an α microstructure with mixed morphologies including plate-like and widmanstätten for LENS somewhat similar to the serrated and fine acicular α obtained from casting. In contrast, the SLM samples showed only martensitic α′ phase mainly with a lath-type morphology. The difference between SLM and LENS microstructures was discussed based on interrelated aspects including energy density, solidification rate and specific point energy. Differences in their microstructures are mainly associated with differing rates of cooling and differing energy densities during SLM and LENS processing. Compression and hardness tests indicated that SLM titanium possesses better mechanical properties due to a fine grain size and martensitic phase composition, whereas LENS and cast titanium with α microstructures show similar mechanical properties.In recent years, titanium (Ti) and Ti alloys have attracted increasing attention in biomedical applications due to their remarkable combination of properties including high biocompatibility, excellent corrosion resistance and superior mechanical properties, thus rendering them more attractive than other conventional metallic biomaterials (e.g. 316 Ti materials are usually fabricated by conventional methods such as casting Selective laser melting (SLM) and laser engineered net shaping (LENS) are among the most commonly used additive manufacturing (AM) technologies. SLM is a powder-bed metal printing system which has been extensively applied for fabrication of various Ti-based materials with both simple and complex geometries To date, some comparative studies of Ti and Ti alloy produced by different additive manufacturing and by traditional methods have been conducted Plasma atomized commercially pure titanium powder (Grade 1) with the size range below 100 The density of the LENS and SLM samples was measured using Archimedes’ principle and is presented as a percentage of the pure Ti density (4.51  For both SLM and LENS processing of Ti materials, Energy density (  During SLM processing, different scanning speeds were investigated, while both the layer thickness and hatching distance were fixed. As can be seen in To investigate the influence of the laser parameters on relative density, SEM images of the LENS and SLM samples produced using different energy densities were examined for transverse ( The major causes of defect formation during deposition mainly relate to improper adjustment of processing parameters, an unbalanced viscosity of the liquid pool or instabilities in the melt pool To study the effect of balling on densification, the top surface of the LENS and SLM processed CP-Ti samples was studied by SEM ( It is well known that pure titanium undergoes an allotropic phase transformation at temperatures around 865 During laser processing of materials, the cooling rate influenced by the specific processing parameters is an important factor in controlling the phase composition and also the microstructural features The LENS processed CP-Ti presents microstructures distinct to those of the SLM processed material, with the LENS microstructures featuring various morphologies of the α phase. They predominantly feature coarse plate-like and widmanstätten α, while in some regions serrated α and fine plate-like α are formed. In addition, the martensitic (α′) phase was not observed in the LENS samples. Although high heating and cooling rates are generally present during laser processing of materials, it appears that the LENS Ti sample is not subject to sufficiently high cooling rates necessary to form the martensitic phase. The differences observed between the microstructures of SLM and LENS samples can be explained on the basis of three interrelated aspects; 1) linear energy density, 2) cooling rate and 3) specific point energy as follows: 1) Laser power has considerable influence on the resulting microstructure. As previously described, the ratio of the laser power Generally, increasing the laser power causes a significant increase in the processing temperature, whereas the temperature is slightly reduced with increased laser scanning speeds 2) The effect of laser power and laser scanning speed on the microstructures, phase constituents and their morphologies is also related to the solidification rate which is dependent on the thermal gradients and cooling rates during deposition by the following equation Considering Points 1 and 2 in respect to the current work, the laser power used for LENS of 350 3) The influence of linear energy density on the cooling rates and, consequently, microstructures can be also rationalized in respect to the phase transformations by the depth-to-width heat penetration ratio occurring during LENS and SLM processes. Previous studies In the current work, the laser power for LENS was twice as high as that applied during SLM. In addition, the beam diameter for LENS of 400 Compressive strength is an important factor in the life span of biomedical implants as bone and tooth root tissues are mainly subject to compressive loading The compression properties of the samples are summarized in As mentioned, Grade 1 CP-Ti was used in this work which usually has lower mechanical properties in comparison to Grade 2 CP-Ti due to lower levels of oxygen. However, the compression properties obtained for SLM and LENS samples are comparable and even greater than those previously reported for other additive manufacturing and conventional methods, as summarized in  In the current work, Ti samples were produced by additive manufacturing using LENS and SLM as well as through traditional casting. The processing parameters for LENS and SLM were optimized in order to obtain highest densification which was at least 99.5%. Almost fully dense CP-Ti was achieved using higher laser power and higher energy density for LENS than for SLM. SEM investigations showed that some issues such as the balling effect are common across both processes, leading to the formation of various defects. The microstructural investigation revealed that the LENS sample had an α phase microstructure with mixed plate-like, widmanstätten and serrated morphologies somewhat similar to cast microstructures. In contrast, SLM showed only martensitic α' phase microstructure. The observed difference in the microstructures of the LENS and SLM CP-Ti was related to interconnected aspects of processing including linear energy density, specific point energy and solidification rate and it is observed that the SLM sample undergoes significantly higher cooling rates than its LENS counterpart. The mechanical properties obtained from compression and hardness tests showed that the SLM sample had the highest mechanical properties due to its martensitic phase composition and finer microstructure. The authors acknowledge the support of Queensland Centre for Advanced Materials Processing and Manufacturing (AMPAM). The authors also would like to acknowledge the support of the