The consumption of energy in comminution processes is approximately 2–3% of the worlds’ total energy demand. There is clear room for improvement. This paper follows a presentation given at the 4th Asian Particle Technology Symposium that suggests significant improvements are possible by the use of high pressure grinding rolls, a new design of stirred mills and a new approach to circuit design.Formal projections of energy use for the world are well established. The most recent projections from the International Energy Authority (IEA) suggest a 40% increase in demand between 2007 and 2030 with coal use rising most in absolute terms is shown in Whilst there is widespread agreement that emissions must be reduced, and be reduced quite significantly, the underlying trait that is driving energy consumption upwards appears to be somewhat unstoppable. We have a strong growth in population and at the same time an increase in economic activity in developing countries together with a world population that is urbanising. Accepting the IEA projections, we can now turn to comminution and note that there are estimates Along with the pattern of increasing demand for minerals, and hence an increasing energy demand, there is also the challenge of falling grades. If we use copper as an example, we note in Whether mining is underground or above ground, comminution still plays a major part in the energy consumption of mining, as shown in Fuerstenau ( Clearly the demand for new comminution techniques with significantly lower energy consumption is timely and necessary. A recent study by Adair at The Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre (JKMRC) at the University of Queensland Equally there is significant indirect and embodied energy savings possible by redesign of circuits to minimise the usage of grinding media and mill liners. These of course embody indirect energy from the iron and steel production processes. All in all the estimate from Prof. Adair is that it may be possible to save up to 50% of energy via a different approach to comminution circuit design. This is a significant challenge and one in which a focussed government – industry and research partnership could realise the opportunities within 5–10 Against the background of a very slow change in the industry, it is interesting to look at high pressure grinding rolls. They have been used for some areas such as cement clinker grinding for many years and show a significantly reduced energy consumption compared with ball mills. It has taken many years for high pressure grinding rolls to penetrate; initially diamond liberation, followed by preparation of iron ore for pelletising and now eventually into hard rock mining applications such as copper. Some typical figures for conventional milling via semi autogeneous grinding and high pressure grinding rolls are shown in An integrated approach is required here, where the separation processes are modified to account for the different nature of the product from high pressure grinding rolls. The author suggests that given the ever-increasing demand to reduce energy consumption and consequently greenhouse gas emissions, high pressure grinding rolls will become the standard for the industry. Stirred mills have been common place for many years in the industrial minerals area before their application to hard rock mining. The massive lead-zinc deposits both at McArthur River and Century in Australia are perhaps the first examples where high tonnages needed to be ground down to of order 90% passing 8 While stirred mill design has improved over the years and the understanding of the benefits of different designs have become apparent, it is still a relatively high energy consumer. It is of course a distinct improvement on ball mills where energy requirements rise asymptotically as the final size decreases. Novel designs of stirred mills are being commercialised and one notes that some hold promise for significant energy reduction. The KAD mill in particular warrants attention From the International Energy Agency projections, it is clear that coal-fired power generation is going to remain the dominant source of base load energy in the world for at least the next 40 The general trend of processing cost versus product ash is shown in This paper outlines some of the challenges in comminution in terms of ever-increasing pressures to reduce energy consumption. The use of high pressure grinding rolls, novel stirred mills and improved circuit and equipment design holds the possibility for reducing world emissions of order 1% – a significant prize.