The excellent combination of strength and corrosion resistance in duplex stainless steels (DSS) is due to their strict composition control and microstructural balance. The ferrite–austenite ratio is often upset in DSS weld metals owing to the rapid cooling rates associated with welding. To achieve the desired ferrite–austenite balance and hence properties, either the weld metal composition and/or the heat input is controlled. In the current work, a low heat input process viz., EBW and another commonly employed process, gas tungsten-arc welding have been employed for welding of DSS with and without nickel enhancement. Results show that (i) chemical composition has got a greater influence on the ferrite–austenite ratio than the cooling rate, (ii) and even EBW which is considered an immature process in welding of DSS, can be employed provided means of filler addition could be devised.Duplex stainless steels (DSS), with a microstructure comprised of nearly equal proportions of ferrite and austenite, combine the attractive properties of austenitic and ferritic stainless steels: high tensile strength and fatigue strength, good toughness even at low temperatures, adequate formability and weldability and excellent resistance to stress corrosion cracking, pitting and general corrosion For ensuring the excellent combination of properties of DSS, it is essential to maintain a ferrite–austenite ratio close to 50:50. This phase balance, however, is upset during welding on account of the rapid cooling involved in most weld thermal cycles. This can result in weld metal ferrite contents much in excess of 50%. In order to restore the phase balance, weld filler materials are usually overalloyed with 2–4% more Ni than in the base material Power beam processes such as electron beam welding (EBW) are especially suitable for joints in thick components. EBW offers other advantages, too, such as greater productivity, absence of contamination, a higher depth–width ratio, reduced residual stress and distortion and the possibility of automation. There is, however, a serious disadvantage in the case of DSS viz., that the ferrite–austenite ratio could be adversely affected as a result of the particularly fast rate of cooling characteristic of EBW, the absence of filler material in the process and the possibility of nitrogen loss during welding In the current work, two weld metal compositions were studied by using nickel-enhanced filler material in some cases and producing autogenous welds in others. Weld heat input and thus the cooling rate was varied by employing two processes, viz., gas tungsten-arc welding (GTAW) and EBW. This paper describes the effect of weld metal chemistry and heat input on the microstructure and mechanical properties of the weld fusion zone. The objectives were twofold: (i) to see which of the two factors has the greater influence; and (ii) to explore the possibility of using EBW and still obtaining an acceptable ferrite:austenite ratio. The material chosen for the investigation was a 5 mm DSS sheet corresponding to UNS 31803, whose composition is given in Ferrite contents of the weld metals were estimated in terms of extended ferrite number (EFN) using the Fischer ferritescope. Metallographic examination was carried out using light microscopy and two-step etching procedure. The mechanically polished specimens were first etched in a solution containing 20 g ammonium bifluoride, 0.5 g potassium metabisulphite and 100 ml distilled water maintained at 40 The DSS base material was received in the form of hot rolled 5 mm sheet. Its microstructure shown in The ferrite contents of the various weld metals, measured magnetically, are listed in During solution treatment, the material seeks to attain thermodynamic equilibrium characteristic of the treatment temperature and the composition. Any effect of cooling rate in the as-welded material will be nullified during the solution treatment. Thus, AG and AE show similar EFNs in the solution treated condition, so NE and NG also exhibit values close to each other. However, AG/AE and NG/NE show different EFNs in the solution treated condition, the former being significantly greater on account of the lower nickel contents in the autogenous welds. The microstructure of the autogenous GTA weld (AG) is reproduced in The microstructure of the GTA weld produced with nickel-enriched filler metal (NG), shown in  These features are apparent consequences of the higher cooling rate prevalent in EB welding, which causes the ferrite–austenite transformation to occur at lower temperatures. There are many similarities between this transformation in DSS welds and the austenite–ferrite transformation in low-carbon low-alloy ferritic steel weld deposits. In the latter case it is known that ferrite forms on cooling from austenite also in three modes: first as grain boundary allotriomorphs, then as ferrite side-plates and finally as intragranular acicular ferrite. It is further known that the formation of grain boundary and side-plate fractions requires a relatively smaller driving force The possibility of chromium nitride formation during welding of DSS has been indicated in several studies The nitride precipitation in this case may be explained by the fact that the EB weld microstructure is dominated by ferrite, which, as noted above has low solubility for nitrogen. Also, for nitrogen to dissolve in the austenite, it has to diffuse through long distances to the austenite islands that act as nitrogen sinks The microstructures of the weld metals after solution treatment are shown in In the solution treated condition also, the proportion of the intragranular austenite is much greater in relation to grain boundary and Widmanstätten austenite in the EB welds than in the corresponding GTA welds. This implies that, although the ferrite–austenite ratio is nearly the same in all the solution-treated welds, there are significant morphological differences between the GTA and EB welds. The results of the Vickers hardness measurements (5 kg load) on the various weld metals are given in In all the four welds solution treatment causes a significant lowering of hardness. It is clear from the above that this cannot be explained by the reduction in ferrite:austenite ratio consequent to solution treatment. The softening is apparently a result of the relief of welding stresses and the globularisation of the intragranular austenite particles. The notch toughness values obtained by Charpy impact testing both at room temperature and at −40 One important result is that even the autogenous EB weld with a ferrite content of as high as 86% exhibits room temperature toughness equal to that of the weld metal NG (ferrite content 62%) that has been produced with nickel-enhanced filler in the conventional manner. The smaller grain size of the EB weld is likely to be a contributory factor in this context, while the reduced oxygen level in the EB weld might also have played role, as pointed out by Bonnefois et al. (1) Nickel is very effective in controlling the ferrite–austenite ratio than the cooling rate for the range of composition studied. (2) The faster cooling in EB welding, while reducing the austenite content, also changes the proportion in the three morphological forms of austenite, the intragranular fraction forming to a greater extent than the grain boundary fractions. (3) Differences in ferrite–austenite ratio do not lead to significant differences in hardness. (4) The toughness at −40 (5) EBW can be applied to DSS provided nickel enrichment of the weld can be made through practically applicable means.