In this study a bioinspired approach to induce self-mineralization of bone-like material on alumina surfaces is presented. The mineralizing enzyme alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is covalently immobilized by a carbodiimide-mediated chemoligation method. The enzymatic activity of immobilized ALP and its mineralization capability are investigated under acellular conditions as well as in the presence of human bone cells. Analytical, biochemical and immunohistochemical characterization show that ALP is efficiently immobilized, retains its activity and can trigger calcium phosphate mineralization on alumina at acellular conditions. In vitro cell tests demonstrate that ALP-functionalized alumina clearly boosts and enhances bone cell mineralization. Our results underpin the great potential of ALP-functionalized alumina for the development of bioactive surfaces for applications such as orthopaedic and dental implants, enabling a fast and firm implant osseointegration.The immobilization of specific, active biomolecules on material surfaces (biofunctionalization) is considered as a highly effective strategy to improve the biocompatibility and bioactivity of materials The enzyme alkaline phosphatase (ALP, Enzyme Commission number EC 3.1.3.1) is known to play a central role in hard tissue formation and osteogenesis and is commonly used as marker for assessing maturity of mineralized tissue or cell phenotype in biochemical and histological assays Due to its central role in bone formation some in vitro and in vivo studies have exploited the clinical potential of ALP for ligament and bone regeneration. For instance, ALP deposited on polymer surfaces induces the attachment of collagen fibrils In this study the possibility of immobilizing biomolecules such as ALP, which can simultaneously promote cell–surface interactions, cell attachment and boost the mineralization capability and induce self-biomineralization of CaP on inert ceramic surfaces, has been considered. ALP has been immobilized to highly inert surfaces, such as alumina, to catalyze and induce CaP mineralization. Alumina (Al Here, a simple and biocompatible immobilization approach based on the zero-length cross-linking system 1-ethyl-3-(dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC) and High-purity α-alumina powder (Taimei, TM-DAR), 99.99%, particle size d Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM), Alexafluor®488-phalloidin, Alexafluor®546-phalloidin goat anti-mouse IgG and Quant-iT™ PicoGreen® dsDNA assay kit (Lot No. P7589) were purchased from Invitrogen (Germany). Polyacrylic acid (molecular weight Double-deionized water (ddH Planar alumina discs were fabricated using a modified micromoulding method described in Holthaus et al. Before ALP immobilization, samples were sterilized by autoclaving. Silanization and ALP immobilization were carefully conducted under sterile conditions and using sterile solutions to avoid any possible contamination. ALP was covalently immobilized on alumina discs using the coupling cross-linkers EDC/NHS and using a protocol adapted from Kroll et al. Silanization was carried out in aqueous solutions as described as described in Refs. APTES-silanized alumina discs were immersed in a solution of 10 Alumina discs with immobilized ALP are named ASNEA. Non-treated (A), silanized (AS) and alumina discs functionalized with APTES, EDC/NHS but without ALP (ASNE) were used as reference ( The enzymatic activity of immobilized ALP was determined using pNPP as an enzymatic substrate as described in Ref. The activity and mineralization capability of immobilized ALP were initially evaluated at acellular conditions by in vitro soaking experiments as described in Ref. After each incubation time, discs were removed, rinsed thoroughly with ddH In vitro mineralization and biocompatibility were assessed with human osteoblast cells (HOBs, passage 4, Provitro, Germany). Cells were pre-cultured in cell culture medium (DMEM, 10% Three independent experimental runs were performed. Cell morphology at different time points was evaluated by immunofluorescence microscopy and SEM after 1, 4, 7, 14, 17, 21 and 28 For SEM investigation, the samples were rinsed with 1 Cell viability was analyzed using a colorimetric WST-1 cell proliferation assay as described in Ref. The activity of cellular ALP, as a marker for cell differentiation, was measured from cell lysates by determining the production of pNP from pNPP as previously described in Section The cell lysate was prepared as described in Ref. ALP measurements were done with six samples of each type of sample per sampling day. Cell mineralization at days 10, Cells were rinsed with PBS, fixed with ice-cold ethanol, kept at 4 After trypsinization, the samples were gently washed with ddH The crystal phases of mineral was determined by grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD, Ultima IV type III diffractometer, Rigaku, Tokyo, Japan) equipped with cross-beam optics using a To quantify the calcium content in CaP mineralized on sample surface after CCM soaking experiments and cell tests, samples were demineralized with 10 All the data were presented as mean value After immobilizing ALP on the samples by EDC and NHS ( The activity and mineralization capability of immobilized ALP was characterized by in vitro soaking experiments in osteogenic medium without cells (CCM test under acellular conditions) for 1, 4, 7, 14, 21 and 28 CaP nucleation was visible on ALP-functionalized samples (ASNEA) even after 4 The composition of mineral clusters was determined by EDX analysis, which confirmed the presence of Ca and P. The CaP formed on ASNEA samples had a Ca/P ratio of between 1.5 and 1.8 ( The ability of immobilized ALP to support cellular growth and mineralization was determined by in vitro cell tests with HOBs. Three independent cell-culture experiments were carried out. Cells were initially cultured in normal cell medium up to confluency, which was reached after 7 Cell viability was evaluated by WST-1 assay. Cell number and viability increased from day 1 to day 10 to an equivalent extent and without a statistically significant difference between the different samples at every time point ( To further analyze cell differentiation on the samples, the production of cellular ALP and collagen type I were determined at different cultivation times. The activity of cellular ALP quantified from cell lysates increased up to 7 Cell growth and morphology was analyzed by fluorescence microscopy and SEM at different sampling points. There were no distinguishable differences in the cell morphologies of all experimental samples up to 7 After day 7 cells were further cultivated in osteoinductive medium and still no significant differences with respect to the cell morphology were observed between the different samples. HOBs featured a flat appearance and spread over the surface and a continuous growth was observed at each sampling time as shown in some representative micrographs ( Multiple cell layers, a higher formation of fibrous ECM containing mineralized globules was detected on ALP-functionalized alumina after only 7 To determine if a mineral layer could form underneath the cells and on top of the samples, the cells were removed by trypsinization. This gentle approach was specifically used to remove the cells without altering the mineralized layer. On ALP-functionalized samples small mineralized nodules spread over the surface were detected at days 7 and 10, whereas after days 21 and 28 a dense, homogeneous mineral layer and large round spherical mineral agglomerates were visible. On reference samples up to day 10 no mineral deposition was observed, but after 21 In vitro HOB mineralization capability was further assessed by staining calcium minerals with ARS. Representative images are given in The crystal phase of the mineralized nodules was characterized by GIXRD which confirmed the presence of hydroxyapatite ( In this study, ALP was covalently immobilized on bioinert alumina substrates using a relatively simple carbodiimide-mediated approach. This widely applied and biocompatible immobilization route was found to be suitable for binding ALP without significantly altering ALP activity and mineralization capability as confirmed by enzymatic assays ( The suitability of this immobilization approach and ALP activity was additionally confirmed by in vitro soaking tests under acellular conditions with O-CCM as shown in The effect of ALP on CaP formation was additionally confirmed by quantifying the calcium content in the mineral layer. Significantly higher calcium content on ALP substrates was detected after only 1 Cell-culture experiments showed that normal cell growth is taking place on all substrate types, demonstrating that neither ALP nor the immobilizing agents such as APTES, EDC and NHS had a negative effect on HOBs, and this immobilization method is biocompatible. Cell proliferation increased up to day 7 when the cells were grown in normal cell medium. After day 10, cell proliferation decreased as HOBs started to differentiate A higher amount of cellular ALP was detected on ALP-functionalized alumina in comparison to reference samples ( The osteoinductive properties of ALP-functionalized alumina were additionally demonstrated by the higher and faster calcium mineralization in cell tests. Nodule formation was detected for all experimental groups, but on ALP-functionalized surfaces a rapid and higher CaP production from day 14 was observed ( The results presented in this study confirm that the immobilization of ALP onto alumina is a highly suitable approach to design material surfaces which can induce self-formation of bone-like material under acellular conditions and clearly stimulate bone cell mineralization activity. In our study we also confirmed that the widely applied EDC/NHS immobilization route is biocompatible and suitable for stably binding active ALP molecules, and that ALP activity can be enhanced by simply controlling the reaction parameters. Preliminary demineralization tests showed that this immobilization route is suitable for keeping ALP active even after treatment under acidic conditions. Such surfaces are feasible candidates for activating inert biomaterial surfaces and for designing load-bearing implants, featuring outstanding osteogenic, mechanical and chemical properties, and at the same time providing a bioactive surface in order to enhance and guide osteogenic behaviour. We acknowledge the German Research Foundation (DFG) for funding this project (Project No. TR 978/3-1). Certain figures in this article, particularly Figs. 1, 6 and 7 are difficult to interpret in black and white. The full colour images can be found in the on-line version, at Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 