Hollow nickel particles were synthesized via ultrasonic spray pyrolysis using ethanol or sucrose as the reducing agents, and nickel nitrate precursor solution in a temperature range of 500 to 800 °C. At 500–600 °C hcp Ni was the main synthesis product, and at 700–800 °C fcc Ni was formed. Ethanol effectively lowered the particle and crystallite sizes. The synthesized sample with ethanol at 700 °C had a specific surface area of 106 m2/g with a non-uniform meso/macroporous structure. The catalytic activity of the synthesized Ni particles for dry reforming of CH4 at 750 °C yielded 90% for the conversion of CH4. Al2O3 was also added to the precursor solution to provide active support for Ni particles. The synthesized Ni/Al2O3 particles yielded 89% and 70% conversion for CH4 and CO2, respectively, which shows the hollow structures of Ni combined with Al2O3 support is effective for the dry reforming of CH4.Synthesis of nickel and nickel oxide particles has attracted much attention because of its application as a catalyst in reforming of natural gas [ Different methods, such as nickel carbonyl process [ Morphology and crystal structure (stable face-centered cubic (fcc) or meta-stable hexagonal close-packed (hcp)) of nickel particles produced by different synthesis methods, affect the magnetic [ Synthesis of solid or hollow Ni/NiO particles via SP has been reported in several studies [ In this study, co-solvent ultrasonic spray pyrolysis (USP) was used to synthesize nickel and nickel oxide nanostructured hollow particles. The effect of process variables, i.e., reaction temperature, type and amount of reducing agent, i.e., ethanol and sucrose, and residence time on the morphology, composition, specific surface area and crystal structure of the synthesized nickel particles was investigated. Also, the addition of nanosized Al  Nickel (II) nitrate hexahydrate (Ni(NO Powder X-ray diffraction patterns were collected using a PANanalytic X'pert pro MPD diffractometer, with Cu Ka radiation operating at 40 kV and 40 mA. The morphology and particle size of the synthesized particles were examined by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, MIRA3, TE-SCAN, Brno, Czech Republic) operated at 5 kV or 15 kV, and equipped with an energy dispersive X-Ray spectroscopy (EDS) for elemental analysis. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM; Model CM30, Philips, Ltd.) operated at 200 kV was used to examine the morphology of the particles and to determine the crystal lattice. Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) specific surface area was measured using a Micromeritics Tristar II 3020 (Micromeritics, Norcross, GA, USA) instrument with N X-ray diffraction pattern of the synthesized samples is shown in The crystal structure and size, the particles morphology, and the extent of reduction was examined as the furnace temperature was varied between 500 and 800 °C (samples C, E, F, and G). The residence time of the particles in the hot zone of the reactor was kept constant at about 0.5 s by adjusting the carrier gas flow rate vs. temperature ( The XRD patterns of the synthesized particles at various temperatures are shown in Kim et al. [ XRD pattern of sample H ( A comparison between sample H and I ( The crystallite size of the products was calculated ( The results show that an increase in the ethanol concentration lowers the fcc Ni crystallite size, which should have a positive effect on the catalytic activity of the nickel product [ The crystallite size of synthesized particles at temperatures between 500 and 800 °C are presented in The XRD pattern of the sample that had nanosized γ-Al The FESEM micrographs of the synthesized samples are shown in The particles median size, d The SEM micrograph of the samples synthesized at different temperature is illustrated in The TEM micrographs of samples E and C are shown in In order to determine the crystal structure of the synthesized material, Surface Area Electron Diffraction (SAED) analysis was performed on samples C (  FESEM micrographs of the particles synthesized with sucrose (sample H) and ethanol (sample C) are shown in The FESEM micrograph of the sample J (Fig. S3), in which the γ-Al Structural and morphological evaluations suggested that sample C, with ethanol as the reducing agent, had a combination of characteristics, which made it more suitable as a catalyst for CH The primary dry reforming reaction of CH In practice, the dry reforming reaction on nickel catalysts is carried out at about 600–800 °C [  In order to determine the stability of the catalysts, separate tests were carried out at constant temperature of 750 °C for up to 11 h' stream time. A comparison between the CH In the time on stream experiments, the CH The CO Results in In this research hollow spherical Ni particles with either fcc or hcp crystal structure was synthesized using USP technique in a reducing atmosphere created by either ethanol or sucrose, and the product was characterized and then tested as a catalyst for dry reforming of CH Low temperatures and residence time in the furnace is essential for achieving hollow structure and high surface area. Both ethanol and sucrose can reduce the NiO in a short period (0.5 s) in a moderately low temperature range of 600 and 800 °C that shows very fast kinetics of the gas/solid reaction. Lower temperatures and residence time results in incomplete conversion. Although sucrose had a similar reducing ability as the ethanol, the formation of sheet-like hydrocarbons that partially covered samples reduced with sucrose lowered the catalytic activity of the product. The byproduct of ethanol did not appear to affect its catalytic activity negatively. Moreover, ethanol did have an observable effect in reducing both particle size and crystallite size of the product. Both of these properties are important for achieving very high surface area (up to 125 m  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at