The direct synthesis of hydroxyapatite in the presence of bisphosphonates is quite difficult due to the great affinity for calcium of these compounds, which are widely used in the treatment of pathologies related to bone loss. We recently developed a new method which allowed to synthesize alendronate–hydroxyapatite composite nanocrystals with a bisphosphonate content up to about 7wt%.
                  Herein we report the results of an in vitro study aimed to investigate the effects of alendronate incorporation into hydroxyapatite on bone cells response.
                  Osteoblast-like MG63 cells and human osteoclasts were cultured on nanocrystals at different alendronate content (3.9, 6.2, 7.1wt%). MG63 cells cultured on the composite nanocrystals display normal morphology, good proliferation and increased values of the differentiation parameters. In particular, when cultured on composites at relatively high alendronate contents, osteoblasts display increased values of alkaline phosphatase activity (ALP), collagen type I, and osteocalcin production, as well as significant decrease of matrix metalloproteinases (MMP-1 and MMP-13) production, with respect both to the control and to pure hydroxyapatite nanocrystals. It follows that the presence of alendronate enhances osteoblast activation and extracellular matrix mineralization processes, without any abnormal collagen degradation. The osteoclast number on the composite nanocrystals decrease indicating that the bisphosphonate exerts its inhibitory effect on osteoclast proliferation even when incorporated into hydroxyapatite.Bisphosphonates (BPs) are a class of compounds widely used for the management of disorders of bone metabolism, such as Paget bone disease, osteoporosis, fibrous dysplasia, myeloma and bone metastases The syntheses of AL–HA nanocrystals were carried out using a method recently developed X-ray diffraction analysis was carried out by means of a PANalytical X’Pert PRO powder diffractometer. CuK AL content was determined spectrophotometrically via complex formation with Fe(III) ions using a Varian Cary50Bio instrument ( For cell experiments disk shaped samples were prepared by pressing the powders into cylindrical moulds. Cell experiments were carried out on gamma rays sterilized disks of HA–AL7, HA–AL14, HA–AL28, and HA as reference. Peripheral human blood was obtained from healthy adult volunteers. To prevent clotting blood was collected in heparinated tubes. Density gradient centrifugation was used to separate the mononuclear cells from the other elements of blood. Briefly, a volume of peripheral blood was diluted 1:1 with pre-warmed PBS and carefully layered on an equal volume of Histopaque1077 in a 50 MG-63 human osteoblast-like cells were cultured in DMEM medium (Sigma, UK) supplemented with 10% FBS, and antibiotics (100 MG-63 osteoblast-like cells were plated at a density of 2×10 Cell Proliferation Reagent WST-1 test was done to assess cell proliferation and viability (3, 7, 14 and 21 days): 100 Finally, at the end of experimental times the supernatant was collected from all wells and centrifuged to remove particulates, if any. Aliquots were dispensed in Eppendorf tubes for storage at −70 Samples for each material, at the end of experimental times, were processed for scanning electron microscopy (SEM): osteoblasts grown on the materials were fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde, in pH 7.4 phosphate buffer 0.01 Statistical evaluation of data was performed using the software package SPSS/PC In agreement with our previous results, the modified procedure of synthesis allows to prepare composite HA–AL nanocrystals at different concentration of the BP. As a matter of fact, the dropwise addition of the AL solution into the reaction vessel just after completing the phosphate solution addition prevents the precipitation of amorphous calcium phosphate The slight structural disorder induced by AL incorporation is responsible of the observed reduction of the thermal stability of the composites. In fact, heat treatment induces a partial conversion of HA–AL nanocrystals into AL incorporation into HA nanocrystals affects At variance, AL improves osteoblast proliferation, as it results from the values reported in ALP, CICP and OC were chosen to evaluate osteoblast activation and differentiation. In fact they are the typical markers for osteoblast characterization. ALP activity is an early marker of osteoblast differentiation, and its increased expression is associated to the progressive differentiation of cultured osteoblasts The levels of osteoprotegerin/Trance ratio of the different samples do not display significant differences among the groups. OPG is a member of the TNF receptor family expressed by osteoblast and acts in the regulation of bone metabolism, and it has been shown to be a potent inhibitor of osteoclast differentiation and activation. Its role is linked to Trance that induces osteoclastogenesis and osteoclast activation. Therefore the OPG/TRANCE ratio has a key role in the control of bone resorption. However, the subject is still matter of debate, since some Authors exclude that the inhibition of BPs on bone resorption is mediated by OPG and TRANCE expression In order to evaluate the possible cell damage after culture on experimental substrates MMP-1 and MMP-13 were measured at 14 days, when cultures reached the maximum level of proliferation. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play an important role in physiological and pathological processes including tissue remodelling, and inflammation. In particular MMP-1 and MMP-13 are implicated in a variety of biological processes where collagen degradation occurs. MMPs values reported in the study were never higher than CTR ( The presence of the BP in the composite nanocrystals inhibits osteoclast proliferation and promote osteoblast growth and differentiation. In particular, osteoblast cultured on the samples at relatively high content of AL (HA–AL14 and HA–AL28) display an increased production of ALP, CICP and OC with respect both to the control and to pure HA, without provoking abnormal collagen degradation. These results demonstrate that alendronate is able to influence bone cells even in composite nanocrystals. It follows that the novel strategy developed to synthesize composite HA–AL nanocrystals could be successfully applied in the preparation of a wide range of biomaterials for hard tissue repair where a local action of alendronate is desirable. This research was carried out with the financial support of MIUR, and of the Fondazione Monte dei Paschi di Siena (Progetto “Traslazione Clinica Ingegneria Tissutale Muscolo-Scheletrica).