The paper presents the advanced control systems installed by the authors in two gold ore grinding circuits in South Africa, with three lines at Anglogold Ashanti Mponeng mine and six lines at Anglogold Ashanti Kopanang mine. At both plants the advanced control system is based on the OCS© software, and combines the flexibility of an expert system with fuzzy logic and the power of an on-line dynamic phenomenological model used as an advanced soft sensor of the whole process.
                  The history and implementation methodology is described, and the results—increases in throughput and gold recovery—are analysed. The improved control of particle size makes it possible to maximise gold recovery. This is discussed and illustrated.The paper describes the advanced grinding control systems installed at two Anglogold Ashanti gold plants in South Africa’s North West Province, and illustrates the benefits achieved. The first plant to implement an advanced grinding control system is situated at Mponeng mine (West Wits area). The system was installed in the year 2000 and the pay back period was quoted as being approximately 3 months. The system is still running four years later and the plant is still realising the financial benefits. Mponeng gold plant is fed with run-of-mine ore that is stored in mill silos. A variable speed belt controls feedrate to the mills. Three parallel SAG mills (4.85 Whilst tools are available to improve control, few have the sensitivity to process movements to provide real-time information for optimal grind control. For this reason an “Advanced Control” solution was sought. Advanced Control is often described as the supervision of basic PLC/SCADA control. Advanced control systems have to seamlessly complement the existing controls and bridge the gap that exists between basic control and optimised control. Following the successful implementation and continued benefits obtained from the system at Mponeng, Kopanang plant (Vaal River Area) decided to follow suit and investigate the installation of a similar system. Run-of-mine ore feeds Kopanang’s gold plant from two different shafts. The Tau Lekoa shaft feeds the first three SAG mills (4.85 The general objective when one considers mill circuit optimisation is usually either that of improved throughput at a sustained grind, or an improved grind at relatively consistent tonnages. A combination effect is usually realised, where one of the two mentioned parameters is significantly enhanced at the slight expense of the other. The Anglogold Ashanti South African Metallurgy philosophy emphasises efficient recovery, rather than maximised tonnages. The mill control objectives have therefore been constructed on the premise of improved grind at the given operating tonnages. The performance outcomes at Mponeng Gold Plant have displayed the benefits of improved grind because the plant is not under pressure from the shaft for higher tonnages. This has consequently improved the cyclone overflow product to the point where the grind is typically ∼0.5% >150 The grind of the final product in this area of South Africa has a large influence on the overall gold recovery. The closer the maximum ore particle size is to the maximum grain size of the valuable material, the more efficient the extraction will be ( Although the reasons for improved recoveries cannot be only attributable to an improvement in grind, it is well known that consistency in grind size makes for more efficient operation. The results shown in The Kopanang mills have achieved significant improvements in a more complicated way. The plant is under greater pressure for tonnage, so the mill optimisation was more challenging. The results show that the overall plant grind size has been optimised, and where grind has specifically not been improved it can be seen that higher mill tonnages were obtained. This is due to the flexibility of the control process controller. The data shown below was taken from daily averages and then averaged into monthly figures. The “average” lines shown on the graphs are averages according to the dates of project implementation on each specific mill. Mills 4, 5 and 6 (Kopanang) were the first three mills to be commissioned with advanced control. Mills 1, 2 and 3 (Tau Lekoa) were commissioned later. During the commissioning of OCS© on the Kopanang mills, the mill mass optimisation loop was commissioned first. After May 2004, the grind-control loop was commissioned. The installation of the system on the Tau Lekoa mills took place after that of the Kopanang mills. The results are preliminary but the data looks promising. The system was installed during April 2004 and commissioning ran until the end of May 2004. The average monthly tonnage of all three mills has increased from ∼61 Analysis of the power used per ton of −75 In addition to improved mill efficiency, long-term cost savings have been realised through the integration of expert control, holistic process control ( The availability of the mills have been noticeably improved at Kopanang Gold Plant as a result of improved mill mass control—thus fewer stops for loose liner-bolts. This has also reduced maintenance on mill feed hoppers and seals. Fewer mill stop/starts are possible, as the mill load no longer requires frequent calibration checks. Avoiding the associated power spikes therefore reduces electrical costs. The defined control strategy for both grinding plants was implemented using OCS© software, which was designed specifically for advanced control of mineral processing plants. OCS© includes all the required functionality for successful implementation of advanced control. It was designed from the ground up by mineral processing experts and thus has developed over the years in accordance with what is required for practical and simplified configuration of the system. The design also reduces software size and speeds up code execution. OCS© supplements conventional DCS (Distributed Control Systems) or PLC (Programmable Logic Controllers) by automatically reading information from them and then determining optimum setpoints by using various advanced techniques (see OCS© software embeds numerous modules, each used for different aspects of controlling a mineral processing plant, into a single structure as schematically shown in The Process Display module acts as an HMI (Human/Machine Interface) for the advanced control system. It can be easily configured for each application and serves to give a more graphical representation of the process and the parameters being optimised. The process display can take the form of a process flow sheet, block flow diagrams or tables. Data being read from the DCS/PLC, as well as data from the other modules, can be displayed here. Data can also be entered in this module and then used by any of the other modules. The user may also animate or develop new interfaces using Visual Basic. In this application, an OCS© control checklist is included which has a check-box for all the manipulated variables. Should you not want OCS© to manipulate a specific variable, it can be “unchecked”. The Process display used at Kopanang is illustrated in The Expert System module is a real-time expert system with embedded fuzzy logic, which acts as the core of any OCS© application. It obtains data from the other modules and uses “IF/THEN” rules to optimise and control the process. It includes a powerful inference engine, which executes the instructions programmed as rules into the knowledge base. The knowledge base contains the control strategy, also expressed as rules. The rules can be crisp, fuzzy or a combination of both. The decisions made by the expert system are graphically explained in real time. The success of any expert system depends on an in-depth knowledge of the process, control-philosophy and the expert system tool being used. The fuzzy logic rules are used extensively for situations where the actual measured value changes depending on the state of the process. It is a simple and powerful technique by which the rule syntax is simplified and the control is smoothed. In the example below the mill discharge density error will calculate the step change that needs to be made in the mill feed water setpoint. Real-time graphics make it very simple to understand the fuzzy rules. OCS© Soft Sensors make use of in-depth knowledge of the physics of the process. The Soft Sensor module combines this knowledge and inputs from plant instrumentation to infer numerous non-measurable process variables. These variables are especially valuable in control but also add value to historical databases. At the core of the soft sensor module is one or several dynamic predictive models of the process, with a filter estimator for on-line self-tuning of the models. The main unit operation models are population balance models. The extended Kalman filter continuously computes estimates of unmeasured state variables through comparison of measured and calculated variables. The filter first corrects its past estimates and then the differential equations, which reflect the evolution of the state of the process. These are then integrated to predict forthcoming estimates. So the model becomes an adaptive predictive model. The estimated values are used for the control and the expert system will then ensure the correct action. The use of the population balance models has been made operational with OCS©. This module generates configurable on-line statistical data, which can either be used by the expert system or for process evaluation. Histograms, moving averages, standard deviations, rates of change and numerous other statistical data are configured and used for the specific requirements of any application. Trends are configured to monitor the performance on-line and get a better understanding of how the OCS© reacts to different situations. A history of the rules can be viewed by double clicking the trend in order to trace what action OCS© took and why. While it is true that an experienced supplier and a technology that has been tried and tested is required for the success of the application, to a large extent, the outcome is defined by the teamwork and understanding of the requirements by both parties. The emphasis has to be on long-term benefits. Each application is therefore not a short-term project between client and supplier, but is more of a long-term working relationship. It is important that the process engineer has a significant amount of independence in so far as optimising and tuning the system, as well as the peace of mind knowing that the experts are available for assistance at all times. The project is divided into a number of phases and the objective and outcome of each is equally crucial to the overall success of the system. The time, planning and effort put in at the beginning of any advanced control project influences the ultimate success of implementation. The objective, basic control strategy and timing of the project should be established at an early stage. It is essential that the objective is realistic and reflects the objectives of the company. It should then be established how the objectives will be achieved and this involves using tools within the chosen software, as well as the existing control system. The existing control loops and measurements should be well tuned. Two crucial measurements that were found to experience significant drift (and affect production performance) are the mill mass signal, whose calibration is often overlooked, and the cyclone feed densitometer. Experience shows that calibration drift tends to occur with these units, and it is up to the metallurgist on site to be highly conscious of such events. OCS© has been specifically configured to validate instrument data only if it falls within a realistic range, but minor drifts can still occur within these ranges to affect fine-tuning. The plant design parameters required are established so that the information that the model (soft sensor) uses is accurate and will ensure accurate inferences and measurements. Should any design or process change take place after the installation of a system, these need to be built into the system. The different modules of the system can then be configured. In order to configure the rules to handle a wide range of disturbances, a history of plant operating data is studied and analysed. The rules are classified heuristically and divided into various groups. Initialisation rules reflect all actions that are required to take place either at every cycle, daily or at start-up/shutdown. Sensor validation rules ensure that the expert system is not using data from plant measurements or from other modules, which are outside of the scope of validation. Should a pressure transmitter reading not be validated, that control loop will not be activated these are referred to as “control branches”. A set of “alarm-rules” are created called ”Smart Alarms” which can alert operators of undesirable states of the process such as ”underload detected”. The alarm can alert people by “flash” screens on the operator console or by using the “text-to-speech engine”. The next set of rules is the “control rules”, which are divided into various control branches. These rules are responsible for deciding what action to take to optimise the process. This is translated into an output that is either calculated using crisp or fuzzy logic. The ”apply setpoint” rules send this output to the PLC/SCADA. Thereafter the last set of rules is used for evaluating the action taken. The data is also used to ensure that the specific models used for the soft sensor are appropriate to the process. A library of appropriate models is available within the software to facilitate this. The population balance model used at both plants is a generic one, but was configured specifically for the needs of each site. The expected accuracy of each measurement and each model parameter needed to be tuned. This model adaptation and tuning should be done early enough so that the model estimates can be used effectively by the control logic. The control strategy that was initially implemented at Mponeng will now be described. The changes to the strategy during the duplication and modification of the control strategy to Kopanang will then be summarised. At the beginning of the project the following parameters were measured: Feedrate to mills by mechanical belt scales. Mill feed water flow. Sump level by ultrasonic level transmitters. Volumetric flow indication to the cyclone feed line. Cyclone pressure. Mill power. Mill mass based on bearing pressures. Product particle size on Mill 1. In the past the Mponeng mills were controlled by three basic PLC control loops: Mill mass was controlled to a setpoint by varying the variable speed feedbelt and thus the feedrate. Cyclone feed pressure was maintained at a setpoint of 80kPa by means of a variable speed pump. The discharge sump level was maintained by adding dilution water. The objective of the advanced control at Mponeng was defined following an extensive base-line audit. The objective was to obtain optimised grind at the given throughput. In order to achieve this the following control loops were implemented using OCS©. The soft sensor in the model inferred certain required values that were not measured by the plant instrumentation, i.e. the mill discharge density and the particle size on all three mills. In addition to this, the model calculates the mill charge and the percent solids and particle size distribution in all streams. Manipulating the mill feed water flowrate controls the mill discharge density, which is inferred by the soft sensor. Fuzzy logic is used to calculate a step change to the mill feedwater based on the discharge density error. The % solids inside the mill largely influences the grinding efficiency of a mill. Conventional control systems cannot directly control the % solids inside a mill but typically use ratio control of The cyclone pressure is optimised by manipulating the cyclone pressure setpoint to optimise the density and the flowrate. The cut-point of the cyclone is optimised and has resulted in the much-improved grind as shown in the “Outcomes” section. The mill mass setpoint is continually optimised in order to maximise the power using fuzzy logic. The mill feedrate is then controlled in order to achieve the required mill mass setpoint. Weighted fuzzy logic is also used to determine the onset of a mill overload condition and steps are taken in advance to prevent the mill overload in a stable way. When the rate of change of the mill mass is positive and the rate of change of the mill power is negative, the system detects an overload condition and immediately begins to decrease the mill feedrate. The mill feed water will be increased in emergencies only, in an attempt to flush solids from the load. Once the overload condition has been resolved, the original control strategy is resumed. Included in the OCS© configuration are a number of smart alarms, which are presented to the operator as a screen or voice message. These instructions are clear and understandable, thus increasing the operator knowledge as well as increasing the response times to situations outside of OCS© control ( The configuration of the soft sensor proved to be of considerable value for inputs to the expert system, when used with fuzzy logic to control the milling circuit. Experience has shown that soft sensors can be successfully employed in the control of autogenous and semi-autogenous milling circuits. Given the measurements that were available, calculated values using widely accepted equations are fitted. Circuit parameters could be predicted and corrected using the Kalman filter ( Measurements are sent to the soft sensor every cycle (set at 30 The control strategy at Kopanang was based on the Mponeng system due to its success and the similarity of the circuits. Although the two plants are similar, the objectives differed slightly in that Kopanang was under greater pressure to achieve tonnage. The control strategy had to be manipulated in order to cater for this ( The objective of Kopanang is to “maintain the %<75 The main control variables at Kopanang are: grind size (estimated by the soft sensor); daily average of throughput; mill discharge density (also estimated by the soft sensor); mill load status (overload and underload); mill circulating load estimate. The PLC setpoints manipulated are: mill feedrate setpoint to control the mill mass; cyclone pressure setpoint; mill feedwater setpoint. The OCS© also calculates a mill mass target, which it manipulates to achieve maximised power. At Mponeng, OCS© directly manipulates the mill feedwater to achieve the desired mill discharge density. At Kopanang, a mill feed % solids ratio is calculated and this ratio is then manipulated so that the mill feedwater always corresponds to the fresh feedrate (from feed belt and cyclone underflow). The mill mass optimisation is constrained by detection of a mill overload or a mill circuit overload (steady increase in mill circulating load). This condition could eventually lead to an overload commonly referred to by operators as a “sand load”. A specific feature of the control strategy at Kopanang is the ability of the grind-size estimate to be tuned daily. OCS© calculates a daily average of the estimated grind size. By entering the result of a twenty-four hourly composite manual grading analysis into the operator console, the model is able to automatically tune itself. This results in no gradual bias of the model coefficients. A diagram depicting the control loops of the OCS© and the PLC is depicted in The two applications at Anglogold Ashanti’s Mponeng and Kopanang sites were clearly successful. This is based on the increase in throughput, the finer grind, enhanced recoveries and the maximising of power. The systems are operating at over 95% running time in both plants, which indicates the acceptance by the plant staff. A decrease in certain operating expenses was also observed and this all contributed to the bottom line–profitability of the process. Such improvements result from the methodology applied, the teamwork carried out and the technology used, which combines the strengths of an expert system and a soft sensor. Similar results could not have been achieved with a simpler technology. Based on this success, Anglogold Ashanti has opted to install a similar system at the Noligwa plant and this new project is already in progress. Metso Minerals Cisa would like to thank the staff at Mponeng and Kopanang plants for supplying the data and to Anglogold Ashanti for permission to publish the paper.