Several methods for disintegration of biofuel pellets were tested and compared for their ability to break up the pellets into the original particles of the raw material. Analyses performed on softwood pellets and straw pellets concluded that wet disintegration in water at ambient temperature is insufficient for a determination of the internal particle size distribution of wood- and straw pellets. When the wet disintegration was performed with water heated to the boiling point and coupled with mechanical disintegration in terms of stirring a more complete disintegration of the pellets was obtained. Based on the results obtained in the initial study a round robin was set up including six European laboratories where the selected method was tested. In the round robin test the method combining heated water and stirring of the slurry was tested on solid biofuel pellets produced of comminute straw, deciduous wood and coniferous wood respectively. With the method a satisfactory disintegration was obtained of all three types of pellets.
                  Further wet disintegration of coniferous pellets was compared to a dry disintegration using a hammer mill. The dry disintegration of the coniferous pellets resulted in smaller particle sizes compared to the wet disintegration using heated water and stirring of the slurry indicating a further disintegration of the original particles in the hammer mill process.
                  Overall the wet disintegration combined with mechanical impact was found to be the most suitable method for disintegration of solid biofuel pellets. Combined with sieving analysis the method gives realistic image of the internal particle size distribution of solid biofuel pellets.The growing focus on reduction of greenhouse gases emissions, especially carbon dioxide has led an increasing part of electricity producers to convert coal pulverized systems into co-combustion using solid biofuel in the form of comminuted wood- or straw pellets The growing consumption of pellets, both for direct combustion and for suspension combustion have increased the import of pellets from outside Europe. Considering Europe with the formal 15 countries, the use of imported biomass for electricity production could reduce by about 20% the costs related to the achievement of renewable energy use goals The recommended particle size distribution of the fuel for co-combustion varies, Baxter recommend that all particles shall be below 6.34 A method based on a wet disintegration of the pellets is commonly used for describing the internal particle size distribution of the pellets. Assuming that the internal particle size distribution of the pellets reflects the particle size distribution of the comminute pellets the method is used to estimate the behaviour of the comminute product in a suspension boiler. The present study investigates a number of methods to describe the internal particle size distribution of solid biofuel pellets. The methods are based on either wet-disintegrations of the pellets in water and subsequent drying and sieving of the particles or on a dry disintegration by crushing the pellets in a laboratory scale hammer mill and subsequent sieving of the particles. The obtained particle size distributions from the wet-disintegration methods are compared to the particle size distribution obtained with the dry disintegration. For the present used wet disintegration method an initial study was carried out to investigate whether comparable results were obtainable between laboratories and moreover to see whether the method could be improved. The initial study gave rise to changes in the method and a round robin test with six participating laboratories was subsequently conducted for this revised method. The aim of the round robin test was to verify the revised method and to determine the variation in terms of repeatability and reproducibility in the obtained results. All test material origin from commercially produced biofuel pellets acquired from the Danish energy company ‘DONG energy’. The pellets had a diameter of 8 Three laboratories participated in the initial study of the existing method which consists of a wet disintegration of the pellets and subsequently drying and determination of the particle size distribution of the obtained particles. The disintegration was performed by placing a test portion of 300 Beside the disintegration with demineralised water at ambient temperature additional tests was performed, using demineralised water heated to boiling point and using mechanical impact as stirring with a spoon respectively to facilitate the disintegration. All types of disintegrations were performed in duplicates. After the equilibration the test portion was divided into two portions each of 150 Moisture determination was performed by drying the moisture test portion in a drying cabinet at 105 Duplicate particle size analysis were performed with a Retsch AS 200 control ‘g’ sieving machine using eight The dry disintegration was performed in duplicates using a laboratory hammer mill fitted with six equidistantly pivoting hammers. The rotation axis are mounted on a 10 The particle size distribution of the dry disintegrated pellets was determined as described in Section Six laboratories participated in the round robin test. The method used was based on the experience from the initial study. The disintegration was performed by placing a test portion of 300 After the equilibration the test portion was divided into two portions each of 150 Particle size analyses were performed using the sieving equipment and procedure described in Section For comparisons of the results from the round robin test (2.4) are the 25%-, 50%- and 75% quantiles calculated. The variation in the particle size distribution obtained within and between the laboratories is calculated as the standard deviation: All data, which cannot be rejected due to procedure errors, are applied in the calculation of the standard deviations. Thereby no Differences between the calculated quantiles from each laboratory are identified using a one-way ANOVA with following model: Standard deviation of repeatability ( Solid biofuel pellets produced of coniferous wood and straw were tested at three different laboratories using the existing method and modifications hereof. The obtained cumulative particle size distributions indicate that there is a considerable influence from the applied disintegration method on the distribution ( The disintegration of the straw pellets was much more complicated and some of the experiments were abandoned. In some of the experiments the material absorbed all of the 1200 Solid biofuel pellets from coniferous wood was disintegrated in a hammer mill as described in Section Solid biofuel pellets produced of coniferous and deciduous wood and comminuted straw were tested in a round robin test at six different laboratories. Except for one laboratory the obtained particle size distributions of the disintegrated deciduous wood pellets showed very little variation ( The sieving of the straw pellet material caused problem in three of the laboratories where mass losses of the disintegrated material during the sieving operations caused rejection of the results. However, for the three laboratories where the disintegration of straw pellets was completed without problems the resulting particle size distributions was very similar ( The mean value, the standard deviation (SD) and the coefficient of variance (CV) at the 25%-, 50%- and 75% quantile for the cumulative particle size distributions of straw-, coniferous- and deciduous pellets is presented in The repeatability was found to be smaller than the reproducibility indicating that the disintegration and sieving procedure varies between the laboratories and thereby influence the result of the method. The result of the initial wet disintegration study illustrated that wet disintegration in water at ambient temperature is an unsuitable method for determining the internal particle size distribution of wood- and straw pellets. The method does not adequately separate the particles in the pellets from each other and thereby result in an overestimation of larger particles. When the wet disintegration was performed with water heated to the boiling point and coupled with mechanical disintegration in terms of stirring a more complete disintegration of the pellets was obtained. In the round robin test the method combining the use of heated water and stirring of the slurry was tested on solid biofuel pellets produced of comminuted straw and deciduous- and coniferous wood. With this revised method a satisfactory disintegration was obtained of all three types of pellets. The dry disintegration of coniferous pellets resulted in smaller particle sizes compared to the wet disintegration using heated water and stirring of the slurry. The particle size distribution of the dry disintegrated pellets to a large extend reflects aperture size of the applied sieves in the hammer mill and the further comminution by the hammer mill of the disintegrated particles. It is not possible from the present study to identify whether wet or dry disintegration as applied here, describes the resulting particles size distribution of a large scale hammer milling operation in the best manner. However, as shown in the round robin test the revised wet disintegration method gives highly repeatable and reproducible results and the method may provide both a relative measure of the particle size distribution of the produced fuel powder in a large scale milling operation and the particle size distribution of the raw material used for the pellet production respectively. Further, the wet disintegration method can be conducted by any laboratory having access to sieving equipment, whereas the dry disintegration demands a hammer mill and a procedure which secure that the dry disintegration results in comparable results between laboratories. By comparing results obtained with the wet disintegration method to the particle size distribution for the actual produced fuel powder in large scale hammer mills a functional relationship might be constructed. The relationship would be explicit for the specific hammer mill and the operation hereof. The research was supported by energinet.dk (PSO 5297). The authors would like to express their gratitude to the following laboratories which also participated in the round robin test: DONG energy, Denmark, ENAS Oy, Finland, Technologie- und Förderzentrum Nachwachsende Rohstoffe (TFZ), Germany.