The objective of this study was to prepare micronized cefquinome sulfate by negative-pressure cavitation antisolvent precipitation to improve its permeability and transdermal absorbability. Dimethylsulfoxide and ethanol were used as the solvent and anti-solvent, respectively. The effects of operating parameters, including cefquinome sulfate concentration, volume ratio of antisolvent to solvent, antisolvent precipitation time, and applied negative pressure on the characteristics of the precipitate crystals, were evaluated using an orthogonal array design. Under the optimized conditions, micronized cefquinome sulfate with a mean particle size of 415.8nm was obtained at a yield of 78%. The micronized cefquinome sulfate was characterized by scanning electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction, and differential scanning calorimetry. No obvious change in its chemical structure was observed, but crystallinity was reduced. The physicochemical properties and transdermal absorbability of crystalline cefquinome sulfate improved as a result of the particle size reduction by physical modification. This negative-pressure cavitation antisolvent precipitation process offers a promising technique for improving the physicochemical properties and anti-inflammatory activity of cefquinome sulfate.Cow mastitis, the most commonly occurring inflammation in dairy cows, is difficult to cure, and is therefore a major topic of research by international scholars Oral anti-inflammatory drugs are often mixed in with the animal feedstocks, but, because the cow has a complex four-chambered stomach, this leads to excessive drug loss in the metabolic process Cefquinome sulfate, a fourth-generation cephalosporin, has been solely researched for veterinary use owing to its antimicrobial activity against a broad spectrum of gram-positive and gram-negative bacterial species Microparticles have been popularly applied in enhancing the dissolution rate of drugs that have poor solubility in water. Owing to the reduced particle size of microparticles as compared with that of the raw drug particles, the interfacial surface area is increased, leading to improved solubility in water The aim of this study was to prepare cefquinome sulfate microparticles using a negative-pressure cavitation antisolvent precipitation process and to evaluate their physicochemical properties and transdermal delivery Cefquinome sulfate powder (purity of 98.5%) was provided by Zhejiang Hisun Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd. of China. Ethanol (analytically pure) was purchased from Tianli Chemical Reagent Company (Tianjin, China). N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone, acetone, methanol, dichloromethane, trichloromethane, and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (analytically pure) were purchased from Bodi Chemical Reagent Company (Tianjin, China). The skin permeation study was performed and approved by the Institutional Animal Ethics Committee. The thoracic skin of a dairy cow was obtained from Mengniu Pasture, Zhaodong, China. The skin was washed with normal saline and the hair on the skin was removed with an electric shaver before use. Micronized cefquinome sulfate was prepared by antisolvent precipitation. A schematic diagram of the apparatus is shown in An L Generally speaking, MPS and yield are selected as the two indexes used to evaluate the advantages and disadvantages of the antisolvent precipitation technique. In the orthogonal design, a scoring system was applied to comprehensively investigate the proposed process. MPS and yield were considered as equally important, with each assigned a value of 0.5. The detailed appraisals and the relative marking criteria with respect to MPS and yield are presented in The diameter distributions of the cefquinome sulfate powders were measured using a dynamic light scattering analyzer (ZetaPALS, Brookharen Instrument Corporation, USA). Samples were suspended in deionized water and treated by sonication for 3 The surface morphologies of the unprocessed and processed cefquinome sulfate were investigated by SEM (Quanta 200, FEI, Hillsboro, USA). Before examination, the samples were sputter-coated with a thin layer of gold–palladium (5 to 10 Powder XRD patterns were collected in transmission mode using an X-ray diffractometer with a rotating anode (Philips, Xpert-Pro, Holland) with Cu Kα The unprocessed and processed cefquinome sulfate powders were analyzed by DSC (TA instruments, Q100, New Castle, USA). About 5 As shown in Both the unprocessed and processed cefquinome sulfate present in the permeate liquors generated in the transdermal delivery test were analyzed by HPLC using a Waters 1525–2489 series system (Waters, USA), equipped with a HiQ sil-C18 reversed-phase column (4.6 The residual DMSO in the micronized cefquinome sulfate was analyzed using gas chromatography (GC) (Agilent 7890 The first step in developing the antisolvent precipitation method was to select the solvent and antisolvent, making sure that the solute has high solubility in the solvent and that the antisolvent has little solubility in solvent but is miscible with it. Seven common solvents were evaluated, including N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone, ethanol, acetone, methanol, dichloromethane, trichloromethane, and DMSO, with respect to solubility of cefquinome sulfate, so as to choose the most suitable combination of solvent and antisolvent. Cefquinome sulfate has a solubility at 25 The various operational parameters exert different influences on the preparation process, each of which should be systematically optimized. For the antisolvent precipitation process, the cefquinome sulfate concentration, the volume ratio of antisolvent to solvent, the antisolvent precipitation time, and the negative pressure applied are generally considered to be the most important parameters. An orthogonal L Electron micrographs of the cefquinome sulfate surfaces are shown in To further investigate the occurrence of possible crystal structural changes, XRD analyses were undertaken. The results for unprocessed and processed cefquinome sulfates are shown in As seen in DMSO acts as a Class III solvent with low toxicity and is limited to a maximum of 0.5% in a drug, according to the International Conference on Harmonization (ICH) The cumulative absorptions of the unprocessed and processed cefquinome sulfate suspensions by the cowhide pieces in the transdermal tests are shown in In this work, micronized cefquinome sulfate was successfully prepared using a negative-pressure cavitation antisolvent precipitation process. A sample of micronized cefquinome sulfate with a MPS of 415.8 The authors thank the