Sodium carbonate solution was used to leach alumina from ladle furnace refining slag. The parameters studied were slag particle size, leaching temperature, leaching time, sodium carbonate concentration and liquid:solid ratio. The parameters had significant effects on the leaching efficiency of alumina. For the following leaching conditions: particle sizes between 48 to 63μm, leaching temperature of 358K, a leaching time of 2h, sodium carbonate concentration of 10% and a liquid:solid ratio of 8, the leaching efficiency of alumina was 78.4%. The leach solution was purified to remove calcium, iron, and silicate ions. The purified leach solution was treated by carbonation to precipitate Al(OH)3, and the Al(OH)3 was then dried at 383K for 4h. Finally, Al2O3 with a purity of 98.5% was obtained by calcination of Al(OH)3 at 1473K for 2h. Based on laboratory work, a circulatory alkaline extracting method could be developed to prepare Al2O3 from high-alumina LF refining slag.Alumina is an important metallurgical resource. Most alumina is used for extracting aluminium, and a small fraction is used to produce refractories and ceramics ( For the steelmaking industry, aluminium is an important deoxidizer. In the process of de-oxidation, aluminium combines with oxygen dissolved in liquid steel to generate alumina, then it combines with the calcium oxide in molten steel or slag, forming calcium aluminate (12CaO·7Al In view of the above reasons, sodium carbonate solution was used to leach LF refining slag. Based on existing studies and thermodynamics analysis, the reactions which may occur in the leaching process are ( Eqs. The aim is to extract alumina from ladle furnace refining slag by sodium carbonate solution leaching. The experimental procedures are now described in detail. Ladle furnace refining slag from Maanshan Iron & Steel Co., Ltd was ground by planetary mill. Then most of the scrap iron and ferric oxide were separated by magnetic separator. By screening, four series of samples with size fractions of 96 to 270 To study leaching behaviour of ladle furnace refining slag by sodium carbonate solution, a series of experiments were carried out. Experimental conditions were as follows: sodium carbonate concentration ranging from 4% to 12% (% w/w), leaching time ranging from 0.5 Since calcium hydro-aluminate-carbonate (HCAC) has some special properties, such as low density, loose structure, high water of crystallisation content, and a high dispersion degree for its calcium, it was used as the reagent for silicate ion removal. Different amounts HCAC were added to 1 With the amount of HCAC increasing gradually from 3.5 As the main mineral phase in LF refining slag is 12CaO·7Al During leaching, a little iron was introduced into the leached solution. Different amounts of 0.2% non-ionic polyacrylamide (NPAM) solution were added to the solution that had undergone silicate and calcium ion removal to remove iron ions. Experimental results showed that, when the amount of NPAM added was 0.25 At 298 As shown in  The experimental conditions were as follows: leaching temperature: 378 The experiments were performed under the following conditions: leaching temperature: 378 Experimental results are shown in The experimental conditions were as follows: particle size: 48 to 63  The experiments were carried out under the following conditions: particle size: 48 to 63  The following experimental conditions were used: particle size: 48 to 63  Experimental results showed that the leaching efficiency was 78.4% under the following leaching conditions: sodium carbonate concentration: 10%; leaching temperature: 358 Silicate, iron, and calcium ions were removed from the leach solution. Then, carbonisation was undertaken, during which process, the variation of pH with time is shown in After carbonisation, precipitates were obtained by filtration and analysed by differential thermal analyser. The results are shown in When temperature was in the range of 373 to 437 When temperature lay between 523 When temperature lay between 1073 Alumina was obtained by calcining aluminium hydroxide; the composition of the product is shown in Based on these experimental results, the following conclusions can be drawn: The main chemical components of ladle furnace refining slag are CaO (52.75%) and Al Under the following leaching conditions: particle sizes between 48 and 63 The leach solution was purified to remove silicate, iron, and calcium ions. The purified leach solution was treated by carbonation to precipitate aluminium hydroxide. Al The study was supported by the