Numerical simulation that will capture the complex behaviour of rock fragment systems, e.g., in mining and civil engineering, requires both the computational mechanics capability to model particle interactions between complex shapes and an associated means to represent the kind of arbitrary or angular geometry relevant to problems involving rock fragments. This paper is concerned less with the modelling and more with the representation. Here, we focus on representation geared to ‘soft contact’ modelling using either combined finite-discrete element (FEM/DEM) methods, or non-spherical DEM methods such as multi-sphere approximations of irregular geometry. 3D laser ranging (LADAR) is used to capture astonishingly realistic rock aggregate geometries. We report on the work flow procedures to generate computationally meshed virtual particles for modelling. The design of a shape library and a suggested procedure for selecting virtual particles for input to FEM/DEM or DEM models is discussed together with the use of inertia moments for shape descriptors. Use of the shape library for shape descriptor analysis is also illustrated. DEM simulations of packing using irregular particles from the shape library are presented.Our development and use of a virtual geoscience workbench (VGW) for the study of particulate systems has focussed initially on length scales similar to rock aggregates, i.e., hand-sized particles whose interactions are dominated by gravity forces. The work is however, generic and has wide relevance, e.g., to powder technologies. The importance of the influence of particle shape in mining, e.g., draw-point and hopper hang-ups, mineral processing, civil engineering and the behaviour of bituminous- and cementitious-bound geomaterials has contributed to the development and use of DEM and FEM/DEM simulation techniques that can handle irregular particle shape interactions (e.g., The modelling of interactions between non-rigid irregular particles using DEM adopts essentially two different types of approach. The first are those that in order to compute normal and tangential contact forces rely on a well defined parametric form for the curvatures and overlap volumes of the colliding/contacting particles such as multisphere, ellipsoidal and superquadric models. An intriguing and powerful recent development has been the work of Another reason for modelling realistic shape is to capture the breakage behaviour of granular materials more realistically, irregular geometries with sharp edges being much more susceptible to breakage than rounded objects. In simulating granular crushing in pseudo-static loading or in impacts or flows involving multiple collisions with breakages, a range of breakage algorithms and failure criteria with varying degrees of sophistication have been proposed depending on purpose and computational efficiency needed. All models which discretise the particle into sub-elements in which the stresses are calculated and compared with fracture criteria will benefit from accurate particle geometries from a shape library in order to compute these internal stresses. However, breakage remains an active research area with more success in 2D FEM/DEM models (see Often, when modelling particulate flow and packing of rock fragments and when compaction is negligible, if the particles to be modelled are relatively stiff and non-breaking, a reasonable approach is to model the internal volume as rigid. The outer skin volume is then represented by deformable adjacent tetrahedral skin elements or overlapping spherical elements, making the solution more manageable. Whether tetrahedrons or spheres are employed as primitives, thousands of elements making up the skin may be required to achieve a close geometric match for irregular shapes. For angular rock aggregate shapes, e.g., as shown in The representation at fine length scales and the capturing of surface texture enters the realm of friction effects. Assigning appropriate friction and damping coefficients for the various different types of modelling and resolution approaches is a subject wide open to direct means of further study using highly resolved geometry. We recognise that hard contact modelling of irregular particle shapes with polyhedral representation may be useful for applications where pseudo-static pack geometry is more important than realistic dynamic behaviour during pack formation or flow. Our concern here is mainly with providing meshed geometries that can be used for soft contact modelling whether for FEM/DEM or DEM including fracturing tetrahedral agglomerates modelled by DEM (see To simulate bulk behaviour and emergent properties of angular and irregular particle systems that have direct relevance to rock fragment applications: e.g., sediment grains, aggregates, boulders, rocks and meteorites, particle shapes require a computationally meshed representation. The user of the modelling technology must then be able to select the range of shape characteristics of scientific and engineering interest. The associated research issues introduced briefly in this conference paper are therefore as follows. Acquisition of surface geometry of objects including re-entrant shapes. Surface mesh quality and resolution settings for virtual particle shape retrieval. Principal moments of inertia and model variables required for each particle. Shape library. Particle shape descriptors stored in the shape library. Shape descriptor plots. Example simulations using particles from shape library. Two shape acquisition methods for surface capture well-suited to coarse aggregate-sized particles (10–100 In future, modellers will wish to have the option of representing the geometry at the level of detail compatible with varying computational resources and the problem of interest. For example, the behaviour of a system of 20–50 representative particles may provide all the scientific insight needed for a certain problem. Furthermore, the ability to model highly resolved realistic geometries is an essential special case in evaluating the influence of increasing geometric accuracy in a FEM/DEM model and for developing efficient approximate approaches that capture essential behaviour at lower resolutions and has the potential for examining friction effects. To obtain high resolution surface scans the system in High quality computational meshes of triangulated surfaces, triangle normals and mesh connectivity can be created in SLIM and exported from 3D Viewer. Several different standard format surface meshes can be exported including stl and vrml. When modelling particulates processes with VGW, we propose to use a combination of open source codes for meshing and visualisation together with custom-built mesh translator and visualisation software. These provide the necessary surface and volumetric computational meshes and file formats for a range of simulation approaches, e.g., for multisphere DEM solvers for particles with rigid interiors or tetrahedral FEM/DEM solvers. To achieve acceptable CPU time and results accuracy, the question of resolution selection in irregular shaped particulates modelling is paramount. The highest resolution possible, as set by the original data capture, will need to be available for certain modelling applications, e.g., for modelling frictional behaviour, irregular particle bouncing and settling in a rock-fall simulation, or fluid flow around rock bodies. However, for typical applications, it will be necessary to provide mesh coarsening while retaining an optimum of edge and triangle quality (see The level of sophistication of mesh manipulation needed currently suggests commercial meshing software may have the edge over freely available meshing codes for user-defined mesh thinning. Mesh thinning options, when high resolution is not appropriate, is an essential GUI feature. For triangular surface meshes, the user interactively adjusts grid resolution by selecting minimum node separation noting the number of surface triangles. For the purposes of building a shape library, scanning errors are not especially significant but it is interesting to note that the particle volume can be obtained from its mass and density and this can be compared with the volume integration from the acquired surface mesh as one means of checking the geometric accuracy of the scanning process. The results are more than satisfactory and within the margin of error for the granite density. In the simulations, 2.70 There is some debate regarding whether shape is intimately linked to size in geomaterials but there is no doubt that to investigate effects of shape, the ability to create particle geometry independent of size is essential. For coordinates preserved at the true acquisition scale (i.e., high resolution), two different surface meshes; triangular and voxelised, may be accessed for each particle. From the node coordinates in the high resolution surface and associated triangulated surface meshes volume tetrahedral meshes can be generated. The equivalent voxel-formed meshes for volume-occupying and surface-occupying voxels have been derived using an algorithm which is able to deal with convex and concave particles during conversion to voxels. For simplicity, a high resolution default size of 1 Several options exist to non-dimensionalise the meshes. Here, the dimensionless length units are rescaled according to the equivalent volume spherical diameter. Equivalent volume cube length and the circumscribing sphere diameter are alternative choices, each having certain advantages. Essentially, the formats of available surface and volumetric meshes for every particle residing in the shape library are (i) tetrahedral dimensionalised: high resolution, user-defined resolution, (ii) tetrahedral non-dimensionalised: high resolution, user-defined resolution, (iii) voxelised dimensionalised: high resolution (default set to 1 To compute the 3D particle dynamics involving rotations using DEM or FEM/DEM, the moments of inertia tensor must be computed for all non-spherical particles. The principal axes of inertia of a rigid body are a set of orthogonal axes passing through the centre of mass of the body. These axes relate to the object’s mass distribution and rotation in such a way that when the body rotates free of torques about any of these axes, the angular momentum is not transferred to any other axis. For instance, a spinning top rotating about its long axis continues rotating in this way if not disturbed. However, if the initial rotation is about an arbitrary axis, it rapidly becomes disordered. For this reason, it is simple to operate a scalar multiplier along the principal axes of inertia of a particle as a means of numerically distorting particle geometry but retaining axial directions governing rotational stability. This fact opens up a whole spectrum of particle shape hybrids with which to extend the library capabilities. The three principal inertia axes are in the direction of the eigenvectors of the inertia tensor, a symmetric, second rank tensor. In the discrete case where masses where The eigen-values corresponding to each eigen-vector of the inertia tensor are called The moment of inertia calculation is of course perfectly general and can handle non-uniform density materials. For example, when applied to voxel mesh together with density data as may be acquired by X-Ray CT scan, the calculation method implemented is directly applicable to handling the variable density that may be assigned to separate voxels. Such a variable density could be generated by different mineral species within a rock or entire voids that have been geometrically deduced by the scan. As we are in this paper focussing on external surface-acquired data and on the shape effect on inertia moments which is a much more significant effect in nearly all applications than internal density variation within a particle and since we are dealing with very low porosity aggregates with rock forming minerals of densities ranging between 2.65 and 3.1 at most, we have proceeded with the simplifying assumption that the density is uniform within a particle. For simplicity, we calculate the inertia moments from the voxelised rather than the tetrahedral mesh of the object. Assuming a uniform mass distribution within the particle, we may assign to each cell a differential mass and a position vector at its centre. Then, we construct and diagonalize the inertia tensor. As an example, we applied this procedure to three different particles. Results are presented in Of great significance in the comparison of particle form are the orthogonal axial dimensions. Unfortunately, as anyone with experience of making axial measurements on real angular particles will attest, measuring the maximum, intermediate and minimum length objectively often degenerates into crude approximation. Given that the entire geometry has been captured numerically, there are many objectively defined sets of axial directions and axial dimensions systems (e.g., as defined by first locating the longest distance within the particle or by the minimum volume bounding box dimensions) but it is reasonable to suggest that no axial directions and section planes are as mechanically attractive as the principal directions and planes defined by inertia moments. These intersect at the centre of mass. To obtain unique and meaningful axial dimensions for use as shape descriptors of form, we propose to record Sources of crushed rock aggregates of different rock type, e.g., basalt, or limestone, have different shape characteristics, making some more suitable as aggregates than others. Particles scanned for the library are of crushed rock aggregates from a granite quarry that supplies railway track ballast, but other rock types will be added to the library. Pieces within a suitable narrow mass range 100–200 The library is designed as an interactive tool where the user is allowed to select populations of particles with different characteristics. The selection is interactive where the user can actually pre-visualize the particle together with some of its characteristics to aid selection. So for example, the user is able to select from a screen shot showing surface meshes of either equant, long, flat, intermediate, rounded, very rounded or even artificial-shaped particles, in much the same way the photographs of our initially scanned particles are shown in There is a vast literature on particle shape characterisation and shape descriptors beyond the scope of this paper. The trend towards capturing and modelling 3D shape effects in granular systems is developing fast (e.g., Another shape property governing both space filling and strength behaviour, independent of form and at a distinctly finer scale than form, is angularity or roundness. Descriptors of angularity have rarely been addressed in 3D, although high amplitudes of higher order spherical harmonics will have the same significance as the 2D Fourier amplitudes used widely for angularity measures. It is intended to explore the use of the three principal planes of inertia to define three orthogonal cross-sections through the particle’s centre of mass and make them viewable to the shape library user from thumb-nail representations. The many traditional 2D descriptors of shape can then be extracted from the perimeter coordinates of these objectively defined cross-sections. 2D angularity measures such as those of Surface texture of particles is beyond the scope of geometric representation in typical particulate simulations. Mechanical behaviour attributable to surface texture lends itself quite well to representation by coulomb friction and damping terms in the contact interaction models of DEM, although it is worth pointing out that FEM/DEM provides a further means to study friction-generating asperity deformation as a fundamental process. Depending on how much resolution is maintained per modelled particle, it is possible to capture in the simulation the effects of both angularity and form of particles. Typically, at least 50 pixel elements per particle diameter are needed to begin to capture the effects of angularity. The calculation of a few important particle properties ( Surface area can be obtained directly from the surface mesh of the scanned particle. Typically, this mesh consists of a set of non-overlapping triangles. The total surface area Volume of the particle may be computed from the voxelised mesh or the tetrahedral mesh. In the former case, we calculate the mass The latter approach is more accurate given that the acquired surface mesh yields a more highly resolved surface geometry that can be internally meshed with tetrahedra. The volume is then the sum of the sub-volumes of all tetrahedra in the volumetric mesh. For a given tetrahedron This procedure was used to determine the volumes shown in within the expected error of the calculation and within expectation of the known mass. Specific surface is defined as the ratio of surface to volume Equivalent diameter of circumscribing sphere of influence is the diameter of the sphere with a radius joining the centre of mass of a particle to its most extreme surface point. This descriptor gives a qualitative idea of the possible area/volume of influence when the particle rotates about its shortest axis. It may thus be substantially greater than the inscribed volume sphere. Its value is calculated directly from the voxelised mesh or from the triangulated mesh. In either case, the coordinates of the particle’s centre of mass are first determined. To illustrate the analysis tools offered within the shape library, a selection of plots are presented and discussed briefly with reference to some 38 particles shown in photographs in the paper. The surface area to volume relation as size increases is one of the most fundamental indicators of shape for 3D objects. Until recently it has been neglected for irregular shapes for the obvious reasons that hitherto, the values have been hard to come by. Surface area and volume relations can be computed for irregular particles in the library and compared with platonic solids. In Another interesting plot, shown in The standard axial ratios are presented in The main purpose of the shape library, apart from providing shape analysis tools, is to provide a versatile interface for input to DEM and FEM/DEM simulations that require irregular particle shapes. For example, using an algorithm (recently submitted for publication) to cluster overlapping non-uniform spheres efficiently and optimally within particle meshes from the shape library, it has been possible to examine mono-shaped packs with different particle shapes. We use an in-house multisphere DEM code to produce packs from gravitational settling. Results presented in The work flow to acquire geometry and generate computational meshes requires investment in equipment and specialised meshing software. The structure of an expandable sharable shape library has been illustrated and a rationale for resolution, different mesh types, and non-dimensionalisation of shape geometry has been proposed. For irregular shaped particles, descriptors derived from principal moments of inertia are likely to have an important role especially because of their significance in simulation. The shape library comes with powerful analysis tools to study the effect of shape attributes on the emergent properties of interest. The roll-lock coefficient, closely related to the surface area to volume ratio, is a good candidate for a predictor of many granular processes. The use of the library as input to DEM simulation of irregular shaped granular behaviour has been illustrated in possibly the first numerical study of 3D packing of its kind, in this illustrative case using real quartzite pebble shapes. The authors wish to acknowledge EPSRC Grants GR/S42699/01 and GR/S42705/01 for funding the Virtual Geoscience Workbench project. Thanks are also due to Ken Chatfield for work on improving the scanning work flow.