A fundamental investigation was carried out on coal–coal, kaolinite–kaolinite, and coal–kaolinite interactions using the atomic force microscopy colloidal probe technique at different pH and calcium concentrations to explore the effect of kaolinite on fine coal flotation in the present study. The results showed that the kaolinite particles seem to be always detrimental to the flotation process. In deionized water, a repulsive force was always detected in the kaolinite–kaolinite interaction while kaolinite-coating phenomenon was not observed on a coal surface under the neutral pH. However, the repulsive force made it more difficult for the ultra-fine kaolinite particles to settle in the tailing thickener and the unsettled particles returned to the flotation flowsheet, which decreased the flotation efficiency because of the water entrainment. With the addition of Ca2+, the repulsive electrostatic force between kaolinite and kaolinite decreased. The attractive van der Waals force could dominate the kaolinite–kaolinite interactions, enhancing the sedimentation classification performance of fine kaolinite in tailing thickener. However, the interaction forces between coal and kaolinite changed from being weakly repulsive to strongly attractive and increased monotonously, resulting in the occurrence of the kaolinite-coating phenomenon during flotation.Froth flotation is an effective separation method for fine coal cleaning. In this method, separation is achieved because of the differences in surface hydrophobicity between organic and mineral matter Many studies have been conducted to investigate the effect of fine clays on coal flotation. Fine/ultra-fine clay particles are easily carried into froth products by entrainment or mechanical coating, degrading the quality of the final products in mineral flotation. Commonly, entrainment is strongly dependent on water recovery, which is considered as the carrying medium to transfer the mineral particles into the concentrate in flotation process However, unlike entrainment, mechanical-coating behaviour is mainly determined by the particle interaction force due to the electrostatic attraction between negatively charged coal particles and positively charged edges of clay particles. A new method called the zeta potential distribution measurement of coal–clay suspensions was used to study the interactions of clay with coal particles by Xu et al. To date, the complex interactions of coal and clay particles are not well understood, and the direct measurement of the interaction forces between practical coal and clay particles are of considerable academic and practical importance in the field of flotation engineering. In recent years, rapid development of advanced analytical methods has enabled basic theoretical research on mineral processing shift to nano-scale. The atomic force microscopy (AFM) colloidal probe technique was initially developed by Ducker et al. In the present study, a fundamental investigation was carried out on coal–coal, kaolinite–kaolinite, and coal–kaolinite interactions using the AFM colloidal probe technique at different pH and calcium concentrations. However, it must be noted that the irregular geometry and surface heterogeneity of a practical coal or clay particle make it difficult to use this technique to obtain reliable and reproducible force measurements for quantitative analysis with the standard DLVO theory of colloid stability. Consequently, the force curves are only qualitatively compared and we restrict our discussion to qualitative speculations. This procedure has been successfully used before to study coal particle–bubble interaction and the presence of nanobubbles on ZnS surfaces and/or slime removal from ZnS surfaces after methanol treatment Lump coal samples with 20.27% ash content were collected from a coal preparation plant in Shandong Province, China. Float–sink test was performed with heavy liquids (density: 1.35 A BioScope Catalyst (Bruker, America) atomic force microscope was used in the contact mode for force measurement between a particle and substrate. A coal or kaolinite particle was glued to the apex of a triangular cantilever using a very small amount of epoxy resin; this process is described in detail elsewhere The zeta potential (electrokinetic potential) of coal or kaolinite particles was measured using a ZetaPALS instrument (Brookhaven Instruments Co., USA), which is based on an extension of the principle of laser-based electrophoretic light scattering. A suspension with 0.1 wt.% coal or kaolinite particles (− The surface interaction forces were measured as a function of the separation distance force vs. separation curves, between coal and coal, kaolinite and kaolinite, and coal and kaolinite in solutions with different acidities. The effect of pH on the interaction forces between coal and coal is shown in For a system comprising two spheres with radiuses Commonly, the electrical double-layer force In conclusion, the classical DLVO force ( The zeta potential distribution of the coal and kaolinite particles at different pH values is shown in The effect of pH on the approach curves for the kaolinite–kaolinite interaction in DI water is shown in The effect of pH on the approach curves for the coal–kaolinite interaction in DI water is shown in The effect of calcium concentration on the interaction forces between coal and coal at pH 7 is shown in The effect of calcium concentration on the interaction forces between kaolinite and kaolinite at pH 7 is shown in The effect of calcium concentration on the interaction forces between coal and kaolinite at pH 7 is shown in The above analysis indicates that kaolinite particles seem to be always detrimental to the flotation process. Under the neutral condition in DI water, the kaolinite-coating phenomenon was not observed but the efficiency of recycled-water applications was reduced. The unsettled fine kaolinite colloid particles always returned to the flotation flowsheet, which decreased the flotation efficiency (because of water entrainment). To improve the sedimentation classification performance, Ca  The interaction force curves for the coal–coal interaction in DI water at different pH values were qualitatively described by the classical DLVO theory. At low pH values, the attractive van der Waals force overcame the repulsive electrostatic force to achieve the rupture of the thin liquid film, while at pH 10, opposite results were obtained. Unlike the coal–coal interaction where attraction was recorded at pH 4 and 7, in the kaolinite–kaolinite interaction, a repulsive force was always detected throughout the pH range of 4–10. This can probably be attributed to the fact that in the pH range of 4–10, the surface potential of kaolinite was always lower than that of coal, leading to a stronger repulsive electrostatic force. It must be noted that the kaolinite-coating phenomenon was not observed on the coal surface under the neutral condition. With the addition of Ca The analysis results indicate that kaolinite particles seem to be always detrimental to the flotation process. However, the behaviour of kaolinite particles in flotation and sedimentation classification is complex. Therefore, the measurement and control of particle interactions require further study. This research was supported by the