The ore under study was obtained from the Kab Amiri area located close to the northern boundary of the Central Eastern Desert. The ore is constituted of different kinds of refractory minerals. These are mainly represented by the niobium–tantalum rare earth-bearing minerals namely euxinite, samarsakite and fergusonite, beside the uranium refractory minerals davidite and zircon. Increasing demand for niobium, tantalum, titanium, uranium, thorium and rare earth elements has stressed the importance of developing methods for their recovery and processing into marketable form. In the present work, Kab Amiri ore was subjected to direct agitation leaching with sulfuric acid. Variables such as acid concentration, temperature, time, ore to acid ratio and oxidant effect were studied. When finely ground ore (−74 μm) was reacted upon for 2 h with a mixture of sulfuric acid (10.8 M) and nitric acid (5.3 M) in the ore to acid weight ratio of 1:3 at 200 °C, almost complete recovery of both niobium and tantalum was achieved while the leaching extents of thorium and total rare earths were 86% and 70%, respectively. On the other hand, the recovery of both uranium and titanium did not exceed 60% due to their presence in the refractory mineral davidite.Niobium and tantalum elements occur in a great variety of ores. Their commercial value in the metallurgical, nuclear and space industries, etc. make their recovery desirable in relatively concentrated form. The total production of tantalum from raw materials as reported by the Tantalum–Niobium International Study Center (T.I.C) The chemical study of niobium and tantalum elements shows that there are large numbers of procedures for their ore decomposition. All niobium minerals can be readily decomposed with hydrofluoric acid with almost complete dissolution. This method is widely used for the dissolution of columbite–tantalite minerals The niobium–tantalum rare earth-bearing minerals which occur in the form of multiple oxides are commonly associated with uranium minerals. These minerals are opened by different methods including acid leaching, atmospheric alkaline leaching, pressure alkaline leaching, roasting and chloride roasting followed by acid and alkaline leaching Owing to the refractory nature of some uranium minerals such as davidite, more aggressive conditions are required for leaching than those used in conventional uranium circuits The present work is concerned with the leaching process performed upon Kab Amiri ore. This area is located near the Qena–Safaga Road, i.e., close to the northern boundary of the Central Eastern Desert. Two radioactive anomalies were reported in the Kab Amiri monsogranite: one in the pegmatites and the other in the silica veinlets. The pegmatites host rocks are composed of quartz cores surrounded by alkali feldspar outer zones. Both cores and outer zones are separated by an incomplete zone of muscovite. The muscovite zone shows high radioactivity, within which visible black metallic minerals are detected. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) results of the black metallic minerals showed that they are composed of zircon (Zr,U,Th,Hf)SiO The niobium–tantalum raw material under study was selected from Kab Amiri. The ore was ground to −500 μm and physically treated with heavy liquids, as shown in In order to study the distribution of minerals in different grain sizes, the ore was crushed to −590 μm then the fractions were separated to various sizes from −500 to −74 mesh. The distributions of the economic elements in each size were determined as shown in The agitation leaching process was performed under different conditions summarized in The determination of niobium, tantalum, total rare earth elements, titanium, thorium and uranium in solution were carried out using a UV–VIS spectrophotometer (Shimadzu UV-160A). The values of total iron and zirconium were obtained by Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (UNICAM 969). Relating to the process of the present work, sulfuric acid (considered to be an inexpensive reagent) was used for leaching the niobium–tantalum rare earth minerals. The effects of different factors on the leaching extents of the minerals' constituents were studied in detail as follows. Increasing the temperature was found to be effective in increasing the leaching extents of the elements composing the economic minerals. Above 300 °C, hydrolysis may occur thus the leaching extents decreased. The results are shown in Under these conditions, niobium reached its maximum leaching extent of 73.5% at 200 °C, while most of tantalum may precipitate as tantalum hydroxide The ability of both titanium and uranium to be leached with concentrated sulfuric acid at various temperatures is less than 45%, Two sets of experiments were performed at 65 and 200 °C. The agitation leaching process was carried out by mixing sulfuric acid with the ground ore to −74 μm in ore to acid ratio of 1.0:2.5 for 2 h.  It was reported by As shown in At 200 °C, it is preferable to apply the leaching process using 10.8 M sulfuric acid. Higher concentration should be avoided due to the fact that concentrated sulfuric acid is consumed in attacking the gangue constituents of the ore.  The reaction between Kab Amiri ore ground to −74 μm and sulfuric acid of concentration 10.8 M in ore to acid ratio of 1.0:2.5 was studied at 200 °C, while varying the leaching time from 0.5 to 7.5 h. The results in A set of experiments was carried out to examine the effect of ore to acid ratio. The experimental conditions were kept constant as mentioned before while varying the ore to acid ratio from 1.0:1.5 to 1.0:5.0. The results are illustrated in These experiments were performed to find the minimum concentration of nitric acid needed for maximum leaching. The other leaching conditions were kept constant, in which the ground ore −74 μm was mixed with sulfuric acid of 10.8 M in the ore to acid ratio of 1:3 and the mixture was heated for 2h at 200 °C. The results are shown in It was found that the increase in nitric acid concentration above 5.0 M decreases the leaching extents of both niobium and tantalum. This may be due to the formation of protective coating of insoluble niobium and tantalum oxides at higher nitric acid concentration Slight improvement in uranium leaching was obtained by mixing 9.4 M nitric acid with 10.8 M sulfuric acid On the other hand, leaching euxinite mineral from Norway Examining the results in Increasing the concentration of sulfuric acid, under atmospheric pressure at 200 °C, or mixing with nitric acid has no great influence in improving the leaching efficiency of both U In view of the foregoing results, the optimum conditions for leaching Kab Amiri ore is to mix the ground ore to −74 μm with a mixture of 10.8 M sulfuric acid and 5.3 M nitric acid in a ratio of 1:3 for 2 h leaching time at 200 °C. The obtained leach liquor contains: 99.50% of Nb This work is devoted to the study of the behavior of not only niobium and tantalum using sulfuric acid leaching, but also the associated elements such as rare earth elements, thorium, uranium and titanium in Kab Amiri ore. All these elements have great commercial value in metallurgy and nuclear industries. Thus, the recovery of each element individually from their leach liquor is a most interesting task. From the present study, it became evident that Kab Amiri ore of multi-oxides minerals (euxinite, samarsakite, fergusonite, davidite and zircon) decomposes in sulfuric acid media. The results obtained from the laboratory experiments can be summarized as follows: Sulfuric acid leaching of Kab Amiri ore material was found effective for the dissolution of the economic elements in the leach liquor—with the added advantages of minimum acid consumption—and convenience for further extraction procedures. The optimum leaching conditions were obtained by mixing the ground ore to −74 μm with a mixture of sulfuric acid of concentration 10.8 M and nitric acid of concentration 5.3 M in a ratio of 1:3, and heating for 2 h at 200 °C. Under the mentioned conditions, almost complete recovery of both niobium and tantalum has been achieved while the leaching extents of thorium and total rare earth elements were 76% and 70%, respectively. The recovery of both uranium and titanium did not exceed 60% during the leaching process of niobium–tantalum minerals, even in the presence of an oxidant. This is attributed to the fact that they are mainly incorporated in the refractory mineral davidite. According to the grain size separation, it is possible to conclude that the minerals of Kab Amiri ore are variably distributed in all the separated fractions. Thus, the present study contributes to the evaluation of Kab Amiri niobium–tantalum ore. It also provides a case study for processing similar local niobium–tantalum ores. The authors wish to thank NMA for the permission to publish this work. Thanks are extended to Dr. Saleh E.S. Ammar for the provision of Kab Amiri's ore material, also to Dr. Tarek A. Amer for his help in the physical separation work and Dr. Fathi Ammar for the XRD analysis. Special thanks are due to Tantalum–Niobium International study Center, Belgium, for supplying some useful papers related to this work.