Thermal shock resistance of electroslag cast steel for hot-working tools has been studied. High resistance to thermal shock is an important requirement for hot-working tool steels, which are exposed, to both severe thermal and mechanical stresses. Electroslag casting is a method of producing shaped ingots in a water cooled metal mould by the heat generated in the current-conductive slag when electric current passes through a consumable steel electrode. The method provides the possibility of producing material for high quality hot-working tools cast into a variety shapes. Good ductility and toughness as well as high tensile strength at elevated temperatures are important properties for high thermal shock resistance. Direct measurements of quantitative values for the thermal shock resistance of hot-working tool steels is needed. Hence, a new testing procedure is proposed in the present study to measure the relative thermal shock resistance of electroslag cast steel. The reliability and reproducibility of the results from the new test are confirmed by measurements of the thermal shock resistance for several commercially available hot-working tool steels, which are consistent with high temperature mechanical properties.Hot-working tools are often subjected to extreme thermal shocks, which sometimes can lead to cracking or premature fracture of the tool In general, cast metal is not only mechanically inferior to forged metal one but also it has less chemical and physical homogeneity and mechanical property uniformity. For the traditional methods of shaped casting, the molten metal is in a ladle or crucible prior to being poured into the mould. Properties of the poured metal are usually inferior to those of the original, since secondary oxidation of the metal stream occurs during pouring. Reactions with atmospheric gases and ambient air inside the mould and with other materials in the mould can cause contamination with inclusions. During solidification, flaws are initiated within the ingot due to segregation and shrinkage processes, which drastically deteriorate the chemical and the physical homogeneity of the ingot. In contrast, the problems listed above are eliminated or minimized in the electroslag casting (ESC) process, which is schematically shown in In general, since thermal shock resistance may differ considerably among different steels, it is important to be aware of methods to determine comparative quantitative values that can be used to assess the relative thermal shock of various hot-working tool steels. The relative thermal shock resistance of the material can be measured by the procedure developed by Uddeholm The total temperature change (  In the case of materials having low uniform elongation, the application of 0.7% prestain may cause severe tensile load damage during the prestraining step. Furthermore, the wide variation in load carrying capacity during prestraining due to higher sensitivity of notched specimens may decrease the reproducibility of the test. In the present study, the thermal shock test proposed by Uddeholm is modified to increase the reliability and reproducibility of the test. The modified test is based on the Uddeholm test method, but the prestraining stage has been replaced by imposing tension on the specimen with simultaneous cooling. The shape of the consumable electrode for electroslag casting process is shown in The chemical composition of electroslag cast steel was adjusted to that of AISI-L6 tool steel for a comparison of an electroslag cast product with a forged product. Also, for the purpose of comparison, H13 tool steel was tested. All test specimens were held at 810 In the  Tensile testing was performed on a servo-hydraulic mechanical testing machine at the temperatures of 300, 500 and 650  The specimen is inserted and preheated from room temperature to a predetermined high temperature called the top temperature. It is held for 5 The test was done on a Gleeble3500 thermo-mechanical testing machine. The schematic loading mechanism for the Gleeble is shown in The specimen was inserted in the Gleeble and preheated from room temperature to top temperatures of 700, 800 and 900 The high temperature tensile properties of tensile strength and reduction in area have been determined. The high temperature hardness values are presented in The thermal shock resistance of hot-working tool steels is better in materials with the greater ability to accommodate both elastic and plastic deformation before fracture at elevated temperatures. Thus, a superior thermal shock resistance is accomplished by an optimal combination of strength and ductility in the material  As shown in   For good thermal shock resistance the elastic and plastic deformation before fracture at elevated temperature needs to be accommodated by an optimal combination of mechanical properties. The thermal shock results of the steels are consistent with their high temperature mechanical properties, which are shown in With the experimental implementation of a modified test method, the critical temperatures at which fracture occurs have been measured in order to characterise the thermal shock resistance of the material. The numerical value of Δ