Adopting an appropriate failure criterion plays a key role in the borehole stability analysis. In this paper the induced stresses on a vertical borehole wall were calculated based on the elastic theory. Then, to predict the stability of a borehole drilled through a poorly cemented sand formation, failure envelopes in different failure criterion domains were derived using the results from a series of precise laboratory tests conducted on solid and hollow cylinder specimens. The mixture used in specimen preparation was designed to simulate the properties of the samples collected from depths up to 200m at a drilling site in South Australia. The hollow cylinder test apparatus was developed by modifying a Hoek triaxial cell. These modifications allowed observing the process of debonding of sand grains from the borehole wall during the test and consequently, acquiring a better understanding on the failure mechanisms of a borehole drilled through poorly cemented sand formations. Three well-known failure criterion domains; Coulomb, Drucker–Prager and Mogi, were considered versus the laboratory test data to investigate their capability to predict the shear failure of a borehole using the data from hollow cylinder tests. The obtained results showed the significance of selecting an appropriate failure domain for predicting the shear failure behavior of poorly cemented sands near the borehole wall. The results also showed that the Coulomb criterion is not well suited for predicting the borehole failure when there is no pressure acting inside the borehole. A failure envelope based on the Mogi domain was developed which can be used for the far-field stress states. The introduced failure envelope allows predicting the stability of a borehole drilled in poorly cemented sands.thick-walled hollow cylinder ratio of cement to sand grains weight tangential stress (MPa) radial stress (MPa) vertical stress (MPa) shear stress (MPa) in-hole pressure (MPa) uniaxial compressive strength (MPa) Poisson’s ratio  internal diameter of a hollow cylinder (mm) dry density mean grain diameter (mm) coefficient of uniformity confining stress (MPa) angle of internal friction (deg) cohesion (MPa) normal stress (MPa) mean effective normal stress (MPa) octahedral shear stress (MPa) octahedral normal stress (MPa) ratio of fine to coarse sand weight  optimum water content Exploration drilling is one of the most frequently used data collection methods in mining, petroleum and civil engineering. Drilling a borehole is an excellent method not only for monitoring and petrographic assessment of borehole walls but also for measuring spatial position of formations and for obtaining characteristics of faults and joints. Hence, borehole stability is one of the most important challenges to be addressed in geomechanics. A number of drilling companies in Australia have reported several borehole instability issues in poorly cemented formations in last few years. Thus, it is important to conduct a comprehensive research on borehole failure at shallow depths (up to 200 There are many closed form solutions ( Prior to drilling a borehole, the underground formations are usually subjected to vertical compressive stress and horizontal stresses caused by the overlaying strata and lateral pressure respectively. The vertical principal far-field stress can usually be estimated as the weight of the overburden ( Different faulting conditions that introduce in situ stress regimes are presented in This formation system is in a static equilibrium stress state assuming no movement exists due to any seismic activity nearby. Once a borehole is excavated, the balanced stress condition will be disturbed eventually causing instability in the adjacent rock formation. This causes an increase in the tangential stress and a decrease in the radial stress near the opening wall thus resulting in the elastic deformation of the formation near the opening at the very least ( Depending on the conditions and purpose of drilling (e.g. air pressure or filled with a drilling mud) the walls of the excavated opening are usually supported by a corresponding supporting system exerting a pressure, The equations for calculating stress distribution around a circular hole in an infinite plate in linear elastic rock were initially introduced by It is worth to mention that from theoretical point of view tangential and vertical stresses can be assigned negative values corresponding to the tensile stress ( The main purpose of drilling exploration boreholes is to investigate the suitability of a given site for potential mining activates. In a mining exploration drilling site in Burra, South Australia the exploration boreholes are drilled through unconsolidated poorly cemented formations. The majority of these boreholes are 25 The subsurface investigation of sediments and borehole surveys showed that the sediment above the bedrock is heterogeneous and irregular. From the ground surface up to 30–40 Laboratory investigations play a key role in acquiring a better understanding on the behaviour of a granular formation under different loading conditions and are necessary for determining the parameters required for borehole stability analysis. Unconfined compressive strength (UCS), triaxial and thick-walled hollow cylinder (TWHC) tests are the most popular laboratory experiments for this purpose. Site investigations showed that drilling through shallow formations results in extensive sand grain debondings at the borehole wall due to the lack of sufficient cementation and consolidation. Various mixtures of sand particles, cement and water were casted into prefabricated specific cylindrical moulds to prepare suitable specimens for laboratory tests. Specimens were designed to fit into a HQ Hoek triaxial cell of 63.5 The hollow cylinder specimen test is a common method used in a wide range of studies (Adam, 1912; Since the poorly cemented specimen is very weak in nature, deforming the mould to release the specimen after the curing time imparts damage to it. Also, moulds should be hard enough to allow compaction of the mixture without any deformation of the mould. Specific moulds were manufactured to produce specimens which would fit into a HQ Hoek cell ( As discussed in the previous section, sample preparation is one of the most important stages of the laboratory tests aimed to simulate the actual behaviour of poorly cemented sands at the drilling site. The elements of synthetic poorly cemented mixed sand specimens prepared in this study, including texture and sand grading size distribution were designed similar to the properties of the samples collected from the drilling field in Blanch town, South Australia. This is a problematic drilling site where the weak formation comprises of quartz grains (≥ To determine the grain size distribution of the samples collected ( Standard Proctor test was performed on the prepared cemented–sand mixture and the optimum water content was measured to be 9.7–10.3% by using standard compactor hammer with the energy of 0.55 Different curing times have been suggested in previous studies ( Since the cementing agent at the actual field was different from the one used for laboratory tests and preparing a specimen with the original cement takes a long time (e.g. several years), Portland cement type II ( Different mixtures with respect to various Portland cement content ( A modified hollow cylinder test cell with a fitted micro camera was designed and manufactured at the University of Adelaide. The fitted camera allows real-time viewing and video recording of the borehole walls during the triaxial test on TWHC specimens. The modified hollow cylinder test cell was built by applying modifications to a large Hoek triaxial cell into which a TWHC specimen of 63 A servo controlled axial loading system of 100 A micro camera with 225 ppi resolution was installed inside the hollow platen to record the process of borehole breakout. A 60 channel data acquisition system was connected to two personal computers in order to monitor and record stress, strain, load and displacement. The specimen loading process comprised of several stages. First, vertical and confining stresses acting on the specimen were simultaneously increased up to a certain stress level to simulate the hydrostatic stress condition. Then, the vertical load was increased at the constant displacement rate of 0.07 It should be mentioned that all tests were conducted in a dry boundary condition and the effect of pore pressure is not considered in this study. Coulomb suggested that shear failure occurs when the shear stress is equal to the sum of the cohesive shear strength and the product of the coefficient of internal friction and normal stress across the fracture plane. Later, Mohr asserts that the relationship between the normal and shear stresses along the failure plane is non-linear, Since the distortional energy is proportional to the octahedral shear stress, In the linear case the failure criterion can be written as, Although the Drucker–Prager failure domain considers the effect of In polyaxial compression tests, there are three different variables (i.e. principal stresses) which cannot be shown explicitly in two-dimensional space to analyse the principal stresses. Therefore, the function should be reasonably reduced to two dimensions in order to show them in the To identify shear strength characteristics of the designed mixture, initially triaxial tests were conducted on the solid specimens. Solid specimens showed strain hardening behaviour and the stress corresponding to the 1% of axial strain was considered as the peak stress. The results from these tests were evaluated versus different failure criteria as follows.   The data from conducted tests were analysed in the For the test data plotted in the The Mogi failure domain was considered for plotting failure envelopes using the obtained test results. The octahedral shear stress and the mean effective normal stress were calculated and plotted in the It is worth mentioning that the maximum confining pressure applied to the specimens (= In order to investigate the stability of boreholes, an element on the borehole wall in a TWHC specimen must be studied. For the case of a solid specimen, the specimen was considered as a single element and the principal stress matrix was analysed. However, for TWHC specimens principal stresses should be calculated based on the applied stresses at the boundary of the specimen. Two dowels having different sizes were manufactured for preparing specimens with 10 As mentioned earlier, the main borehole failure issues are the shear failure in the form of a borehole breakout accompanied by debonding of the sand grains, and the tensile failure observed as hydraulic fracturing at the borehole wall. It should be noted that a further condition for tensile failure to occur is when Grain debonding occurs when there is no sufficient pressure inside the borehole. Therefore, case one may happen under this condition ( Test results from TWHC specimens were evaluated versus the elaborated failure criteria to investigate whether or not these criteria can predict the behaviour of the poorly cemented sands in case of drilling a borehole through it. The stress states were defined theoretically in case of applying the in-hole pressure, As stated in Section 5.4, all specimens were introduced to hydrostatic stress state by applying confining pressure and vertical stress at the same magnitude and rate. Afterwards, the vertical displacement was increased at a constant rate ( It should be mentioned that Different general expressions have been phrased to use the Coulomb criterion for a drilled borehole. In order to investigate the capability of the Coulomb criterion for the performed laboratory tests conditions (second stress state in Eq. Since According to the Eq. Thus, the Coulomb criterion could not properly predict this specific condition that may take place due to drilling a borehole before applying mud pressure. It is worth to mention that when applying an in-hole support pressure, As mentioned in the previous section, the second case from Eq. The data from experimental tests were used to calculate the According to In order to compare the results from the TWHC specimens with 20  Since the solid specimens showed strain hardening behaviour, the maximum vertical stress was calculated based on 1% of axial strain, but in TWHC specimens this was not the case and exact peak stress was captured during the test. The stress conditions in solid and TWHC specimens were different. In TWHC, stress condition was σ According to On the other hand, the trend line of all the data associated with 10 The correlation coefficient corresponding to Eq. According to Eqs. In order to estimate the Coulomb shear strength parameters based on the Mogi failure domain in the case of an unsupported borehole, results from laboratory tests were used. According to the definition of Stress invariants remain unchanged in all three cases. It is inferred that the only term in Eq. Introducing Eq. According to Eq. It is worth to mention that by using the experimental data to plot the In this case according to the linear Mogi criterion one can calculate However, for the second case in Eq. Therefore once the stress condition varies, it is essential to apply changes to the mean effective stress. Also, the comparison between In order to relate the Mogi constants to the Coulomb criterion, the relationship between the maximum shear stress on the borehole wall and the principal stresses must be identified. According to the Coulomb criterion, As mentioned earlier for the linear Mogi domain in Eq. Solving the This equation shows that it is possible to find the maximum shear stress in the Coulomb criterion by applying the Mogi failure domain for an unsupported borehole. Thus, it is possible to derive the Number of laboratory tests was performed on synthetic solid and thick-walled hollow cylinder (TWHC) specimens to investigate the failure behaviour of poorly cemented sands adjacent to the borehole wall. Different cemented-sand mixtures were considered to prepare poorly cemented sand specimens closely resembling grading and textural properties to the samples collected from a problematic drilling site in South Australia. Triaxial tests at different confining pressures were performed on solid specimens to find the shear strength properties of the mixtures. The normal faulting stress condition, i.e. Although the Coulomb criterion can be used as a rock failure criterion under triaxial stress state, applying this criterion to borehole wall analysis could not represent the failure behavior of the TWHC specimens under specific stress conditions. This criterion showed a constant value of The Drucker–Prager criterion could not fully represent the failure behavior of an element on the borehole wall. When using this domain all failure points for different borehole sizes and cement contents could not be fitted into a single failure envelope within the range of tests performed in this study. Implementing the Mogi criterion in a borehole stability model showed that all the results can be represented with a single straight line. Therefore, influence of size-scale effect on boreholes and different cement contents were not significant within the test condition practiced in this study. It was shown that for an unsupported borehole the Coulomb shear strength parameters can be calculated based on the Mogi stress domain. To achieve this, the principal stresses on the borehole wall should be calculated based on the stress state condition. Two borehole sizes, 10 This work has been supported by the