Toppling failure is one main failure types of anti-dip slate slopes, and is strongly affected by the mechanical properties of foliation. This study conducted a series of pull-off tests and direct shear tests on slate foliation to obtain its failure envelope, and an innovative failure criterion was accordingly proposed. The proposed failure criterion exhibits a nonlinear trend in the low normal stress range; considers both tensile and shear strengths, and has three material parameters - tensile strength 
                        
                           T
                           0
                        
                     , 
                        α
                     , and 
                        β
                     . Parameters 
                        α
                      and 
                        β
                      are related to the slope variation of the failure criterion. To investigate the effectiveness of the proposed failure criterion on the evaluation of slope stability, it is implemented in a discrete element code UDEC and a simulation was carried out to evaluate the deformation and failure pattern of an anti-dip slate slope. The results of the UDEC analysis demonstrate that the simulated failure pattern and deformation characteristics agree with that of an actual anti-dip slate slope. The proposed failure criterion of foliation and the Mohr-Coulomb criterion are further compared in slope stability analysis. The proposed failure envelope accurately reflects the tensile strength and shear strength under low normal stress, but the Mohr-Coulomb criterion apparently overestimates the strength in this stress range. Therefore, the proposed criterion is more effective than the existing criteria in predicting the toppling failure of slate slopes.Slate is a fine-grained, foliated metamorphic rock, derived from an original shale-type rock that is subjected to low-grade metamorphism. In Taiwan, most slate is found in the central mountain range ( The anisotropic behaviors of slate have been widely investigated through a series of Brazilian, uniaxial, and triaxial tests ( To apply the proposed failure criterion of foliation in engineering, the proposed criterion is implemented using the discrete element method (DEM) in simulations of the deformation and failure of slate slopes. In recent decades, DEM has been considerably developed and successfully employed in geotechnical engineering, landslide, and mining engineering. Unlike the continuum analysis, DEM allows for the separation and movement of elements, which makes DEC programs suitable for simulating the deformation, sliding, and deposition of a slope ( A typical anti-dip slate slope in the Tiangul Creek basin in Yilan county ( To investigate the mechanical properties of the slate foliation, rock blocks with a thickness of at least 70 mm were sampled from the slope toe area to be prepared as testing specimens ( For laboratory tests, the slate samples were used under both dry and wet condition at room temperature. To establish the dry conditions, the specimens were air-dried for at least 24 h. To investigate the effect of wetting-softening on foliation strength, the specimens were soaked in water for 48 h. A pull-off testing machine DY-216 (Proceq Co.) was used to measure the tensile strength of foliation ( To investigate the shear strength of the slate foliation, direct shear tests were performed on a rock servo-controlled direct shear testing machine ( All specimens were square in the plane view and had a size of 50 mm × 850 mm (   The failure envelopes of foliation were further obtained from the peak strength: of the direct shear tests ( The shear stiffness was determined from the tangential slope of the shear stress–displacement curve at 50 % of peak strength.  Unlike the Mohr-Coulomb criterion, the proposed failure criterion exhibits a nonlinear trend in the low normal stress range and considers both tensile and shear strengths ( The proposed criterion requires three material parameters - tensile strength According to the proposed criterion, the variations of friction angle under different normal stress and cohesion can be determined by To investigate the effectiveness of the proposed failure criterion, it was implemented in a discrete element code UDEC to simulate the deformation and failure pattern of a slate slope. The UDEC analysis model was based on the profiles of the Tiangul Creek case in   To elucidate further the difference between the results of the analysis using the proposed failure criterion for foliation and those obtained using the Mohr-Coulomb criterion, a DEM analysis on the same anti-dip slope model was performed using the two criteria.  To investigate the variations of stress inside the slope, the stress paths of a series of monitoring points are plotted in Numerous researches suggest that failure criteria of soils and rocks are not linear, particularly in the range of low normal stresses. Several nonlinear criteria were proposed to fit the curved failure envelopes and used to analyze the slope stability ( The results of the DEM analyses using the two criteria differed significantly despite the use of the same models, geometric conditions, and analytic procedure, because the proposed failure envelope (Case FC) could accurately reflect the tensile strength and shear strength under low normal stress, without an abrupt turning point at the tension cutoff. In In addition to the failure criterion, to determine the foliation spacing is another key issue in DEM analysis. The spacing of slate foliation is quite small so it is difficult to adopt the actual spacing in the numerical analysis. To determine a suitable foliation spacing for the analysis, this study selected the Tiangul Creek case as the verification case. In the DEM analysis, the adopted spacing in the model included 3.0, 1.0, 0.5, and 0.25 m, respectively. The model with the smaller foliation spacing led to a more sophisticated deformation pattern of the slope, but it was more time-consuming. In addition, the smaller spacing induced a high aspect ratio of the element, which led to the instability of numerical analysis. After compared with the actual deformation pattern of the anti-dip slope, the model with the spacing of 0.5 m provided reasonably simulation. Therefore, this study adopted 0.5 m as the spacing of the foliation in the DEM analysis. To reasonably assess the stability and deformation of anti-dip slate slopes, the mechanical properties of foliation, which causes rock to exhibit high anisotropy and heterogeneity, were studied. A series of pull-off tests and direct shear tests were carried out on slate foliation to obtain its failure envelope. At the toppling failure of an anti-dip slope, the overburden stress is low and the widely used Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion with a tension cutoff overestimates the actual strength of foliation, potentially leading to incorrect and unsafe evaluations of slope stability. Therefore, to describe the failure envelope of foliation in the low normal stress range, an innovative failure criterion was proposed. The proposed failure criterion exhibits a nonlinear trend in the low normal stress range and considers both tensile and shear strengths; it has three material parameters - tensile strength To investigate the effectiveness of the proposed failure criterion, it is implemented into a discrete element code UDEC to simulate the deformation and failure pattern of a slate slope. The results of the UDEC analysis show the reasonable simulation of the failure pattern and deformation characteristics of an actual anti-dip slate slope. This proposed failure criterion of foliation was compared with the Mohr-Coulomb criterion in a slope stability analysis. The proposed criterion is better than existing criteria in predicting the toppling failure of slate slopes, including tension cracks at the top of the slope, propagation of the failure plane from the toe, and the overturning of rock blocks. Landslides are generally triggered by rainfall and earthquakes. Precipitation increases the pore pressure and material deterioration, resulting in the failure of slate slopes. This work considered only material deterioration, neglecting pore pressure. The dynamic response of a slate slope under earthquake attacks is another important issue ( The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was financially supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan under Contract MOST 106-2625-M-390-001, MOST 107-2625-M-009-010, and MOST 108-2628-E-009 -004-MY3. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: