In real hydrometallurgical systems, ion exchange of metal cations is often accompanied by competing processes, such as complex formation. In this paper, we have analyzed influence of complex formation on nickel uptake in a chelating ion exchanger that contains iminodiacetate groups. Both outer-sphere complexation with sulfate and inner-sphere complexation with ammonia were studied at 22 and 80 °C. In ammoniacal ammonium sulfate matrix, both these complexes are formed and prediction of nickel uptake becomes challenging. According to the results, nickel uptake can be substantially enhanced by complex formation. Under acidic conditions and at 80 °C, proton is complexed by sulfate more effectively than nickel and as a result, the exchange equilibrium favors nickel uptake. High sulfate background concentration further enhances the positive effect. In ammonium sulfate solutions, however, complexation with ammonia is needed to prevent nickel precipitation. The solution is stable near pH 7 and high nickel uptake can be obtained, because competition by H+ is practically absent and Ni2+/NH4
                     + selectivity is high. Complexation with NH3 thus makes the conditions favorable for Ni uptake rather than affects directly on Ni exchange. All these findings were successfully correlated with a dynamic model including pertinent complexation and dissociation equilibria.molar concentration, mol/L average particle diameter, m pore diffusion coefficient, m axial dispersion coefficient, m NICA parameter, – rate constant, 1/s dissociation constant, – bed length, m molar mass, g/mol number of mixing stages, – number of reactions, – reaction rate, mol/(dm time, s temperature, °C interstitial velocity, m/s axial coordinate, m charge number, – stability constant, bed void fraction, – pore void fraction, – affinity constant, stoichiometric coefficient, – initial, pure component or infinite dilution value value in eluent value in feed component, reaction, mixing stage pore solution water bed volume iminodiacetate resin Ion exchange of heavy metals is a well-established technology in hydrometallurgical processing and in water treatment Complexation of the target metal cations in the solution phase may affect the exchange process in different ways depending on the properties of the ligand. With neutral ligands like ammonia, the cation charge is retained but the selectivity may change depending on the degree of coordination Use of ion exchangers in complexation studies is well-established The objective of this study is to investigate in detail the nickel uptake from synthetic ammoniacal ammonium sulfate solution containing 0.017 mol/L (1 g/L) of nickel and 3.4 mol/L (450 g/L) of ammonium sulfate. In particular, the role of complexation with sulfate anion and ammonia in nickel uptake was studied. Using a commercial Lewatit TP 207 (Lanxess, supplied by Sigma-Aldrich) is a macroporous poly(styrene-co-divinylbenzene) resin containing iminodiacetate ( The feed solutions given in Resin density Exchange kinetics was measured in a closed glass vessel equipped with a stirrer and a recirculation pump for on-line UV–vis measurements. The stirring rate was 1000 min In fixed-bed experiments, the resin was packed in a jacketed glass column (ID 15 mm) and the bed volume (BV) was 22 or 106 mL. The column was attached to a precision pump (Knauer) and the outlet stream was analyzed on-line for conductivity and UV absorption at 365–395 nm. Absorbance at 500 nm was used for baseline correction. Bed temperature was controlled by thermostated water circulated in the column jacket. In feed D ( Samples taken in stirred-tank and fixed-bed experiments were analyzed using off-line UV–vis spectroscopy (Cary 8454, Agilent) and ICP-OES (iCAP Duo 7600, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for nickel, and pH measurements and/or potentiometric titration (T50, Mettler Toledo) for the acid. Ammonium ion was analyzed using a C/N analyzer (TNM-L, Shimadzu). Ion exchange in a NiSO Ion exchange equilibria were described using the explicit model derived earlier In Eq. (2), The concentrations in Eq. The accumulation rate in the solid particles was evaluated using the linear driving force (LDF) approximation of Nernst-Planck equation reported by Melis et al. Assuming that no exclusion effects are present, the concentration at the pore entrance The reaction rate is written in a conventional way and as an example, Eq. The overall mass balance for a batch system is given by Eq. Axial concentration profiles in a fixed-bed column were calculated using a discrete model described in detail elsewhere Axial dispersion is not explicitly accounted for in Eq. The differential Eqs. During the experiments, bed volume changed less than 5% and a constant value of 0.40 was used for Goodness-of-fit to equilibrium and kinetics data in stirred tank was evaluated using the average relative deviation (ARD) defined in Eq. Dissociation constants of NH Because of the system complexity, we first consider in The influence of sulfate complexation on Ni uptake was studied in fixed-bed experiments with TP 207 and the nickel break-through curves were measured for 0.017 mol/L NiCl The experimental break-through profiles measured at 22 and 80 °C are shown in  There is a small difference in the breakthrough curves measured in chloride and sulfate solutions at 22 °C but at 80 °C ( The explanation may be found in the behavior of the Because the functional groups mostly are in forms A and C, there is little or no hindrance for anions to enter the resin matrix during the exchange process. We therefore propose an indirect mechanism, where complexation of In summary, the positive influence of sulfate anion on nickel exchange can be explained by complexation of the competing ion. This effect is further illustrated in The simulated effect is qualitatively similar to that in In the NiSO Because of the key role of ammonia, nickel breakthrough depends markedly on feed pH as shown in When operating near pH 7, a good dynamic capacity was obtained even at a feed rate of 8.3 BV/h. If we assume a purification process, where the target nickel concentration in the treated ammonium sulfate solution is 10 mg/L, about 30 bed volumes can be treated in one loading/regeneration cycle. As will be shown in the next Section, the regeneration step is much shorter than the loading step and therefore high throughput rate is possible even in a simple batch-wise fixed-bed operation. It is well-known that higher metal uptake is obtained if the After the loading step shown in Integration of the experimental outlet profiles in Preliminary tests with authentic process solutions containing also other impurity metals showed that the similar regeneration procedure is sufficient also there. The only exception is Fe The equilibrium and diffusion parameters were determined from the kinetic measurements using NiSO The uptake curves of The influence of the anion was seen only in the equilibrium nickel uptake at 80 °C, while the diffusion rates in sulfate and chloride solutions were identical at 22 °C within the experimental accuracy. According to In the ammoniacal ammonium sulfate solution, model parameters for the The parameters obtained in this Section were used in simulation of the break-through curves shown in In this paper, we have shown that complexation reactions taking place in bulk and pore solution significantly affect metal binding in a chelating ion exchanger. Even weak outer-sphere interactions with the sulfate anion give rise to a surprisingly large effect on nickel breakthrough in an iminodiacetate ( Formation of This work was supported by Business Finland and CMEco project partners (Norilsk Nickel Harjavalta Oy, Boliden Harvalta Oy, Boliden Kokkola Oy, Outotec (Finland) Oy, Fortum Waste Solutions Oy, and Outokumpu Stainless Oy). None. The authors thank Mr. Tommi Huhtanen for assistance in experimental and analytical work.