Scanalyse in collaboration with JKMRC and Newcrest Mining Limited conducted an extensive study of the effect of liner wear on mill performance of a 32 foot SAG mill at Newcrest’s Cadia Valley Operations in Australia. The methodology of determining the optimum liner shape was previously presented at Metplant 2011, and expanded on at the SAG11. The results presented indicated that liners with a reduced mass and shorter life outperform their longer life counter parts in all key production parameters of throughput, energy consumption and product size.
                  This paper quantifies the benefit of having shorter liner life cycles for improved performance by calculating the increase in throughput and reduction in power based on historical data for an operational 32 foot mill. It also presents the total overall gain by accounting for the increase in required reline effort. This provides a holistic view of the net achievements when designing liners for performance and not life.Liners play a critical role in SAG milling due to their strong influence of load trajectory and ultimately breakage efficiency ( Installation of new liners reduce the internal mill volume. Possible packing of material in between lifters. Decrease in grate open area if discharge grates are relined. Suitable but overdesign of new liners causing a decrease in breakage. Unsuitable design of new liners for the mill in question. Inefficient adjustment of operational parameters during early liner life cycle stage. John Russell hypothesised in his paper ( Scanalyse in collaboration with JKMRC and Newcrest Mining conducted an extensive 12  A noticeable reduction in throughput occurs at half-life when the discharge grates (1/2 set) and the feed outer liners are relined. This causes the regressed throughput curve to taper but still increase as the shell liners wear further. It should be noted that the throughput post grate reline is still approximately 3% higher on average than the throughput prior to the grate reline, indicating the increase in throughput is not only due to an increased open area of the grates but also due to the wear in the shell liners (see Another observation is that throughput at the end of liner life is slightly reduced for this mill, which could be explained by excessive loss of lift caused by severe liner wear at the end of the life cycle (see most worn profile in There are also some noticeable outliers where there is a sudden drop in throughput which were caused by lack of ore availability. These outliers have been highlighted in red in Finally grinding surveys conducted during the course of the project indicate that SAG product is finer as the liner wears. This is highlighted in JKSimMet Modelling of new and fully worn liners was carried out to compare mill performance with the progression of liner wear. The comparison of breakage rates across the liner life was of particular interest.  SAG feed, which is comprised of fresh feed, recycle crusher product and cyclone underflow has F80 characteristics in the order of 15–20 MillMapper® provides high resolution three-dimensional mill liner thickness information inside a mill by mapping in the order of 10 million individual survey points. Aside from tracking liner shape and wear, other variables such as liner weight, net mill volume, charge volume, ball size distribution, and discharge grate open area are also quantified, ( From the plant data, survey results and JKSimMet modelling it can be seen that key mill performance indicators of throughput, specific energy/power and product size all improve as liners wear, for the mill investigated. This suggests that liners with a reduced thickness and mass outperform their larger and heavier counterparts. This section highlights the potential benefits of having shorter life liners which deliver more tonnes at a lower power and produce a finer grind. Importantly it is envisaged the increase in downtime due to the additional relines is overcome and exceeded due to the increase in mill performance. It is possible to predict the throughput of liners with reduced mass by analysing existing plant data. For example, to estimate the total life cycle throughput for a new liner design with a half-life shape, one would simply average the throughput from the second half of the original liner life. Referring to Using simplified examples of each additional reline taking a possible l 20, 30, 40, 50 or 60 However if relines are taking approximately 60 As stated earlier the above scenarios are simplified to highlight the concepts of shorter liner lives with improved performance. Relining every 2 Considering there is a reline every 3 As stated earlier, the fact that the extra reline can be incorporated into a non-shell reline shut to minimise the amount of downtime makes a redesign far more appealing. A broad estimate can be made of the economic benefit possible in utilising liners designed for performance and not life. For the above table, the following data was used: Assumed mill availability of 96%. Feed grades represent the average gold and copper grades in the block cave material from 1 July 2011 to 1 March 2012. Recoveries were sourced from the To estimate the cost of relining the figure of $3/kg of steel was used for material cost plus 10% for labour costs. The volume of the shell liners were obtained from MillMapper for new shell liners and half-life shell liners (proposed design). From The aim of the paper is to quantify the benefit of using shorter life liners. Previous work ( It is acknowledged that a change to relining schedule has to be considered in conjunction with general plant maintenance work, so plant maintenance and operational input is required before pursing such a course of action. A simple half-life liner profile has been used, there is clearly further opportunity to optimise the liner profile if a shorter liner life is targeted. Optimisation would aim at minimising the wasted shell plate thickness that is evident at the end of the liner life, plus changing lifter width to reduce metal wastage there. The excessive width is a function of the structure required for the very high new lifter bar, so is not required for a lower lifter design. Improvements along these lines would further decrease the liner cost, and lighter liners are faster to replace, with the added potential to decrease the number of liner elements in line with the liner handlers capacity. These additional opportunities will be pursued in ongoing liner studies.