Every process is subjected to changes in performance and efficiency over time. These dynamics can originate upstream and be inherent through the process or occur anywhere in the downstream process. Traditional plant simulations are performed with steady-state simulation, which are limited to give the performance in an ideal situation. However, plant performance usually tends to deviate away from the predicted plant performance. These dynamics are usually consequences of an altered state of the plant due to factors such as natural variation, unmatched, inappropriate or degrading equipment performance and/or stochastic events.
                  This paper presents a novel approach for simulating dynamic plant behavior and evaluating effects from process modification through dynamic simulations with MATLAB/Simulink. An example of an existing crushing circuit is used to illustrate the functionality and the advantage of using a dynamic simulator. The results and knowledge gained from the simulation can provide a base for optimizing a robust production output in the form optimal utilization, energy efficiency or higher product quality.Crushing plant’s design relay on accurate plant simulations. Crushing plants are designed to be able to produce certain throughput on predefined specification (i.e. a certain particle size distribution) and a certain particle size distribution while operating at a reasonable cost and at efficient energy consumption. Equipment manufactures as well as plant designers use software packages for predicting the plant performance. There are a number of software packages available that are able to predict plant performance. The most widely used type of simulations is steady state simulations, meaning that the system is considered to be at equilibrium with all time derivatives exactly zero. Examples of steady state simulation packages include: Plantdesigner (Sandvik), Bruno (Metso), JKSimMet (JKSimMet), Aggflow (BedRock Solution) and UsimPac (Caspeo). An interest in more dynamic simulations has been growing in minerals processing ( A development of a simulator which is capable of representing the dynamic behavior in crushing plant is ongoing at Chalmers University of Technology. The purpose of the simulator is to get more detailed simulation tool which can be used for: evaluating plant performance, control development and operator training. This paper aims to describe the developed simulator and the methodology for evaluating dynamic plant performance by introducing mechanical process modifications. All models and layouts have been modelled using the MATLAB/Simulink software. Crushing plants like any other production process are affected by changes over time. To be able to predict the dynamic behavior of any system an understanding about the entities and interaction there in between is essential. System complexity is depending on the level of detail. Simple models are single input single output (SISO) but that is seldom the case in reality, actual systems are often complex with multiple input, where an output (variable Plant dynamics is a complex phenomenon where correlation and casualization can be vague. To simulate plant dynamics mathematical models for every production unit, e.g. crushers, screens, conveyors, silos, etc., has to be created. The models describe the changes in flow and particle size of the material traveling through the plant. Plant simulations generally only focus on the production unit and plant configuration, but due to accumulation of material the flow needs to be controlled in dynamic simulations. Additionally the process can be sensitive to startups, discrete events, wear, segregation, natural variation and more which is not uncommon in operation, all depending on interaction between single production units, plant configuration, plant control and diverse events and disturbances that can influence the process, see Factors that influence production unit performance are well documented both for specific production units and for material handling. According to Screen performance has been described by Another factor that can decrease predicted plant performance is inadequate bulk material handling. Material flows in bins where there are multiple inflows and multiple outflows can cause problem in the downstream process due to segregation within the bin. There are documented cases ( Predict variations in a dynamic plant simulations is difficult and the variations are everywhere, both in the production units and the rock material itself ( Every production process experiences dynamic behavior as a result from the process control counteracting the effects from dynamic disturbances. The level of control is depending on the complexity of the process and the control system designer’s ability in providing appropriate solution to the task. Most crushing plants are equipped with some sort of basic regulatory control operating under a supervisory control. Dynamic simulators have been used for years in control development and verification is many industries ( In order to simulate an entire system, a plant, the models are connected together according to the user preference and configured with a set of defined parameters. The models share the same type of connection, so any unit can be connected together with ease and material properties are inherent for subsequent units. The modelling has been done by using MATLAB/Simulink. Simulink is a commercial simulation software developed for simulating and analyzing dynamic and discrete systems, which is widely used within industry as well as within academia for representing process behavior and control systems. Simulink provides a graphical programming user interface for block-oriented modelling. A custom library has been developed, by the authors, for equipment representation, see Any equipment is subjected to change in performance in way or another and in many cases it is due to accumulation of mass and change of settings. Every process unit model is therefore equipped with ordinary differential equation (ODE) for keeping track of the material in the process (Eq. Due to this the material travelling through the plant will experience delays in all equipment, as described by In the crushers the material accumulates in a perfect-mixed model where the level is function of crusher geometry and mass flow. In larger bins, due to the bin geometry of the bins, the material can be segregated between coarser and finer particles. Vertically separated section in bins was modelled with flow distributed depending on the level in each section and angle of repose to enable vertical segregation within the bin. The accumulated material is perfectly mixed in each section. The crusher will not operate efficiently until it has achieved choking condition. The transient response behavior in the crusher throughput is modelled as a function of the level in the hopper and the estimated maximum capacity ( First order transfer functions ( The crusher performance used in this study is based on the crusher performance at survey performed prior to the simulation study at the reference plant. The gathered data was empirically fitted to a modified Swebrec function which has been used in previous project ( Different types of regulatory controllers are used throughout comminution plants depending on the plant layout, operation and objectives. The general purpose of any control system is to manipulate variables to compensate for the changes in the process due to effects from disturbances, see To illustrate the possibilities with dynamic simulation a reference plant was modelled. This particular section shown in General aspects that can cause discrete or gradual changes in the process are summarized in Identifying problems and debottlenecking an existing process is challenging and requires detailed information from the process and how it is controlled. In an open circuit the bottleneck is usually the last production unit to ensure constant output from the plant but with closed circuit the configuration can cause problems. Identifying problems can often be done by manually studying the raw data from the plant´s SCADA system, but this is although time consuming process and will not always guarantee results. The underlying reasons for the low throughput were identified to originate in the stockpile feeders located on the far left in The initial phase is to model the plant using the custom build blocks and connect in an appropriate way, see In order to regulate the plant, single unit controllers and plant wide control were set up. PID controllers were modelled in the feeders above the screens that were regulated with the level in the screen bin and in the feeders above the crusher to regulate the level in the crusher hopper, PID controller were calibrated to react in the same manner as the actual PID´s. All interlocks and control limits for this particular section were programmed for the plant to avoid overloading. As the purpose of the simulation is to validate if different configuration of selected production units could increase the maximum overall capacity the simulations were configured with regards to these constrains. A reference plant simulation was configured to represent the performance of the actual process. No events were included in these particular scenarios as it would not contribute to any significant difference between the scenarios. The variation in the incoming feed was analyzed; both varying particle size distribution and the total amount of material and included in the simulation as disturbances. The feed size distribution can be seen in Four different scenarios were simulated to evaluate if the overall capacity could be increased by altering the plant configuration. All four scenarios were simulated under different loads to evaluate when the plant would reach performance saturation. The manipulating variables were selected from systematically valuating the effort of change and probability of increased output with the support of data from the crushing survey, equipment specification and the diagrams illustrated in Varying the mass and particle size distribution of the incoming material into the circuit. Reducing the Closed Side of the coarse crusher (located on the far left in Increasing the throw in fine crusher (located on the far right in Additional factors were considered but these were considered to have the largest probability in increasing the throughput without affecting the downstream process in a negative way. The scenarios were set up as following: Reference simulation, only amount of incoming feed varied. Feed varied and CSS on coarse crusher reduced. Feed varied and the throw on the fine crusher increased. Feed varied, CSS on the coarse crusher reduced and throw on the fine crusher increased. The simulations show that the plant operates in efficiently during a lower load (1250 TPH shown in The first graph in The simulations revealed that the plant reaches performance saturation at a particular point depending on how it is configured, see The simulation scenarios in The simulations results were validated with actual process modifications with the suggested changes. The process modifications were made and the process allowed to normalize. The process performance was later analyzed from when the process is operating. Increasing the throw of crusher 3 from 38 Operating the crushers 1 and 3 at different close side settings, from larger settings at 65 As can be seen in the plant example it was demonstrated that for this particular plant the plant reaches performance saturation under specific load. By evaluating and simulating process modification the theoretical plant performance was increased by up to 13.3%. The empirical test revealed increased plant performance of the magnitude of 1.6% resp 4.9% for the two different scenarios, increasing the actual maximum plant performance. One of the main sources of dynamics in the simulation was caused by material flow in the bin above the crushers, which was also observed in the production data. In the scope of this work the focus was to simulate these dynamic effects in the production by mechanical process modifications. Further analyses should be done with a focus on the control loops where regulatory control loops are tuned, different supervisory control algorithms tested and more disturbances included. In this paper, it has been demonstrated how dynamic plant simulations can utilized for representing dynamic plant performance and for evaluating effects from process modification. Even though dynamic plant simulations are more complicated than a steady state simulations, they do have a higher potential in predicting the actual plant performance. The developed simulator used during this work has proven useful in giving more comprehensive information about the process to the user. This work has been performed within the Sustainable Production Initiative and the Production Area of Advance at Chalmers; this support is gratefully acknowledged. The authors wish to thank the Hesselman Foundation for Scientific Research and the Swedish national research program MinBaS (Minerals, Ballast and dimensional Stone) for its financial support. Anglo Platinum and their personnel at Mogalakwena are gratefully acknowledged for all of their support and efforts to make this work possible.