The separation and recovery of gold from waste LED using ion exchange method was investigated, employing commercial polyamine type anion exchanger, Diaion WA21J. Leaching of gold from LED terminal was successfully carried out with aqua regia at 80°C. Separation of gold from the leaching solution was then carried out by column adsorption with WA21J. The selective adsorption of gold was achieved, while adsorption of the co-existing metals in the leaching solution was suppressed. Quantitative elution of gold from WA21J was achieved with diluted thiourea solution. Elementary gold was then obtained from the eluent by simultaneous precipitation and reduction of gold with sodium borohydride with 100% purity.Gold is currently used as a raw material in numerous industrial applications, due to its specific physical properties of electrochemical potential, and electro and thermal resistivity. The industrial demand of gold is expected to increase in the fields of pollution and emission control, chemical processing, and fuel cell applications ( Generally, metals in waste materials are separated and recovered by solvent extraction and/or ion exchange in the hydrometallurgical process. There are several reports concerning the separation of gold by solvent extraction ( There are several reports concerning the separation and recovery of gold from waste materials. One of the waste materials applied for the separation and recovery of gold is printed circuit boards (PCBs). Adsorption process with Amberlite XAD-7HP, acrylic polymeric adsorbent, followed by leaching of the PCBs ( In the present work, the separation and recovery of gold from waste COB-LED was investigated using the ion exchange method. Commercial anion exchange resin, Diaion WA21J, having a polyamine group was used as an adsorbent. Leaching behavior of gold and co-existing components from LED terminal was first investigated by using aqua regia. Adsorption properties of gold and co-existing metals in the leaching solution were also investigated by both the batchwise and column adsorption systems. Precipitation and reduction of gold were then carried out by adding sodium borohydride to the eluent from the column operation. Recovery yield of the gold from the leaching solution was finally evaluated. Commercial ion exchange resin, WA21J, was kindly supplied by Nippon Rensui Co., Ltd. (Tokyo, Japan). Gold(III) chloride was supplied by Alfa Aesar, and all other inorganic reagents were supplied by Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd. (Osaka, Japan), as analytical-grade reagents. Actual waste COB-LED samples (Panasonic) were used in the present work. The waste LED terminal was first taken off from the lamp. The LED terminal (0.5 Gold single aqueous feed solution was prepared by dissolving appropriate amounts of gold(III) chloride to aqua regia solution for fundamental studies. Diluted actual leaching solution was also used for the practical study. Batchwise adsorption was carried out by adding 20 The column operation using WA21J was investigated. WA21J (weight: 0.6 Gold in the eluent from the column operation was precipitated and then reduced by sodium borohydride (NaBH Leaching of the waste LED terminal was firstly investigated. Our preliminary experiments revealed that a solid/liquid ratio of 0.2 Adsorption behavior of gold and co-existing metals in the leaching solution with WA21J was then investigated in the batchwise system. Adsorptive separation of gold with WA21J in the column system was then investigated. Recovery of gold from the eluent by simultaneous precipitation and reduction was then investigated. The effluent of the elution was collected, and then NaBH Separation and recovery of gold from actual leaching solution after 10-time dilution was finally carried out. When the leaching was conducted by adding 12.0 Separation and recovery of gold from waste LED was investigated using ion exchange method with polyamine type anion exchange resin. The important features of the system are summarized as follows: Leaching of gold could be successfully achieved with aqua regia at 80 Adsorption of gold with WA21J was decreased with increase in the concentration of aqua regia, due to decomposition of the amine group of the resin at high aqua regia concentration. Selective adsorption of gold with WA21J was achieved at 1.2 Selective adsorption of gold from the leaching solution was carried out by column adsorption with WA21J. Gold adsorbed was quantitatively eluted with 0.1 Gold was recovered as precipitates by adding sodium borohydride to the eluent. The precipitation yield of gold was increased with increase in pH, and 100% precipitation was obtained at pH