Serial sampling and stable isotope analysis performed along the growth axis of vertebrate tooth enamel records differences attributed to seasonal variation in diet, climate or animal movement. Because several months are required to obtain mature enamel in large mammals, modifications in the isotopic composition of environmental parameters are not instantaneously recorded, and stable isotope analysis of tooth enamel returns a time-averaged signal attenuated in its amplitude relative to the input signal. For convenience, stable isotope profiles are usually determined on the side of the tooth where enamel is thickest. Here we investigate the possibility of improving the time resolution by targeting the side of the tooth where enamel is thinnest. Observation of developing third molars (M3) in sheep shows that the tooth growth rate is not constant but decreases exponentially, while the angle between the first layer of enamel deposited and the enamel–dentine junction increases as a tooth approaches its maximal length. We also noted differences in thickness and geometry of enamel growth between the mesial side (i.e., the side facing the M2) and the buccal side (i.e., the side facing the cheek) of the M3. Carbon and oxygen isotope variations were measured along the M3 teeth from eight sheep raised under controlled conditions. Intra-tooth variability was systematically larger along the mesial side and the difference in amplitude between the two sides was proportional to the time of exposure to the input signal. Although attenuated, the mesial side records variations in the environmental signal more faithfully than the buccal side. This approach can be adapted to other mammals whose teeth show lateral variation in enamel thickness and could potentially be used as an internal check for diagenesis.Over the last 15 As the approach has gained in popularity, controlled experiments on rodents, rabbits, cattle and sheep demonstrated that changes in the isotopic composition of environmental parameters (food, drinking water) are not instantaneously recorded in tooth enamel ( Different approaches have been proposed to minimize this bias. Another approach to minimize this bias is to modify the sampling strategy. The conventional protocol entails hand-milling a series of samples perpendicular to the tooth growth axis, with each sample spanning the entire thickness of the enamel layer. Several authors recommended targeting the innermost enamel layer because this zone is strongly mineralized just after its formation ( The aim of this study was to investigate the variability of tooth growth parameters in time and space for teeth that do not grow indefinitely. We hypothesized that for a given tooth the time required for the enamel layer to mature (and therefore the attenuation of the isotope variations recorded along this tooth) will be proportional to the thickness of this layer. To test this hypothesis we compared the amplitude of carbon and oxygen isotope variations recorded along the different sides of the M3 from sheep ( To document the different stages of third molar growth we examined the M3s of 24 sheep ranging in age from 261 to 910 We tested the new sampling strategy on eight of the 14 ewes. The animals that we used belonged to three groups of two or three ewes (E1, E2, E3) that were each offered a C Mandibles were defleshed and cleaned by boiling. Molars were extracted from mandibular bone and enamel surfaces were cleaned by abrasion with a tungsten drill bit. The length of the appositional layer ( Crown heights were measured in all animals ( Tooth enamel thickness was measured on one tooth (#1649) using thin section. The tooth was embedded in polyester resin (GBS1 Brot Technologies, Argenteuil, France) and cutted using a precision diamond wire saw (Well 3241 Escil, Chassieu, France). A cut was made parallel to the height of the tooth (occlusal-cervical axis) through the mid-point of the anterior lobe, in order to measure the enamel thickness on the buccal and lingual sides. The anterior lobe was then sectioned parallel to the length of the tooth (buccolingual axis) in order to measure the thickness on the mesial side. The cut surfaces were polished and mounted on a glass slide. The mounted specimen was then sectioned to a thickness of approximately 300 Our results suggest that the growth rate of the sheep third molar is not constant and decreases with time ( For teeth of known length at different animal ages, Eq. On the buccal side, enamel thickness increased from about 500 to 900 The length of the appositional front ( Visual observation of the thin sections allowed us to estimate the variability in Carbon isotope profiles generated from the buccal side have been previously published (see Carbon isotope profiles generated from the mesial side present a very similar pattern of variation but differ in the amplitude of variation ( Finally, we noticed that the isotope profiles measured along the mesial and the buccal sides were often slightly offset. The diet-switch was usually recorded 4–5 Oxygen isotope profiles derived from the buccal side of the molars showed a 2.5–3.4‰ decrease from apex to cervix ( An oxygen isotope profile was also generated from the lingual side of individual #1649 ( As for the carbon isotope record, oxygen isotope variations were recorded slightly lower on the mesial side compared to the buccal side. Although considerations of incremental growth lines has led some researchers (e.g. This equation can be rearranged to convert measured distances along the tooth into time and give an estimate for the time When comparing isotope profiles performed on hypsodont enamel (like bovids, equids or ovicaprids), it is implicitly assumed that each sample forms over an equivalent period of time, no matter where the sample comes from. However, our results suggest that one millimetre of enamel is deposited over 6–7 Using Eq. Another important result arising from this study is that different sides of the same tooth record environmental variation differently. Although none of the different sides sampled here captured the full amplitude of short-term dietary changes experienced by our sheep (16.1‰ based on the isotope difference between the C Visual observation suggested that the angle between the appositional front and the EDJ was roughly similar on the mesial and the buccal sides ( Our approach did not allow us to calculate precisely the maturation length. Intra-tooth sampling and stable isotope analysis has been proposed as a tool to document animal migration patterns, using Traditionally, stable isotope profiles were determined on the thickest side of a tooth, mainly for two reasons. Firstly, it is easier to recover sufficient powder for analysis of individual samples. This is not so important anymore because the miniaturization of preparation techniques and increased sensitivity of mass spectrometers now permit the generation of isotope data using minute amounts of bioapatite. Secondly, a thick layer of enamel is more likely to resist diagenetic alteration than a thin one. This could be an issue for old (pre-Quaternary) fossils although several studies showed that a biogenic signal was preserved in dinosaur enamel ( We tested this hypothesis by sampling the mesial and buccal sides of a modern sheep M3 from the Massif Central (France) and a ∼2000 Observation of developing sheep molars both macroscopically and in thin sections showed that the geometry and rate of tooth growth are not constant but vary in time and space. Growth rate decreases exponentially while the angle between the newly accreted enamel layer and the EDJ increases as the tooth approaches its maximal length. We also documented lateral variation in enamel thickness and showed that it is possible to minimize the attenuation of the environmental signal recorded along the growth axis of a tooth by selecting the side where enamel is the thinnest. This approach is simple and can be extended to all taxa where lateral variation in tooth enamel thickness can be documented. These finding allowed us to improve the fit between the forward model of The animal study was carried out with the approval of Teagasc, the Irish Agriculture and Food Development Authority. All procedures employed in this study were in accordance with national regulations concerning animal care and use. We thank S. Hanrahan and T. Keady (Teagasc Animal and Grassland Research and Innovation Centre, Athenry, Co. Galway) for sourcing the animals, S.M. Harrison (University College Dublin) for assistance, and V. McHugh and A. Marron (Teagasc Animal and Grassland Research and Innovation Centre, Grange, Dunsany, Co. Meath) for animal care and logistics throughout the animal experiment. We thank J. Planchot (Brugiroux, France) for providing the modern sheep tooth. Access to the archaeological material from Petra (Jordan) was facilitated by M. Mouton (CNRS) through the “Early Petra” project funded by the