For measurement of component content in the extraction and separation process of praseodymium/neodymium (Pr/Nd), a soft measurement method was proposed based on modeling of ion color features, which is suitable for fast estimation of component content in production field. Feature analysis on images of the solution is conducted, which are captured from Pr/Nd extraction/separation field. H/S components in the HSI color space are selected as model inputs, so as to establish the least squares support vector machine (LSSVM) model for Nd (Pr) content, while the model parameters are determined with the GA algorithm. To improve the adaptability of the model, the adaptive iteration algorithm is used to correct parameters of the LSSVM model, on the basis of model correction strategy and new sample data. Using the field data collected from rare earth extraction production, predictive methods for component content and comparisons are given. The results indicate that the proposed method presents good adaptability and high prediction precision, so it is applicable to the fast detection of element content in the rare earth extraction.Obtaining accurate information of component content quickly is a premise for realizing real-time adjustment of feed flow in a rare earth extraction process. Traditional offline laboratory analysis needs a long time and can't meet the rapidity requirement for component content detection. Besides, online component content analyzers, such as 241Am-EDXRF In the rare earth extraction separation system with ion color features, various extraction tubs will show different feature colors with the change of ion concentration, forming an “ion characteristic color belt”. A praseodymium/neodymium (Pr/Nd) extraction separation process is depicted in Machine vision detection has advantages of no-contact, efficiency, high accuracy and durability, and it is successfully applied in other industrial processes. For example, the machine vision system is applied to monitor metallic ore flotation process and forecast concentrate grade Adaptive iterative least square support vector machine (AILSSVM) is an algorithm based on the LSSVM modeling. Using the characteristic of nuclear matrix, the AILSSVM supersedes the higher order matrix to find inversion directly in an adaptive iterative learning way, updating the model quickly. In this paper, we consider a production line of Pr/Nd extraction and collect images of rare earth solution in an enterprise. We extract H/S feature components from the images in HSI color space and take their first moment as the auxiliary variable. A rapid correction model based on AILSSVM is established to estimate the component content of rare earth extraction process. Our results are compared to the field data of Pr/Nd extraction process to validate the effectiveness of this approach. The rare earth solution is collected from the field production of Pr/Nd extraction/separation in a rare earth separation company. Each sample is divided into two parts, one part is used to detect the value of component content in laboratory, while the other is used for the image information monitoring of rare earth solution in a sample pool. The R/G/B feature components can be extracted from the figures of the rare earth solution directly and there is a strong correlation among them, but their representation of color difference does not conform to human eyes to color feeling. Consequently, it is necessary to adopt the HSI color space with independent feature components, which conforms to the human visual features well The nonlinear relationship between the first moments of H/S color feature extracted from images of rare earth solution ( The nonlinear relationship in Eq. LSSVM First, combine ( According to the modeling approach of LSSVM and the principle of minimum structure risk, the regression problem described in Eq.  To solve the optimization problem with constraints, Eq. According to the optimality condition, take partial derivatives of Eq.  Solving the linear equations in Eq. The LSSVM output model of component content Eq. In derivation for output of component content model based on ion color feature, when the kernel function is a RBF function as follows Some methods for optimizing parameter combination of ( The specific steps are as follows. Set initial values population size binary code length Calculate the fitness of populations Because the unbiased estimation of cross-validation restrains “under fitting” and “over fitting” phenomena, the root mean square error ( Genetic process In this paper, the operating modes of selection, crossover and mutation are the roulette wheel method, single point crossover, and single mutation, respectively. Termination condition The algorithm terminates when its iterative times reach the maximum value In the predictive process, the accuracy of the component content model may be unsatisfactory under new operating conditions. Therefore, a real-time correction of model parameters is needed to track the operating conditions. When conditions change, original component content model based on LSSVM is used for prediction. Then, judge whether the prediction error meets the given accuracy, if so, keep the model, otherwise correct the model. The equation for calibration is Generally, it will takes longer time to correct model parameters by a uncorrected LSSVM method, in which new sample data are added into the training set Eq. The result From Eq. In view of the Pr/Nd extraction process with ion color features, with a given precision threshold Based on data set S, build a LSSVM predictive model satisfying precision requirement and compute initial kernel matrix Under a new work condition, collect new image of the rare earth mixed solution to extract its color feature components H and S, express their first moment as { Compare predictive value Calculate Assign We consider the production line of Pr/Nd extraction in an enterprise and collect 66 groups of samples of Pr/Nd solution at different time. The samples are divided into two parts, one part is sent to the laboratory to obtain accurate value Then, color features of components H/S are extracted from sampling solution images in the HSI color space, while the data set composed of the first moment ( Data set To verify the advantages of adaptive LSSVM model for estimation of component content, SVM algorithm and BP neural network are used to modeling the same data set Subsequently, data set   Based on the predictive LSSVM model with good generalization ability, the 12 groups of sample data in As shown in Although the LSSVM, SVM, and BP neural network prediction models based on historical sample data have generalization ability, the prediction still presents a large deviation under new production conditions, and their In practice, the sample solutions are generally collected at certain time for laboratory instrument analysis. The adaptive correction of component content prediction models based on ion color feature can be operated by using the laboratory analysis data, given the precision threshold. As an important indicator to control the product purity in the rare earth extraction process, detection of element content is a choke point in the automatic control. For a Pr/Nd extraction process with ion feature color, the adaptive iteration algorithm is adopted to correct the component content LSSVM model. The model is based on the first moment of component H/S of ion feature color and its model parameters are optimized with GA algorithm. The sample data collected from industrial field are used for comparison on the four methods, uncorrected LSSVM, SVM, BP neural network, and AILSSVM proposed in this work. The results indicate that the AILSSVM method has the advantages of higher precision, faster speed and more adaptable, so it can adapt the change of production conditions well. Consequently, the proposed method is suitable for the fast detection of element content in the rare earth extraction field with ion feature color.  offset error variable nonlinear function fitness value of the maximum iteration times kernel function length of binary code maximum relative error size of rare earth mixed solution samples root mean square error data set maximum value of variable minimum of variable weight vector input variable the first moment of H color feature the first moment of S color feature output variable value, component content of the solution output values of the model Lagrange multiplier regularization parameter precision of variable threshold for the output precision of model prediction kernel width nonlinear mapping function kernel matrix H color feature component in HSI color space maximum minimum S color feature component in HSI color space