During the direct acid-leaching process of vanadium extraction from black shale, the participation of fluoride ions greatly improves the leaching efficiency of vanadium. Its enhanced effect is influenced by the sulfuric acid concentration, amount of added fluoride, leaching temperature, and leaching time. The migration of fluoride ions during leaching is critical for the dissolution of muscovite and the release of vanadium. In this work, we employed a central composite design of response surface methodology to design the leaching experiment. Results show that the CaF2 dosage is highly significant, and the H2SO4 concentration, CaF2 dosage, and leaching temperature all exhibit interactive effects with each other during acid-leaching. The higher concentration and reactivity of H+ and F− in solution result in a higher vanadium leaching efficiency for direct acid-leaching. The role of F− in the reaction mechanism was investigated using density functional theory simulation. After the removal of structural oxygen of tetrahedra by H+, F− closely bonds with the exposed structural aluminum atom and drags it away from the muscovite surface in the form of [AlF4]−, F− continues to coordinate with [AlF4]− to form the stable [AlF5]2− in solution. The enhanced effect of F− is mainly reflected in its smaller volume and higher electronegativity as compared to those of HSO4
                     − and SO4
                     2−.Vanadium (V) extraction from black shale has been widely studied in China ( Furthermore, many theoretical and experimental studies have concluded that vanadium, as an isomorphism, occupies the octahedra of mica minerals such as muscovite ( In this study, we employed central composite design (CCD) of the response surface methodology (RSM) process optimization to investigate the significance and relationship of influencing factors in depth ( The vanadium-bearing shale used in this study was obtained from Hubei Province, China. The main chemical composition of the raw ore was analyzed by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES, Optima-4300DV, PerkinElmer, Boston, MA, USA). The results are listed in The CCD used in this work is an experimental design suitable for fitting a quadratic surface which facilitates the optimization of the effective parameters with a minimum number of experiments, and the analysis of the interaction between the parameters. The variables studied were the concentration of sulfuric acid, the amount of fluoride added, the leaching temperature, and the leaching time. Each numeric factor was varied over 5 levels: +α, +1, 0, −1, −α, respectively. The α value, which depends on the number of points in the factorial portion of the design ( The response of the experiments was measured in terms of leaching efficiency η which is defined by The regression analysis was performed using a mathematical model in the form of a second-order polynomial to predict the response as a function of independent variables involving their interactions. The leaching efficiency can be predicted by The vanadium-bearing shale was crushed to 3 mm and ground in a vibration mill (HLXZM-100) until at least 80% of the particles were < 0.074 mm. The leaching experiments were carried out in a heat-collection-type constant-temperature magnetic heating stirrer (DF-101S) with five different H One muscovite lattice is comprised with two TOT slabs. Each slab is composed of two tetrahedral layers (T) and one sandwiched octahedral layer (O). The tetrahedra are connected with each other by the triangular basal oxygen to form coplanar hexagonal siloxane cavities. The octahedra are supported by the four top tetrahedral oxygens and two hydroxyl groups at the center of the hexagonal siloxane cavities. In the tetrahedral layers, a quarter substitution of Si In this study, the muscovite (001) surface was modeled using one TOT slab. Meanwhile, the interactions between slabs was interdicted by a vacuum boundary of 20 Å. Moreover, a 2 × 1 × 1 supercell containing 80 atoms was employed to calculate the surface reactions. Due to the complication of the real acid solution containing fluoride in the leaching process and the difficulty of building this model, we simplified the model of erosion of the structural surface with dissociative H All periodic DFT calculations were performed with the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) ( The complete design matrix together with the leaching efficiency of V, Al, and Fe obtained from the experiments is given in The following regression equation was developed from the CCD results, showing the empirical relationship between the leaching efficiency of vanadium and the four experimental variables in terms of their coded forms. The ANOVA results are presented in The P-value of the interactive effect of the H  The 3D plots of response surface curves are generated to show the interactions between factors. Each response surface curve represents the change in levels of two factors with the other two factors maintained at zero levels.  Hydrofluoric acid is a weak acid of low ionization (  The total K The rate of reaction at the interface is controlled by two main factors: (1) the diffusion rate of ions arriving to the solid surface and (2) the chemical reaction rate of ions corroding on the solid surface ( Under the premise of an acceptable vanadium leaching efficiency, the cost can be reduced by the decrease in H Vanadium extraction is based on the dissolution of muscovite in black shale. The balanced chemical reaction equations of muscovite dissolution in the absence or presence of fluoride are given by Eqs. The Gibbs free energies of two reactions relating to the temperature were calculated by Factsage 7.0. In traditional acid-leaching without fluoride addition, the removal of structural cations depends on the HSO The dissolution of the Al According to the related potential energy shown in However, HSO In this work, the significance and relationship of the influence factors during the direct acid-leaching process of vanadium extraction from black shale were systemically investigated using CCD of RSM. The CaF This work was supported by the None.