The gibbsite shales belonging to the Paleozoic sequence of sedimentary rocks occurring at the Abu Zeneima area in SW Sinai Egypt has been found to host several economic metal values. These include Al, Cu, Zn, Co, Ni, REE, and U beside several Mn minerals. In this work, the ore was subjected to sulfuric acid leaching to maximize extraction of these metal values. The optimum leaching conditions were 800 g/L acid with a Solid/Liquid ratio of 1/2 at 100 °C for 4 h and using an ore size of −60 mesh. Under these conditions, it was possible to achieve high leaching efficiencies with complete leaching of Al together with 93.0% Cu, 58.6% Zn, 69.0% Co, 92.6% Ni and 84.4% U. Extension of the leaching time to 8 and 12 h significantly improved the leaching efficiencies of Co and Zn to 91.0% and 84.0% respectively.The Um Bogma formation in Egypt is composed of different rock faces that are mainly represented by shale, siltstone, clay, ferruginous sandstone, calcareous sandstone and feldspathic sandstone ( Several leaching studies have been performed upon comparable Abu Zeneima ore from different locations, but with different constituents and grades of the economic metal values. These studies include those of On the other hand,  Finally, In the present work, a proper sample of the gibbsite-bearing shale was collected from the Um El Moghirat locality of Abu Zeneima. It assayed about 27% Al Different leaching conditions were studied to attain the maximum possible leaching efficiency of the metal values. These conditions include the reagent concentration, time, temperature, ore sample to reagent ratio and the ore grain size. Leaching was carried out in a well-stirred 3 necked round flask fitted with a thermometer and condenser. The leaching efficiency of the metals was calculated from the analysis of the pregnant leach solution after filtering and washing the slurry. To define the mineralogical composition of the working ore material, the bulk and sieved samples were subjected to X-ray diffraction analysis. For this purpose, a Philips X-ray diffractometer, model PW 223/20 was used where the copper tube was operated at 40 kV and 20 mA. The diffractogram was properly interpreted using standard diffraction mineral patterns ( The major oxides of the working sample were analyzed using the rapid silicate analysis method of The chemical analysis of the working Abu Zeneima ore material is given in To study the effect of sulfuric acid concentration on the leaching efficiency of the metal values, a number of preliminary leaching experiments were performed using different acid concentrations of 100, 200 and 400 g/L. In these experiments, the conditions were fixed at 4 h agitation time at ambient temperature with a solid/liquid ratio (pulp density) of 1/2 using − To interpret the leaching efficiencies, both the amount of input acid and the oxidation state and mineralogy of the metal value must be considered. The almost unchanged leaching of Zn and Cu when the acid is increased from 200 to 400 g/L might be due to their presence in more than one form; viz in the mineral forms chalcophanite and crednerite respectively, or in other oxide or silicate minerals. The case of Co is different, however, since only 8.4% was dissolved with an acid input of 800 kg/t. This might be due to its oxidation state in the ore where it is most probably present as insoluble Co The same applies for Mn where its leaching efficiency at the three acidities of 100, 200 and 400 g/L was only 1.5, 1.9 and 2.5% respectively, thus requiring the presence of a reducing agent. It is interesting to note that a leaching experiment using concentrated HCl with a solid / liquid ratio of 1/3 at 100 °C for 4 h resulted in almost complete leaching of Mn (99.7%) together with 96.5% Cu and 92% Co. In the same experiment, Al in gibbsite was completely leached as well as over 85% of Zn and Ni and about 80% of U. An acid consumption test was performed using 250 g ore in 400 g/L H To improve the leaching efficiencies of the metal values, another similar series of experiments was performed at 100 °C together with an increase of the input acid concentration up to 800 g/L (1600 kg/t ore). From the results in Increasing the acid concentration to 800 g/L, which greatly exceeds the ore consumption, significantly increased Cu and Co leaching efficiency (up to 93% and 69% respectively), suggesting dissolution of crednerite. On the other hand, Zn leaching unchanged indicating inadequate conditions for chalcophanite. To study the effect of the leaching time, two series of experiments were made using 800 and 1600 kg acid /t ore at 100 °C ( Working at the same acid concentration but varying the solid/liquid ratio could provide for improved metal leaching through the increased mass of input acid. The effect of solid/liquid ratio was studied using 800 g/L acid at 100 °C over 4 h ( In another trial to improve the leaching efficiencies of Zn and Co, the effect of the grain size of the ore was studied under similar conditions to The difficulty of leaching Co and Mn, even under the most promising conditions, was interpreted as due to the presence of the Co (III) and Mn (IV) and therefore prior reductant roasting should improve their leaching efficiencies. Accordingly two sample were roasted at 650 °C and at 850 °C with and without 20% w/w charcoal followed by sulfuric acid leaching. The leaching efficiency of the metal values including Mn and U are shown in Surprisingly, prior roasting improved the leaching of Co as well as Mn even in the absence of a reductant. Thus, 76.4% Co could be leached after prior roasting at 650 °C in the absence of a reductant, but 100% in the presence of charcoal. Likewise, 82% Mn was leached after prior roasting at 850 °C in absence of a reductant and 96.3% in the presence of charcoal. Accordingly, it can be noted that normal roasting is advantageous for extracting both Co and Mn as it changes their mineral phase to the more acid soluble forms. On the other hand, prior roasting has an adverse effect upon the leaching of Al, Cu, and Zn; due to partial formation of relatively refractory oxides or ferrites of these metals. With respect to U, prior roasting had little effect on its leach recovery, but reduction roasting clearly led to the partial formation of poorly acid soluble U(IV) oxide. In a trial to decrease the amount of acid required for leaching while keeping a high acid concentration, it was decided to explore the effect of using the acid pug leaching technique where the ore sample was thoroughly mixed with concentrated acid and allowed to cure at different temperatures for 2 h. The cured ore was then water leached at 100 °C for 4 h. The results obtained are summarized in From the table, it is clear that the high acid strength attained by pug leaching is beneficial for leaching Al, as well as Cu and U, even by curing at 120 °C. However, the leaching of both Co and Ni did not improve except when using 1080 kg acid/t and curing at 200 °C where complete dissolution was realized. Under these latter conditions, 82.6% Cu and 80.0% Zn extraction was achieved. On the other hand, the presence of a reductant was essential for increasing Mn extraction to about 77% but this impaired U extraction. Further increasing the amount of acid to 1800 kg/t decreased Co and Mn extraction to 77.5 and 43.7% respectively. From the above studies of the leaching parameters and techniques, it can be concluded that agitation acid leaching is preferred to leach most of the metal values with high efficiencies leaving Mn and REEs for subsequent processing. The optimum acid agitation leaching conditions involves working at 800 g/L acid in a S/L ratio of 1/2 at 100 °C for 12 h and using an ore mesh size of −