The cyanidation of argentian potassium jarosite in alkaline media is characterized by an induction period, followed by a conversion period, as was observed in other synthetic jarosites. The induction period shows an apparent order of 0.7 (NaOH) and 0.2 [Ca(OH)2] with respect to the [OH−], and an apparent activation energy of 86 kJ mol−1 (NaOH) and 36 kJ mol−1 [Ca(OH)2]. The conversion period is characterized by the presence of a reaction front with an unreacted jarosite core. The decomposition products are amorphous. The process is chemically controlled in both media. In NaOH–CN−, the order of reaction is 0.6 with respect to the [OH−] and the activation energy is 43 kJ mol−1. In Ca(OH)2–CN−, the order of reaction with respect to [OH−] is 0.5 and the activation energy is 80 kJ mol−1. The order of reaction with respect to the [CN−] concentration is zero in both media. The process is faster than that observed in natural arsenical potassium jarosite from gossan ores (Rio Tinto, Spain). The addition of potassium chloride to the reaction system increases the reaction rate; the order of reaction with respect to the [Cl−] was 0.13.In the 1970s and 1980s, the jarosite process for zinc hydrometallurgy was developed and improved to remove iron, control sulphates concentration, and obtain good filterability of this residue. In this period, the efforts were devoted to improve this process: - to increase the rate of jarosite precipitation and obtain better and quicker filtration by the growth of jarosite crystals - to avoid silver and lead coprecipitation (argentojarosite/plumbojarosite) in the jarosite precipitation Several authors have proposed the jarosite process to remove the soluble iron generated in the sulphuric acid leaching process of clays In the 1990s, efforts have also been dedicated to other aspects such as: (1) studies of reactivity of synthetic jarosites: alkaline decomposition–cyanidation of argentojarosite This paper consists of a reactivity study of cyanidation of argentian potassium jarosite in alkaline media. It allows for increase in knowledge of the reactivity of jarosite materials and results obtained are very useful in discussing their behavior with respect to other synthetic jarosites and the arsenical potassium jarosite from gossan of Rio Tinto (Spain) After considering all the factors that affect the synthesis of jarosites The jarosite sample was fully characterized by X-ray fluorescence (XRF), chemical analysis, X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDS), BET surface area, density values, and granulometric analysis. The characterization performed by XRD, SEM, and EDS confirmed a single-phase product. The chemical composition is shown in Dutrizac and Jambor The morphology of the potassium jarosite consists in spheroid aggregates of 0.2–1.5 μm rhombohedral crystals as in the case of argentojarosite The experimental procedure used for cyanidation experiments was similar to that employed in previous works The progress of the reaction was followed by taking samples of the solution (5 ml) throughout the experiments and testing for silver using atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS). Variations in the mass balance due to the sampling and reagent addition were corrected for. To observe the evolution of solids at different conversion values, they were characterized by XRD, SEM, and EDS. Particle families of limited size (38–45 μm), were used for the kinetic studies. The effect of particle size was carried out with particle families of 25–38, 38–45, 45–53 and 53–63 μm. Two experiments were carried out in the following conditions: Results for silver evolution are given in In both cases, the X-ray diffractogram of the decomposition residues confirms that they are amorphous in nature; in Ca(OH) Thus, the stoichiometry of the process in the conditions studied can be expressed as: The effect of the hydroxide concentration on the induction period in both media is shown in  The plot of the experimental rate constants against the inverse of diameter is linear and passes through the origin. This is consistent with the spherical particle model with decreasing core and chemical rate control. The reaction rate is independent of the cyanide concentration in the range studied [5–30 mol m According to the results obtained, the kinetic expressions are (in the range studied) as follows: NaOH/CN  The cyanidation in Ca(OH) The addition of soluble salts to the reaction system can modify the reaction rate of cyanidation as was observed in natrojarosite and also in potassium jarosite. Sodium chloride or sodium sulphate (120 mol m Assuming that the The activity coefficients of KOH were determined in the range of hydroxide concentration employed, according to the expressions developed by Kusik and Meissner (1) The cyanidation process of argentian potassium jarosite in alkaline media occurs with an induction period that seems to be associated with the synthesis that decreases exponentially with increasing temperature and [OH (2) The experimental data obtained using both alkaline media fit the model of a particle with a decreasing core and chemical rate control. (3) In NaOH media, the induction period shows an apparent order of 0.7 and an apparent activation energy of 86 kJ mol (4) In (2.7–25.9 mol m (5) In (0.35–4.5 mol m (6) The reaction rate determined during the cyanidation of potassium jarosite is faster than that obtained in the previous work using arsenical potassium jarosite contained in the gossan ores from Rio Tinto, Huelva (Spain). Consequently, the reaction rate decreases in the presence of arsenate in the jarosite lattice. (7) The addition of potassium chloride to an aqueous solution of KOK–KCN increases the reaction rate. The apparent order with respect to the chloride concentration was 0.13. The authors thank the CONACYT of the México Government for their financial support. Thanks also to the Serveis Cientı́fico-Tècnics de la Universitat de Barcelona for their assistance in this work.