For the first time, the electrochemical Brownian motion is considered in the context of discrete Chebyshev spectroscopy. The computer processing of output signal of analog-to-digital converter operating in the first-order sinc filter mode enables measuring the discrete Chebyshev spectrum of electrochemical analog of Brownian particle coordinate. It is shown that there is the Chebyshev power spectral density with respect to the normalized Chebyshev polynomial degree. The Chebyshev power spectral density is determined for the Brownian coordinate of corrosion noise and for the Brownian coordinate of intrinsic noise of EVAL-AD7176-2SDZ evaluation board with a shorted input. For the first time, it is shown that the Chebyshev power spectral density for the Brownian coordinate of electrochemical noise depends on the first-order sinc filter output data rate. The trend-resistant method of Chebyshev power spectral density of Brownian coordinate can be used for the noise diagnostics of electrochemical devices and processes.The theory of classical Brownian motion In the theory of electrochemical potential noise The methods of noise electrochemical spectroscopy are used to solve various electrochemical problems and to study the processes of various nature, for example, the electrochemical corrosion According to An important technical problem is the diagnostics of the current state of electrochemical power sources. An in-depth assessment using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy enables estimating the current state of power sources. However, the application of the method encounters a number of difficulties. It is difficult to interpret the impedance spectra and develop adequate corresponding models of electrochemical devices, and the measurements take rather long time (up to several hours). The electrochemical noise diagnostics facilitates estimating the state of charge and the state of heals of primary current sources The methods of electrochemical noise spectroscopy enable one to reveal the abrupt changes in the nature of electrochemical processes: the transition from the uniform corrosion to pitting corrosion; in the metal electrodeposition, the transition from the growth of high-quality coating to the dendritic deposit. In recent years, the number of publications on the application of the methods of electrochemical noise spectroscopy has been growing rapidly, for example, However, the noise measurements in the electrochemical systems are characterized by the presence of a trend that hampers the analysis of measured results. The results of electrochemical noise measurements are commonly analyzed using the method of the Fourier noise spectroscopy. The drawback of the method is its sensitivity to a trend. To eliminate this drawback, it is necessary to develop and apply special programs and methods The aim of the work is to present a trend-resistant spectral method for the analysis of the Brownian coordinate of electrochemical noise. The Brownian coordinate is measured using an analog-to-digital converter operating in the first-order sinc filter mode Trend-resistant processing of noise data is provided by the Chebyshev discrete spectroscopy The study of Chebyshev spectra of electrochemical Brownian coordinate may be of interest from the viewpoint of general spectral theory of random processes Here, we use the approach developed in In this work, we develop a trend-resistant spectral method for investigating the Brownian coordinate of potential noise using an AD7176-2 delta-sigma analog-to-digital converter operating in the first-order sinc filter mode and the Chebyshev discrete spectroscopy. Here, we discuss a relation between the electrochemical Brownian coordinate and the output signal of the first-order sinc filter. The potential noise ( Here, the time variables The sum on the right-hand side of Eq. Signal The discrete Chebyshev spectroscopy The realization of discrete signal Let us apply the discrete Chebyshev transform. For this purpose, the basic functions in the form of orthonormal Chebyshev polynomials The Chebyshev spectrum Here, the concept of the Chebyshev power spectral density The discrete version of Parseval-Plancherel equation The left-hand side of Eq. The dimensionless variable The variance The potential noise was measured using an EVAL-AD7176-2SDZ Evaluation Board (“Analog Devices”, USA). The Evaluation Board involves a 24-bit ADC (analog-to-digital converter) AD7176-2, a low-noise amplifier with high impedance input  The corrosion electrochemical system is chosen, because the majority of publications on the electrochemical noise spectroscopy belongs to this field.  Statistical analysis of many random processes is complicated by trends. The problem of trend elimination arises in many applications of the theory of random processes, for example, in the astrophysics The Chebyshev spectroscopy is a powerful tool for eliminating the action of a trend of a random process   In Eq. The Chebyshev noise spectroscopy is used to study the electrochemical systems by the example of an important corrosion problem: steel corrosion in an aggressive solution in the presence of inhibitor. The time dependence of Brownian coordinate of electrochemical noise is measured. For the first time, it is found that the Chebyshev spectra of Brownian coordinate of electrochemical noise are self-similar. It is shown that there is the Chebyshev power spectral density with respect to the normalized Chebyshev polynomial degree. For the first time, it is shown that the output data rate has a pronounced effect on the Chebyshev power spectral density for the Brownian coordinate of corrosion noise. For the first time, Using the method of artificial trend, it is shown that the Chebyshev power spectral density for the Brownian coordinate of corrosion noise is trend-resistant. These results allow us to suggest the method of Chebyshev power spectral density of the Brownian coordinate for the noise diagnostics of electrochemical systems.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The work was performed with support of