Objectives
                  The management of high energy tibial plateau fractures is a surgical challenge. Recently described Luo’s classification is based on CT scans and is more objective with a better inter-observer agreement as compare to Schatzker and AO/OTA classifications. We describe the functional results of a series of 53 cases classified and managed according to the Luo’s column concept.
               
                  Methods
                  A retrospective review of 53 high energy tibial plateau fractures, operated between January 2012 and March 2015 at a Level I trauma center, was performed. CT scans were used to classify these injuries based on the number of columns involved. Plating configuration and surgical approach were chosen based on the number of independent articular fragments on axial sections at the level of fibular head.
               
                  Results
                  1 one-column, 51 two-column and 1 three-column fractures were studied. Triple plating was done in 5 patients. Mean follow-up was 2.7 years and mean Insall Knee score was 95.42. Four patients had varus malalignment and 1 had joint depression in the post-operative period. These were due to imperfect reduction during the surgery itself, and no case of late collapse was detected.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Utilizing Luo’s classification for treating these complex injuries will assist in better understanding of fracture pattern and hence help in achieving a better functional outcome. Each fractured column needs to be independently addressed.Tibial plateau fractures are high-energy injuries with significant soft tissue compromise. The management of complex bicondylar tibial plateau fractures which are classified as Schatzker type 5 or 6 is a surgical challenge. Relying on radiographs alone for classifying and managing these injuries can lead to intra-operative surprises, or a suboptimal post-operative outcome. This is because articular depression and coronal fracture lines are difficult to assess on plain radiographs. Hence, carefully studying the fracture geometry on CT scan and planning the number and placement of plates accordingly is a pre-requisite to achieving uniformly good results. The CT based column concept classification described by Luo et al. has been shown to have a better inter-observer reliability than the Schatzker and AO/OTA classifications. Soft tissue compromise in these complex fractures also plays an important role in deciding the timing of surgery. Plating through a compromised soft tissue envelope entails significant risk of complications such as wound dehiscence and deep infection. Staged management consisting of external fixation followed by definitive internal fixation once soft tissue condition improves has been shown to decrease complications. Recent literature shows a clear paradigm shift from radiographs based treatment protocols to CT based management, especially in complex fracture patterns. This retrospective study was conducted to analyze the importance of fixation in multi-columnar proximal tibial fractures based on CT scans and also to assess the functional outcome of these complex fractures. A retrospective review of 53 patients with two-column and three-column (Luo’s classification) high energy proximal tibia fractures which were treated at a Level I trauma center from January 2012 to March 2015 was undertaken. Clinical data was obtained by evaluating hospital charts, office records, and pre-operative and post-operative radiographs and pre-operative CT scans. Inclusion criteria were age between 18 and 60 years, bicondylar tibial plateau fractures, a minimum follow-up of 2 years. Exclusion criteria were pathological fractures, associated vascular injury, age <16 years and >60 years, zero-column fractures, isolated anterolateral or anteromedial column fractures, grade II and III open fractures, floating knee, associated compartment syndrome, and patients lost to follow-up. Ethics committee approval was obtained. Demographics, mechanism of injury, associated injuries, hospitalization details, along with operation description were collected from the hospital records. As a protocol, all patients with high energy multicolumn tibial plateau fractures were evaluated for severity of injury, swelling and presence of blisters. Patients were taken for surgery only when skin and soft tissue condition was optimal. Patients were initially managed with calcaneal pin skeletal traction on Bohler Braun frame or a knee spanning external fixator with the dual aim of reducing swelling and achieving alignment of the fracture fragments. The decision was based on overriding of fragments and metaphyseal impaction. Temporary external fixation was preferred if gross overriding was present. CT scan was done in all cases to further define morphology and aid in surgical planning (based on Luo’s classification). Lateral side was approached via standard anterolateral approach and minimally invasive technique used for fixation with a pre-contoured LCP. Medial side was fixed using the standard posteromedial approach as described by Lobenhoffer et al. A supervised physiotherapy regime of active assisted and passive exercises and quadriceps strengthening was started for all patients from the first post-operative day with initial 3 to 5 The fractures were classified according to Luo’s classification. Insall Knee Society Score was used to measure the functional outcome at the last visit. A total of 53 patients satisfying the inclusion and exclusion criteria and operated during the study period were included in the study. Demographic profile of patients and fracture characteristics are summarized in The number and positioning of plates to be used were determined based on axial CT images. Although posterior column is considered one column by Luo, posterolateral and posteromedial fragments need to be dealt with separately. Overall dual plating was done in 46 cases and triple plating in 5 cases. 2 two-column fractures (anterolateral fragment with posteromedial fragment) were managed with plating for posteromedial fragment and cannulated screws for the small anterolateral fragment. In 4 of the 5 cases managed with triple plating, posterolateral column was involved. Posterolateral column was also involved in one more fracture (posteromedial and posterolateral fragments). It was fixed via fibular osteotomy or via posteromedial incision. One case of triple plating involved both anteromedial and posteromedial column, along with the anterolateral fragment. The time to union and final outcome are summarized in There was one case of medial incision dehiscence in immediate post-operative period. It was managed with debridement and secondary closure. One case (dual plating) had prolonged serosanginuous discharge in first week after surgery and was suspected to have infection. Surgical debridement was done and intra-operatively hematoma was found superficial to iliotibial band, and intra-operative cultures were negative. After hematoma evacuation, wound healing progressed uneventfully. Late post-operative infection (deep infection) was seen in 1 patient (1.9%) (dual plating, 6 months following surgery). Debridement with implant removal, followed by split thickness skin grafting was done. There was no case of post-operative deep vein thrombosis. There were 4 cases of varus deformity (5–10°) at final follow-up. On careful analysis of serial radiographs, in all these 4 cases, varus was evident on immediate post-operative radiographs also. Bicondylar fractures are usually high energy injuries seen mostly in young adults with RTA being the most common cause. Staged fixation, plating as per fracture morphology, and advances in implant design (introduction of precontoured locking plates) have considerably improved outcomes of bicondylar tibial plateau fractures over the years. These complex injuries require meticulous pre-operative planning and surgical decision making based on the critical issues of soft tissue condition, fracture pattern and comminution. Dual plating can be done via a single midline incision (similar approach as in a Total Knee Replacement) or a combination of anterolateral and posteromedial incisions. Multiple studies exist in the literature citing higher rate of soft tissue complications and infection in midline approach, and hence its use has decreased in the past decades. The evaluation of skin condition to decide when to proceed with surgery is a subjective one. A combination of parameters may be used, including swelling, tenseness of leg, wrinkling, fading of bruises and healing of abrasions, re-epithelialisation of blisters. Although wrinkling is classically described in relation to calcaneal fractures, It is highly relevant to study the exact configuration of the medial column injury in bicondylar fractures based on axial CT sections and to define whether the main fracture line is in coronal (posteromedial fragment) or sagittal plane. The orientation of the primary fracture line determines the positioning of medial plate, in a manner such that the plate must be coplanar to the fracture line. A laterally applied locking plate may not effectively hold the medial fragment and later lead to varus collapse on weight bearing. The infection rate in our study was low and comparable to previous studies We feel that column specific fixation is the ideal modality of treating these fractures, and rather than classifying these as unicondylar and bicondylar, number of columns involved should be recognized in an axial CT cut at the level of fibular head. Luo’s classification does overcome the shortcomings of Schatzker and AO/OTA classifications. It is easy to understand and apply and has a high inter-observer agreement. Also, fracture patterns previously not fitting into any Schatzker type can now be classified. Most importantly, it is a management based classification rather than just a descriptive one. CT based management is simple, objective, and easily reproducible. However, following this classification shall lead to an increase in the proportion of cases managed by multiple (3 or more) plates. The significance of the compromised soft tissue envelope in these high velocity injuries requiring multiple plate fixation cannot be overlooked. Other point that concerns us is the lack of inclusion of displacement and size of fracture fragments in the classification. Small undisplaced cortical rim fragments, according to this classification, will need to be stabilized. Whether this is needed or not, is still not clear. Furthermore, the location of apex of fracture on the posteromedial plane must be taken into consideration while applying a plate. The distal limb of the plate must overlie the apex, the farther away from the apex the plate is applied the lesser will be the buttressing effect. The benefits of fixation as per this classification needs to be compared with the present day dual plating concept for bicondylar fractures. Of course, such matters need further research to reach to a conclusion. Another drawback of the Luo’s classification is the fact that it considers the posterior condyle as one single column. Similar to division of anterior part of plateau into two separate columns, the posterior condyle should also be considered to be composed of two columns instead of one. Hence a “Four-column” classification would be a logical improvement over the current Luo’s classification. This has also been suggested by Chang et al. Luo’s concept has significantly helped in understanding the fracture morphology of unicondylar and bicondylar fractures. However, it might not be possible to apply this classification to the badly comminuted fractures. We feel that its greatest contribution is in the management of posterior column shearing injuries. The question still remains of the need for fixation of small fragments which are less than 2–3 Our study is not without limitations. Judging accuracy of articular reduction is difficult on post-operative plain radiographs. Best way would be to get a post fixation CT, which was not done in our series due to ethical issues. Further a longer follow-up of such high energy injuries might provide us a better perspective of managing these fractures and the onset of degenerative changes, if any. The guiding principles in managing high energy proximal tibia fractures are restoration of normal limb alignment, achieving stable internal fixation, and restoring anatomical articular congruity. Utilizing Luo’s classification for treating these injuries will assist in better understanding of fracture pattern and hence help in achieving a better functional outcome. The posterior column must be visualized as having two separate parts (posterolateral and posteromedial), requiring individual attention. Of utmost importance is the realization of the fact that every broken column is equally important and hence requires good fixation with sturdy implants. Data collection: Vivek Trikha, Sahil Gaba, Prabhat Agrawal, Buddhadev Chowdhury. Statistical analysis: Sahil Gaba, Arvind Kumar. Literature review: Sahil Gaba, Saubhik Das. Manuscript writing: Vivek Trikha, Sahil Gaba, Prabhat Agrawal, Saubhik Das. Final editing and formatting of manuscript: Vivek Trikha, Buddhadev Chowdhury. None. On behalf of all the authors, the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest.