Schwertmannite (Fe16O16(OH)12(SO4)2), commonly found in acidic aqueous systems, forms rapidly into a “hedge-hog” morphology, where nanodimension whiskers project outwards from an electron-dense interior. Schwertmannite whiskers were recently found to contain the highly disordered and maghemite-like structural components present in ferrihydrite, and on this basis, schwertmannite was postulated to be an intermediate phase (in terms of crystallinity and kinetics of formation) to the least and most crystalline forms of ferrihydrite, 2- and 6-line, respectively. To test this hypothesis and help elucidate the schwertmannite growth mechanism, we reduced supersaturation (a function of pH and ferric concentration) during the crystallization of 2-line ferrihydrite from ferric sulphate liquors. Lower supersaturations resulted in schwertmannite formation, often in an admixture or possibly nucleated on 2-line ferrihydrite aggregates. Alternate experiments performed in the presence of arsenic (as a crystal growth modifier) produced X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns consistent with admixed ferrihydrite and schwertmannite, but with a morphology where aligned ferrihydrite nanoparticles appeared to approximate the structure of schwertmannite whiskers. We postulate that as similar structural components constitute 2-line ferrihydrite and schwertmannite, but are only minor components in 6-line ferrihydrite, the proportion of each component (with the maghemite-like phase dominating) permits the specific alignment and growth of the intriguing schwertmannite morphology.Schwertmannite (Fe The methods of characterisation and elemental analyses are detailed in previous publications Schwertmann et al. At a fixed pH (3.5) the effect of the initial Fe(III) concentration and hence supersaturation on the crystal structure of ferrihydrite is shown in TEM and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) analyses were consistent with XRD interpretations. In all samples, primary ferrihydrite particles were not larger than 4 The effect of pH on supersaturation and 2-line ferrihydrite formation was less obvious in the 0.7 In a previous study Using the Loan et al. At constant pH, the crystal structure of 2-line ferrihydrite can be altered via supersaturation control, where lower ferric concentrations increase crystallinity. By reducing the driving force for precipitation (i.e. pH and Fe The experiments involving crystallization in the presence of arsenic provide the most interesting insight. On the basis of previous As-ferrihydrite studies ( Our studies demonstrate that in ferric sulphate media schwertmannite is an intermediate phase in the ferrihydrite crystallinity and crystallization series, specifically governed by supersaturation. Lower supersaturations result in the formation of schwertmannite, often in an admixture or nucleated on 2-line ferrihydrite aggregates. Our studies suggest that controlling supersaturation dictates the proportion of each ferrihydrite/schwertmannite structural component. Alternate experiments performed in the presence of arsenic (as a crystal growth modifier) produced XRD patterns consistent with admixed ferrihydrite and schwertmannite, but with a morphology intermediate to ferrihydrite and schwertmannite. Whiskers did not radiate out from an electron-dense interior; the morphology was more consistent with nanoparticles of ferrihydrite aligning to approximate the bulk structure of schwertmannite. This is thought to be immature schwertmannite, where crystals are terminated with arsenic, which blocks complete whisker formation. We postulate that as similar structural components constitute 2-line ferrihydrite and schwertmannite, but are only minor components in 6-line ferrihydrite, the proportion of each component (with the maghemite-like phase dominating) must permit the specific alignment and self-assembly and growth of the intriguing schwertmannite morphology. We would like to acknowledge the contributions to this work made by Miroslav Mihov (University of Limerick), J.M. Cowley (Arizona State), and R. Hart and J. Morton (Curtin University). The Materials and Surface Science Institute at the University of Limerick, the Australian Government's Cooperative Research Centre (CRC) Program, through the AJ Parker CRC for Hydrometallurgy, are also thanked for support. M.L. thanks the Australian Research Council and Pasminco Ltd. for support in the form of an Australian Postgraduate Award (Industry).