Two kinds of NiO–YSZ (yttria-stabilized zirconia) coatings, respectively with uniform and gradient distributions of NiO content along the coating thickness direction, were prepared by electron beam physical vapor deposition (EB–PVD) via adjusting electron beam currents. Then uniform and graded Ni–YSZ coatings were obtained from corresponding NiO–YSZ coatings after a reduction treatment. For uniform Ni–YSZ coating, the composition and porosity distributions along the coating thickness were uniform. The specific surface area and total pore volume for this coating could reach up to 4.330  m2 g
                        −1 and 0.0346  cm3 g
                        −1 respectively. The area specific resistance (ASR) of this coating kept increasing with the rise in temperature and an ASR of 2.1×10
                        −5Ω cm2 was obtained at 600 °C. For graded Ni–YSZ coating, a gradient in Ni content and porosity was realized along the coating thickness. A high porosity of up to 33% was achieved in the part of the coating close to the substrate, while a low porosity of 10% was obtained in the part close to coating surface.In order to reduce manufacture cost and improve long-term stability of solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC), the reduction of operation temperature of planar SOFCs to an intermediate temperature range is a significant objective in current research work Ni–YSZ (yttria-stabilized zirconia) cermet has been widely employed as anode coating material for SOFCs because of its low cost, good catalytic activity and suitable thermal expansion coefficient As a typical process for coating preparation, electron beam physical vapor deposition (EB–PVD) technique has exhibited a unique superiority in fabrication of microporous coatings with the advantages of high deposition rate, large deposition area and good adherence to substrates So in this investigation, NiO–YSZ anode coatings were prepared by EB–PVD through simultaneously evaporating two adjacent ingots of NiO and 8YSZ. The uniform or gradient distribution of NiO content along the coating thickness direction was realized by adjusting the electron beam currents during evaporation course. Then uniform and graded Ni–YSZ coatings were obtained from NiO–YSZ coatings after a reduction in hydrogen. The performances of these two kinds of Ni–YSZ coatings were analyzed and characterized. An EB–PVD equipment of type L5 was employed to prepare NiO–YSZ coatings with a deposition rate of 0.6 µm/min by simultaneously evaporating two adjacent ingots of NiO and 8YSZ. The final Ni–YSZ coatings were obtained from NiO–YSZ coatings after a reduction at 800 °C in hydrogen for 2 h. A plate of stainless steel (SUS430) with a size of Φ100 Two kinds of NiO–YSZ coatings, respectively with uniform and gradient distributions of NiO content along the coating thickness direction, were prepared by EB–PVD. According to repeated experiments, when the currents of electron beams for evaporating NiO and YSZ ingots were 0.18 A and 0.48 A respectively and the area of melting pool kept constant at 10 mm After coating preparation, the phase composition of this coating was characterized by Philips X’Pert diffractometer (XRD) with parallel Cu Kα radiation. The morphology of fracture surface as well as element distribution of the coating was analyzed by scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Hitachi S4700) combined with an electron probe microanalysis (EPMA). The specific surface area of the open pores, average pore diameter and pore diameter distribution of this coating were measured with a Quantachrome Autosorb-1 analyzer employing N Uniform NiO–YSZ coatings were prepared by EB–PVD via simultaneously evaporating two adjacent ingots of NiO and YSZ and then the coatings were reduced in hydrogen at 800 °C for 2 h. The phase compositions of the coatings before and after reduction treatment were analyzed and exhibited in Two ingots of YSZ and NiO were evaporated to prepare NiO–YSZ coating by EB–PVD and the currents of electron beams for evaporating YSZ and NiO ingots were kept constant at 0.48 A and 0.18 A respectively during preparation course, just as described in In order to measure the specific surface area of open pores and the pore diameter distribution in this coating, N The ASR of uniform Ni–YSZ coating was measured in temperature range from 30 °C to 600 °C and shown in According to the gradient design, NiO–YSZ coating was prepared by adjusting electron beam currents for evaporating YSZ and NiO targets, just as described in In order to analyze the porosity of different regions along the coating thickness direction quantitatively, a digital image analysis method was employed and the measurement result is shown in Two kinds of Ni–YSZ coatings, respectively with uniform and gradient distributions of element content and porosity along the coating thickness direction, were prepared by EB–PVD combined with a reduction treatment. For uniform Ni–YSZ coatings, the specific surface area of open pores could reach up to 4.330  m The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial assistance from the New Century Excellent Talent Plan of China (NCET2004).