A geochemical model was established to predict the chemical and hydraulic performances of MgO columns used to treat a nickel- and cobalt-contaminated groundwater. Using the PHREEQC software, an advection-reaction simulation was carried out to re-create the outlet concentrations observed during a previous axial column laboratory test. Reaction kinetics were introduced to calculate the rates of brucite dissolution as well as iron and manganese oxidation. Pore volume diminution during the test was also predicted using the volume of goethite precipitates generated. The floating-sphere model was applied to calculate the equivalent hydraulic conductivity (Keq) of the column. The geometry of the model's cells was then adjusted to represent a radial centripetal filter containing the same amount of reactive MgO. The Keq predictions for the centripetal filter showed that the loss of permeability in the filter could be significantly delayed by changing the filter's flow configuration. While those results are promising, further testing is necessary to provide additional experimental results for radial filters.Permeable reactive barriers (PRBs) are a groundwater remediation technique that consist of a reactive zone placed in the path of a contaminant plume with the objective of treating it. Because they rely on the natural groundwater gradient, PRBs are considered as a sustainable groundwater remediation method ( Clogging by precipitates is a problem than can affect both the hydraulic and chemical performance of barriers ( This study proposes a theoretical way to enhance the hydraulic performance of these filters by modifying the flow pattern from the traditional axial to the radial centripetal configuration where water flows inwardly through a cylindrical annulus of reactive material towards the center (see This paper aims to demonstrate the theoretical efficiency of centripetal radial filters for PRBs in three steps. First, geochemical models are constructed to recreate the results of previous batch and axial column tests ( The experimental data used in this study comes from our previous work ( The physicochemical characteristics of the contaminated groundwater are those of a site near a nickel mine's tailings storage area and are typical of a neutral mine drainage or NMD ( The efficiency of the treatment was previously demonstrated in a small-scale axial column test ( The simulations were performed using the PHREEQC software ( k k Using the same parameters as in the batch test simulation, the second simulation was performed to simulate the results of the column test in t t V V As mentioned above, the chemical efficiency of the column dropped rather abruptly during the test after approximately 380 pv and it was attributed to the passivation of the reactive media, i.e. the clogging of reactive sites of the magnesia by precipitates. This result, i.e. a sudden drop in pH values (from 10 to below 7) and a breakthrough in iron, cobalt and nickel concentrations, was also observed by The hydraulic conductivity for each nth cell (K To predict the hydraulic behaviour of a centripetal filter, the K results of the cell in the axial simulation were applied to 10 cells of corresponding volumes in the radial filter. For a pure centripetal flow (i.e. with no vertical component), the cells are divided perpendicularly to the water flow and thus correspond to annuli of equal volumes. An example of the geometry of these cells is exhibited in Because corresponding cells have the same volume in both models, reaction rates are expected to be the same as are the amount of precipitates generated. Applying Darcy's law to the centripetal flow, we can express the hydraulic head loss in each cell with Eq. Results of the batch test modeling along with the experimental results are presented in The model results are exhibited in The density of spherical precipitates was determined by varying its value and calculating the MSE between the modeled K Also shown in A geochemical model was developed and was able to predict the results of an axial column test where Co- and Ni-contaminated water was filtered through a granular MgO media. Aside from the main chemical calculations (speciation, kinetics, precipitation), this advective model also takes into account the pore reduction and associated shorter residence time caused by the gradual clogging, mainly by goethite. Considering the amount of precipitates generated, the equivalent hydraulic conductivity was satisfactorily modeled using the ‘floating spheres’ model and the Kozeny-Carman equation. By using these results and changing the filter's geometry, equivalent hydraulic conductivity values could be determined for theoretical radial centripetal filters and it was found that this change of configuration has the potential to significantly delay the decline in hydraulic performances. While comparison with preliminary experimental data was promising, further testing is necessary to determine if the chemical and hydraulic predictions made using this model really match those of a real radial filter.  The authors would like to thank the Quebec Fonds de Recherche Nature et Technologies, the