The wetlands play an important role in carbon storage, especially at high latitudes, at which they store nearly one-third of global soil carbons. However, few studies have investigated the emissions of CO2, CH4 and N2O in the long-term, especially effects of freeze–thaw cycles on these gases emissions in freshwater marsh ecosystems. In this paper, we collected greenhouse gas emission data from a freshwater marsh area in China for 4 years, evaluated their release variables and speculated on their potential atmospheric impact. For this paper, we report on the CO2, CH4 and N2O emission rates recorded from June 2002 to November 2005 in the Sanjiang Plain of northeast China. We measured their interannual variations and fluctuations, as well as factors affecting their emissions, and estimated their regulation and freeze–thaw cycle impacts. Our results revealed obvious CO2 and CH4 emission fluctuations during the winter months, and during the freeze–thaw cycle, and a strong interannual variation during the growing season. Overall, we documented a close relationship between the CO2 and CH4 emissions, implicating some regulatory commonality. We determined that the marsh was a N2O sink during the winter, but a significant source of N2O during the freeze–thaw cycle as the temperature increased, especially in early summer. During the thaw–freeze period, the N2O levels were positively correlated with the water depth. Additionally, water depth greatly governed the interannual variation of the N2O emissions from the marshes during the thaw–freeze period.The wetlands play an important role in carbon storage, especially at high latitudes, at which they store nearly one-third of global soil carbons ( Wetlands, on the other hand, are among the primary sources of atmospheric CH N The seasonal freeze–thaw cycle is an important meteorological event in boreal areas. The emission of greenhouse gases during freeze–thaw periods probably results in altered atmospheric chemistry. The transfer and transformation of the soil nutrients greatly impact the carbon balance in these areas during this period, when the emission of CO Overall, these greenhouse gas emission studies were mainly conducted indoors under highly controlled conditions. Long-term reports regarding the measurements of CO We selected the Carex Lasiocarpa freshwater marsh study site to measure greenhouse gas emissions. We set up our study area at the Sanjiang Mire Wetland Experimental Station, Chinese Academy of Science, in the Sanjiang Plain of China, at approximately 47°35′N, 133°31′E. The average altitude at Carex Lasiocarpa is between 55.4 and 57.9 We placed the thermometers, with soil measurement sensitivities of ±0.1 We measured gas emissions in triplicate. The static chamber method was adopted to measure the concentrations of CO The CH The gas flux was calculated according to the following equation: The data in this study were collected over 3 years, from June 2002 to September 2005. In the winter months (November–March, next year), we collected measurements in triplicate once every 2 weeks. However, during a large flux freeze–thaw fluctuation period (April–June), we collected emission measurements once daily. During the growing season (July–October), the CH Statistical analysis was done with SPSS and Microsoft Excel for Windows 2000. The normality of variables was checked using The deepest freezed soil appeared in January and February; then surface snow and ice began to thaw at 13:00–14:30 each day at the end of March. In April, surface of soil thawed with the increasing temperature, and it completely thaws up in July. The same pattern of freeze–thaw in this area occurred every year with little difference ( The soil temperatures at the study site were measured at a depth of 5 Likewise, there were no significant precipitation differences across the 4-year study period, including during the growing season ( There were significant differences in water depth during the freeze–thaw period (April–June) across 2003, 2004 and 2005 ( There was an obvious CH During the thaw–freeze period that we investigated, the CH The CH As with CH We measured no significant differences in CO The secretion of N During the freeze–thaw period, the marsh was a source of N The field measurements and indoor experiments all showed that the activity of the bacteria was a main factor controlling N We recorded obvious CH This work was founded by National Natural Science Foundation of China (40471124, 40431001), Chinese Academy of Sciences (KZCX2-YW-309).