In this study distillery wastewater was treated using the vermifiltration technology in a bid to reduce downstream contamination by the effluent. 10 kg of Eisenia fetida earthworms were used as the vermifiltration media in a 0.5 m × 0.5 m x 0.3 m vermifiltration bed over a 40 h period cycle. The distillery effluent physicochemical parameters which included pH, total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN), biological oxygen demand (BOD), total dissolved solids (TDS), total suspended solids (TSS) and the chemical oxygen demand (COD) were measured every 5 days. The vermicompost which was produced as a result of the vermifiltration process's nitrogen, phosphorous and potassium composition was also determined. The distillery effluent pH changed from acidic to neutral whilst a decrease of 94.9% was observed for the TKN, 91.1% for the BOD, 91.9% for the TDS, 92.4% for the TSS and 89.4% for the COD upon treatment with vermifiltration. The vermicompost, a by-product of the vermifiltration process had a nitrogen, phosphorous and potassium composition of 1.87%, 0.87% and 0.66% respectively.The distillery industry generates a lot of wastewater from its processing and most distilleries end up disposing their untreated effluent into water bodies causing environmental threats to aquatic life due to high levels of biological contaminants ( This study investigated the potential of applying the vermifiltration technology in the treatment of distillery wastewater in a bid to ease downstream contamination from the distillery industries. Vermifiltration of the distillery effluent was conducted in a 0.5 m × 0.5 m x 0.3 m vermifiltration bed which was prevented from direct exposure to the sun. A sample of 100 L for the distillery wastewater was obtained from a local distillery in Harare, Zimbabwe. The gravel and sand for the vermifiltration bed were obtained locally and set up in accordance to  The distillery effluent was characterized by high COD values (92 500.0 ± 500.0 mg/L), high BOD values (25 466.7 ± 814.5 mg/L) and high TDS (65 116.7 ± 600.7 mg/L). These characteristics made vermifiltration an interesting option for the distillery effluent treatment. A summary of the characteristics of the wastewater are shown in The pH of the distillery effluent changed from being acidic to neutral during the vermifiltration of distillery effluent ( The TKN decreased by 94.9% in the distillery effluent during the vermifiltration process ( The distillery effluent decreased by 91.1% during the vermifiltration process ( The TDS in the distillery effluent decreased by 91.9% during the vermifiltration process ( The TSS reduced in the distillery wastewater upon treatment using the vermifiltration technology by almost 92.4% ( The COD in the distillery wastewater decreased by 89.4% upon vermifiltration ( A summary of the distillery effluent after treatment with vermifiltration is given in Vermicompost, a bio fertilizer was produced during the vermifiltration process as the earthworms fed on the organic matter in the distillery effluent. The characteristics of the vermicompost obtained from the distillery sludge are given in The vermifiltration technology can be used to effectively treat distillery wastewater which has high solids content and is highly biodegradable. The COD, BOD, TKN, TSS and TDS were significantly reduced by more than 90% during the 40 h vermifiltration process. The treated distillery effluent can be used for irrigation purposes. In addition, vermicompost, a bio fertilizer which was rich in NPK was produced as part of the vermifiltration process. The authors declare no conflict of interest. The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at