Toppling failure is a common mode of instability in layered and blocky rock slopes where rock blocks rotate about their toes and overturn. One of the most important types of toppling failure is slide-toe-toppling. In this failure, rock blocks at the toe of the slope are overturned by the pressure of sliding mass from the upper part of the slope. In the present study, this type of failure is examined through physical and theoretical modeling. The literature on toppling failures is reviewed briefly first and, then, the mechanism of slide-toe-toppling failure is described. To clarify the mechanism of the failure, a series of physical model tests is conducted under static condition by means of a new tilting table apparatus. Then, a theoretical approach is proposed based on limit equilibrium analysis and some new equations are developed for stability analysis of this type of failure. Finally, the results of physical modeling are compared with outcomes of proposed theoretical approach. This comparison shows a good agreement between the theoretical and experimental results.Tensile strength of rock blocks Uniaxial compressive strength Unit weight Average length of blocks or slices Height of falling Thickness of blocks Dip of slope face Dip of dominant discontinuities of rock mass or soil slices Dip of overall failure plane of toppling failure Dip of upper surface of the slope Dip of normal to discontinuities Distance between tensile crack and crown of slope Number of rock block Number of soil slice Height of slope Inter-slice normal force acting at the right side of slice “ Inter-slice normal force acting at the left side of slice “ Normal force acting at the base of slice “ Shear force acting at the base of slice “ Angle between Angle between Point of application of Point of application of Point of application of Dip of base of slice “ Thickness of slice “ Internal friction angle of soil Cohesive strength of soil Interface friction angle between soil and rock masses Interface friction angle of base of rock blocks Cohesive strength of base of rock blocks Interface friction angle between adjacent rock blocks Internal friction angle of intact rock Cohesive strength of intact rock Constant coefficient Weight of rock blocks Inter-block normal force Inter-block shear force Point of application of “ Toppling failure is a common instability in natural and excavated rock slopes. From the mechanism point of view, the toppling failures are classified as main and secondary ( Failure due to overturning of natural rock blocks was first mentioned by Müller in 1968, after studying the instabilities near the Vaiont dam lake in Italy ( In 1976, Goodman and Bray classified the toppling failures into two categories: main (flexural, blocky and block-flexure) and secondary types and introduced a theoretical approach for the analysis of blocky mode. Later, several researchers tried to develop this approach into some design charts and computer programs to assess the failure ( The first comprehensive approach to analyze flexural toppling failure was introduced by In 2012 and 2015, Amini et al. combined the method of As mentioned, when a slope is made of an upper portion susceptible to sliding and a lower portion prone to toppling failure, the slope has a potential of slide-toe-toppling. Schematic diagram of this type of failure is shown in In the simplest case, the first top rock block is subjected to its own weight and a force exerted by the upper soil mass. But in general, this block could also be subjected to some external forces such as dynamic loads, water pressures and loads of rock bolts. In any case, resultant of all of the mentioned forces may push the block to topple or slide. This block also will push and destabilize the next block and this domino effect will continue down to the last block at the toe of the slope. Finally, if the last rock block slides or topples, the entire slope will fail and a slide-toe-toppling failure will occur; but as long as the last rock block remains stable, the slope will be stable too. Hence, to evaluate the stability of the slope, the reaction force between upper soil mass and the first top rock block should be known. But, sliding soil mass is statically indeterminate. Therefore, it should first be solved with appropriate theoretical methods and, then, its reaction with the first block should be estimated. In next sections, the mechanism of this instability is clarified by physical modeling and a new theoretical model is proposed to determine the reaction between the upper soil mass and the lower rock mass in the slide-toe-toppling failure. Physical modeling is a conventional method for studying the mechanisms of instabilities in soil and rock masses. These models play an essential role in validation of theoretical and numerical models and verification of their results. In the case of slopes, physical modeling is usually carried out by tilting table, centrifuge apparatus, base friction table and temporary support. In the tilting table method and temporary support, weight of samples is modeled directly; so the model should be large enough to naturally fail under its own weight. But in the centrifuge and base friction methods, weight is simulated with the aid of centrifugal and friction forces; so the model can be reasonably small ( The selection of modeling material is one of the most important issues in regard to physical modeling. In this study, all physical models were made with base friction powder. This powder is a frequently used material to construct physical models and is a highly regarded for this purpose ( The unit weight of a solid blocks could be controlled by the compressive pressure (0–1036 To simulate the soil mass behind the rock blocks, the same base friction powder was used under its loose condition. The air pluviation technique was applied where the material is poured into the modeling box from a certain falling height. A feeder was produced for this purpose with the ability to move along the modeling box and with a controllable falling height. The powder was poured from different falling heights (5, 10, 15 and 20 As it can be seen, in the scope of this study, powder's unit weight showed an almost linear relationship with the falling height which is expressed as the following equation: Uniaxial compressive strength of solid blocks is one of the most important mechanical properties of these material which acts as a measure of blocks' strength and competency and a criterion for the choice of ultimate compressive pressure. The blocks should be strong enough to sustain their shape during preparation in the model; but weak enough to fail under modeling stress level. To determine the relationship between blocks' compressive strength and molding compressive pressure, uniaxial compressive strength of several specimens made under pressures of 346–570 As mentioned earlier, in flexural and block-flexure toppling failures, rock blocks first break under tensile stress and then overturn. Thus, these modes of failure are particularly sensitive to the blocks' tensile strength. This also applies to the case of physical models. In view of this sensitivity, tensile strength of solid blocks made under different compression pressures should be measured. Measuring the tensile strength of weak and brittle material is subject to many limitations. Hence, to measure this parameter, indirect test methods are more preferable. The common practice for determining the tensile strength of these blocks is the use of three-point or four-point bending tests. In these methods, especially in four-point bending test, stress concentration around supports may lead to crack initiation and propagation in those areas which results in a lower accuracy of the results. To avoid this issue, the authors designed and built a new device shown in In this study, several 5 In slide-toe-toppling failure, soil mass must undergo shear sliding and rock blocks must slide on each other before toppling. Thus, the internal shear parameters of both powder and blocks and also the inter-block shear parameters are important for analysis. The internal shear parameters were measured by direct shear test using a 6 To determine the internal shear strength parameters of the blocks, a number of blocks were made under pressure of 460 Slide-toe-toppling failure was modeled on a tilting table designed and constructed at the University of Tehran by the authors specifically for this purpose. For each test, first, solid blocks were placed vertically alongside each other to form the rock mass of the toe of slope. As table tilts, these blocks become susceptible to overturning. Since toppling failure of rock mass at the toe may be in blocky, flexural or block-flexure modes, each scenario was investigated separately by some models built specifically for that failure mode. For flexural toppling failure, rock mass was built with continuous blocks; so for toppling to occur, blocks had to break at the base by the tensile stress caused by bending. For blocky mode, a set of artificial cross-joint was made at the base of blocks in a way that overall toppling failure plane would be at an angle of 14° to the table floor. These joints allowed the blocks to easily separate at their bases and overturn under the exerted loads. For block-flexure toppling failure, continuous blocks and those with cross-joints were placed alternately. The dip of overall toppling failure plane was chosen to be 14° in this model too, so that block-flexure toppling failure would be regular and easier to analyze. To avoid the problems associated with making and movement of the blocks, their maximum height was limited to 35 In every test, tilting was stopped immediately after the failure stage, geometric details of the model were recorded, depth of sliding surface in the powder was captured three-dimensionally to acquire geometric data required for theoretical analyses and finally sliding mass and broken blocks were carefully removed to measure the height of blocks below the overall toppling failure plane ( For theoretical analysis of this type of toppling failure, first, reaction between weak material and rock masse should be determined and then applied to block “n”. In this study, this reaction force is determined by the conventional slice method. But since the contact surface between the soil and block “n” is tilted, selected slices should not be vertical. Thus, the sliding mass is divided into multiple hypothetical slices, all parallel to dominant discontinuities of the rock mass. A random sliding surface is assumed in soil mass to ensure the adequate generality of sliding surface geometry and thus its capability to account for various circular and non-circular forms. According to Assuming that sliding mass is in the limit equilibrium condition and follows the Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion, the normal and shear forces acting on the slice bottom will have the following relationship: Determining Also, writing the moment equilibrium equation with respect to middle point of base of the slice “ After arranging Eq. To solve the problem, we assume a primary function such as To solve the problem, first,   According to The presence of a cross-joint at the block base undermines its ability to resist against bending stress; so it either topples or slides, in which case, sliding or overturning can be examined by Eqs.    Moreover, shear parameters of discontinuities, intact rock and sliding surface can be adjusted in a way that slope would reach the point of equilibrium and then the obtained shear parameters can be compared with the real values to determine the slope's FoS against slide-toe-toppling failure. This technique is a common practice for determination of the slope's FoS. In all discussed calculations, it is assumed that the slope is completely dry and is subjected to no external forces such as dynamic and structural loads or reinforcement force. When the slope's water level is higher than overall failure plane or sliding surface or when the slope is subjected to some external loads, these forces can be added to the discussed limit equilibrium equations to reanalyze the situation. Since magnitude and point of application of these forces are known, they make no change in general condition and structure of the solution. Analysis of physical models or real case studies with a potential of slide-toe-toppling failure with the proposed theoretical method requires extensive calculations which would take considerable time and effort to be performed manually. To avoid manual calculations, the proposed theoretical method for analysis of slide-toe-toppling failure was coded into a computer program. This program receives the slope's characteristics from the user and performs all analyses associated with the proposed method and displays all geometric information and forces acting on rock blocks and soil slices. This program allows the user to adjust the values of parameters and thereby examine the sensitivity of the slope to different variables. To evaluate the performance of the proposed method, the coded program was used to analyze a typical example. To allow the readers to compare the slide-toe-toppling failure with the main toppling failures, this example was also analyzed for the main flexural, blocky and block-flexure toppling failures. The diagram of one state of this example is illustrated in For more explanation, magnitudes of inter-column normal forces acting at rock blocks in the toe of these case studies are presented in To verify the results of the proposed method, this method was used to analyze the physical models described in In In this study, the mechanism of slide-toe-toppling failure was investigated through a series of physical models. The investigation results showed that a roughly circular failure in the homogeneous soil mass at the upper part of the slope leads to toppling failure of the rock blocks at the toe of the slope. This observed mechanism was used as a base to develop a theoretical model for the analysis of this type of slope instability. In the resulting model, first, the reaction forces between soil and rock mass are obtained by limit equilibrium methods. Then the obtained force is transferred to the rock mass at the toe to determine its stability against toppling failure. The validity of this theoretical method was investigated by comparing its results with the experimental observations. The results showed a difference of < The authors express their sincere thanks to Prof. Ömer Aydan from Ryukyu University, Ryukyu, Japan for his invaluable help and guidance throughout this research. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.