Background
                  Complex fracture-dislocations of the proximal ulna and radius represent a challenge even for expert orthopaedic surgeons. A new comprehensive classification, the proximal ulnar and radial fracture-dislocation comprehensive classification system (PURCCS), was recently proposed. The aim of this study was to analyze the clinical usefulness of this classification in a large series of patients.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  We studied 38 patients (39 elbows) with a mean age of 56 years. All patients were classified with the PURCCS by use of standard radiography, computed tomography, and intraoperative fluoroscopy. Surgical treatment was performed according to the PURCCS therapeutic algorithm. Patients were followed up for a mean of 23 months. The clinical evaluation was performed with the Mayo Elbow Performance Score and Index (MEPS and MEPI); the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand (DASH) score; and the modified American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (m-ASES) score.
               
                  Results
                  Each pattern of fracture-dislocation in our series finds its position within the PURCCS. At the last follow-up, the mean MEPS, DASH score, and m-ASES score were 91.2, 14.9, and 83.9, respectively. The mean extension, flexion, pronation, and supination were 19°, 136°, 81°, and 79°, respectively. According to the MEPI, 72%, 20%, and 8% of cases were rated excellent, good, and fair, respectively. Two patients with elbow stiffness underwent a reoperation, with final satisfactory results.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The PURCCS helps identify the main lesions of each injury pattern; the associated therapeutic algorithm helps select correct surgical strategies. This study showed that the clinical results were satisfactory in the majority of cases, with few major complications and reinterventions. The PURCCS is a comprehensive classification that may contribute to the surgical management of these difficult fracture-dislocations.Complex fracture-dislocations of the proximal ulna and radius include multiple injuries that are difficult to manage and often yield unpredictable results. In 1814, G. B. Monteggia first described a fracture of the proximal third of the ulna associated with anterior dislocation of the radial head. The aim of this prospective study was to analyze the clinical usefulness of the PURCCS in a series of patients affected by fracture-dislocations of the proximal ulna and radius that were classified and treated on the basis of the PURCCS algorithms. We hypothesize that the new classification system may help improve the clinical outcome of these complex injuries. Thirty-eight patients (39 elbows) who underwent surgery for fracture-dislocations of the proximal ulna and radius were analyzed. The patients were 18 men and 20 women, with a mean age of 56 years (range, 20-86 years). The type of injury was classified according to the PURCCS The patients underwent surgery on average 4 days after trauma (range, 2-24 days), and all were treated by the same surgeon (G. G.). A posterior skin incision was performed in all the cases. A posterior approach was used in olecranon, metaphyseal, and diaphyseal ulnar fractures. Radial head fractures were treated by a Kocher approach in all but 3 cases; in these 3 cases, a posterior transolecranon approach was used because the proximal ulnar fracture directly exposed the proximal radius. Anterior coronoid fractures were fixed through the Kocher interval when they were associated with a comminuted radial head fracture or by means of a posterior approach in the presence of an olecranon fracture. In the remaining cases, either the Hotchkiss approach or elevation of the flexor-pronator muscles from the subcutaneous and medial border of the ulna was used. According to the PURCCS therapeutic algorithm ( All patients received the same postoperative management. Two drains were applied at the end of surgery. The elbow was immobilized in extension with a plaster splint for 48 hours in a raised position. Cryotherapy and Kinesio tape were applied in the first 2 weeks. On postoperative day 2, the cast was removed and all patients were allowed to start active and passive self-assisted range of motion exercises with a hinged brace. The hinged elbow brace or elbow fixator was removed 6 to 8 weeks after surgery. Indomethacin (100 mg daily) was administered for 4 weeks to prevent heterotopic ossifications and to control swelling and pain. All the patients were discharged on average 3 days after surgery (range, 2-6 days). Patients were allowed to resume daily activities 2 months after surgery; strengthening exercises were prescribed after fracture healing. A clinical assessment was carried out every 3 weeks in the first 3 months, every 6 weeks in the subsequent 3 months, and every 3 months thereafter. The clinical evaluation was performed annually after the first year. The patients were recalled for questioning about subjective and objective functional outcomes. The study-specific evaluation performed at the last follow-up was based on the Mayo Elbow Performance Score and Index (MEPS and MEPI), the modified-American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (m-ASES) score, and the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand (DASH) score. Each fracture-dislocation pattern observed in this series finds its position within the PURCCS. There were 6 type 5BIIICI, 5 type 2BIIICI, 3 type 1AI, 2 type 5BIIICIII, 2 type 4BIIICIII, 2 type 4AI, 2 type 3BIIICI, 2 type 3BIII, 1 type 6BIIICIII, 1 type 6BIIIE, 1 type 5BIII, 1 type 5BIIICIIIE, 1 type 5BIIICID, 1 type 4BIII, 1 type 4AII, 1 type 2BIIIE, 1 type 2BIIICID, 1 type 2BIIICIII, 1 type 2BIICI, 1 type 2BIII, 1 type 1BI, 1 type 1BIIICI, and 1 type 1BIIICIII. All the patients returned for questioning and a clinical and radiologic evaluation. The mean follow-up was 23 months (range, 12-87 months). At the last follow-up, the mean arc of elbow motion was 117° (range, 20°-155°), with a mean flexion of 136° (range, 90°-155°) and a mean extension of 19° (range, 0°-70°). The mean forearm arc rotation was 160° (range, 50°-180°), with a mean supination of 79° (range, 0°-90°) and a mean pronation of 81° (range, 20°-90°). The mean recovery of arc of motion during the entire follow-up is shown in The mean MEPS was 91.2 points (range, 60-100 points). According to the MEPI, 28 elbows were rated excellent ( Seven cases of elbow stiffness were observed; in 4 of them, the flexion-extension plane was involved; in the other 3 cases, both planes of motion were involved. In 1 of the 4 cases with stiffness involving the flexion-extension plane alone, rated very severe, the main cause of range of motion impairment was a heterotopic ossification (class IIA according to Hastings and Graham In the 3 patients in whom both planes of motion were involved, flexion-extension limitation was rated minimal in 1 and severe in the other 2. Stiffness involving the pronosupination plane was rated very severe in all 3 patients owing to the presence of radioulnar synostosis (class IIIB according to Hastings and Graham Of the 7 patients with elbow stiffness, 2 underwent a second operation to release soft tissue and to remove heterotopic ossification; the clinical outcomes after the second operation were satisfactory according to the MEPI. Two other patients with a fair clinical outcome did not undergo further surgery owing to scarce compliance or additional clinical problems. The clinical outcome in the remaining 3 cases was good, and the patients were satisfied with the final result. Complications were observed in 7 patients, although the final outcome was satisfactory. In particular, 1 patient who was a diabetic, obese, immunodeficient 65-year-old man, classified as 5BIIICIIIE, underwent surgery 24 days after the trauma because of the presence of a mild compartment syndrome with blood blisters that affected the whole arm. After surgery, the patient developed a deep infection, hardware failure, and chronic elbow instability secondary to trochlea and capitellum osteonecrosis. However, he reported a satisfactory clinical result at the final follow-up ( In the present study, we analyzed the clinical usefulness of the PURCCS in a series of patients affected by fracture-dislocations of the proximal ulna and radius classified and treated according to the PURCCS algorithm. Satisfactory clinical outcomes were observed in the majority of the patients examined, confirming that this new classification system may help improve the clinical outcome of these complex injuries. Complex fracture-dislocations of the proximal ulna and radius are rare injuries that represent a challenging condition even for expert orthopaedic surgeons. Several studies have reported a high failure rate associated with such injuries, with poor results and reoperation rates in 33% to 44% and 26% to 55% of cases, respectively. In 2002, Perez reported the results of treatment of 54 patients with Monteggia fractures. In a retrospective study, Konrad et al The results of previous studies have shown that the treatment of fracture-dislocations of the proximal ulna and radius remains a controversial issue that is associated with unpredictable outcomes, possibly owing to the lack of widely accepted guidelines for classification and treatment. Giannicola et al The aim of this prospective study was to analyze the clinical usefulness of the PURCCS in a series of patients treated by the same surgeon with use of the proposed diagnostic and therapeutic algorithm. Our clinical results show that this system can be used easily, with each fracture-dislocation pattern finding its position within the PURCCS classification. Two-dimensional and three-dimensional computed tomography and intraoperative fluoroscopy are essential diagnostic steps to correctly classify each lesion; computed tomography is needed to identify any osseous lesions and joint dislocations, particularly those of the proximal radioulnar joint, whereas intraoperative fluoroscopy is necessary to evaluate soft tissue lesions and the involvement of the distal radioulnar joint. In our series, lateral collateral ligament involvement was found in all type B lesions, whereas ligament injuries were not found in any type A lesions. In 2 of the 39 cases, the fluoroscopic evaluation revealed the involvement of the distal radioulnar joint and interosseous membrane, thereby confirming that such lesions may, on rare occasions, be associated with proximal ulna and radius fractures. The PURCCS diagnostic algorithm allowed us to plan the correct surgical treatment in all the cases; we believe it should be used before surgery to investigate the presence of specific injuries, such as the level and comminution of ulnar fracture, radiohumeral and proximal radioulnar joint involvement, presence and type of radial head fracture, interosseous membrane and distal radioulnar joint involvement, and, last, presence of ulnohumeral dislocation. We found that the preoperative identification of these injuries was extremely useful in planning the correct surgical treatment according to the PURCCS algorithm. This treatment approach, followed by early functional elbow rehabilitation, yielded a satisfactory clinical result in more than 90% of the cases, together with a lower prevalence of major complications and reinterventions than that reported in other studies. Our study has limitations. It does not compare different classifications or surgical techniques. The number of patients enrolled was limited, although the low incidence of such injuries may justify the small sample size examined. The strengths of our study are that all the patients were operated on by a single surgeon, thereby reducing the variability of the clinical results; all the fracture-dislocations were classified and treated with a standard protocol; and all the patients were observed prospectively. This study shows that the PURCCS is a useful classification and therapeutic algorithm system, yielding satisfactory results in the majority of cases. An accurate diagnosis and thorough evaluation of the main lesions in fracture-dislocations of the proximal ulna and radius are essential for correct surgical management. The PURCCS alphanumeric system helps identify the injury pattern, whereas the associated therapeutic algorithm provides the appropriate surgical guidelines. A comprehensive classification is needed to compare surgical outcomes and to draw up guidelines for the management of fracture-dislocations of the proximal ulna and radius. Further clinical studies are warranted to confirm whether the PURCCS can achieve this goal. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.