In the present studies trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium bromide (Cyphos IL 102) diluted in toluene has been employed as a novel reagent for the extraction and recovery of Cadmium(II) and Zinc(II) from hydrochloric acid medium. The influence of different parameters such as concentration of H+, extractant and chloride ion, nature of acid (HCl, H2SO4 and HNO3), diluent and equilibration time and temperature on the extraction of Cd(II) and Zn(II) have been investigated. The stoichiometry of extracted metal species examined by Cyphos IL 102 was found to be [(R3R′P)2 MCl2A2]org at low concentration of chloride ions <10−2
                     molL−1 for Cd(II) and <1.5molL−1 for Zn(II) where M2+
                     =Cd(II)/Zn(II) and R3R′P+
                     A−
                     =Cyphos IL 102. The maximum loading capacity for Cd(II) and Zn(II) were 86.46mg and 61.91mg per gram of extractant, respectively. Efficient stripping of Cd(II) and Zn(II) from the loaded organic phase was achieved with 1.0molL−1 HNO3. A series of successive extraction-stripping cycles with the extractant revealed good recyclability of the extractant. In addition to Cd(II) and Zn(II), the partition behaviour of other associated metal ions namely, Mn(II), Fe(II), Ni(II), Co(II) and Fe(III) from chloride medium at different acid molarity has been investigated. Binary separations of Cd(II) and Zn(II) from each other and other associated metal ions have been achieved using 3.0×10−3
                     molL−1 Cyphos IL 102. Based on the extraction data a separation scheme was designed and applied to a synthetic mixture. The developed separation scheme was successfully applied to zinc plating mud for the recovery of Zn(II). Zn(II) was quantitatively (96.64%) recovered with a purity >99.00%.The demand for transition metals, particularly cadmium and zinc is regularly increasing because of their wide range applications in various industries such as pigment, plastic, alloy, cosmetic, battery, agriculture and electroplating ( Recently ionic liquids (ILs) have come up as a new generation of solvents due to some specific features such as low vapour pressure, non-flammability, high thermal stability and low melting point ( Phosphonium based ionic liquids have several advantages over nitrogen based ionic liquids because of their high thermal and chemical stability and less toxicity ( Present paper incorporates the extraction behaviour of Cd(II) and Zn(II) with Cyphos IL 102 solution in toluene. The effect of different aqueous and organic phase parameters such as type of acid HCl/H Cyphos IL 102 Trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium bromide was received from Cytec Industry Inc., Netherlands, as a gift sample. The structure and physical properties of the ionic liquid are given in Cd(II), Zn(II) and other metal ions were analysed through atomic absorption spectroscopy using (AAnalyst 800, Perkin Elmer, Germany). AAS was calibrated by sequential on peak measurement of the corresponding absorption signal and background. The effect of temperature on distribution of metal ions was studied using a Julabo thermostat (GmbH, Germany). A mechanical shaker (Riviera, Bombay, India) was used for shaking the aqueous and organic phases for different studies. Extraction studies were carried out in batch mode. Equal volumes of aqueous phase (metal in appropriate acid) and organic phase (Cyphos IL 102 in toluene) were mechanically shaken at room temperature for 5 Distribution coefficient (D) was defined as the ratio of metal ion concentrations in the organic [M] The extraction behaviour of Cd(II) and Zn(II) was investigated from HCl, HNO The extraction of Cd(II) is ~ Zn(II) shows negligible extraction at low acidity (5.0 All further studies for Cd(II) and Zn(II) were carried out at 1.0 The effect of Cyphos concentration on the distribution of Cd(II) and Zn(II) was studied by varying the concentration of Cyphos IL 102 from 5.0 To investigate the metal to extractant ratio in extractable species log-log plots ( To study the influence of Cl To study the effect of equilibration time on the distribution of Cd(II) and Zn(II), shaking time was varied from 30 Different species of Cd(II) and Zn(II) exist in aqueous phase at varying HCl concentrations. At low HCl molarities cadmium and zinc exist as M Similar type of species for Cd(II) and Zn(II) have been reported earlier ( The extraction equilibrium constant (K Extraction studies on Cd(II) and Zn(II) were carried out at varying temperature ranging from 283 to 333 The dependence of K Taking the logarithm of Eq. The values of extraction enthalpy (ΔH°) and entropy (ΔS°) were calculated from slope and intercept values from the plot between log D and 1000/T ( The change in standard Gibbs free energy (ΔG°) is obtained using: At room temperature (25 For stripping studies 3.0 A number of aromatic and aliphatic diluents namely, benzene, toluene, cyclohexane, xylene, cyclohexanone, n-hexane, n-butyl alcohol and kerosene, were employed to observe the effect of nature of diluents on the extraction of Cd(II) and Zn(II). The results are given in Loading capacity of the extractant was determined by equilibrating the same organic phase with fresh aqueous phases of Cd(II)/Zn(II) at 5.0 Hydrolytic stability of Cyphos IL 102 towards HNO Recycling capacity of an extractant needs to be evaluated to assess its ability to reuse for its commercial applications. To examine the recyclability of the extractant, a series of extraction-stripping cycles were performed. Fresh solution of 3.0 The extraction behaviour of commonly associated metal ions such as Mn(II), Fe(II)/(III)/, Ni(II) and Co(II) was investigated from 1.0 Based on the distribution data for Cd(II), Zn(II) and various metal ions, the conditions for separation of Cd(II) and Zn(II) from one another and from other associated metal ions were worked out. Results along with separation factors are tabulated in Binary separations of Cd(II) from Zn(II) and Fe(III) were carried out at 1.0 Separation of Zn(II) from other associated metal ions has been achieved at 2.0 Based on the distribution data a flow sheet ( 50 Depending upon the nature of the sample and purity required, number of extraction, stripping and scrubbing stages can be increased or decreased. About 1 The separation scheme developed for synthetic mixture ( To 30 The concentration of the metal ions in ZPM-1,rt. ZPM-2, ZPM-3, ZPM-4 and ZPM-5 are given in The present studies highlight that Cyphos IL 102 is an effective extractant for Cd(II) and Zn(II) from chloride medium. Studies also reveal that a very low concentration of Cyphos IL 102 solution is required for quantitative extraction of both the metal ions. The extracting species for Cd(II)/Zn(II) is [(R Extraction data obtained with Cyphos IL 102 indicate clean separations of Cd(II) and Zn(II) from other associated metal ions with reasonably good separation factors. Both Cd(II) and Zn(II) can be recovered almost completely from the loaded organic phase using 1.0 We thank Cytec industries Inc., Netherlands, for gifting the Cyphos IL 102. The financial support to one of the authors by