Calcium sulphate solubilities in simulated zinc processing solutions, as well as the densities of the corresponding saturated solutions, were determined on heating and cooling in a series of experiments carried out from 20 to 95 °C. In dilute ZnSO4 media, increasing H2SO4 concentrations in the range of 0.0–0.6 M H2SO4 strongly increase the solubility of calcium sulphate, but have little additional effect for acid concentrations >0.6 M H2SO4. In more concentrated zinc sulphate solutions, however, increasing acid concentrations in the range from 0.0 to 2.0 M H2SO4 slightly decrease the solubility of calcium sulphate. In dilute H2SO4 media, the solubility of calcium sulphate decreases with increasing ZnSO4 concentrations, and the decrease is most pronounced for concentrations in the range 0.0–0.2 M ZnSO4. Higher ZnSO4 concentrations further depress the solubility at temperatures below 70 °C, but have a complex effect at higher temperatures. Increasing ferric sulphate concentrations to 1.0 M Fe(SO4)1.5 in 0.3 M H2SO4–1.15 M ZnSO4 media depress the solubility of calcium sulphate to a modest extent. The addition of up to 1.25 M MgSO4 also decreases the solubility of calcium sulphate in 0.3 M H2SO4–1.15 M ZnSO4 media. In contrast, the solubility of calcium sulphate in 2.5 M ZnSO4–0.4 M MgSO4–0.18 M MnSO4 solutions, at pH values ranging from 3.6 to 4.6, is not significantly affected by the presence of up to 0.25 M Na2SO4 or up to 0.09 M (NH4)2SO4. Supporting mineralogical studies showed that the solubility depends strongly on whether the saturating solid phase is gypsum (CaSO4·2H2O) or anhydrite (CaSO4). The transition from gypsum to anhydrite was found to depend on the temperature, the H2SO4 concentration and the total sulphate concentration of the solution. Unlike the solubilities, which varied in a complex manner, the densities of the calcium sulphate-saturated solutions increased systematically with increasing concentrations of any of the solution species and decreased slightly with increasing temperature.Over 80% of the world's zinc is produced by hydrometallurgical methods, in which roaster calcine or zinc concentrates are leached in sulphuric acid media The solubility of calcium sulphate in water has been extensively studied, and it is known that the solubility increases to ∼50 °C and then decreases gradually, at least to 100 °C Relatively few investigations have been carried out on the solubility of calcium sulphate in zinc processing solutions, which typically contain ZnSO The above discussion indicates that the solubility of calcium sulphate in zinc processing solutions is an important industrial parameter which is only partly elucidated. To address the need for a more comprehensive solubility database, a systematic study of the solubility of calcium sulphate was carried out at temperatures up to 95 °C in solutions having a broad range of H All solutions used in the study were prepared from reagent grade chemicals. Calcium sulphate dihydrate reagent from J.T. Baker was employed as the saturating solid phase. The reagent contained 0.09% Mg, 0.002% Cl and <0.01% of other metal contaminants. X-ray diffraction analysis, carried out using the maximum sensitivity of a Rigaku diffractometer, detected gypsum (CaSO The experiments were done using a 2-L reaction vessel which was heated to ±0.2 °C in a temperature-controlled circulating oil bath. Through the tight-fitting lid of the reaction vessel were placed a calibrated thermometer (±0.1 °C), a water-cooled condenser which was loosely stoppered at the open end, and a sampling tube which was closed at the bottom by a medium porosity glass gas-dispersion frit. The reaction vessel containing 1.5 L of solution and an excess (∼50 g) of calcium sulphate dihydrate rested on the bottom of the stainless steel oil bath; the contents of the reaction vessel were stirred magnetically from beneath. A solution of known composition was placed in the 2-L reaction vessel together with an excess of calcium sulphate dihydrate. The experiments were started by heating the charged reactor to ∼50 °C for 24 h to solubilize the trace bassanite present and to dissolve any very fine gypsum particles. The reactor was then cooled to room temperature. X-ray diffraction analysis of the cooled solids indicated only gypsum; that is, the bassanite converted to gypsum on heating to ∼40 °C. The contents were then stirred for ∼70 h at temperatures <40 °C and for ∼36 h at higher temperatures to attain solution equilibrium. Separate experiments at various temperatures showed that such lengthy equilibration periods were necessary to achieve complete saturation. After equilibration, a clean and dry fritted sampling tube was inserted through the ground joint in the lid and was immersed in the liquid. After thermal equilibrium was achieved, saturated solution was drawn through the glass frit into the sampling tube by the application of suction at the open end. Both medium porosity and fine porosity glass frits were used, with the choice being dictated by the need to produce a visibly clear filtered solution free of suspended solids. When the sampling tube was partly filled with the filtered solution, the suction attachment was removed and samples of the hot solution were taken using calibrated 5-mL glass pipettes. The pipettes were heated in an oven to the sampling temperature, and were withdrawn from the oven immediately before the sample was taken. The pipettes were previously calibrated at each temperature using pure water and the same sampling procedure as for the calcium sulphate-saturated solutions. The glass pipettes were accurate to ±0.02 mL. Generally, two solution samples were taken. The first was discharged directly into a weighing bottle, sealed, cooled and then weighed to allow the calculation of the density of the saturated solution. The second solution sample was diluted into a 100-mL volumetric flask containing 2% HNO After the solution samples were taken, the reactor temperature was increased in 10 °C increments to ∼95 °C, with samples being taken at each temperature. The solution was then cooled in a similar manner to ensure that equilibrium solubilities were determined. Samples of the equilibrating solid phase were extracted at various temperatures for X-ray diffraction analysis. These were filtered and washed with a small amount of alcohol to displace the solution prior to drying at room temperature. Comparisons of the X-ray patterns of prepared samples relative to the unfiltered slurries indicated that no transformations occurred during sample preparation. The densities of the saturated solutions were calculated as a function of temperature from the measured weight of the sample and the volume at temperature as determined from the calibrated pipette. The solubility of calcium sulphate (reported as g CaSO The solubility of calcium sulphate in water has been determined by numerous workers The acid concentration of zinc processing solutions ranges from near-zero in weak acid leaching circuits to 160–170 g/L H  In contrast to the complex solubility dependencies noted above, the densities of the calcium sulphate-saturated solutions increase systematically as the acid concentration increases. For a given acid concentration, the density of the saturated solution decreases systematically with increasing temperature, as illustrated in Both the solubility versus temperature and density versus temperature curves were fitted to second degree polynomial equations, for the entire range of acid concentrations studied The solubility of calcium sulphate, as a function of the acid concentration, was also measured in solutions containing 1.5 M ZnSO Although the acid concentration has a complex effect on the solubility of calcium sulphate in 1.5 M ZnSO The solubility versus temperature and density versus temperature data sets obtained in the various 1.5 M ZnSO Zinc processing solutions commonly contain small amounts of MgSO  All the solubility versus temperature and density versus temperature curves obtained at the various pH values were fitted to second order polynomial equations In a hydrometallurgical zinc circuit, the ZnSO Although the solubilities of calcium sulphate vary in a complex manner as the ZnSO The solubility versus temperature and density versus temperature data obtained at the various ZnSO In the dominant roast–leach–electrolysis zinc process, iron present in the concentrate feed is oxidized to the ferric state in the roaster and is subsequently solubilized as ferric sulphate in the hot acid and super hot acid leaching sections of the process. Accordingly, the influence of dissolved ferric sulphate on the solubility of calcium sulphate is of some commercial importance. For the range of temperatures noted in  The individual solubility versus temperature and density versus temperature data sets were fitted to second order polynomial equations Zinc processing solutions typically contain modest concentrations of MgSO Although the densities of the calcium sulphate-saturated 0.3 M H The individual solubility versus temperature curves (0.3 M H As noted above, high concentrations of ferric sulphate are generated in the hot acid leaching and super hot acid leaching circuits of hydrometallurgical zinc operations. At some point in the process, the dissolved iron must be eliminated, and the removal is most commonly effected by the precipitation of jarosite-type compounds  The densities of the saturated solutions were also measured. There was a minor and random fluctuation of the density from test to test (±1.5%), but this seemed to be attributable to slight and inadvertent variations of the ZnSO The various solubility versus temperature and the density versus temperature data sets were fitted to second-order polynomial equations  The densities of the calcium sulphate-saturated solutions were also measured, and the values were essentially the same as those obtained in the analogous Na-containing solutions. Although slight and random variations (±1.5%) in the density of the saturated solution were noted from experiment to experiment, the variations seemed to reflect minor fluctuations in the concentration of ZnSO The individual solubility versus temperature and saturated density versus temperature data sets were fitted to second-order polynomial equations. All the data thereby obtained are summarized in Calcium sulphate solubilities in simulated zinc processing solutions were measured from room temperature to 95 °C. The data were generally obtained on heating and cooling (i.e., on dissolution and precipitation), and the various data were consistent, as long as the saturating solid phase remained unchanged. The solubility of calcium sulphate in water indicated the often-reported solubility maximum at ∼50 °C, followed by a slight decrease in solubility at higher temperatures. The addition of H Unlike the solubilities of calcium sulphate, which are a complex function of temperature and solution composition, the densities of the corresponding calcium sulphate-saturated solutions behave in a consistent and predictable manner. The densities of the saturated solutions increase with increasing solution concentration and decrease monotonically with increasing temperature. The implication is that the modest variations of the solubility of calcium sulphate with composition or temperature have little effect on the density, which is mostly determined by the behaviour of the concentrated zinc processing solution itself. The author wishes to recognize the support of Noranda, CEZinc for part of the experimental program and for encouraging the publication of the study. The assistance of CANMET staff members A. Kuiper and D.J. Hardy with the experimental program and the preparation of this report is gratefully appreciated.