Biomass as a waste product in the form coffee extract residue (CER) has been shown to have potential for the dual purpose of ethanol production and preparation of activated carbons. A straightforward method of direct hydrolysis and fermentation (DHF) is considered as the main option utilized in this study for the generation of fuel ethanol from the biomass waste. Factors such as loadings of saccharomyces cerevisiae, temperatures (21 and 30 °C) and substrate content were investigated to maximize the yield of ethanol. Ethanol production rates between 1.1 g and 0.70 g h−1 kg−1 without pretreatment and 2.7 and 2.3 g h−1 kg−1 dry substance with mild treatment were obtained, respectively. The CER was also used to prepare activated carbons using both chemical and physical activation methods. The effects of process parameters such as temperatures and concentrations of acid were varied and determined as to the yield, BET-surface areas and porosities of the final product. H3PO4 treatment at 600 °C and steam treatment at 700 °C show maximum surface area of >640 m2 g−1 with increased total pore and micropore volumes.Lignocellulosic biomass has the potential to be one of the major feedstocks for the production of bioethanol, recognized as the main replacement for the fossil fuel-based energy consumption in most IC engines. Ethanol as oxygenated fuel with almost 35% oxygen is an octane booster, which either in blended or pure form is believed to cut hydrocarbon and NOx emissions by 20% and CO Coffee usually packed in 60 kg bags is one of the second traded commodities after petroleum and is one of the most consumed beverages totaling about eight million metric tons in 2009/10 ( As the cellulose and hemicellulose content of CER is high ( The coffee extract residue (CER) was obtained from the Division of Chemical Technology's coffee machines by discharging the filter paper into a flat tray of glass and was dried in an oven at 120 °C for 24 h as the water content of the residue exceeds more than 150%. This precursor is then used for further processing in the steps to follow for the generation of either ethanol or activated carbon. Bakers' yeast (Jästbolaget AB) from a local store, analytical grade 99.5% ethanol (Solveco AB), 85% H No special strain, seed culture, inoculation or immobilization of the The experimental procedures consist of evaluating and comparing the surface properties of the activated carbons prepared by the chemical activation using phosphoric acid and physical activation using steam. During the chemical activation process 50 g of the dry CER samples were placed in a beaker and impregnated by adding adequate volumes of H The physical activation was conducted at three different temperatures (600, 700 and 800 °C). Prior to the introduction of 50 g sample of the CER in the hot zone of the furnace, the furnace was purged by a flow of nitrogen to remove oxygen. The flow rate of deionized water was 20 ml/h, where it was injected in the cooling zone, moved through the tubing and vaporized at the rear side of the furnace. The steam to nitrogen volume ratio was held constant at 1:2 during the two hours of carbonization. All the other procedures for the after treatment of the final activated carbons were similar to the procedures of those described above. The activated carbon yield was calculated by the following equation: The degree of burn-off is similarly given by the percentage of mass loss after the whole activation step, while the ash content is the difference between the weight after carbonization and the remaining mass after washing with HCl and drying. The total surface area (BET-area), pore size distribution and pore volume are important properties for the assessment of the surface characteristics of activated carbon and similar materials. These properties were determined for the different activated carbons obtained by both the chemical and physical activations by adsorption isotherm of nitrogen at liquid nitrogen temperature (−196 °C) at different partial pressures (ASAP-2000 Micromeritics) according to the Brunauer Emmett and Teller (BET) equation. Small samples of the activated carbons (0.3–0.6 g) were loaded into a glass holder, degassed at 250 °C under vacuum until equilibrium was achieved and were then analyzed. The t-plot as a function of the thickness of the adsorbed layers to the relative volume (V/Vm) and relative pressure (P/Po) defines the micropore volume and microporous surface area, while pore size distributions were obtained from the adsorption branch of the isotherms by Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) method. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) on the chemically activated samples was carried out for characterization of the microstructure and particle morphology by a high resolution Gemini, Zeiss-Ultra 55.     Though pretreatment steps such as physical, physicochemical, chemical and biological processes for modification of the surface properties of lignocellulosic materials are used ( Coffee beans are normally processed industrially by roasting or by mild torrefaction at temperatures between 180 and 240 °C, where substantial part of the moisture contained in the beans and volatile compounds are degassed and released along with the removal of the protective cover of the lignin and hemicellulose. This is followed by comminution with milling where fine powders are obtained for further brewing in most cases by filtration. After filtration the coffee extract residue (CER) does contain an ample amount of the lignocellulosic compounds, which still have readily accessible C6 sugars (hexoses) and other fermentable components. Thus, CER disposed as a waste might accrue the positive outcome in a product's lifecycle and become a potential source for the production of ethanol. Its thermal treatment in the form of roasting and with surface properties due to destruction of the cell wall structure makes it highly exposed to the ease of fermentation with higher yields of ethanol. Down stream processes for utilization of the byproducts is important, especially in the ethanol fermentation industry using appropriate technologies for cleaner production. The concurrent production of stillage should be addressed where big volumes are dispatched, impacting pollution problems. Various separation technologies after distillation and making use of the stillage by recycling the water by ultrafiltration with ceramic membranes, generation of biogas by anaerobic digestion, extraction of organic acids and sugar alcohols were reported by   The general trend of the CER samples impregnated with the different concentrations of the dehydrating agent is that the yield at similar temperatures is high for the lower concentrations, decreases to some level at the intermediate temperature and then increases at higher temperatures. The insertion of phosphoric acid in the lignocellulosic (cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin) layers leads to the attack of the structure by dehydration reactions during the heat-treatment, release of water vapour and other volatile compounds form the surface and modification of the structure by the insertion of functionalized surface groups. The cross-linking reactions of the carbonaceous material, oxygen, hydrogen and nitrogen-containing compounds during pyrolysis result in a charred residue with high porosities and surface areas. The liberation of volatiles and tar components as well as oxidation products of carbon from the mixtures are dependent on the concentration of the activating reagent, residence time, temperature, which are considered to be important parameters for the creation of activated carbon in the process ( The reaction of biomass with H Total surface areas, pore diameters, total pore volumes and micropore volumes together with the type of the treatment methods, phosphoric acid concentrations and temperatures are shown in Activated carbons have characteristic porosities, which depend on the size (micropore < 2 nm, mesopore 2–50 nm and macropore > 50 nm) and pore size distributions and as such are distinctive for application in adsorption processes for gases, liquids and solids. This work demonstrates that coffee extract residue can be used for the generation of two distinct products, viz. ethanol and activated carbons. The prospective end-use of abundant waste and waste feedstocks of lignocellulosic biomass is attractive and promising for the production of both fuel and adsorbent. A straightforward method for ethanol production by Highly developed mesoporous and microporous structures of activated carbons were prepared by both chemical and physical activation of the coffee extract residue. Depending on the activation method, concentration of acid and pyrolysis temperature, different surface areas and yields were obtained for specific use of the activated carbons as adsorbents. The waste CER is a potential source and can find applications as low cost alternative for the removal and adsorption of solid, liquid and gaseous contaminants. The Department of Chemical Engineering & Technology, KTH is acknowledged for creating the opportunity for Nima Fotouhi Tehrani and Javier S. Aznar to conduct their work on this research.