Pyrometallurgy and hydrometallurgy are two routes usually implemented to recover valuable metals from primary and secondary resources. In recent years, the metallurgical industry has been searching for hydrometallurgical processes as an alternative to pyrometallurgical treatments due to some inherent advantages associated with hydrometallurgy, such as the possibility of treating low-grade resources, easier control of wastes, and lower energy consumption. This chapter will give an overview of the hydrometallurgical processes developed to recover metals from waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE), including leaching, precipitation, solvent extraction, and resin ion exchange.Recovery of metals from primary and secondary sources is carried out using hydro-, pyro-, and electrochemical processes In recent years, the metallurgical industry has been searching for hydrometallurgical processes as an alternative to pyrometallurgical treatment. This is due to some inherent advantages associated with hydrometallurgical processing, especially for low-grade and chemically complex streams. Pyrometallurgical processes are energy intensive, and often the products that are obtained pyrometallurgically by treating WEEE require additional processing to produce pure compounds. Pyro-processing of chemically complex streams may lead to mixed products, as it is the case of rare earth elements (REEs). For REE-containing streams that end up in electric arc furnaces or nonferrous smelters, the REEs will typically be found in the slag phases in low concentration, making their economic recovery more difficult This chapter brings into focus possible hydrometallurgical routes that are available to recover important metals from a wide range of WEEE. The first part of the chapter will address the principles for hydrometallurgical separation of metals from WEEE, together with comparisons between the different routes available. The remaining subsections will discuss some of the most important WEEE targets for hydrometallurgical processing and state-of-the-art recovery technologies for them. Two main steps are required in any hydrometallurgical process: The transfer of metals from the solid matrix into an aqueous phase. This step is called leaching or lixiviation and often brings into solution not only the metals of interest but also undesired constituents present in the material. Separation of the metals of interest from the undesired elements present in solution. Alongside these two main blocks, additional processing steps are often required. These usually constitute a preconcentration of metals in the leachate in the case of low-grade materials and a refining and purification of separated feeds. A simplified representation of a typical hydrometallurgical process for the separation of important metals from WEEE is presented in The efficiency of the leaching process is influenced by many factors: the type of leaching agent, its concentration, pH, temperature, leaching time, stirring, solid-to-liquid ratio, particle size, distribution of elements in the material, entrapment of soluble species into less soluble/insoluble particles, and others Due to the chemical form in which many metals are present in WEEE, for example, elemental form, alloys, oxides, etc., acidic leachants are often needed to efficiently bring these elements in solution Some of the most useful hydrometallurgical methods for separation of metal ions from leachates are solvent extraction, ion exchange, and precipitation. A comparison between these is given in Large-scale solvent extraction separation makes use of countercurrent equipment such as mixer settlers and pulse columns Examples of commercial extractants and ion exchange resins that have applications in the hydrometallurgical processing of WEEE are given in Parameters such as pH, acidity, anion composition, temperature, and ionic strength often play a critical role in selecting the right separation system, for example, the extractant and the diluent used in solvent extraction separations Five main solvent extraction systems have been described Extraction of almost purely covalent inorganic compounds by nonsolvating solvents; Extraction of neutral coordinatively saturated complexes formed between metal ions and lipophilic organic acids (chelate extraction); Extraction using solvating extractants, which replace the water of hydration in the complexes formed between the metal ions and the counter-ions present in the aqueous phase (solvate extraction); Ion pair extraction (anion/cation exchange); Extraction of metal complexes that do not fit into any of the previous categories (eg, chlatrate compounds). Out of these systems, chelate extraction and solvate extraction play an important role in the hydrometallurgical recovery of a wide variety of metals from WEEE. Recently, ionic liquids have gained increased attention, being regarded as more environmentally friendly solvents. Their low volatility, adjustable miscibility and polarity, and electrical conductivity make them better substitutes for common solvents Given the straightforward nature of the processes and the wide range of available commercial compounds tailored to bind or create extractable complexes with various metal ions, hydrometallurgy can be applied for the recovery of many metals from WEEE. It is possible, in theory, to separate most critical metals in WEEE, even from low-grade and chemically complex streams. Selecting the right combination of solvents and having enough separation and purification stages can achieve this. The economical feasibility to do this can be challenged, however, and it will likely be an issue. Nonetheless, there are several streams that are considered attractive targets for the recovery of metals using hydrometallurgy ( Base metals: copper, aluminum, nickel, tin, zinc, iron, and so on; Precious metals: silver and gold; The platinum group metals (PGMs): palladium, platinum, rhodium, iridium, and ruthenium; Hazardous metals: mercury, beryllium, lead, cadmium, arsenic, antimony, and so on; Scarce or critical metals: REEs, tellurium, gallium, selenium, tantalum, indium, germanium, and so on. While the hydrometallurgical recovery of base metals doesn’t look as attractive, there is an interest in the recovery of precious metals and critical metals. This has to do with several factors such as their price, scarcity, low availability, and high demand; their importance in the advancement and development of future sustainable technologies; political issues, for example, control over resources; and, last but not least, their relatively high abundance in various WEEE compared to virgin deposits The following subsections deal with the hydrometallurgical recovery of important metals from the most common fractions that are encountered in WEEE. The discussion is structured by stream category (column 1, Permanent magnets are used in many electronic products, from small consumer-oriented devices, for example, speakers, headphones, mobile phones, HDDs, etc. to industrial equipment, for example, electric motors, electric generators, magnetic separators, etc. Two types of permanent magnets are common: NdFeB magnets and SmCo magnets. The former are the most common type in applications today, having a market share of about 98% Due to the nature of the material (an alloy), the relatively high REEs content and somewhat simple matrix, the recycling of the actual magnets is not regarded as being complicated and can be done either pyrometallurgically or hydrometallurgically Regardless of the nature of the initial WEEE stream, once the permanent magnets are separated from the bulk products, their hydrometallurgical processing follows a similar approach. For NdFeB magnets, iron makes up approximately 70% of the composition, and for this reason selective leaching is desired. The subsequent separation of REEs is simplified if iron is selectively removed in a first leaching step. Contacting thermally treated magnetic powder with 3% hydrogen peroxide solution, followed by magnetic solid–liquid phase separation led to a significant decrease of iron in the REEs containing fraction Solvent extraction and precipitation have been investigated for the separation of REE ions from other impurity metal ions in solution. The REEs can be selectively precipitated from iron and boron as double salts at pH 0.6 (Eq. Precipitation of the REE ions can also be done as oxalates, using, for example, oxalic acid according to Eq. Solvent extraction was investigated as a possible separation method for REEs and also other metals. Recovery of transitional metal ions (eg, cobalt, copper, and manganese) from NdFeB magnet leachates has been carried out with the ionic liquid trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium chloride When it comes to recycling of batteries, we can distinguish two scenarios: Recycling of general-purpose primary batteries (eg, AAA batteries); Recycling of batteries that are a part of the product itself (eg, rechargeable batteries in mobile phones or HEV vehicles). The former is easier to achieve given legislative incentives that require separate collection and the absence of detachment steps. For products employing batteries in their structure, separation from the bulk of the product is needed. Because a wide range of batteries is used at present ( Two types of rechargeable batteries are commonly used in many electronic products: NiMH and Li-ion batteries. The first type is viewed as a potential source of REEs, nickel, cobalt, and manganese, and the second type is viewed a source of cobalt and lithium NiMH batteries: 33% nickel, 30% iron, 10% REEs, 3% cobalt, 1% manganese, 1% zinc; others; Li-ion batteries: 15–25% aluminum, 5–15% copper foil, 1–5% lithium hexafluorophosphate, 25–45% lithium cobalt oxide, others. The hydrometallurgical treatment of active battery material involves leaching with mineral acids, followed by selective precipitation of metals and/or solvent extraction. For NiMH battery material, mineral acids such as sulfuric acid and hydrochloric acid are effective leaching agents The REEs in NiMH battery leachates can be recovered by precipitation with sodium hydroxide (Eq. Inorganic acids are effective at leaching cobalt and lithium from Li-ion batteries’ active material, with hydrochloric acid having the highest efficiency due to the ability of chloride ions to destabilize the formation of a surface layer A combination of precipitation and solvent extraction can be used to recover metals from Li-ion battery materials leachates. Impurity metals such as aluminum, iron, or copper can be precipitated with bases, for example, sodium hydroxide When it comes to mixed streams, for example, mixed Li-ion and NiMH batteries, the REEs can be recovered from the leachates via double salt precipitation, followed by solvent extraction of copper ions using Acorga M5640 and, finally, solvent extraction of cobalt and nickel with Cyanex 272 at different pH values The phosphors employed in fluorescent lamps, LEDs, CRTs, and cold-cathode fluorescent lamp (CCFL)/LED-illuminated LCD TV sets and notebooks can be a source of multiple REEs Typical fluorescent lamps contain approximately 2% wt. phosphors powder; that’s about 4–6 g for a typical 40 W fluorescent lamp The main issue with direct processing of fluorescent lamps is the presence of mercury in their composition, a vital constituent needed to generate light. Hydrometallurgical methods Dissolution of the yttrium- and europium-based red phosphor is easier to achieve even at room temperature with mineral and also organic acids Further separation of the REEs from phosphors leachates can be carried out using precipitation or solvent extraction. Given the more complex chemical nature of the stream and thus the larger number of impurities that end up in the leachate, the former method leads to mixed precipitates and lower product purity. Yttrium was precipitated as oxalate with a purity of 90–95% wt. and a content of elements such as iron and calcium lower than 1.5% wt. Solvent extraction of the different types of REE-based lamp phosphors is possible in addition to the solvent extraction of the REEs ions in phosphors leachates. Commercial blue (BaMgAl Compared to precipitation, not only does solvent extraction lead to higher product purity but it also allows separation of individual REEs. Typically up to 10 extraction stages with extractants such as D2EHPA or HEHEHP followed by two to four scrubbing and stripping stages, respectively, can lead to purities >99% for individual REEs As is the case with fluorescent lamps, photovoltaic materials have seen an increase in use in order to achieve a greener global energy profile. These have widespread use in thin-film solar cells. Such end-of-life products, as well as the large amounts of production residues, are viewed as potential sources of economically important elements ( Copper, indium, gallium, and selenium in the case of CIGS solar cells; Tellurium in the case of CdTe cells. Since large-scale solar cells are usually designed with a longer life, fewer potentially recyclable streams are available compared to other WEEE discussed in previous subsections. Processing of end-of-life products will also require pretreatment, notably the destruction of the laminate that uncovers the semiconductor film and, preferably, a Processing of thin-film solar cells at industrial scale was/is investigated as part of three different projects: First Solar, SENSE, and RESOLVED A combination of pyrometallurgy and hydrometallurgy can be used to selectively recover metals in CIGS materials To reclaim metals from waste CIS cells by means of leaching, electrolysis distillation was patented Electrochemical techniques can be used to overcome some of the manufacturing problems with CuInSe Most electronic products contain one or more PCBs. Their size and composition depend on the application, with PCBs in communication devices, for example, laptops, smartphones, etc. containing a wide range of metals due to the large number and large variety of embedded electronic components. Important metals are found in the actual board (the copper patterning), the electronic parts, the contacts, soldering, and the protective coatings. The main incentives in PCBs recycling are the recovery of copper and precious metals, for example, gold, silver, and palladium. The weight and concentration of precious metals in the PCBs found in notebooks is given in Hydrometallurgical processing requires the separation of the PCBs from the bulk of the WEEE. Mechanical pretreatment is needed due to the multilayered construction of some PCBs and because plastics or ceramics can encapsulate metallic fractions. Generally, the PCBs are subjected to size reduction, for example, shredding, grinding, and milling prior to leaching. At this stage, magnetic separation and eddy-current separation allow for the recovery of desired/undesired fractions Leaching of precious metals can be carried out with various solutions Leaching with cyanide solutions raises environmental and safety concerns, while aqua regia requires special equipment that withstands corrosion and also leads to generation of chlorine gas. Thiourea and thiosulfate leaching lead to high chemical consumption and more expensive recovery processes Gold can be recovered from cyanide solutions by zinc cementation in the pH range 8–11 (Eqs. The economical feasibility to process waste mobile phones to recover metals was extensively studied due to their widespread adoption, large mass flows, and very high precious metal content per mass unit when compared to PCBs from other electronic products This subsection addresses the hydrometallurgical recovery of metals from WEEE such as LCD materials and magnetic refrigeration alloys. Magnetic refrigeration is gaining more and more interest due to better efficiencies and being more environmentally friendly than gas-compression refrigeration LCD panels are viewed as a potential stream for recovery of indium. The ITO layer that coats the glass of LCD panels consists of 90% wt. indium oxide and 10% wt. tin oxide. Although variations exist, the average indium content in an LCD panel is in the range of 200–300 mg/kg glass Solvent extraction with phosphorous-based extractants and ion exchange was proposed to separate indium in solution The best alternative regarded in solvent extraction separation is the separation with D2EHPA from sulfuric acid media, followed by stripping of indium with hydrochloric acid (Eq. Precipitation was proposed to either recover indium from leachates or remove some of the impurities, for example, tin. Indium can be precipitated from hydrochloric acid media using alkaline bases to produce indium hydroxide that is afterward converted to oxide Despite the significant number of studies outlined in the previous subsections, the industrial applicability of hydrometallurgical methods to recover important metals from WEEE is not as vast, especially when it comes to reclaiming critical elements, for example, REEs, indium, gallium, etc. Many of the aforementioned processes have not been applied on a large scale, and such elements have very low functional recycling rates (<1%) In Europe, one of the major recyclers of WEEE is Umicore. Hydrometallurgical processing is one of the steps integrated in its separation units, alongside pyro- and electrometallurgical processing. A wide variety of metals are recovered, including common ones (cobalt, copper, nickel, lead, zinc, etc.), PGMs, precious metals, indium, and so on Rhodia operates two recycling plants in France dedicated to REEs processing via hydrometallurgy. The plants, which have a production capacity of more than 200 tons/year REE oxides, focus on the separation of REEs from phosphors. Joint efforts between Umicore and Rhodia on Li-ion and NiMH batteries processing have also been reported. The process is based on Umicore’s Ultra High Temperature processing of batteries, which leads to a concentration of REEs in the slag phase. This slag is further used as feed in the separation plants that Rhodia operates in France Some industrial applications related to battery treatment rely on a combined pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical processing A cooperation between Honda Motor and Japan Metals and Chemicals to establish a plant for the recovery of REEs from HEV NiMH batteries collected from inside and outside of Japan was also reported Recycling of tellurium and cadmium from CdTe thin-film solar cells is being established in Germany by First Solar. For indium, at the end of the past decade, large-scale recycling operations were only partly installed and initiated in Europe by Umicore and were absent in the United States. This is due to the lack of focused collection and reconditioning of products containing indium Hydrometallurgy has proven great potential for the recovery of metals from WEEE. Leaching followed by either precipitation, solvent extraction, ion exchange, or a combination of these can lead to effective separation of most important metals from a wide variety of streams. For WEEE, the routes are based on common hydrometallurgical technologies used to extract metals from virgin ores. The strength of these technologies when Base metals (copper, aluminum, nickel, tin, zinc, etc.), precious metals (silver, gold, PGMs) and metals at present regarded as having critical economic importance (REEs, indium, etc.) have been effectively recovered from WEEE using hydrometallurgy. Once leached from the solid material, often with mineral acids, metal recovery can be carried out using precipitation, solvent extraction, and ion exchange techniques. The first method is the simplest and cheapest, but it often leads to lower product purity due to coprecipitation of undesired constituents. Industrially, solvent extraction is preferred for the separation of metals from WEEE with high enough purity. This is due to the large range of commercially available extractants that have been tailored to selectively separate a wide range of metal ions, and the ability to have a large number of extraction stages by using countercurrent contractors, for example, mixer settlers and pulse columns. Ion exchange techniques are mostly used for refining purposes or to treat small amounts of feed due to difficult scale-up and high cost. Combining precipitation, solvent extraction, and ion exchange leads to processes that can handle very complex streams and are able to separate metals with very high levels of purity, for example, >99.999%. At present, hydrometallurgy is being investigated to reclaim important metals from most common fractions in WEEE, for example, the REEs from permanent magnets, phosphors, and batteries; indium from LCD screens and CIGS photovoltaic materials; precious metals such as gold, silver, and PGMs from PCBs; etc. Many efficient and robust processes have already been proposed and have been tested with success. A rise in industrial-scale applications dealing with hydrometallurgical separation of metals from WEEE was noticed in the last decades, confirming the potential and advantages of these methods. Optimizations and improvements in hydrometallurgy have also been observed, a notable example being the development of greener technologies, for example, ionic liquid separations.  Cold-cathode fluorescent lamp Copper-indium(-gallium)-selenium Cathode ray tube (CRT) Bis-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid For example; such as Hard disk drive 2-ethylhexyl-2-ethylhexyl-phosphonic acid or 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid mono-(2-ethylhexyl) ester Hybrid electric vehicle Indium–tin oxide Liquid crystal display Light-emitting diode Neodymium–iron–boron Nickel metal hydride Printed circuit board Plasma display panel Platinum group metal Rare earth element Tributyl phosphate Television Waste electrical and electronic equipment