Role of liquid phase stability on the glass forming ability (GFA) has been reviewed and the alloy systems have been analyzed by introducing a contribution factor (wg
                     ) to the characteristic temperature Tg
                     , in the γ parameter. The kinetics of glass formation for various alloy systems has been found to vary with liquid phase stability in metastable state. The GFA of a fragile liquid is found to be more responsive to the contribution of metastable stability compared to strong liquid.The bulk amorphous and nano-crystalline materials have attracted considerable interest of researchers due to their unique properties and potential for engineering applications The continued efforts in this direction, in the recent past, has led to an agreement among the researchers Based on the above arguments, Lu et al. The Since   Δ Based on the data collected by Yuan et al. Zr, Fe–Co, Ti based alloys: Cu, Mg, La based alloys: Ca, Pd based alloys: The Although, the above classification of alloys have been derived on the statistical arguments based on liquid phase stabilities, this classification can also be interpreted in terms of glass formation kinetics. Fan et al. The change of liquid fragility at It is apparent from the above relation that higher the value of In summary, we can conclude that the role of stability of supercooled liquid at metastable state is an important factor in understanding glass formation kinetics of various glass forming alloys. Researchers are recognizing its role and including in GFA parameters explicitly  For the successful amorphization of all the alloy system, stability of supercooled liquid at equilibrium temperature i.e. Behavior of various alloy systems is explained on the basis of glass formation kinetics. Consequently, a correlation has been found between the fragility index We would like to thank Professor R.K. Mandal (Professor of Metallurgy, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, India) for a fruitful discussion during this work. One of the authors (Dr Srivastava) would like to thank Alexander von Humboldt Foundation (Germany) for granting fellowship for supporting his stay in Germany.