Flotation is a physicochemical process utilizing the difference in surface properties of particles for their separation. One of the common methods to study the surface properties of the particle is by using Inverse gas chromatography (IGC). It can be used to estimate the surface energies, surface energy heterogeneity, work of adhesion, and index of hydrophilicity of a given sample, thus predicting their flotation behavior.
                  This paper utilizes the IGC method to determine the surface energy heterogeneity of waste printed circuit boards (PCB) rejects, also known as the nonmetal fraction (NMF). The test was performed to observe if any differences exist in the surface energy of NMF particles that might provide preliminary information regarding their response to flotation. The results showed that the distribution of surface energies is narrow and reached a plateau by 10% surface coverage. It suggests that approximately 10% of all the available particle surfaces have relatively higher surface energy compared to other particles that would report to the tailings (remain in water) if subjected to flotation without any reagent and further grinding.Printed circuit boards are an essential component of the electrical and electronic product and waste printed circuit boards are one of the most researched units in electronic waste due to their high metal value. The metallic fraction in PCB is the primary focus of recycling industries due to presence of valuable metals such as copper, silver, and gold whereas the nonmetal fraction is mostly sent to landfills because of its lower value ( Some researchers have suggested alternative use of this scrap NMF as fillers in polypropylene composites, manufacturing of composite boards, and wood-plastic composites ( Froth flotation is a physicochemical process that utilizes the differences in the surface properties of materials to achieve separation in the water medium. In the field of waste PCB recycling, flotation with or without reagents has been researched to recover metals due to the difference in the floatability of metals and nonmetals ( This paper investigates the applicability of the flotation process for NMF recycling. One of the most common ways of measuring particle behavior in flotation is by contact angle measurement that depends on the surface tension of the solid, liquid, and gas interface. The surface tension at three interfaces is highly affected by the surface properties of the solids and surface energy is one of the fundamental surface properties ( One of the benefits of using an IGC for estimating the hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity of particles that it can be used on fine particles, powders, and rough/uneven surfaces, whereas direct contact angle measurement is feasible only for smooth and coarse particles. Researchers have shown that the surface energy measured using IGC could directly be correlated with their flotation behavior ( IGC could also be used to understand the sample surface energy heterogeneity by estimating the free energy at different surface coverage. The surface energy of the particles can be divided into dispersive (due to London/Vander Wall forces) and specific components (due to polar interactions). The surface energy in IGC is measured using the interaction of non-polar and polar organic solvents with the solid particles. The solid sample is placed into a column, and a fixed number of moles of organic probe molecules (nonane, octane, heptane, hexane, dichloromethane and ethyl acetate) depending on the surface coverage required is passed through the column using an inert carrier gas and the time taken for the molecule to exit the column is measured and then used to estimate the two surface energies components ( Once the dispersive and specific free energy of the solids are determined, the work of adhesion of the solid with any liquid can be estimated using The degree of hydrophilicity (hydrophilicity index) of a given sample can also be estimated using the specific and dispersive component of the surface free energy using In this study, the possible flotation response of the NMF sample was assessed with the use of IGC without any further size reduction. Size reduction is an energy-intensive process that would not be economical for low-value NMF sample, hence was not out of the scope of this study. The IGC test was performed to reveal if any differences occur in the surface energy of the NMF particles that might provide some preliminary information regarding the possible response to flotation. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and micro- Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) analysis were also conducted to support the information obtained from the IGC study. The oven-dried NMF sample used in the study was obtained from a waste printed circuit recycling plant located in British Columbia, Canada. The plant processed a mixture of PCBs obtained from computers, and accessories, small home appliances, and IT equipment. The sample consisted of 38.8% fiberglass, 59.4% resins, and 1.8% residual metals. The sample was screened to obtain – 1180 + 600 µm, – 600 + 300 µm, – 300 + 150 µm, – 150 + 75 µm and – 75 µm size fractions for IGC study. One of the input parameters for the IGC study is the surface area of the sample. The surface areas of the screened fractions were measured using the AUTOSORB -1 (Quantachrome Instruments, USA). The specific surface area is measured using nitrogen gas adsorption based on the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) model. Approximately 1-2 grams of sample were outgassed for 24 hours at room temperature to remove any gas molecule present. After outgassing, samples were analyzed by using nitrogen gas as an adsorbent. The surface energy measurements were carried out using the Inverse Gas Chromatography- Surface Energy Analyzer (Surface Measurement Systems Ltd., England). The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) study was conducted using FEI Quanta 650 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA) on coarse samples (+ 600 µm) and fine samples (- 600 µm) to visualize particle morphology and composition to assist with understanding the IGC results and flotation behavior. SEM is frequently used to understand the surface morphology and elemental composition but have limited application for carbon-based organic compounds. The cut-size was based on the coal industry, where 600 µm is used for classifying the fine coal for flotation. The Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy technique has been used for the characterization of carbon-based compounds and carbon-based polymers. It provides information regarding the chemical composition of the analyzed samples surfaces. The NMF samples contain reinforcement materials encapsulated in the resin system, and FTIR is an appropriate method to analyze various resin systems present in the studied sample. Micro-FTIR spectroscopy was conducted on several particles using the Nicolet This study was focused on understanding the flotation behavior of NMF with the help of IGC without any further size reduction. The test was performed to provide some preliminary information regarding the flotation behavior based on the differences in surface energy and surface heterogeneity. The BET specific surface area of various size fractions was determined as a prerequisite for the IGC testing and is shown in Using the specific surface area as an input, the surface energies, the work of adhesion, and the hydrophilicity for various size fractions at increasing surface coverage were estimated during the IGC test work and are plotted in No significant differences in the surface energy (mJ/m As suggested by If these samples are subjected to flotation, particles with a higher degree of hydrophilicity would tend to remain in water due to their high affinity with water, whereas the low degree of hydrophilicity would be floated first due to their low affinity to water. The surface energies and the hydrophilicity values reached the plateau/averaged values by 10% surface coverage, suggesting that the approximately 10% of all the available particle surface have relatively higher surface energy compared to other particles, and might report to the tailings (remain in water) if subjected to flotation without any reagent. This suggests that the flotation system without reagent might provide some separation between the organic resins and inorganic fiberglass but will have a low yield and recoveries. Since the fiberglass is most encapsulated in epoxy resins, the unliberated fiberglass would mostly be hydrophobic due to the presence of organic resins on its surface. Only the entirely/partially liberated fiberglass would show any increase in its hydrophilic behavior. To further analyze particle properties, SEM analysis was conducted on coarse and fine samples. In the finer -600 µm size fraction ( The micro-FTIR analysis was also conducted to study the chemical composition of the surface of the particles. Micro-FTIR allowed us to observe the particle using the microscope and then identify the polymer/compound using FTIR spectroscopy. The polymer type was identified by matching the obtained spectra with the FTIR library available in the software. The FTIR spectra of identified polymers in the sample are shown in The spectra of various fibrous particles, when compared with the library, showed the presence of epoxy resin on all the studied particles suggesting a poor liberation of resin from the fiberglass as also evident from the SEM images. The FTIR spectra also showed the presence of phenolic resin, polyamide, polyester, and polypropylene. The phenolic resin is present in the FR-2 boards, as discussed earlier, whereas polyamide and polyester are used as resin systems in some CEM and other circuit boards ( The band assignment for different FTIR spectra of the identified polymers is listed in The presence of all these polymers shows the high heterogeneity of the studied system and suggests that the development of a flotation-based separation system would require a study of all these resins individually, thus making flotation a challenging process for NMF mixture. The differences in the functional groups in various resin systems, as suggested from the FTIR spectra, suggest that selectivity of various reagents towards one resin compared to the other may exist, potentially providing a path for selective flotation. The reagents that are commonly researched in plastic flotation such as polyethylene glycol, lignosulfonates, tannic acid, methylcellulose, Triton X-100 could also be potentially used for separation of these polymers from each other and should be studied in detail. The applicability of flotation for NMF recycling was assessed using inverse gas chromatography (IGC). The preliminary assessment showed the presence of surface energy heterogeneity in the sample, but the high energetic sites only represented 10% of the total sites suggesting a low separation efficiency if subjected to froth flotation. The IGC results, coupled with SEM analysis, showed that the fiberglass has poor liberation and would require fine grinding for increased liberation that is not favorable for low-value materials. The micro-FTIR study also showed a heterogeneous mixture of various polymers that would render the flotation process challenging. The IGC and micro-FTIR techniques have not been researched in the field of e-waste but could be used as potential tools for the characterization of NMF and other e-waste components. However, flotation is a very complex process with a significant number of process operating variables such as impeller speed, particle size, pH, airflow rate, and reagents such as frothers, collectors, and depressants. A more comprehensive study using pure FR-2 and FR-4 (the most common types of circuit boards) should be conducted to access the applicability of the flotation process. The effect of the presence of other types of circuit boards should also be evaluated.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The author would like to acknowledge the financial support provided by