From April 9 to 12, 2013, the KU Leuven hosted the 4th Edition of the International Conference on Accelerated Carbonation for Environmental and Materials Engineering. ACEME 2013 followed the three successful previous editions held in: London/UK (Jun-2006), Rome/Italy (Oct-2008), and Turku/Finland (Nov-2010). The ACEME conferences aim at promoting research and development activities on accelerated carbonation at an international level, favoring knowledge sharing and critically discussing future development and implementation in the field. The objectives of the 4th Edition were to communicate and discuss the latest advances in the field of theoretical and applied research on accelerated carbonation of various types of natural materials and industrial residues. Processing conditions, product properties and (on-line) analysis at lab-, pilot- and full-scale were the key focus themes of the conference. The conference also aimed at promoting mineral carbonation in the context of Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) and Carbon Capture and Utilization (CCU). A total of 115 participants from twenty-three countries were present with a good blend of participants from academia, research institutes, and a fair share of industrial delegates (17%). Attendants had the opportunity to view 42 oral presentations and 20 poster presentations. The conference was kindly sponsored by Arcelor Mittal S.A., the Lhoist Group, Redco N.V. and Solvay S.A. Among the 62 contributions, 14 were selected to be published in this Special Issue of Minerals Engineering. The bulk of the papers report on the reaction kinetics, mineralogical properties and leaching behaviour in various materials that include serpentine (Ghoorah et al.; Maddedu et al.), mining residues (Assima et al.; Bodenan et al.; Meyer et al.), oil shale ash (Uibu et al.), metallurgical slag (Capobianco et al.; Morone et al.) and hydrated cement (Kinoshita et al.; Pizzol et al.). The papers of Bundeleva et al. and Oliver et al. highlight the use of biological catalysts, a rather new development in the field of mineral carbonation. Process conditions and potential applications of carbonated products are discussed in many of the earlier cited papers as well. For those who missed the conference, copies of the proceedings (551 pages!) are still available for purchase ( Finally we would like to thank Rabab Nasser who helped in organizing the conference, Barry Wills, Editor-in-Chief of Minerals Engineering, for hosting this Special Issue, and the members of the International Scientific Committee and the Local Organisation Committee for reviewing the papers in this Issue.  Tom Van Gerven, KU Leuven, Belgium Koen Van Balen, KU Leuven, Belgium Jan Elsen, KU Leuven, Belgium Özlem Cizer, KU Leuven, Belgium Rafael M. Santos, KU Leuven, Belgium Renato Baciocchi, University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, Italy Bodzio Dlugogorski, University of Newcastle, Australia Colin Hills, University of Greenwich, UK Rein Kuusik, Tallinn University of Technology, Estonia Klaus Lackner, Columbia University, USA Faïçal Larachi, Laval University, Canada Marco Mazzotti, ETH, Switzerland Ah-Hyung Alissa Park, Columbia University, USA Alessandra Polettini, University of Rome “La Sapienza”, Italy Mieke Quaghebeur, VITO, Belgium Katta J. Reddy, University of Wyoming, USA Carlos Rodriguez-Navarro, University of Granada, Spain Caijun Shi, Hunan University, China Ron Zevenhoven, Abö Akademi, Finland