In a retrospective study the results of a series 34 wrist arthroscopies in 189 acute scaphoid fractures were analysed. Scapholunate ligament tears were found in 13 cases. In 10 cases there was complete disruption of scapholunate interosseous ligament causing dynamic instability. Partial ligament tears without instability were seen in three cases. Despite the limitations of this series we conclude that occurrence of scapholunate ligament injury with a scaphoid fracture may be more common than generally thought.According to the generally accepted pathomechanisms of carpal instability, a scapholunate ligament tear and a scaphoid fracture should not occur together. However, there are several case reports of concurrent scapholunate ligament tears and acute scaphoid fractures ( We reviewed a series of wrist arthroscopies in patients with acute scaphoid fractures in order to investigate whether an associated scapholunate ligament injury is a common or rare finding. One hundred and eighty-nine isolated acute scaphoid fractures were treated in our hospital during a 7-year period. Patients with additional wrist injuries, such as fractures of the distal radius and triangular fibro cartilage tears, were excluded from the series because they probably represent a more severe pattern of trauma. One hundred and sixteen fractures were treated nonoperatively in a plaster cast and 73 underwent operative fixation with a cannulated screw. The indications for osteosynthesis were displacement or comminution of the scaphoid fracture, or the preference of the patient. Thirty-four of the 73 cases treated operatively underwent a wrist arthroscopy. This was either part of an arthroscopically controlled osteosynthesis of scaphoid ( The findings of the 34 wrist arthroscopies were retrospectively analysed from the medical records. All patients had standard radiographs of their wrist (scaphoid series including one posteroanterior, one lateral, and two oblique projections) and stress views with thumb traction. The scaphoid fractures were classified according to Twenty-nine of the 34 scaphoid fractures were treated by screw osteosynthesis and five in a plaster cast. Screw osteosynthesis was performed percutaneously with a cannulated screw ( Partial tears of the ligament were treated by arthroscopic resection of the torn fibrocartilaginous portion. All complete scapholunate ligament tears were treated by arthroscopic and fluroscopic controlled transfixation with Kirschner-wires ( There were 29 men and five women with an average age of 28 (range 18–57) years. One man had bilateral fractures. All had suffered a hyperextension injury to their wrist when falling on the outstretched hand. The time between injury and arthroscopy was always less than 1 week. There were 27 type B2, two type A2, one type B1 and four type B3 fractures according to the classification of Thirteen traumatic tears of the scapholunate interosseous ligament were seen in these 34 wrist arthroscopies. This equates to more than one third of the arthroscopy cases, but only 7 per cent of the 189 isolated acute scaphoid fractures treated in the same time period. Comparison between cases with torn and intact scapholunate ligaments showed no difference for the scapholunate gap on standard radiographs (median 2.0 There were no degenerate perforations of the scapholunate ligament and all the ligament tears showed signs of acute injury, such as haemorrhage, haematoma and fresh, sharply edged ends. According to Geissler's classification there were three Grade 1, five Grade 2 and five Grade 3 tears ( Thirty-two of 34 scaphoid fractures healed but nonunion occurred in two cases, one after screw osteosynthesis and one following conservative treatment. Four of the 13 scapholunate ligament tears, all complete ones, caused persistent instability. Conventional and stress radiography of these four patients showed one static and three dynamic instabilities. The patient with static instability experienced persistent pain and disability and required treatment with a dorsal capsulodesis. The other three patients with dynamic instability did not receive any further treatment as they only had minor complaints. Although simultaneous occurrence of a scaphoid fracture and scapholunate ligament tear is thought impossible, there are several reports of scapholunate ligament injuries occuring with trans-scaphoid perilunate fracture dislocations ( Scapholunate ligament injury is seldom reported in association with an acute scaphoid fracture ( Whereas Our findings are not in accordance with the commonly accepted pathomechanisms of carpal instability. Lichtman's carpal ring concept ( Our results suggest that a scapholunate ligament injury in combination with a scaphoid fracture is not as rare as is generally thought. It is probable that some such ligament injuries will heal during the non operative treatment of the scaphoid fracture since the wrist is immobilized. However, many ligament tears do not heal with plaster treatment alone ( There is an increasing tendency to treat scaphoid fractures by internal screw fixation, with only a short period of postoperative immobilization which is not sufficient to allow healing of any scapholunate ligament injury. Furthermore, instability and the disturbed blood supply of the proximal fragment may predispose to nonunion of the scaphoid fracture ( We recommend operative treatment of both the scaphoid fracture and scapholunate ligament tear in combined injuries. The scaphoid fracture should be internally fixed with a screw, preferably using a minimally invasive technique and a palmar approach. The treatment for the scapholunate ligament injury depends on its extent (