In this work, the phase equilibria of the system comprised of isophorone, furfural, water and acetic acid were studied from the viewpoint of the extraction process. Equilibrium vapor pressure of pure isophorone was measured at sub-atmospheric pressure. Isobaric (at 40 kPa) isophorone-furfural vapor-liquid equilibria, the excess enthalpy of isophorone-furfural mixture (at 323 K) and isophorone-acetic acid vapor-liquid equilibria (from 322 K to 342 K) were investigated and compared to the available literature data. Liquid-liquid equilibria of systems comprised of isophorone-furfural-water (from 303 K to 343 K) were measured for the first time. The experimental results of this study and the literature values were utilized for optimizing the parameters for UNIQUAC model. The model was validated against the measured liquid-liquid equilibrium of the quaternary system isophorone-furfural-acetic acid-water (from 298 K to 343 K). Isophorone was found to be a favorable solvent for furfural extraction from its aqueous solutions.Furfural is a top high value ( Furfural is produced by the hydrolysis of renewable pentosan-rich agricultural resources and forest residues in the presence of mineral acid ( Furfural is also formed as a by-product during other industrial processes ( Thus, the separation and purification of furfural and carboxylic acids from diluted aqueous solutions is of increasing technical interest due to environmental and economic reasons and the significant demand for these chemicals. Nevertheless, the removal of furfural from aqueous solutions by distillation is energy consuming, technically challenging and economically inefficient for diluted solutions, or even impossible in the case of complex mixtures where the direct heating is inappropriate. In addition, complete recovery of furfural from aqueous solutions by distillation is challenging since at atmospheric pressure a minimum-boiling hetero-azeotrope with water is formed containing only 35 wt% of furfural ( Adsorption by solid materials and liquid-liquid extraction with suitable solvents were reported in literature ( Alternatively, the separation of furfural from its complex aqueous solutions may be achieved by liquid-liquid extraction processes with a water-insoluble extractant followed by the separation of the resulting furfural/solvent solution by vacuum distillation. Methyl-isobutyl ketone (MIBK) ( The application of supercritical CO At the same time, solvent-extraction of furfural and acetic acid from the acidic evaporated condensate, originating from the spent sulfite liquid concentration step, has been successfully applied on an industrial scale since 1981 by Lenzing AG (Austria). The extraction of furfural and acetic acid from aqueous effluents is achieved by the use of polar water-insoluble tri-n-octylphosphine oxide (TOPO) as an extractant dispersed in n-undecane ( The simultaneous recovery of furfural and carboxylic acid(s) from a dilute aqueous solution with a single extraction solvent by a more efficient process is still essential. The current investigation addresses furfural extraction from dilute aqueous solution by liquid-liquid extraction with isophorone. Isophorone ( The liquid-liquid equilibrium (LLE) and the vapor-liquid equilibrium (VLE) data of the system provide important information about the phase behavior and they are essential for the design and development of any solvent extraction process. The furfural-water and acetic acid-water binary mixtures are widely investigated and their VLE and LLE data were reported in multiple papers, according to the NIST ( The aim of this study was to experimentally determine the liquid-liquid and vapor-liquid equilibria for multicomponent systems containing furfural, acetic acid, water and isophorone and to establish a thermodynamic model that is optimized based on the literature and newly measured data The chemicals listed in The vapor pressure of pure isophorone and the vapor-liquid equilibria of the furfural-isophorone system were measured utilizing the A static total pressure apparatus ( The composition of the loaded mixture was analyzed by gas chromatography (GC) before and after the experiment. The change of the mixture composition due to degassing of the frozen mixture was immaterial. The equilibrium composition of the vapor and liquid phases was calculated iteratively using the number of moles of both components, temperature, pressure and total volume of the equilibrium cell. The Barker reduction procedure ( The excess enthalpy (h The equilibrium compositions of the liquid phases were measured in the thermostated glass cells ( An Agilent Technologies 6890N gas chromatograph equipped with two detectors and two capillary columns was used for analysis of the VLE samples. The accuracy of the GC composition analysis was determined to be 0.003 during the calibration with gravimetrically prepared mixtures. The liquid samples were injected by the auto liquid sampler into the inlet of the GC. The vaporized sample in the GC inlet flowed through a 1 m inert capillary transfer line and then was divided in a quarts y-splitter between a 28 m DBWaxETR column, connected to the Thermal Conductivity Detector (TCD), and a 30 m HP-5 column, connected to the Flame Ionization Detector (FID). The FID detector component areas were used for calculating the organic component distribution in the VLE samples. The GC setup was changed for all LLE measurements. The vaporized sample from the inlet flowed through the DBWaxETR column followed by the TCD and FID connected in series to increase the peak areas. The response factors were determined for both detectors. The TCD areas were the primary method to determine mass fractions of all components, but in case of a weak signal for the organic component in TCD the FID areas for the organic components were used for checking. The results were modeled utilizing the UNIQUAC-HOC model, a combination of the UNIQUAC ( The binary interaction parameters of the UNIQUAC model were optimized based on the combination of thermodynamic data sets (VLE or VLE and h The GC-analysis of the component mass fractions was based on the response factors determined with binary systems isophorone-furfural, furfural-water, isophorone-water and acetic acid-water, where all binaries, as well as the actual samples of the experiments, had acetone as an internal standard. The response factors were calculated by Eq. The mass fraction of component The The solute distribution coefficients were calculated as The investigated parameters of the bi- and multi-component mixtures in the isophorone-furfural-water-acetic acid system at different temperatures and the available literature data are listed in The results of the pure isophorone vapor pressure measurements in the temperature range 367.76–436.53 K are presented in The comparison of measured values to literature data is shown in The DIPPR database ( Vapor-liquid equilibria were measured for two mixtures of interest, furfural - isophorone and isophorone - acetic acid, by different techniques. The vapor-liquid equilibrium of furfural - isophorone system was measured using recirculation still apparatus. The isobaric measurement technique was applied because it was faster to reach the target isobar than to reach the target isotherm. The boiling temperature of the mixture at the measured isobar fluctuated due to the rather large boiling point difference of the pure components, but the pressure remained very stable due to the large buffer tank of the vacuum system. The uncertainty in boiling temperature of mixture, including fluctuation, was estimated to be 0.3 K. The measurements were complicated because both components tended to undergo resinification at high temperature. During the experiments, the color of the boiling mixture progressively darkened from pale yellow to brown, and therefore, only a few measurements were made with the same loading of chemicals. After darkening, the new freshly prepared binary mixture of furfural and isophorone was loaded into the recirculation still apparatus. The presence of impurities in the mixtures after the measurements was checked by Gas Chromatography analysis. Despite of the color change, no changes were observed in the sample composition, as evidenced from chromatograms. Additionally, the water extracts of the mixtures were titrated with 0.01 mol/l NaOH solution to determine the concentration of acids that can be formed during furfural resinification. A trace amount of acids (0.002–0.02 w%) were found in the water extracts. Results of the VLE measurements for the furfural-isophorone systems are presented in The consistency of the measured data was checked in accordance with the recommendations of The results of the excess enthalpy measurements for the isophorone-furfural system are shown in Vapor-liquid equilibrium for the isophorone + acetic acid binary mixture were measured using a static total pressure apparatus. The composition of the liquid and vapor phases were recalculated iteratively using the The isophorone-acetic acid system is zeotropic and acetic acid has the higher relative volatility over isophorone ( The binary system of water and furfural was measured as a sub-set of ternary systems and the binary results are presented in The comparison of the measured values to the literature data is presented in The parameters of the UNIQUAC model used for LLE predictions ( The binary system of isophorone and water was measured at four different temperatures and the results are listed in The UNIQUAC model parameters for the binary system isophorone-furfural were optimized utilizing only the liquid-liquid equilibrium data. The comparison of the LLE experimental results to the literature data ( The liquid-liquid equilibrium parameters for the ternary system isophorone-furfural-water were measured at three different temperatures, 303 K ± 0.1 K, 322.8 K ± 0.3 K and 342.6 K ± 0.6 K ( The consistency of the measured values was checked with the aid of an Othmer-Tobias plot and the plot of furfural content in the organic phase (extract) vs. the content of furfural in the aqueous phase (raffinate). The Othmer-Tobias plot and the furfural content plot were made independent on the order of phases (top or bottom phase) in The calculated Othmer-Tobias parameters for Eq. The ternary isophorone-acetic acid-water system was measured at four different temperatures. Whereas acetic acid is soluble in both solvents, i.e. in isophorone and in water, the two solvents are only partially soluble. The aqueous phase was the dense phase in all measurements (bottom phase in LLE). The measured mass fractions of the components for liquid-liquid equilibria are shown in  The modeling of LLE is not accurate at the plait point. The UNIQUAC interaction parameters of acetic acid and water were regressed based on the literature binary data: VLE ( The linearity of the Othmer-Tobias plot and the acetic acid composition plot in the two phases (see The equilibria for the ternary system isophorone-acetic acid-water at 298 K and 297 K were measured previously by Quaternary mixture liquid-liquid equilibria was measured in order to verify the thermodynamic model developed in this work. The UNIQUAC model parameters optimized using binary and some ternary mixture data measured in this work were used in the simulation for prediction of the quaternary LLE at the experimental conditions. The measured mass fractions of the equilibrium phases for the quaternary mixture are listed in The deviation between measured and modeled results for the mass fraction of each component is presented in  The experimental distribution coefficients (K) of furfural and acetic acid between extract and raffinate vs. mass fraction of the component in raffinate are shown in The experimental and literature thermodynamic data were used for optimization of UNIQUAC-HOC model parameters, in order to be able to predict the quaternary mixture behavior in furfural extraction processes. The fits of the model to experimental results are illustrated in Thermodynamic properties of the system comprised of isophorone, furfural, water and acetic acid were investigated in this work. The vapor pressure of isophorone, the vapor-liquid and the liquid-liquid equilibria for the studied multicomponent system were measured within the temperature range 298–343 K. The results were compared to the previously published data and they are in excellent agreement. The excess enthalpy of the binary isophorone-furfural mixture and liquid-liquid equilibrium data for isophorone-furfural and isophorone-furfural-water systems were measured for the first time. The obtained thermodynamic properties indicate that isophorone is an efficient furfural solvent and extracting agent. The measured phase equilibria data, isophorone vapor pressure and the excess enthalpy were used for optimization of the UNIQUAC - HOC thermodynamic model parameters. The developed model was shown to predict the thermodynamic behavior of the studied mixtures with good accuracy at various conditions. This study provided a large number of novel experimental data required for simulation of the separation of furfural and acetic acid from their aqueous solutions. Special emphasis was put on investigation of the temperature dependency of the phase equilibria in order to provide a model for not only liquid-liquid extraction but also for distillation. The authors would like to acknowledge the