The paper describes a study carried out to characterise fly ash produced from hard-coal, following recovery from long-term pond and stockpile storage, and wet process separation. Three power station sites, representative of those in the United Kingdom, were considered and initial work examined the characteristics of recovered material from both types of storage area. Most of this had high loss-on-ignition (LOI) and was relatively coarse, with that in ponds generally having greater variability. Fly ash particles had reaction products on their surfaces and the presence of agglomerates was also noted. Methods including, pre-screening, column (hydraulic) separation, froth flotation and lamella hydraulic classifier were considered for processing. Three trials were carried out using various combinations, and it was possible to separate carbon and fly ash to give material groups ranging from carbon-rich to low LOI/high fineness, although fine fly ash particles (<5μm) were distributed throughout these. Relatively minor changes in chemical composition and mineralogy of the separated materials were noted, except for particle groups with high LOI (reflecting fly ash dilution). Similar effects were generally obtained with both pond and stockpile storage. Mass balance calculations were made to quantify material distributions for the three processing trials carried out. Examples are given of yields achieved for potential end-uses from these, which indicate that optimisation to target particular fly ash properties should be possible.It is estimated that 100 Storage periods can range from months to a decade or longer, depending on demand. As a result, it is estimated that more than 100 Research examining the effects of short-term storage under moist or saturated conditions on low-lime fly ash in UK ponds and stockpiles suggests that while physical and chemical changes occur, the material can still be used as a cement component in concrete Several systems have been developed recently towards enabling fly ash separation and their potential is becoming recognised In order to examine different power plant storage conditions, fly ash from both ponds and stockpiles was considered. A survey of storage areas at UK power plants At Power Plant 1, material (Fly Ash 1) was stored in a 0.4 At Power Plant 2, there was a 1 At Power Plant 3, the material (Fly Ash 3) was in a 16 The loss-on-ignition (LOI) of recovered and separated materials was determined to BS EN 450-1 Pressed powder pellets of milled fly ash were analysed for oxide composition using a sequential X-ray fluorescence spectrometer with Rh Kα source. The mineralogy was examined on powder samples by X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα source. An internal standard was used (5.0% corundum) to enable estimation of the crystalline/non-crystalline (by difference) constituents. The results from the tests on recovered fly ash samples are summarised in As expected for bituminous coal sources, all fly ashes had low lime contents, with the maximum level 4.6%. The chemical composition generally corresponded to the typical ranges for UK fly ashes  The research was concerned with characterising UK fly ashes following carbon and particle size separation. This considered various wet processing techniques (given the fly ash storage conditions) used in the mineral recovery industry and which have found application with fly ash previously. The main trials with these considered Fly Ash 3, with confirmatory tests made using Fly Ashes 1 and 2. A stepwise approach was followed, with different techniques combined and refinements made, as required, to target material of low LOI/high fineness. Physical and chemical (selectively) characterisation of particle groups was made at the various stages of separation. Similarly mass balance calculations were also carried out, based on the solids contents and flow rates on entry to and exit from these. This enabled material distributions throughout the processing systems to be determined. Initially, hydraulic classification, with separation by differences in particle velocity passage through water (influenced by density, size, and shape) The LHC used was of 2.4 Given the wet processing approach adopted during the study, froth flotation was considered for carbon removal. The technique achieves this through, (i) physico-chemical property differences between suspended particles, (ii) the use of appropriate re-agents, (iii) passage of air through the flotation unit, and (iv) formation of a stable carbon froth In order to determine the potential for carbon removal from the test fly ashes, release analyses were carried out with a batch flotation machine, using the collector and frother re-agents adopted for the main trials For Trial 1, the processing system shown in The LHC results show that 43.3% of the material settled in U1, with progressively less from U2 to U5. U1 had an increased LOI, was coarser than the column flotation tails and contained 28.0% of the particles <5 The chemical composition data ( The main mineral composition results ( The typical morphology of material groups from Trial 1 before and following the different separating stages is shown in In Trial 2, column (hydraulic) separation (3), mechanical (froth) flotation (4b) and LHC (5) were used (following pre-screening (1) and slurrying (2)), as shown in The typical morphology of these material groups is shown in For the LHC, less material was collected in U1 than for Trial 1, reflecting the additional processes prior to introduction, with similar quantities in U2 to U5. Again, the LOI increased slightly in U1 compared to the feed (tails) and reduced progressively from 7.9% to 6.0% for U2 to U5. The material was also coarser in U1 and U2 than that entering the LHC, with fineness ranging from 11.7% to 0% for U3 to U5. Of the <5 This trial was repeated with Fly Ash 1 and the results compared with Fly Ash 3 in To achieve greater carbon separation a further Trial (Trial 3) was carried out where material was recycled during mechanical flotation (4c) to give the equivalent of four cells for the process, see The results from the LHC were similar to those of the earlier trials, with an increase in LOI and coarseness of U1 material compared to the tails and reductions thereafter to U5 generally noted. Material in the LHC during Trial 3 had lower LOI (reflecting differences on entry) and similar fineness to that in Trial 2. The proportions of <5 The results from a repeat of the trial with Fly Ash 2 are shown with Fly Ash 3 in The research has shown that fly ash can be recovered from long-term storage and by wet processing, separated into a range of particle groups, with properties suitable for various end-uses. For the fly ashes tested, carbon reduction was achieved, but was influenced by the flotation method adopted. It has been suggested that column flotation is effective in the removal of fine minerals The characteristics of fly ash from the LHC were influenced by the properties of the feed material as indicated in Given the influence of the recovered material and processing techniques on separation, the selection of particular systems and optimisation to meet specific end property requirements should be possible. To illustrate end-use potential of material following the three trials, the separated particle groups of Fly Ash 3 are considered with respect to the classification given in Preliminary research  Fly ash in UK pond and stockpile storage areas has a wide range of physico-chemical characteristics, with most being of high LOI (>10%) and relatively coarse (>40% retained on a 45 Initial tests indicate that the use of coarse screening and lamella hydraulic classifier (LHC) only, did not give carbon reductions (measured as LOI) to levels suitable for fly ash use as a cement component in concrete. The results suggest that carbon particles behaved similarly to fine fly ash during separation and thus were difficult to differentiate and hence additional methods (i.e. froth flotation) were necessary to obtain low LOI/high fineness particle groups. The main trials used various combinations of wet-processing methods, i.e. pre-screening, column (hydraulic) separation, froth flotation and LHC. These indicate that initial processing and the froth flotation method used were important factors influencing the properties of the particle groups obtained. The data also show that there was a balance in achieving low LOI and high fineness fly ash during separation and their yields. The effects noted during the trials were generally consistent between fly ash from pond and stockpile storage areas. Scanning electron microscopy and LASER diffraction indicate that particles of <5 For the three trials carried out, it was possible to separate materials to give characteristics for a range of end-uses, e.g. cement component in concrete, grout and road bases. Further work is needed to examine their influences in various applications. The results suggest that there is potential to target specific material properties, using appropriate combinations of separation techniques, depending on local requirements. The Authors would like to acknowledge, The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA) UK, and partners, Ash Resources Ltd. (Pty), British Cement Association, British Precast Concrete Federation, Castle Cement Ltd., European Coal Combustion Products Association (ECOBA), Quarry Products Association, ScotAsh Ltd., and United Kingdom Quality Ash Association (UKQAA) for their financial and technical contributions to the Project. The input of Professor R K Dhir is much appreciated. Thanks are also given to technical staff of the CAER, University of Kentucky, in particular Mr. John Wiseman.