Three categories of plants growing under three different extreme conditions were taken for assaying their promises to undertake nano-transformation. It was found that all of them successfully synthesize silver nanoparticles. The synthesis was performed akin to room temperature. X-ray and transmission electron microscopy analyses were performed to ascertain the formation of silver nanoparticles. X-ray analysis indicated that silver nanoparticles have FCC unit cell structure. Individual nanoparticles having the particle sizes of 2–5nm were found. Possible involved mechanisms for the synthesis of silver nanoparticles from above plant systems have also been proposed.Chemical constitution and metabolic promises decide the phylogenetic and functional fate of an organism in nature. Plants as autotrophs have this edge over others in terms of their morphological organization, molecular distribution, interaction of metabolites during metabolic fluxes (both primary as well as secondary) which probably bestows them with nature's blessing of adaptability against different environmental rigors ranging from deep ocean beds through deserts to extremely cold alpine regions. It is indeed their chemical constitutions (or metabolic status) which provides them strength to withstand such environmentally diverse habitats. These chemical constitutions have enormous significance for the surviving humanity in various manners. It is now well established that the interaction between inorganic nanoparticles and biological structures is one of the most promising areas of research in modern nanoscience and technology To justify the above, the present work emphasizes use of plants growing under different ecological conditions (xerophytes, mesophytes and hydrophytes) as putative candidate source for the synthesis of silver nanoparticles. Nanoparticles of Ag were prepared by using plant exracts. Known weight of (5 40 The formation of single-phase compound was checked by X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique. The XRD spectra were taken with an X-ray diffractometer (XPERT-PRO, PW3050/60) at room temperature, using Cu K    Plants harbour enumerable treasure of metabolites of both primary and secondary types. While primary metabolites are principally responsible for maintenance of regular metabolic fluxes, the secondary metabolites might have a broader function. Among xerophytes (like In mesophytes having well defined and developed metabolic machinery, the process of nano-transformation might have resulted due to tautomerization of quinones. The candidate mesophytic genera, Among hydrophytes like The present biosynthesis method is a green low cost approach, capable of producing silver-nanoparticles in laboratory ambience. The synthesis of Ag NPs might have resulted due to different metabolites (like organic acids and quinones in this case) or metabolic fluxes and other oxido-reductively labile metabolites like ascorbates or catechol/protocatacheuic acid.