This study involved fabrication of simulated plate fuel elements. Uranium silicide of actual fuel elements was replaced with yttria. The fabrication stages were otherwise identical. The final cold rolled and/or straightened plates, without stress relief, showed an inverse relationship between bond strength and out of plane residual shear stress (τ
                     13). Stress relief of τ
                     13 was conducted over a range of temperatures/times (200–500°C and 15–240min) and led to corresponding improvements in bond strength. Fastest τ
                     13 relief was obtained through 300°C annealing. Elimination of microscopic shear bands, through recovery and partial recrystallization, was clearly the most effective mechanism of relieving τ
                     13.Plate fuel elements are widely used in high flux research reactors involved in the production of radioisotopes, irradiation studies, etc. An earlier study  Mid-width sections of the rolled plates, with and without stress relief, were taken for peel tests. This was carried out with ASTM D1876-01 standard Characterization involved residual stress and EBSD measurements. Stress measurements were made with appropriate depths of X-ray penetration (to be discussed latter) of the rolling plane (plane containing RD and TD). On the other hand, EBSD scans were taken on the long-transverse section (containing RD and ND). EBSD samples were prepared by standard metallography followed by electropolishing. Electropolishing involved an electrolyte of perchloric acid and methanol (20:80 by volume), −20 Residual stress measurements were made on a Panalytical™ X’Pert PRO MRD system. A commercial software, X’Pert Stress Plus™, was used.    In GIXRD, reflections for different {h Residual stress measurements estimate appropriate interplanar spacings ( Standard This study used uniaxial stress analysis. Sample RD was aligned for For dislocation density estimation XRD system with line focus and high resolution (0.01° step size)    To understand the rationale behind best stress relief kinetics at 300 The present study brought clear observations on temperature dependent stress relief. Before initiating discussions on microstructural developments and stress relief, it is important to reiterate observations on improved bond strength. Rate of change in bond strength, for initial 30 Annealing temperature/time brought in changes in grain size d ( This study established, see An effort has been made to explain these observations through a hypothesis and complimentary phenomenological evidences, see Initial stages (30 This study provides an important correlation between near interface out of plane residual stress ( An inverse relation between measured bond strength and estimated near interface out of plane residual shear stress ( Developments in ‘lateral’ stresses ( The authors would like to acknowledge the EBSD and stress measurements from the National Facility (DST-IRPHA) at IIT Bombay. Support from BRNS (board of research in nuclear science) is greatly appreciated. Support provided by the team members at Plate Fuel Development and Fabrication group at MFD (metallic fuel division, BARC) was critical: special acknowledgments to Mr. M.R. Shaikh, S.S. Gotad, B.K. Mondal, B.N. Pisal and R.M. Malagi.