In froth flotation, minerals report to the concentrate either by true flotation or entrainment. Previous research reported that flotation by entrainment is related to the amount of water that is transported to the concentrate (water recovery). On the other hand, plant operational experience indicates that frother type can be used to control the amount of water in the concentrate. In this work, a relationship between surfactant type and flotation by entrainment was obtained at laboratory scale using a batch flotation tests. The results indicate that the structure and molecular weight of surfactant influences the water reported to the concentrate, which is also related to the recovery of hydrophilic particles. The relationship between entrainment and water recovery is not unique, but depends on surfactant type. When comparing grade-recovery curves generated with different surfactants, the results show that there is an important effect of the surfactant type on the selectivity of the process.Frothers, also called surfactants, are surface active reagents used in flotation to generate small bubbles and produce stable froths ( Frother structure affects both bubble and froth behaviour, and also flotation performance (  By using sulphur containing frothers, analogous to the common oxygen containing frothers, In flotation there are two mechanisms by which particles report to the concentrate: true flotation, which corresponds to particles that float attached to bubbles; and entrainment, where particles are drawn to the froth and concentrate along with the water that accompanies the bubbles. While true flotation is a selective process, entrainment is not, and has a negative effect on the selectivity of the process, lowering the concentrate quality (  In a recent study, A series of flotation tests was carried out in a 5.1 The quartz was crushed and ground down to 90% -400#. The particle size was then determined using laser diffraction analysis, giving an average value of The surfactants were selected in order to represent two families of different molecular structure: aliphatic alcohols and polyethylene glycols, PEG, with the following generic formula, H(OCH In the case of the kinetics tests with quartz and concentrate (synthetic ore), the collector used was Aeron 343 Xanthate, from Cytec, which corresponds to sodium isopropyl xanthate. The pH was adjusted with lime (CaOH A first series of tests was performed only with quartz, at 17.8% solids, natural pH and 0.5 After 12 In the case of the tests performed with synthetic ore, the procedure was the same, except that 85 For those two reagents, images of 2D foams (water-air) were generated to compare their foamability. The foam was produced in an acrylic cell of 20  For both families of surfactants, alcohols and polyethylene glycols, the recovery by entrainment increases with the molecular weight of the reagent. If one observes the curve corresponding to MIBC, it shows a higher recovery of quartz than Hexanol, despite de fact of having the same molecular weight, formula and HLB number. This may be due to the branched molecular structure of MIBC, compared to the linear structure of Hexanol. The results show that alcohols tend to report more hydrophilic particles to the concentrate than polyethylene glycols. For each surfactant, the entrainment factor, ENT, was determined. The results are summarised in The entrainment factors were plotted against HLB numbers as shown in Since HLB numbers do not account for molecular weight (Mw), which means that two reagents with different molecular weight could have the same HLB number, it is of interest to compare the results against HLB/Mw ( Although in One reagent of each family was selected for comparison: Octanol and PEG300 ( The slopes of the curves presented in In order to complement the results and to contribute to the analysis, 2D foams (water-air) were generated for Octanol and PEG300 at 0.5 It is interesting that though PEG300 shows a higher foamability that Octanol, it reports roughly the same amount of water than Octanol to the concentrate ( To the naked eye, the first 3 In order to confirm the effect of surfactants on selectivity, flotation kinetics tests were carried out with both reagents, Octanol and PEG300, with a synthetic mineral composed of quartz and copper concentrate. The results are presented in The results clearly show that the grade-recovery curve is shifted to the right when changing the reagent from Octanol to PEG300. This means that the flotation test performed using PEG300 was more selective than with Octanol, which confirms the observation made when analysing the results of entrainment factors. Since the concentrate used to prepare the synthetic mineral was received dry and to perform the tests it was resuspended, without any further treatment to remove eventual particle oxidation, the maximum recoveries differ from 100%. The difference in the maximum recovery of copper for both reagents is related to the flotation kinetics, which was also affected by the change in surfactant, presumably due to the difference in foamability between Octanol and PEG300. The effect that surfactant has on the selectivity of the flotation process, through the modification of the entrainment factor, implies that one could have a system with a stable froth, and a high water recovery due to large amounts of water reported to the froth and concentrate, and yet produce a concentrate of good quality, depending on the frother being used. Based on these results, the recommendation is to consider frother selection as an alternative to improve not only gas dispersion and froth stability in the cell, but also selectivity and, therefore, concentrate quality. The results show that the entrainment factor, ENT, calculated as the slope of the curve of recovery of hydrophilic particles vs. water recovery, is not unique, but depends on the surfactant type. In the case of Octanol and PEG300, it was observed that the latter has a lower entrainment factor than Octanol (0.33 vs. 0.49) for the conditions studied, e.g., reagent dosage and particle size distribution. This means that for a given amount of water recovered, different amounts of hydrophilic particles get to the concentrate, affecting the quality of the product. When running tests with a synthetic mineral, composed by quartz and copper concentrate, the different entrainment factors observed for Octanol and PEG300 translate into a shift of the grade-recovery curve, showing clearly an effect of surfactant type on flotation selectivity. Although further testing at industrial scale is still needed, one can speculate that the right selection of frothers may improve not only the gas dispersion and froth stability in the cell, but also improve the grade-recovery curve, giving a new role to the frothers. The authors would like to acknowledge the