We study the effects of the growth phase of Rhodococcus opacus on the floatability of malachite. We find that bacteria in stationary phase show more than two-fold higher floatability than bacteria in mid-exponential phase. To understand the mechanism of this higher floatability for the stationary phase, we examine bacteria surface properties such as zeta potential and contact angle. Surprisingly, all bacteria surface properties are nearly the same; moreover, the amounts of bacteria adsorbed onto malachite are also identical. Despite bacteria's similar surface properties, we discover that the amount of bacteria detached from malachite during the mixing process in flotation is larger for the mid-exponential phase than for the stationary phase. We attribute this to hydrodynamic shear stress due to the fluid flow established in mineral mixing. Furthermore, we observe that bacteria–bacteria interactions are far more significant for the mid-exponential phase, leading to end-to-end aggregation and thus allowing unique loosely-packed structures on the malachite surface to form. Such loose structures of bacteria on the mineral are highly susceptible to fluid flow and can be easily detached from the mineral surface. Our findings suggest that due to the relatively large size of the bacteria, it is crucial to consider the detachment of adhered bacteria on the mineral surface due to fluid flow during mixing, which is easily ignored in typical flotation processes.Separating desired minerals from natural ores has been one of the fundamental engineering issues of the last century. To separate minerals, various techniques have been developed, including many different types of flotation and chemical leaching ( Microorganisms (e.g. bacteria, algae, fungi, and yeast) are typically used for bioflotation because of their abundance in nature ( While surprisingly many capabilities of bacteria in the flotation process have been discovered and studied, bacterial adhesion and detachment mechanisms on minerals still remain elusive. Bacteria surface interaction with minerals is fundamentally different from that of surfactants: surface–surface interaction becomes more important for micron-sized bacteria, while surfactant interaction with minerals is mostly point–point interaction. In other words, nanometer-sized typical collectors are attached to a mineral surface at the point either chemically or physically whereas bacteria collectors are attached by surface–surface interactions. These fundamentally different types of interaction from a typical flotation process require thorough examination of bacteria–mineral interaction. To date, numerous studies have focused on the roles of individual bacteria in the flotation process ( In this study, we investigated the effect of the bacteria growth phase on the floatability of malachite. We found that bacteria in the stationary phase show floatability roughly two times higher than that of bacteria in the mid-exponential phase. Despite this huge difference in floatability, the bacteria surface properties are remarkably similar: bacteria in both phases show the same electrostatic properties, as determined by their zeta potential measurements; the two types of bacteria have the same adhesion ability onto malachite. However, differences present themselves due to the detachment process in the agitation and mixing of minerals. We attribute such differences to the shear-induced detachment process in the boundary layer near the surface of the minerals, which results in differences in size, and the differences are also due to the distinct structure formation on the malachite due to sparse end-to-end aggregation of the bacteria themselves. Based on experimental observations, we provide a simple model that can show how shear detachment force depends on the size of the bacteria in the presence of flow. Sphere-shaped malachite (Cu   In order to characterize the electrokinetic properties of The contact angles of The flotation was conducted using a custom-made Hallimond tube ( Various concentrations of The  We measured the floatability of malachite as a function of the bacteria concentration for both mid-exponential and stationary phases ( In general, floatability depends on two characteristics of a collector: hydrophobicity and adsorption ability to minerals ( We next determined the hydrophobicity of the bacteria in the two different growth phases by directly measuring the contact angle. As shown in To investigate the effects of the actual flotation process, we paid attention to how fluid flow affected this flotation process. Since agitated fluid can apply shear stress to bacteria on malachite and detach them, the number of detached bacteria could change the hydrophobicity of the malachite-bacteria complex, thus affecting the actual flotation results. Hence, we measured how many bacteria were detached under the same fluid flow conditions of the flotation process. To investigate the details of bacteria desorption under fluid flow, we estimated the lift force applied to the bacteria attached to the malachite surface, as illustrated in The velocity of fluid is  Fig. 8 shows how bacteria are attached to a single piece of malachite for three different concentrations. As expected, bacteria in the mid-exponential phase randomly attached to the surface of the malachite with a lot of protruding branches of bacteria aggregates. On the other hand, bacteria in the stationary phase appear to be a monolayer on a surface, with few bacteria extending out. As can be seen in Fig. 8, such a distinct structural formation clearly explains the difference in the floatability of malachite for several reasons: 1) as explained above, the larger an attached object on a surface is, the larger the applied shear force to the object will be; 2) Bacteria in the mid-exponential phase have less contact points of the malachite surface, assuming that the number of adhered bacteria for each phase is the same. Therefore, adhesion energy is smaller for the mid-exponential phase; 3) bacteria–bacteria aggregation is far more evident in a mid-exponential phase and the bacteria structure is sparse due to the presence of end-to-end adhesion rather than side-by-side close-packing. (Here, since the bacteria in a mid-exponential phase has an ellipsoidal shape, there exist two “ends” at the tip and a side surface along the larger axis of this ellipsoid. Side-by-side packing makes a compact aggregates whereas end-to-end adhesion makes a loosely packed structure.) Such a “cellular” structure is weak against external forces (e.g. shear stress by fluid flow), and thus would render the bacteria to be easily removed. Although the exact mechanism is not clear, the experimental evidence suggests that detachment due to hydrodynamic shear stress is an obvious reason for the low floatability of the mid-exponential phase of In summary, we investigated the effect of the growth phase of Although other procedures are nearly the same, bioflotation is distinguished from typical flotation in that, instead of a surfactant, bacteria are used as collectors. In this work, we show that unlike a simple surfactant collector, which is typically used in a flotation process, a micron-sized bacterium can be easily detached from a mineral surface by shear flow in the actual flotation process. Moreover, this study provides the useful information that specific bacteria–bacteria interactions could also be crucial because these interactions play an important role in forming the structure of bacteria on a mineral surface, which structure determines the extent of the detachment, and thus eventually affects the floatability. This work was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the