The adsorption behaviour of natural zeolite (clinoptilolite) has been studied in order to determine its applicability in treating acid mine drainage (AMD) containing 400, 20, 20 and 120 mgl−1 of Fe3+, Cu2+, Mn2+ and Zn2+ respectively. Tests to determine both the rate of adsorption and the uptake at equilibrium were performed under batch conditions from single and multi-component solutions. The optimum conditions for the treatment process were investigated by observing the influence of pH levels, the presence of competing ions, varying the mass of zeolite and thermal modification of the natural zeolite (calcination and microwaves). The adsorption studies showed rapid uptake in general for the first 40 mins, corresponding to ∼80% total removal. After this initial rapid period, the rate of adsorption decreases. According to the equilibrium studies, the selectivity sequence can be given as Fe3+
                     >Zn2+
                     >Cu2+
                     >Mn2+, with good fits being obtained using Langmuir and Freundlich adsorption isotherms. Preliminary tests using AMD samples from Wheal Jane Mine, UK, showed that natural zeolite has great potential as an alternative low cost material in the treatment of acid mine drainage.Acid Mine Drainage (AMD) poses a serious threat to human health, animals and ecological systems. This is because AMD contains heavy metal contaminants, such as Cu The main sources of AMD are mining operations (such as Wheal Jane Mine, Cornwall, UK), metal plating facilities and tanneries ( Zeolites are naturally occurring alumino-silicates with a 3 dimensional framework structure bearing AlO The use of natural zeolite as an adsorbent has gained interest among researchers; mainly because its sorption properties provide a combination of ion exchange and molecular sieve properties which can also be easily modified ( Despite the great interest in ion exchange with natural zeolite, there is very little literature published on the influence of competing cations on the removal of certain heavy metals from mixed solutions by natural zeolite. Other areas that need further investigation are the effect of grain size, pH, use of “as received” (untreated) and thermally treated natural zeolite on the adsorption process. Limited data are also available for cation exchange with untreated clinoptilolite in terms of equilibrium isotherms and reaction kinetics ( The work presented in this paper is a study of the uptake efficiency of Fe In this study natural zeolite (clinoptilolite) samples from Turkey were used, provided by IMERYS Minerals Ltd, UK. The samples were used in their natural state (“as received”) with no chemical modifications, unless stated. The particle size distribution of the samples was determined using screens and a sieve shaker. The particle size range of the natural zeolite used in this study was 1 to 3 mm, unless stated otherwise. Mineralogical analysis of the natural zeolite samples was carried out using X-Ray Diffraction ( Synthetic solutions of Fe Samples of acid mine drainage from Wheal Jane Mine were also collected. The concentration of heavy metals in the samples was 200, 85, 12, 15, 15, 9 mgl Batch sorption tests were conducted by mixing different quantities (3.7 g, 7.5 g and 15 g) of natural zeolites with 100 ml of synthetic solutions containing the desired concentration of heavy metal ions, at 22 The percentage adsorption (%) was calculated using The distribution coefficient/ratio, The percent adsorption and The equilibrium amount of metal adsorbed from aqueous solution was determined by the following equation Several equilibrium models have been developed to describe adsorption isotherm relationships, the two main isotherm models used in this work are the Langmuir and Freundlich models ( The mass of zeolite used was 3.7, 7.5, 15 and 30 g in a constant volume (100 ml) of synthetic solution containing the different metal ions, at different concentrations (20 to 400 mgl The solution pH was varied to 2.5, 3.5 and 4.5 for the single component solutions. 100 ml of solution was contacted with 3.7 g of natural zeolite for 6 hs. The change in solution pH was measured. Acid mine drainage normally contains more than one cation (Fe Heat treatment was carried out using two processes: by heating in an air atmosphere muffle furnace for 30 min at 200, 400 and 800 °C and by exposing the natural zeolite to microwave energy of 2.45 GHz at 950 W for 15 and 30 min. The thermally modified zeolite samples were then contacted with synthetic solutions for 6 hs. The objective of this study was to treat AMD from Wheal Jane Mine. Thus synthetic solutions containing a mixture of Fe Preliminary tests were then conducted to treat real AMD from Wheal Jane Mine. 30 g of thermally modified natural zeolite ( The results of the kinetics experiments to measure the ion-exchange adsorption of cations from aqueous solutions onto the untreated natural zeolite as a function of zeolite mass and time are shown in The effect of the adsorbent dose on the uptake of heavy metal ions is also shown in The legal concentrations of Fe The amount of heavy metal ions adsorbed from solution increases with an increase in initial solution pH as shown in Natural zeolites are generally weakly acidic in nature and sodium-form exchangers are selective for hydrogen (R–Na The adsorption of heavy metals from solution by natural zeolite was fitted to both the Langmuir and Freundlich adsorption isotherm models as shown in The Langmuir gives a better fit compared to the Freundlich adsorption isotherm. According to the Langmuir adsorption model, the values of The Freundlich adsorption isotherm is usually used to fit experimental data over a wide range of concentrations. This isotherm gives an expression encompassing the surface heterogeneity and the exponential distribution of active sites and their energies. Values of The difference in adsorption capacity of the natural zeolite for the heavy metal ions may be due to a number of factors which include hydration diameters, hydration enthalpies and solubility of the cations. The hydration radii of the cations are: The above series according to the hydration diameters and enthalpy are different from the experimentally obtained series which is Fe In practice, acid mine drainage contains a mixture of different heavy metal ions. Experiments were carried out to investigate the influence of the presence of competing cations on the individual adsorption of Cu  The increase in rate of adsorption and adsorption capacity as a result of thermal treatment may be a result of the removal of water from the internal channels of natural zeolite; this leaves the channels vacant and hence increases the adsorption capacity of the zeolite ( The potential of natural zeolite as an adsorbent for treatment of acid mine drainage from Wheal Jane Mine was determined by contacting synthetic AMD with natural zeolite for 6 hs. As before, more Fe The above series shows that more Zn It was found that natural zeolite efficiently removed Zn  Results of the preliminary tests on actual AMD from Wheal Jane Mine are shown in The adsorption of the heavy metal ions from solution onto natural zeolite was determined. The adsorption was rapid for the first 40 min and then gradually decreased. About 80%, 95%, 90% and 99% of Fe The rate of adsorption was directly proportional to the pH value of the solution. Adsorption decreased in more acidic solutions, due to hydrogen ion competition. Adsorption rate and capacity also depends on the adsorbent mass and heat treatment by either microwaves or heating in a furnace. Efficiency of metal removal from solution by natural zeolite is inversely proportional to the initial solution concentration. Adsorption of heavy metal ions from solution follows the sequence: Fe The experimental data obtained from batch studies gave a good fit for the Langmuir and Freundlich isotherm models. Preliminary treatment of actual acid mine drainage showed that natural zeolite has the potential to effectively remove heavy metals from relatively dilute acid mine drainage. This naturally occurring mineral can be used as a substitute for the more expensive adsorbents like activated carbon or other treatment methods like electro-dialysis, due to it availability and low cost. The financial support of the ORSAS is gratefully acknowledged. The authors thank IMERYS Minerals Ltd, UK for supplying the natural zeolite samples and their technical assistance in analysing some of the samples used in this work.