Conventional magnetic separators are only able to split the feeding stream into three different outcome streams. This work presents the theoretical principles of a new device, named MAGCLA™, which is capable to separate and classify particles according to their magnetic susceptibility. This first part of the work reports the equations of movement for non-magnetic particles. The equations for magnetic particles and the limiting conditions for both situations will be given in the remaining parts of this work.
                  A coefficient (T
                     CG1) was introduced to measure the deviations between the experimental and theoretical values.angle between the conical part of the body of the separator–classifier and the horizontal angle between the total velocity and the rotational axis angular velocity of the body of the MAGCLA™ friction coefficient for the surface of the separator–classifier on the tangential direction rotational displacement friction coefficient in the density of the fluid density of the particle acceleration of the particle acceleration on the acceleration on the tangential acceleration of the particle total acceleration of the particles acceleration on the force acting of the particle friction force in the friction force acting on the direction tangential to the surface centrifugal force total force acting on the direction tangential to the surface gravity acceleration height of the conical part of the body of the separator–classifier mass of the particle force exerted by the surface on the particle weight of the particle radial distance between the particle and the geometrical center radius of the cylindrical part of the body of the separator–classifier external radius of the central collector internal radius of the conical part of the body of the separator–classifier initial radius of the fed particles fictitious radius to account for the deviations to ideality radius of the superconducting magnet plus cryostat system space covered by the particle time theoretical adimensional parameters that measure the disparities between theory and practice velocity of the particle in the volume of the particle velocity of the particle in the tangential direction of the circular movement tangential velocity of the particle total velocity of the particle initial height of the fed particles The large majority of current magnetic separators may be divided into two main classes In this section a very brief description of the apparatus working principles will be presented, more details can be found in Refs. In the deduction of the equations and formulae present in this paper, regarding the movement of the particles, several approximations, either specific or general, were used. The specific approximations are indicated in the corresponding section, while the general approximations, considered in the analysis of the movement of the magnetic and non-magnetic particles are detailed below: The movement is considered relatively to a static observer standing outside the volume where it takes place. The situations where such assumption is not made are duly pointed out. The effect of the Earth Coriolis force was considered negligible, or already inserted on the overall effect due to other forces. When non-negligible, the drag force is well described by Newton’s law, as it was considered that the velocity of the (magnetic) particles is always much larger than the velocity of the fluid (air). The drag coefficient, The lifting action exerted on the particles by the drag force or by their movement relatively to the air is considered negligible, as in practice the shape of the particles is non-spherical, which decreases this lifting action to negligible levels. Interparticle forces (drag, friction, magnetic and electrostatic attraction, collisions) are considered negligible. This magnetic separator and classifier has an huge advantage regarding this point, as magnetic and non-magnetic particles follow two completely different paths, and the only interaction among them is inside the feeding systems and at the feeding area. It is also important to notice that even within the streams of particles with similar characteristics, and as long as the approximations are valid, they will not contact among themselves: there is a “clean” separation–classification of the feed stream. The lower the feeding flux, the lower are the interparticle forces. Particles do not present any discontinuity in their path between the feeding system and the apparatus surface. The particles are assumed spherical, but the most important effects related to their non-spherical nature were considered where relevant. Each particle is considered small enough so that: (i) its internal magnetic field is uniform overall its entire volume; (ii) its size is negligible compared to all the distances in the device. The friction coefficient in the rotational direction was considered high enough (and its value calculated) to maintain all the particles “glued” to the body of the separator–classifier, either during the movement performed by the non-magnetic particles, or during the movement performed by the magnetic particles until they “lift off” towards the central collector. The discrepancies between reality and the developed theory will be taken in account by two coefficients – In terms of analysis, it will be considered the movement of the particles from the moment they reach the MAGCLA™ surface. The rotation of the body is considered high enough to cause the raise of the non-magnetic particles (diamagnetic or very weak paramagnetic) in the surface (its minimum value and other conditions will be discussed in Ref. Bearing upon perpendicular to the surface tangential to the surface Making the force balance on the rotational direction, we get a limiting condition for the rotational friction coefficient (see Ref. On the other hand Substituting In order to measure the difference between ideality, as described by the models developed in this paper, and practical reality, we have defined a coefficient For the analysis in this section two axis systems will be considered, using one or the other according to the case in question: the system presented in From On the other hand, using the cylindrical axis system ( As the particles move “glued” on the separator-surface having no rotational acceleration, the modules of Finally, from Hence, as derived in For From Eq. The tangential acceleration is determined by Although there is no angular acceleration, As the rotational velocity ( From The underlying theory of MAGCLA™, a new magnetic separator and classifier, was developed. In this paper we analyse and derive the formulae describing the trajectories followed by the non-magnetic particles. A coefficient The analysis for magnetic particles and the limiting conditions for both cases will be reported in the remaining parts of this work. The Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia is acknowledged for its Post-Doc grant – SFRH/BPD/6964/2001 (P. A. Augusto). In order to solve the differential Eq. The homogeneous equation, Analyzing the non-homogeneous equation In order to determine the constants of Eq.