The paper reports hydrometallurgical method for recovery of bronze (80–92% Cu) from smelted low-grade waste electronic parts. Detailed analysis of five phases in Cu–Zn–Sn–Ag–Pb alloy was presented. Anodic dissolution of the alloy in acid sulfate and sulfate-chloride solutions resulted in distinct metal separation with copper and tin codeposited on the cathode, lead and silver accumulation in the slimes, while zinc, iron and nickel were transferred to the electrolyte. Phase and chemical analyses of slimes and cathodic deposits were performed. The most favorable conditions for the alloy dissolution were obtained in 2M H2SO4 with 0.1M NaCl at the temperature of 60°C, where the highest anodic current efficiency and the lowest energy consumption were found. At lower temperatures periodical inhibition of the alloy dissolution was observed in sulfate-chloride solutions.Discarded and obsolete electric and electronic equipment is one of the fastest growing waste streams in the world ( E-waste represents currently a serious resource of valuable materials ( Consciousness of the world public on WEEE as a potential source of profits and law regulations gradually increases development of the professional recycling business. Currently, most of the waste is recycled pyrometallurgically in the copper smelters ( Independently on the method used, the main problem in the recovery of metals is a treatment of plastics rich e-waste stream. A variety of polymers (e.g. PVC, PE, ABS, PS, PP, PU, PA, POM) is intermingled and embedded with metals, hence separation methods are necessary to implement into the recovery route. A few techniques are used for plastics removal from the metals. Mechanical treatment is applied usually, but pyrolysis ( This paper is focused on the investigation of copper and tin recovery from smelted low-grade electronic waste, containing no precious metals like gold, platinum or palladium. It should be noted that “low-grade” (or “low-value”) e-scrap is generally defined by gold content below 100 Acidic sulfate-chloride system (H Anodic oxidation is also used for hydrometallurgical treatment of multicomponent materials originated from industrial processes ( The aim of the present work was to recover copper and tin and verify behavior of the metals dissolving from the alloy during electrolysis. The influence of bath composition and temperature on the slime, electrolyte and cathode deposit composition, process efficiency and energy consumption was determined. A mixture of waste computer boards and printed circuit boards of mobile phones from an urban scrap heap was collected, then mechanically separated and final granulate was pyrometallurgically treated (without any additives or any special atmosphere) for about 2 Specimens of the alloy were dissolved anodically at the anodic current density of 3 Before and after measurement the alloy sample and cathode substrates were weighed. Slimes produced on the alloy surface as well as cathodic deposits were collected, washed, dried at the temperature of 70 An alloy obtained from low-grade electronic scrap was a polymetallic and multiphase material. It contained mainly copper (69%), zinc (11%), tin (9%), silver (4%) and comparable amounts of lead and iron (each about 2.4%). EDS elemental analysis was performed on variously localized areas in the bulk of the alloy, thus scatter of the results (   Phase composition of the alloy used in this investigation was different from that discussed by Discussion of the results shows that thermal treatment of discarded PC and PCBs leads to the formation of high copper alloys (about 70% Cu) consisting of two Cu–Zn–Sn–(Ag) phases with lead-silver and iron-rich inclusions. The Cu–Zn–Sn–Ag–Pb alloy was anodically dissolved in acid sulfate and sulfate-chloride solutions at various temperatures. Concentrations of tin, zinc, iron and nickel increased almost linearly with electrolysis time, and were practically independent on the acid concentration. Behavior of metals changed in the presence of NaCl. Increase in the Cl Anodic oxidation of iron and nickel was accompanied by spontaneous dissolution caused by acid. It resulted in relatively high contents of these metals in the electrolytes. It was interesting that addition of NaCl inhibited somewhat dissolution of zinc and iron, despite that aggressive corrosion action of chloride ions on less noble metals was expected. Such inhibiting effect was eliminated by the increase of the temperature. Analysis of the slime composition ( Lead was electrochemically oxidized on the anode, but it was accumulated in the slime ( Silver was not dissolved from the alloy. This was favored by higher electrochemical potential of the metal in comparison to other alloy constituents, low solubility of silver compounds and formation of refractory phase with tin in the alloy. Ag  Efficiency of the alloy dissolution in H In turn, the efficiencies of copper and zinc dissolution were in the range of 81–96% and 36–50%, respectively. Transfer of silver and lead to the electrolyte was inhibited, therefore dissolution degrees were 0.5      Smelting of low grade electronic waste led to the formation of polymetallic and multiphase alloys containing about 70% of copper. Anodic dissolution of Cu–Zn–Sn–Ag–Pb alloy in acid sulfate and sulfate-chloride solutions allowed a distinct metal separation with copper and tin codeposited on the cathode (80–92% Cu), lead and silver accumulating in the slimes, while zinc, iron and nickel were transferred to the electrolyte. The most favorable conditions for the alloy dissolution were achieved in 2 This research work was supported by