This study evaluates the effect of submarine ground water discharge (SGD) on biogeochemical processes of sandy sediments of Hel Bight (Poland) in the shallow southern Baltic Sea, using stirred benthic chambers combined to seepage meters, deep pore water profiles and a reactive transport model. The main impacts of fresh anoxic groundwater seepage are due to (1) the efflux of methane; (2) the efflux of phosphate and silicate; (3) the efflux of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) of aquifer origin. Methane from SGD is assumed to be only slightly oxidized within the sediments and potentially reach the atmosphere at a maximum rate of 30 mmol CH4 m−2 d−1. Silicate and phosphate supplied by SGD promote a seep-site net community production rate that is more than twice as compared to adjacent non seeping sites (70 and 30 mmol C m−2 d−1 respectively). However, oxygen uptake rates at the seep site during the night (30 mmol O2 m−2 d−1) are lower than those observed at the reference sites (50 mmol O2 m−2 d−1). We hypothesize that autogenic, relatively labile DOC is available at the reference site, leading to higher oxygen uptake rates as compared to the seep sites where it is being replaced by less reactive DOC originating from the ground water.Submarine groundwater discharge (SGD) connects the continental hydrological water cycle and the ocean with ecological effects on coastal systems that have been studied intensively over the past two decades (e.g., SGD is recognized as a phenomenon with a potentially large contribution to the oceanic biogeochemical element budgets ( Elemental fluxes supplied to the ocean by SGD potentially exceed the magnitude of river-borne fluxes ( The biogeochemical reactions leading to carbon, nutrient and metal release are important aspects of SGD ( Mixing between ground water and seawater in coastal aquifers under specific conditions can result in removal or addition of solutes ( Seepage of ground water in coastal sands may be diffuse or patchy, depending on the structure and permeability of the aquifer, on spatial and temporal patterns of hydrostatic pressure and seasonal changes in aquifer level ( Permeable coarse-grained sands are characteristic for shallow water systems and cover two thirds of the continental shelves worldwide ( The present study was carried out at the coastline of the peninsula Hel, in the north-western part of Puck Bay in the southern Baltic Sea (Poland). The general significance of groundwater on the Puck Bay water balance has been recognized using different methods by Here we focus on the impact of SGD on sediment biogeochemistry and benthic element fluxes in permeable sands. Unaffected reference sediments were compared to SGD-impacted ‘hot spots’. Seepage rates and benthic solute fluxes were measured simultaneously and compared to measured and modeled vertical solute concentrations to assess photosynthetic activity/net community production, aerobic, and anaerobic mineralization processes in the surface sediments. The Polish Hel Peninsula forms a semi-enclosed basin (Puck Bay) in the western part of the Gulf of Gdansk (southern Baltic coast; The surface sediments of the reference and SGD site are characterized by low organic carbon (<0.17% dwt.; Background water column variables (current speed and direction, temperature, salinity, and dissolved oxygen) were monitored with a recording current meter every 5 min (Type Seaguard, AADI, Bergen, Norway) in direct vicinity of the sampling sites (see below) at∼20 cm above the sediment surface. To locate the exact position of the seepage sites at the time of investigation a survey was conducted with a conductivity sensor. Conductivity measurements at ∼10 cm sediment depth allowed to identify spots of high SGD impact where low salinity ground water appeared in the pore space ( Solute fluxes at the sediment-water interface were quantified with stirred benthic chambers (SBCs). Six cylindrical SBCs were deployed for 21 h each at the seep and reference site to investigate exchange of oxygen, dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC and δ Two stirring modes were applied to investigate whether the presence/absence of advective pore water exchange had an influence on seepage rates. In three chambers advective pore water exchange was maintained by stirring continuously at 40 rpm (‘advective mode’). Such stirring rate corresponds to a radial pressure gradient of ∼2.5 Pa at the sediment surface between the center and the rim of the flux chamber ( To collect the ground water seeping from the enclosed sediment patch, polyethylene bags (2 L volume) were connected to the chambers right above the sediment surface by a 10 cm long PVC (Tygon Dissolved oxygen concentrations in the overlying water was monitored continuously using fiber-optic oxygen microsensors that were inserted into the chamber lids ( Oxygen production rates during the day were converted to carbon fixation rates using a photosynthetic quotient of 1.2 mol of oxygen produced per mole of carbon fixed ( Water samples of 50 or 100 mL were withdrawn from the overlying water of the flux chambers every 4 h. Sample-based fluxes were determined from concentrations measured in samples collected between 21:00–5:00 (night) and 9:00–17:00 (day), respectively. Water samples were filtered through 0.45 μm filters except for samples dedicated to oxygen measurements (V∼10 cm DIC and δ Samples for dissolved sulfide were fixed with 5% zinc acetate solution, stored at 4 °C and measured photometrically following the method of ( Samples for dissolved major ions and trace elements were stored in 2 mL PE vials after addition of 20 μL HNO Samples for dissolved organic carbon (DOC) measurements were filtered through SFCA syringe filters into pre-cleaned brown glass flasks, acidified and stored dark and cool until analysis following the procedure described by To check the ability of the chambers to serve as seepage meters and to assess mixing processes, the dilution of the overlying water salinity was predicted from the seepage rate (as inferred from the bags) and compared to the measurements of Na Salinity, sulfate, oxygen, methane and DIC concentration profiles were computed as a function of groundwater seepage rate, diffusion rate and consumption rate using the transient reactive transport model described in The description of the effective diffusion coefficient was taken as In the oxic zone, organic matter and methane are oxidized by oxygen. Applying monod kinetics, oxygen consumption rates were calculated separately as For organic matter decay, the reactive continuum (RC) model of To best reproduce the measured pore water salinity profile at an upward groundwater velocity of 80 m a The seepage site (A) and the reference site (B) for pore water sampling and chamber deployments were selected based on the high resolution salinity survey showed in Currents recorded at 20 cm above the seafloor revealed an average steady flow of 2 cm s The bottom water salinity was close to 7 as expected for brackish waters of the southern Baltic Sea. Dissolved oxygen concentrations in the bottom waters were higher during the day but generally close to saturation with concentrations of 0.2–0.3 mmol L Combining stirred benthic chambers with a seepage meter allowed (1) to investigate sediment processes and fluxes in seepage areas without blocking SGD and (2) to compare sites with and without SGD using the same methodology. To our knowledge this study represents the first application of such combined methods for this purpose. Compared to typical seepage meters (e.g., Lee type), the chambers used in this study enclose a thicker layer of overlying water (see The volume of water collected in the bags at the seep site corresponded to discharge rates of 87 ± 16 L m The obtained seepage rates are in the range reported from earlier studies ( Results for solute time series and benthic fluxes are shown here only for the ‘advective’ chambers, as this stirring mode is assumed to adequately reproduce conditions of pore water transport in shallow water permeable sands ( Pore water profiles for both sites are compared in In accordance with previous investigations ( At the reference site, pore water salinity was essentially constant throughout the upper sediment column. Concentrations of dissolved PO Measurements of dissolved methane concentrations are not available for the period of the present study. However, investigations carried out during a previous campaign (September 2009) and other studies at the same site ( In September 2009 up to 600 μmol L Insights on the effect of SGD on benthic processes may be obtained by assessing the fate of redox sensitive elements along the time course of the chamber incubations. Similarly, for the seep site the TDL was in fairly good agreement with the measurements. However, predicted salinities show a slight tendency to underestimate the actual dilution (     We address here the observed conservative/non-conservative behavior of the different solutes and what that indicates in terms of benthic processes. To allow direct comparison, DIC and SO The rate of decrease in relative abundance of δ DOC concentrations have been measured in the pore waters ( Pore water profiles and chamber time series of Fe Active Fe and Mn redox cycling in sediments is generally restricted to the oxic-suboxic zone ( At the reference site, salinity gradients were absent in the pore waters and chamber water time series. Consequently, none of the solutes depicted a trend relative to salinity and are therefore excluded from In situ chamber incubations allowed to assess the effect of SGD on benthic respiration. The black bars show the difference between the green and red bars, i.e., between the total and SGD-related apparent flux. This is referred to as an SGD-independent flux and represents O As bioirrigation has been reported to be of minor importance in Hel Bight sediments ( Night-time SGD-independent O These rates fall within the range reported for other coastal sediments ( Insights in the biogeochemical pathways that consume oxygen at seep site may be obtained from the DIC isotopic composition, i.e., the depth gradient of δ Enhanced transport by pore water advection is a key characteristic of permeable sediments (e.g., Model results show a slightly better agreement between modeled and measured δ A complete oxidation of 0.3 mmol L In addition to the extraordinarily large rates that would be required, an oxidation of CH The overall increase in oxygen concentration during the almost complete day-night cycle covered by the chamber incubations ( The higher NCP observed at seep site may be due to the elevated concentrations of PO Lower respiration rates at the seep site can be explained by the amount of accessible dissolved organic matter. The refractory DOC supplied to surface sediments by SGD is largely unavailable for microbial degradation and therefore may not create a strong oxygen demand. The upward flux may as well remove labile particulate and dissolved organic matter form the surface sediment. At the reference site, more degradable DOC (and POC) may be provided by the overlaying water to the surface sediments determining the higher oxygen uptake rates as compared to the seep site. Given the different nutrient load at the two sites carbon fixation may be channeled to two different organic matter pools ( Seepage rates of 85 ± 16 L m The lower microbial oxygen consumption at seep site is probably due to the refractory DOC actively fuelled by seeping groundwater. Contrarily, at the non-impacted site, microphytobenthos exudates and water column DOC provided by pore water advection in the absence of SGD may be more easily accessible for aerobic microbial mineralization ( We would like to thank L. Kotwicki and the staff at the Hel Marine Station (Institute of Oceanography in the Faculty of Oceanography and Geography at the University of Gdańsk) for the continuous support during the field campaigns and the stimulating working atmosphere, S. Vogler for measuring CNS, TIC, and TRIS contents, and J. Dippner for coordination of the AMBER project. We thank B.M. Scholz-Böttcher (ICBM Oldenburg) for carrying out the DOC measurements, P. Meyer for the great help preparing for the field work, the technicians of the Microsensor department, Sea-Tech hall and electronic workshop (MPI, Bremen) for providing sensors and helping with the assembly of some of the instruments used in this work. D. Benesch (IOW) is thanked for expert technical support in the laboratory and D.F. McGinnis (UniGeneva) for proof reading. Financial support for this work was provided by the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at