Precision viticulture requires the characterisation of the spatio-temporal variability of the vineyard status to design the appropriate management for each area. The goal of this work was to characterise the spatio-temporal variability of leaf chlorophyll (Chl) and nitrogen (N) content and their relationship with the vegetative growth in a three ha commercial vineyard (Vitis vinifera L.) using a geostatistical approach. Leaf Chl and N contents were assessed by two fluorescence indices provided by a hand-held fluorescence sensor. Fluorescence measurements were taken along five dates, from veraison to harvest, on 72 sampling points delineated on a regular grid across the vineyard. Shoot pruning weight (SPW) was measured for each sampling point as indicator of the grapevine vegetative growth. Geostatistical analysis was applied to model the spatial variability of leaf Chl and N content and SPW. The spread showed an increase of the variability of leaf Chl and N content during the ripening period, reaching maximum values prior to harvest. The variograms illustrated a similarity of the spatial variability structure of leaf Chl at all timings, unlike N which showed changing spatial variability structures along the ripening period. The Kappa index evidenced a slight intra-season stability for both Chl and N and showed that N could not be used alone as an indicator to delineate vigour management areas. The existence of spatio-temporal variability of key vegetative components was proved and its knowledge is crucial to implement precision viticulture approach such as variable rate application of fertilizers or water as needed.chlorophyll Cambardella Index coefficient of variation far red fluorescence evolved from red light emission far red fluorescence evolved from UV light emission global positioning system mean error mean square error mean square standardised error nitrogen nitrogen balance index red fluorescence evolved from red light emission simple fluorescence ratio shoot pruning weight ultraviolet Precision viticulture is the rational and differentiated agronomical management of vineyards based on the spatio-temporal variability of growth, yield and grape composition within the plot ( Vineyard status has been proved to be spatially and temporally variable. Its spatial variability is primarily influenced by soil and mesoclimate. The interaction between root system and soil determines the availability of water and nutrients for the vine ( The spatio-temporal variability of a number of vineyard characteristics has been moderately addressed in literature. Main grape composition parameters such as total soluble solids and titratable acidity revealed similar spatial variability pattern across vintages ( One of the most important nutrients involved in the photosynthesis is the N, which is also part of the Chl molecule. N is an essential nutrient as it is one of the most important elements for biomass production ( Chl and N are associated to grapevine vegetative growth-related variables such as the vine pruning weight ( Leaf Chl and N contents are usually assessed using destructive wet chemistry procedures. Compared to these, optical methods provide much faster assessment, allowing the analysis of the whole plot. Among the wide variety of technologies used in proximal sensing, Chl fluorescence technique has been implemented in a commercial hand-held sensor, Multiplex™ ( The goal of the present work was the characterisation of the spatio-temporal variability of grapevine leaf Chl and N contents and the study of their relationship with vegetative growth in a commercial vineyard ( The study was conducted in a three ha commercial Tempranillo ( A regular sampling grid was defined, consisting on 72 sampling points at 20 m intervals, following the sampling grid strategy described in Measurements of leaf Chl and N content in vine leaves were taken using the hand-held fluorescence-based sensor Multiplex3™ (Force-A, Orsay, France). This is a non-destructive active device that generates fluorescence in plant tissues by the excitation at four different wavelengths: UV_A (375 nm), blue (450 nm), green (530 nm) and red (630 nm). This proximal sensor includes three detectors with specific filters to record the fluorescence emission at three different bands: blue-green (447 nm) or yellow (590 nm) depending whether blue excitation is used or not respectively, red (665 nm) and far-red (735 nm) ( The fluorescence-based indices studied are defined as follows: The simple fluorescence ratio (SFR) The nitrogen balance index (NBI) The simple fluorescence ratio (SFR) index is a chlorophyll fluorescence emission ratio linked to the leaf Chl content of different species ( The Nitrogen Balance Index (NBI) is related to the N status of the plant and proportional to the chlorophyll-to-flavonols ratio proposed by Measurements were carried out on three main leaves per vine, between the 8th and the 10th node, along five dates during the season (17th of August, 2nd of September, 14th of September, 5th of October and 11th of October), from veraison until 6 days prior to harvest. This period of measurement was selected due to its interest to perform N application at veraison that has been proved important to attain a sufficient level of yeast assimilable N in grape juice at harvest. It has also been reported that the application of N at veraison leads to higher amounts of N in woody stems and leaves than the N application at berry set ( The pruning weight of each vine was manually measured for each of the 72 sampling points using a hanging scale (20th of November 2011). The shoot pruning weight per vine (SPW) was calculated by dividing the pruning weight values per vine measured by the number of shoots per vine. In order to have a wider comprehension of the spatio-temporal variability of N and Chl contents, nine soil pits were carried out in different parts of the plot. Each soil profile was described and the first 30 cm sampled for the laboratory chemical and physical analyses ( First, potential outliers were identified and removed by using box and whisker plots as samples with a value higher than two standard deviations. Once the database was refined, the measurements were averaged to obtain one mean value per sampling point, which involved a total of three vines. After that, descriptive statistics were calculated to have a first view of the temporal variation of each individual variable. In addition, the spread of the distributions was calculated as the ratio between the range and the median value ( A geostatistical analysis ( These variograms were also used for applying the spatial interpolation method of ordinary kriging. This method was used to estimate a continuous surface of the indices and the vegetative variable (Z). For every variable, the estimation model was validated applying the cross-validation technique and studying the mean error (ME), the mean square error (MSE) and the mean square standardised error (MSSE), defined as follows: Where n is the size of the population, Z Interpolated maps provide a better understanding of the spatial pattern at each date, that is, the values of the studied variables and the way they are distributed along the vineyard. This must not be mistaken with the spatial structure of each variable that is analysed by the variograms, which indicate whether the variable is spatially dependent and how this spatial dependency works. Maps of the SFR and NBI indices obtained for the 5 dates from veraison to harvest, as well as the map of SPW, were classified in three zones corresponding to low, medium and high values applying an iso-cluster unsupervised classification. Cross tabulation of the classified maps was carried out among the five dates of measurement for each variable and also among SPW and each date of the fluorescence indices, SFR and NBI. Kappa index was applied to measure the temporal stability across the season in the spatial pattern of the same variable and the agreement between shoot pruning weight and each date of SFR and NBI indices by using the equation proposed by The descriptive statistics of the vegetative variables, comprising the SFR index, indicator of the leaf Chl content, the NBI index, indicator of the N content and SPW are summarised in SPW showed higher values of CV and Spread (CV = 26.08%, Spread = 142.17%) than those observed for the SFR (mean CV = 8.91%; mean Spread = 43.17%) and NBI indices (mean CV = 12.30%; mean Spread = 61.32%). The temporal variation of the SFR and NBI indices was illustrated by box plots (  The CmbI (C The spatio-temporal behaviour of the SFR and NBI indices was studied by variographic analysis. Experimental variograms were calculated and fitted using spherical variogram models ( In order to improve the understanding of spatial and temporal dynamics of Chl and N along the vineyard, interpolated surfaces were built for each variable and date.  The assessment of the intra-seasonal stability of the spatial pattern of leaf Chl and N contents was carried out by clustering every variable into three zones of high, medium and low values ( Concerning SPW, the lowest values were located at the centre and south area of the vineyard, while the highest values were found at the north of the plot and two small areas at the east-south and west-south of the vineyard. The stability of the spatial patterns of the fluorescence indices indicators of leaf Chl and N contents across the ripening season was quantitatively assessed by executing a cross-tabulation and the computation of the Kappa index from each variable 3-cluster-maps ( The Kappa index for the 5 dates of the SFR index yielded values ranging from −0.06 to 0.50, that is, from poor to moderate agreement. The highest Kappa index value for the SFR index (0.50) was yielded between the 2nd of September and the 5th of October, while the lowest and the highest values were located at the centre-down and at the upper and left areas of the vineyard, respectively ( This work also allowed to analyse the concordance between SPW and both fluorescence indices for every measurement date (  The spatio-temporal dynamics of the SFR index, indicator of the leaf Chl content in grapevines, was investigated during the ripening period, from veraison to harvest. While Chl accumulates in the leaves until these are fully expanded, its concentration starts to decrease immediately after reaching its maximum ( The different evolution within the vineyard regarding the SFR index has been evidenced, as the SFR values started to decrease at the centre–North of the plot before it spread throughout the rest of the vineyard. As the monitored leaves were selected to be fully expanded leaves of the mid-upper part of the shoot (nodes 6 to 12), this different development may be related with soil features, such as the amount of organic matter ( The variograms of the 5-dates SFR index showed a consistent spatial structure throughout the ripening period. The similarity of the variograms evidenced the proportional effect in the spatio-temporal variation structure of the SFR index. The type of the variogram models and the maximum spatial autocorrelation distance were very similar among dates, but increasing sills, reflected the increasing statistical dispersion of the SFR index as ripening season progressed, as expected in a senescence process. Therefore, it could be concluded that there was only one pattern of the spatio-temporal variability of the SFR index, indicator of the grapevine leaf Chl content in the studied vineyard. As harvest was approaching, a proportional effect of variation due to the variance of each date data dispersion could be observed. It will be interesting, for future studies, to analyse the possibility of building a global prediction model for leaf Chl content any date between these two phenological stages (veraison and harvest). This leaf Chl content model could be useful to optimise the data sampling and also could help to apply selection criteria on the sampling process of future seasons. NBI values, as indicator of leaf N content steadily diminished from veraison to harvest, in agreement with the results obtained by Unlike SFR index, which had a very similar spatial structure, the NBI index presented a heterogeneous structure among dates, attested by the different structures of the variograms throughout the ripening period, especially as harvest approached. The Cambardella Index of the second and forth dates of measurements showed values of moderate correlation. As this index represents the percentage of the non-structured spatial variability, that is, the variability at a scale lower than the sampling grid, it suggested that it would be appropriate to reduce the sampling distance to attain a more accurate description of the spatial structure of the NBI index. In addition to the effects of leaf senescence in N content, its different spatial behaviour along time could also be related to the leaf flavonol content along the vineyard, as this is inversely related with the N content of the plant ( From a practical point of view, it is important to assess the N content through the season within the vineyard, in order to implement the correct fertilization management for each area and diminish the environmental impact of nitrate leaching or volatilization. SPW is the most informative indicator of vine vigour but classical manual methods only allow to assess this variable in late autumn or winter ( These key parameters could also be used as indicators of different variables related with the vegetative status, yield or the berry composition of the grapevine. For instance, Nevertheless, characterizing the variability of important parameters of the vineyard vegetative growth, such as leaf Chl and N contents, provides useful information to support decision taking regarding fertilization and canopy management practices, such as defoliation, shoot thinning, hedging and cluster thinning, oriented to improve vine balance and fruit quality for subsequent seasons. The present work focused on the study of the spatio-temporal variability throughout the ripening period of two important parameters for vegetative growth of grapevines: leaf Chl and N contents assessed by the fluorescence indices SFR_R The existence of spatio-temporal variability of leaf Chl and N contents between veraison and harvest within a vineyard was demonstrated. It is important to note that leaf Chl and N content spatial variability within the vineyard increased as the season advanced, until stabilising prior to harvest. Both, leaf Chl and N content, were found to have slight stability of the spatial pattern through the ripening season. However, in the case of the leaf Chl content, the variographic analysis showed a similar spatial structure along the ripening period, which provides the opportunity of developing a spatio-temporal model for the leaf Chl content from veraison to harvest in future works. Furthermore, the results suggested that the leaf N content alone could not be used, as a suitable indicator to describe the shoot pruning weight variability within the plot and therefore it could be useful to delineate vigour and vegetative growth management zones within the vineyard before the data could be assessed by direct and destructive measurements. Overall, the assessment of the spatio-temporal variability of key vegetative components such as leaf Chl and N contents is of great importance to carry out a well-founded and differentiated vegetative management of the vineyard in the frame of precision viticulture. We would like to thank Bodegas Pago de Larrainzar for their help with the field measurements. Also we thank Javier Baluja, Victor Sicilia and José Ángel Villoslada for collecting field data. Special gratitude is also acknowledged to Dr Zoran G. Cerovic for his comments and suggestions. And one of the authors, Andrés Sanz-Garcia would like to thank