Experimental data is presented for the flow of bentonite–water dispersions, modeled as Herschel–Bulkley fluids, for the pressure loss at different flow rates covering laminar, transitional and turbulent flow regimes, while flowing in concentric and fully eccentric annuli. The concentric experimental data has been compared with predictions from a recently-introduced model which covers the full flow regimes for concentric annulus, while corrections for eccentricity, previously suggested for non-Newtonian fluids, have also been used to compare with eccentric data. Laminar flow data not only from this work but also from work from the literature is very well predicted while transitional and turbulent flow data are predicted with less accuracy, requiring improvements on predicting transition points. The corrections for eccentricity work well and can be used to accurately correct concentric annulus data. Turbulent non-Newtonian flow data exhibit a power law exponent relationship between flow rate and pressure loss smaller than the Newtonian case pointing out directions for future research.Flow of yield-pseudoplastic fluids in annuli is encountered in many situations in a variety of industries and particularly in oil-well drilling. Such fluids require at least three rheological parameters for a near-optimum modeling of their rheological behavior. The non-linear three parameters model proposed by Analytical studies of laminar flow of Bingham plastic and power-law fluids in concentric annuli have been carried out by Experimental data for flow of non-Newtonian fluids, and particularly for Herschel–Bulkley fluids, in concentric or eccentric annuli, covering transitional and turbulent flows are rather scarce. Pipe flow data and analysis, however, are more readily available in the literature. The aim of this paper is to extend the experimental database of much needed data covering all three flow regimes (laminar, transitional and turbulent), for flow of Herschel–Bulkley fluids in concentric and eccentric annuli, while at the same time testing the predictions of the Kelessidis et al. model with data from this work as well as data from other sources. The underlying theory of the Kelessidis et al. model for the flow in a concentric annulus of a Herschel–Bulkley fluid, with rheological equation given by Prediction of frictional pressure losses over the entire flow spectrum spanning laminar, transitional and turbulent flows requires knowledge of the transition limits. These are determined via the use of the modified Reynolds number, Transition is suggested to occur over a range of two Reynolds numbers which are function of the local power value of Thus, the transition points are not fixed but are functions of rheology, flow rate and conduit diameters. The friction factor for turbulent flow is given by Determination of frictional pressure losses for drilling fluid flow in pipes and annuli has been standardized for many years under the document API 13D ‘Recommended practice on the rheology and hydraulics of oil-well drilling fluids’. This standard has been recently revised ( Analytical solutions for the flow of non-Newtonian fluids and particularly for Herschel–Bulkley fluids in eccentric annuli for laminar flow do not exist, let alone for turbulent flow. Hence, resort should be made to correlations. Of the few recommended correlations, those that stand out were proposed by Experimental data has been collected in the flow system of the Drilling Engineering and Fluid Mechanics Laboratory of the Technical University of Crete. The system, shown in For each concentric or eccentric annulus flow test a fresh batch of fluid was prepared. The rheology of the fluids was determined with a Grace Instruments Couette-type concentric cylinder viscometer with samples taken before the start of testing and at the end of each test, with measurements performed following API 13D Standard approach ( A standard run with water has been done both for the concentric and the fully eccentric annuli before testing with the Herschel–Bulkley fluid. Flow conditions of the runs were turbulent as the minimum Reynolds computed was 10,629 at the minimum imposed by the flow system of 0.35 The bentonite–water dispersions were prepared with 1.85% bentonite concentration, based on previous model runs which indicated that the particular fluid experiences all three flow regimes, laminar, transitional and turbulent flow regimes, when using the available pump rate ranges of the flow system. Of course such concentration is not very typical of bentonite concentration used in drilling fluid formulation; however it was the estimated concentration that would give turbulent flow in our flow system. Rheological data for both cases, the concentric and the fully eccentric annulus runs, as determined via the Couette-viscometer, for the 1.85% bentonite dispersions together with the Herschel–Bulkley model fit for both samples, are shown in Results for concentric annulus pressure losses of the bentonite dispersion are presented in Attempts to fit the experimental data in the form of Eq. The Fanning friction factor can be readily calculated by, Computations of the friction factor versus Reynolds number both for the experimental data and predictions, computed by the Kelessidis et al. model, are shown in The experimental results for the pressure losses of the Herschel–Bulkley fluid in 100% eccentric annulus are shown in One can compute the friction factor for the eccentric case, in a way similar to that followed for the concentric case by using Eq. The above analysis has shown that concentric annulus and 100% eccentric annulus experimental data have been correctly predicted by using the Kelessidis et al. model, when the eccentric case was corrected by the Haciislamoglu et al. correlations. The model has been also used to compare predictions with very limited available data from other investigators which cover all three flow regimes. The laminar flow data of It should be further noticed that the coefficient 24 in Eq. Turbulent flow friction factor is slightly over predicted and not following the trend of the experimental data, as discussed above ( The bentonite concentration used was fairly low so that we could cover all three flow regimes for the flow system used in this study. Of course in normal drilling situations bentonite concentrations may be higher giving higher yield stress and flow consistency values and lower flow behavior indices which would then result in an increase in the pressure drop for the cases in laminar flow and in a decrease in the pressure drop for the cases of turbulent flow, in both concentric and eccentric annuli, for the same annulus configuration. In the field operations, however, it will all depend on the combinations of the flow parameters and the conduit geometry and not just on bentonite concentration, but the applicability of the Kelessidis et al. model, as shown in this work, would be sufficient to cover such situations. The annulus has been considered smooth with a very small pipe roughness, as computed before. Surface roughness is not considered in the computations of pressure loss estimation for drilling but also other operations and none of the available models takes it into account, neither for concentric nor for eccentric annuli. One would expect that, according to what is reported for non-Newtonian fluid flow in pipe configuration, surface roughness will increase pressure drop, especially in the transitional and turbulent flows in concentric and eccentric annuli, the magnitude of which should be evaluated both experimentally and theoretically. Experimental data have been presented for the pressure losses of water–bentonite dispersions modeled as Herschel–Bulkley fluids, in concentric and 100% eccentric annuli, spanning the full spectrum of flow regimes, laminar, transitional and turbulent flows, contributing thus to the public database of such data as they are scarce, particularly for transitional and turbulent flows. The experimental data have been compared with the predictions of a recently presented model for such flows in concentric annulus from the same laboratory (the Kelessidis et al. model) which also covers the full spectrum of flows and solves both the pressure losses and the applicable flow regimes. The concentric data is matched fairly well by predictions, with the observed differences attributed to the prediction of the transition points. The eccentric data is also very well matched with the predictions, when corrected with the use of the Haciislamoglou et al. correlations for eccentricity. The Kelessidis et al. model, which uses the local power-law approximation for turbulent flow, assumes that transition occurs over a range of modified Reynolds numbers which depend on the flow situation and they are not known a-priori. The experimental data shows that this is true, both for the concentric and the eccentric case, but some additional parameters may also contribute, thus resulting in the not-so-perfect match of predictions with measurements. Research should thus focus on even better definitions of transition points from laminar to transitional and from transitional to turbulent flow as well as for the correlation used for the transitional friction factor. Model predictions from the recently-revised API correlations were at odds with the measurements, both for concentric and eccentric annuli (corrected also with the Haciislamoglu et al. correlation), with API model predicting much higher pressure drop than data indicates in the transitional and turbulent flow regimes.  coefficient (Pa correction coefficient for eccentric annulus data diameter of inner tube of annulus (m) diameter of outer tube of annulus (m) hydraulic diameter (m) pressure drop gradient (Pa/m) pipe eccentricity Fanning friction factor flow consistency index (Pa∙s flow consistency index for local power-law parameters (Pa∙s length (m) power exponent flow behavior index flow behavior index for local power-law parameters flow rate (m Reynolds number generalized Reynolds number transitional generalized Reynolds number for annulus mean velocity (m/s) shear rate (s Newtonian shear rate on the wall (s wall shear rate (s viscosity at the wall (Pa∙s) dimensionless shear stress for annulus fluid density (kg/m shear stress (Pa) yield stress for Herschel–Bulkley fluid (Pa) wall shear stress (Pa)