A huge number of nonlinear equations must be solved to simulate the multicomponent solvent extraction process for purification of rare earth metals using saponified PC88A. Typical approaches to solve them have not been successful due to the large number of initial guess values and numerical problems such as poor convergence and divergence. In this paper, the number of nonlinear equations to be solved simultaneously is dramatically reduced by a proposed model simplification technique, which reduces the number of initial guess values and overcomes the numerical problems. Furthermore, a thermodynamic equilibrium analysis algorithm using the model simplification technique is proposed to calculate the equilibrium concentrations. Finally, a new multicomponent solvent extraction process simulator is developed to calculate the equilibrium concentrations for all stages of the solvent extraction process.Rare earth metals have been widely used as important materials in various industrial electronics applications such as wind turbines, hybrid cars, displays, nuclear energy applications, and super conductors ( Many researchers have developed non-rigorous mathematical models using the power law, exponential form, artificial neural network, and time-series model ( The solvent extraction process shown in The equilibrium equations in the multicomponent solvent extraction process to purify rare earth metals consist of the equilibrium constant equations, the material balance equations, and the charge balance equations. The equilibrium constant equations are presented as Eqs. The The material balance equations presented as Eqs. [ The charge balance equation is derived from the assumption that the aqueous phase is electrically neutral. The charge balance equation is shown in Eq. Note that the number of the equilibrium concentrations is 7 There are a lot of equilibrium equations that must be solved to simulate the multicomponent solvent extraction process. But, it is not easy to solve them simultaneously because they need numerous initial guess values. Solving the nonlinear equations by improper initial guess values could result in serious numerical problems such as poor convergence and divergence. To overcome these numerical problems, a new model simplification technique to reduce the initial guess values is proposed. First, Eq. Then, replacing [ Second, replace [Cl Third, replace [ Fourth, replace [ Finally, replace [OH Now, it is possible to solve nonlinear equilibrium analysis problems with these fewer number of equilibrium equations. Assume that the equilibrium constants, The new thermodynamic equilibrium analysis algorithm for estimating all of the equilibrium concentrations of the multicomponent solvent extraction process is shown in The overall concentrations of [ As shown in The new multicomponent solvent extraction process simulator was applied to the extraction of Nd–Sm–Gd-Saponified PC88A to confirm the simulation performance. Nd and Sm are the light rare earth metals. Gd is the heavy rare earth metal. The equilibrium constants and stoichiometric coefficients of Nd, Sm, and Gd are shown in Simplified equilibrium models, the thermodynamic equilibrium analysis algorithm, and the new multicomponent solvent extraction process simulator are proposed in this paper. The thermodynamic equilibrium analysis algorithm based on the simplified models can estimate all the equilibrium concentrations by solving only This research was financially supported by the