Chelating resins with different functional groups were evaluated for their potential application in separating uranium U(VI) and thorium Th(IV) from rare earth elements, RE(III). The candidate resins included a bis-picolylamine resin, aminophosphonic resins, iminodiacetic resins, and solvent-impregnated resins. The adsorption selectivity of these resins towards U(VI) and Th(IV) in the presence of selected RE(III) was examined in sulfuric acid media of varying concentrations. It was evident that the adsorption performance of the resins was acid concentration-dependent. Most candidate resins had potentially feasible selective adsorption at or below 0.1 mol/L H2SO4 (or pH ≥ 1). Depending on their functional groups, the chelating resins displayed varying selectivity towards U(VI), Th(IV) and RE(III). It was found that the iminodiacetic resins exhibited the highest affinity for U(VI) and Th(IV) over RE(III). At 0.005 mol/L H2SO4 (or pH 2), the adsorptions of U(VI) and Th(IV) were approximately 90% while adsorption of RE(III) was less than 20%. This can be explained by considering the coordination chemistry of the resins whereby molecular ligands with N- and O-donor atoms were demonstrated to adsorb both U(VI) and Th(IV) strongly. Comparing the different O-donor groups (i.e., sulfonyl, phosphoryl and carboxyl), the carboxyl group from the iminodiacetic resin gave the best separation of U(VI) and Th(IV) from RE(III). The performance of the solvent-impregnated resins has indicated the possibility of exploiting steric effects to obtain a highly selective chelating resin for U(VI) and Th(IV) over RE(III). In addition, the potential application of these resins in an integrated process for sequential 2-stage separation of U(VI) and Th(IV) from RE(III) in sulfuric acid media is also presented.It is significant to note that about 95% of the global rare earth metals market is presently supplied by China ( Among the different separation techniques, ion exchange (IX) has benefits which warrant further development of its application in removing trace U(VI) and Th(IV) impurities from liquors in the hydrometallurgical processing of rare earths. For instance, IX has advantages over the traditional precipitation method in issues of low recovery of rare earths, disposal of the precipitate, and pollution arising from the storage of radioactive precipitate ( The first part of this study reported on the application of conventional anion and cation exchange resins ( Recently, several chelating resins with mixed sulfonic/phosphonic, aminophosphonic, and iminodiacetic acid functional groups were investigated for the recovery of rare earth elements, RE(III) ( The chelating resins used in this study were selected from commercially-available resins supplied by resin manufacturing companies. Their physicochemical properties and functional groups, as reported in their product data sheets, are tabulated in Before testing, pre-treatment was applied to ensure that all resins were converted to either sodium form or sulfate form. Solvent-impregnated resins, Concentrated stock solution was prepared by dissolving appropriate amounts of Th(SO The adsorption experiments were carried out in a batch setup to examine the adsorption of U(VI), Th(IV) and RE(III) in H The adsorption percentage of each metal ion was calculated according to Eq. The distribution coefficient Seven chelating resins were tested for their adsorption affinity for U(VI) and Th(IV) in acidic sulfate solution containing RE(III). ChelR 1 is a bis-picolylamine functionalised resin. ChelR 2 and ChelR 3 are resins with aminophosphonic acid functionality. ChelR 4 and ChelR 5 are resins with iminodiacetic acid functionality. ChelR 6 and ChelR 7, despite having different functional groups, The bis-picolylamine resin ChelR 1 in  It can be seen that the bis-picolylamine resin was protonated at high acidity. As H Based on the results above, the bis-picolylamine resin is not suitable for the separation of U(VI) and Th(IV) from RE(III) in H The results with the aminophosphonic resins ChelR 2 and ChelR 3 in  It can be seen that the aminophosphonic resin has the ability to adsorb by ion exchange and complexation across the range of acidities tested. It is difficult therefore to pinpoint the exact ligating atoms responsible for the high adsorption affinity for U(VI) and Th(IV) in The adsorption performance of the aminophosphonic resins exhibited high tolerance to increasing acidity as a result of their low p Based on the results above, aminophosphonic resins are not suitable for the separation of U(VI) and Th(IV) from RE(III) in H The iminodiacetic resins ChelR 4 and ChelR 5 in  It was observed that the iminodiacetic resins have the ability to adsorb not only by anion exchange but also by complexation across the range of acidities tested. This is evident when the adsorption performance of the iminodiacetic resins (see Interestingly, Based on these results, iminodiacetic resins can potentially be effective for the separation of U(VI) as well as Th(IV) from RE(III) in H The two solvent-impregnated resins ChelR 6 and ChelR 7 are impregnated with liquid extractants during their polymerization, whose equivalents in solvent extraction are D2EHPA and Cyanex 272 respectively ( The solvent-impregnated resins ChelR 6 and ChelR 7 in Based on the    Having established that the adsorption of RE(III) can be attributed to the phosphoryl oxygen groups, as is the case for aminophosphonic resins, it remains to be explained why the RE(III), except for Yb(III), were weakly adsorbed by both solvent-impregnated resins in Based on the results above, the solvent-impregnated resins are not suitable for the simultaneous separation of both U(VI) and Th(IV) from RE(III) in H The varying affinities of chelating resins for U(VI), Th(IV) and RE(III) can be explained by considering their coordination chemistry ( U(VI) and Th(IV) are both A-type metals which form complexes preferentially with ligands having oxygen (O) over nitrogen (N) and sulfur (S) as donor atoms ( The lanthanides also have a tendency to exhibit A-type behaviour in their coordination compounds ( It is therefore demonstrated that molecular ligands with a combination of N- and O-donor atoms, such as iminodiacetic and aminophosphonic resins, adsorb both U(VI) and Th(IV) strongly. Among the different O-donor groups, Apart from the nature of the donor atoms, careful consideration should also be given to the steric constraints of the donor atoms ( The present study has demonstrated that each ion exchange resin has distinctive advantages in its adsorption performance which may be more suitable to a specific application. The findings from this study, while preliminary, suggest that there is potential for designing an integrated process for sequential 2-stage separation of U(VI) and Th(IV) from RE(III) in sulfuric acid media, with different resins in each stage. The first stage involves separation of U(VI) from Th(IV) and RE(III), after which Th(IV) is separated from RE(III) in the second stage. Among the chelating resins tested in H For the separation of Th(IV) from RE(III), the iminodiacetic resins are the most suitable chelating resins. ChelR 5, for instance, demonstrated an adsorption of approximately 90% of Th(IV) at 0.005 mol/L H Commercially available chelating resins with different physicochemical properties were evaluated for their potential application in separating U(VI) and Th(IV) from RE(III) in sulfuric acid media. These resins were classified according to their functional groups into four categories, namely, bis-picolylamine, aminophosphonic acid, iminodiacetic acid, and solvent-impregnated resins. Their adsorption of U(VI) and Th(IV) in the presence of selected elements of RE(III) at different acidities was investigated. It was evident that the adsorption performance of the resins was acid concentration-dependent. Most candidate resins had potentially feasible selective adsorption at or below 0.1 mol/L H Depending on their functional groups, the chelating resins displayed varying selectivity towards U(VI), Th(IV) and RE(III). The bis-picolylamine resin showed affinity for U(VI) over RE(III), but Th(IV) was poorly adsorbed. Approximately 90% of U(VI) was adsorbed at H The varying affinities of chelating resins for U(VI), Th(IV) and RE(III) was explained by considering their coordination chemistry. It was determined that molecular ligands with N- and O-donor atoms adsorbed both U(VI) and Th(IV) strongly. Although molecular ligands with O-donor atoms had a tendency to adsorb RE(III), it was shown that there can be differences in the adsorption of RE(III) among the different O-donor groups, Among the chelating resins, the iminodiacetic resins showed the best potential for application in the separation of U(VI) and Th(IV) from RE(III) in acidic sulfate media. Along with the weak-base anion exchange resin with primary amine functional group ( The authors are grateful for financial support by the Australian Government under the Research Training Program Scholarship.