Intra-articular phalangeal fractures of the small joints of the hand are difficult sports injuries to manage. The Stockport Serpentine Spring System, abbreviated to S-Quattro was developed by the senior author as an external fixator to treat these fractures. We present the largest series of patients with sports injuries treated with the S-Quattro.
                  Twenty patients with these fractures were treated over a three-year period. The injured joint was distracted after inserting two pins percutaneously into normal phalangeal bone. Two serpentine springs were then inserted between the pins applying distraction to the fracture site. The fixation devices were removed in clinic between 4 and 6 weeks.
                  Objective analysis revealed an average arc of movement of the affected joint of 94 degrees at an average follow-up of 14 months. The mean DASH score was 5 indicating mild impairment. All of the patients were satisfied with the results and the radiographic appearances were satisfactory.
                  The S-Quattro is a versatile system that permits some movement of the injured joint while maintaining reduction. It is relatively free of complications with good results. We advocate the routine use of the S-Quattro in view of its inherent simplicity and the good results it produces with these difficult sports injuries.Intra-articular phalangeal fractures of the small joints of the hand are important injuries in terms of the frequency with which they occur in sports. The limited singular plane of motion of the phalangeal joints makes them susceptible to injury, especially with the hand placed in a misjudged position in the path of an oncoming ball. Surgical treatment in the form of Kirschner wire fixation Vidal et al. The Stockport Serpentine Spring System, abbreviated to S-Quattro was developed as an external fixator to treat intra-articular phalangeal fractures. A retrospective study was conducted on the use of S-Quattro for acute intra-aticular phalangeal fractures sustained during sports. Twenty patients were treated with the device over a three-year period. The sex, age, sporting activity causing the injury, injured finger joint and time lapse to surgery are detailed in All patients were operated on by the senior author. The procedure has been described previously. All patients were discharged the same day. All patients were encouraged to mobilise the finger. They were seen on a weekly basis for 3 weeks for check X-rays. The springs and pins were removed between 4 and 6 weeks post-operatively in the out-patients clinic. The patients were subsequently advised on active exercises to carry out by themselves. Physiotherapy was not required in any of these cases. At final follow-up the patients underwent a comprehensive assessment including the recording of history, standard physical examination including joint ranges of motion measurements using a goniometer and radiographic examination. Two additional outcome tools were also used to measure health status. These included the disabilities of the arm, shoulder and hand (DASH) questionnaire, including the athletic section, and a visual analogue pain scale (VAS). The 20 patients were followed up for an average of 14 months (range, 7–20 months). Objective analysis revealed an average arc of movement of the affected joint of 94 degrees (range, 80–120 degrees) at last follow-up. The mean DASH score in our group at final follow-up was 5 points (range, 0–12 points), which indicates mild residual impairment. Using the VAS, 18 out of the 20 patients reported no pain. Two patients reported minimal pain. No patients reported moderate to severe pain. All of the patients were satisfied with the results and stated that they would have the surgery again under similar circumstances. All patients returned to their individual sports and were able to perform their sporting activities without any limitation. There was one complication where the external fixation device was knocked off and required re-application. Post-operative radiographic appearances showed satisfactory reduction of the fracture fragments in all of the patients. Radiograph at final follow-up for two patients are shown in Satisfactory management of intra-articular fractures relies on obtaining good joint congruency by reduction and stabilisation of fragments and on early motion exercises to prevent joint stiffness. The S-Quattro addresses both of these issues. The S-Quattro achieves good reduction of the fracture without interfering with the fracture site. It permits early mobilisation of the uninjured joints and also to a lesser extent of the injured joint, while maintaining reduction at the same time. This helps contour the irregular joint surfaces and prevents extensor tendon adherence and hence joint stiffness. In our study, the radiographs at final follow-up failed to show anatomical reduction of the impacted intra-articular fragments in some cases as shown in A spectrum of joint injury pattern occurs in the digits depending on the direction, rate and force of loading. The S-Quattro has been designed to deal with all types of intra-articular phalangeal fractures. It is a versatile system in terms of the number of positions its pins and springs can be positioned for distraction. In addition, limited internal fixation in the form of Kirschner wires can also be used as it was in two of our cases. This limited use of the Kirschner wire as an additional fixation device does not limit joint movement. The S-Quattro can be applied easily and quickly and is well tolerated by patients. It is particularly suitable in the large number of cases where the fragments are too small to fix and there is comminution involving the articular surface. The DASH questionnaire was used because it is a reliable and validated outcome measure specific for the upper limb disability with a dedicated athletic section. Our study is limited by the absence of a control group. Our study does, however, allow some comparison with other treatment methods described in the literature using the outcome measures including the range of movement. A controlled study looking at the different treatment methods is needed to allow a more reliable comparison. Based on our experiences so far, we advocate the routine use of the S-Quattro in view of the inherent simplicity of this external fixation device and the good results it produces with these difficult sports injuries.