 Displaced intraarticular calcaneus fractures Simpler patterns Early fixation Patients at high risk for wound healing complications with extensile approaches including smokers, diabetics, and those with medical comorbidities  Inexperience with calcaneus fracture reduction techniques Fractures treated beyond 2–3 weeks  Which fractures are best suited for this treatment? Can this technique be used for all fracture types?  Computed tomography scan images demonstrate a displaced comminuted intraarticular calcaneus fracture (  Nonoperative treatment Percutaneous fixation (see alternative technique at the end of this chapter) Surgical fixation using a lateral extensile approach  The calcaneus will be approached just distal and above the peroneal tendons along the lateral aspect of the subtalar joint (  The patient is placed in the lateral position with the injured extremity up and at the end of the operative table (  Care should be taken to pad the peroneal nerve of the down leg. A positioning foam pillow or blankets may be used to elevate the operative extremity to improve the ability to obtain C-arm images. The C-arm monitor is positioned on the opposite side of the table for ease of viewing.  Be sure the end of the table is radiolucent.  Prone position or lateral positioning may be used for bilateral injuries. C-arm may provide better images, but the mini-C-arm produces less radiation and can be operated by the surgical team.  The incision begins 1 cm below and 1 cm distal to the tip of the fibula and is typically 3–4 cm in length ( Elevate the peroneal tendons off the lateral wall of the calcaneus sharply. The peroneal tendons are sharply released at the peroneal tubercle.  Sinus tarsi fat may be removed to improve visualization. The lateral subtalar joint capsule may be sharply incised from inside the joint to improve visualization. Removing hematoma using a small suction tip, or micropituitary rongeur will improve visualization and ease reduction.  Care should be taken to avoid injury to the peroneal tendons in the posterior portion of the incision. Injury to the sural nerve should be avoided.  Small retractors Irrigation Sharp knife  Two Kirschner wires (K-wires) are inserted from the tuberosity just inside the medial wall up to the fracture ( The fracture is reduced using a Schanz pin in the tuberosity, and an elevator is inserted through the fracture of the calcaneus ( Once reduced the wires are advanced across the fracture into the sustentaculum to maintain reduction and tuber height (  Broad elevators should be used in osteoporotic patients to avoid cutting through the bone. Malalignment of the tuberosity can be rotational and may need to be corrected by rotating the Schanz pin anteriorly or posteriorly. Threaded K-wires may be used if severe medial wall comminution is present to maintain height.  Malreduction of the tuberosity will result in malreduction at the posterior facet. Restoring height allows room for the lateral portions of the posterior facet to be reduced.  K-wires: smooth and threaded Schanz pin T handle chuck Elevators  Use of the sinus tarsi approach over the extensile lateral approach for complex/comminuted fractures and fractures with delayed presentation  Reconstruct the posterior facet by reducing more lateral fragments to the restored medial aspect of the articular surface (  Drill sleeves inserted over the K-wires may be used to manipulate fragments. Direct articular reduction is best viewed using a headlight for the procedure.  K-wires Drill sleeves  Place additional wires percutaneously into the anterior process ( Reduce the anterior process at the critical angle and advance the wires to maintain reduction (  The bone at the critical angle is quite dense and usually provides an accurate read for reduction. At least two wires are necessary to maintain reduction.  K-wires Dental picks or a small hook  The plate is then inserted along the lateral margin of the joint, and wires are inserted to hold the plate while the position is checked with a C-arm ( The plate is secured to bone with screws (  Be sure the plate is seated over the lateral wall. If a gap is present in the articular reduction, lag screws should be used initially.  Care should be taken to ensure the peroneal tendons are not under the plate.  Plate Drills Screws, both locking and nonlocking  4-mm Cortical screws are inserted inside the medial wall of the tuberosity (  The two screws should be placed just inside the medial wall for maximal stability.  Maintain two points of fixation in the tuberosity at all times to prevent loss of reduction.  Screws  Long screws are placed from the tuberosity to the anterior process (  Usually two screws are placed. One screw to raft the reduction at the critical angle and a second screw to bridge from the tuberosity to the anterior process for additional stability and to prevent rotation.  Avoid starting screws in the Achilles tendon as it will cause irritation. If necessary to start screws in the Achilles footprint, slightly countersinking the screws may be necessary. Avoid prominent screws at the posterior margin of the tuberosity.  In simple Sanders type II fractures without deep impaction of the posterior facet fragment, anatomic reduction can be achieved with purely percutaneous manipulation, further reducing the surgical impact. This is most easily achieved in tongue-type fractures (Sanders type IIC) in which the posterior joint facet of the calcaneus is displaced as a whole. In these cases, reduction is achieved with the modified Westhues/Essex-Lopresti maneuver, that is, the Schanz screw with T chuck is introduced in a posteroanterior direction into the displaced fragment, parallel to the superior margin of the tuberosity. The screw is moved downward and the tongue fragment reduced ( In Sanders type IIA or IIB fractures the articular reduction is controlled arthroscopically ( Screw fixation under fluoroscopic control is achieved according to the individual fracture pattern as described above ( If anatomic reduction cannot be achieved with percutaneous methods, conversion to a sinus tarsi approach including the arthroscopic portals may become necessary, especially in cases of severe impaction of the lateral joint fragment or if surgery is delayed more than 10 days.  The patient is placed in a postoperative splint. Subtalar motion exercises are started on the second postoperative day. Sutures are removed at 2 weeks. No weight bearing until the fracture is healed. This is usually 9–12 weeks. Compliant patients can be treated with partial weight bearing (15–20 kg), which is equivalent to the foot touching the ground but not being loaded, in their own shoe.  Early range of motion is important to minimize posttraumatic stiffness.  Delay in range of motion may lead to excessive stiffness. Range of motion begins when the wound has stabilized. Wound problems can occur if motion begins too soon.  Implant removal is rarely needed after percutaneous or minimally invasive fixation of calcaneal fractures. It is indicated only in cases of prominent screws, peroneal tendon irritation, or restricted motion of the subtalar joint. In these cases, hardware removal is combined with peroneal tenolysis, arthroscopy, and arthrolysis of the subtalar joint.