Macroporous CeO2-ZrO2 (CZ) solid solutions with gradually changing ceria content were prepared through the EISA method. Pore sizes of the samples are about 100 nm–1 μm and pore walls are 100 nm–1.5 μm. The surface and near surface reduction bands of Ce4+ below 600 °C were maximized for the Ce0.5Zr0.5O2 sample (C5) according to the quantitative de-convolution to the acquired TPR curves. The area percentage of the O2−2p6 → Ce3+3d94f2 electronic transition band on XPS spectra, which related to the concentration of the Ce3+, was found to be a function of the ceria content. The oxygen storage capacity showed a positive relationship with the chemical compositions. Redox reactions below 600 °C play a key role in determining the reduction performances of ceria based TWCs. Three-way catalytic performances of the Pd + Rh + Pt /C5 sample showed an ignition temperature for CO and NOx at about 240 °C, and finished before 300 °C. The ignition of C3H8 started at 270 °C while finished at differed samples. The maximum catalytic efficiencies of CO, NOx, and C3H8 on C5 sample were revealed to 100%, 98%, and 97%, respectively. The performances showed that porous CZ solid solutions are suitable for high performance catalytic applications.Ceria-zirconia (CZ) based solid solutions are the main composition of typical three-way catalysts (TWC) in the automobile exhaust cleaning field [ From another aspect of view, gas phase catalytic reactions often require efficient contact between the gases and catalyst’s active sites [ Efforts in this work aim to determine a quantitative interpretation of the OSC and surface area and the relationship of CZ solid solutions in different compositions, based on the systematic evaluation and quantitative acquisition of the reduction properties and pore structures of a series of CZ mixed oxide samples. The EISA method is adapted in this work to prepare the CZ samples with macroporous morphology to fully expose the active sites, shorten the transfer distances of active oxygen ions, and facilitate the evaluation of the redox properties. The results indicated that the surface area has a positive correlation with the OSC values, and reduction reactions strongly depend on the ceria content in the samples. Porous CeO Thermal gravimetric/Differential scanning calorimetric (TG/DSC) curves of the precursor were recorded with a NETZCH STA-449C combined thermal analysis instrument in air at a heating rate of 4 °C/min, and data were collected at room temperature to 750 °C. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the products were acquired with a Dandong DX-2700 X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα-radiation (λ = 1.541806 Å), the step width was set to 0.02°. Surface morphology of the samples was observed with a TESCAN Mira3 LMU field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM) with an acceleration voltage of 8 kV. Samples were adhered onto a conductive carbon type and then covered by a gold thin film by sputtering. High-resolution transmission electronic microcopy (TEM) images were collected with a FEI Talos F200X transmission electronic microscope at the accelerating voltage of systematically 200 kV. High angle annular dark field (HAADF) techniques were conducted on a Super-X microscopy system for STEM–EDAX elemental mapping. Before the sample was subjected to experiments, the sample suspensions were dropped onto amorphous carbon coated 300 mesh copper grid and then dried at 80 °C. The pore structure and textual property of all of the materials were obtained with a Quantachrome Instruments nitrogen (N Three way catalysis performances of the selected sample was tested by an AVL DiTEST Gas 1000 gasoline exhaust emission testing system using NO, CO, and C Typical DSC/TG curves of the C5 precursor in XRD results of the series of Ce The EISA method is a sufficient way to prepare porous materials, especially mesoporous ones. It is very suitable to be scaled up and have such advantages as easy controlling of the compositions and homogeneity of the products. It was adapted to prepare multi-scale porous CeO TEM was used to observe the morphology of the C5 sample and to analyze the distribution of the noble metals. The macropores with diameter of about 100 nm was clearly observed in XPS analysis was performed to investigate the chemical circumstances of the surface elements and their valence states in different CZ samples. According to the full survey spectra of all of the samples ( Three oxygen states were found according to the fitted O 1s XPS spectra of the samples ( H Quantitative illustration of the changing trends of band A and band B in The OSC of the samples was derived from the deconvolved TPR curves. The method is based on a series of TPR curves of CuO as the standard reference, and the detailed calculation methodology has been reported in Ref. [ All of the N The changes of SA were found to be in accordance with the change of CeO The C4–C7 samples were selected to evaluate their three way catalysis performances, as the OSC and SA results have indicated that CZ with Ce:Zr ratio near 1:1 may have the optimized activity. The samples were impregnated with Pd, Rh and Pt nanoparticles, then were assembled onto surfaces of a cordierite honeycomb ceramic. The catalysis performances for the NOx, CO, and C In summary, the structure, morphology, porosity, and chemical contents should determine the redox properties of a ceria based catalyst, according to the systematic investigation of the texture and reduction properties of CeO JOY thank the support of the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: