High biomass hold-up and high iron oxidation rates of a biological ferric sulphate generating fluidized-bed reactor (FBR) requires a carrier material with high specific surface area, high porosity and inertness. In this work, the effect of activated carbon (AC), diatomaceous earth (Celite) and Al2O3 (Compalox) carrier materials on the ferric sulphate generation in FBRs were studied. Compalox dissolved during the experiments and formed an unfluidizable aggregate, and was therefore rejected. The slow dissolution of Celite resulted in a light, fine-grained, layer on top of the fluidized bed that had to be changed into fresh Celite. AC resisted well the friction caused by fluidization. The iron oxidation in the continuous-flow FBRs became limited by oxygen supply already at loading rates of 2.5kgFe2+
                     m−3
                     h−1. Iron oxidation rates of 27.6 and 25.7kgm−3
                     h−1 were obtained in batch FBR experiments with AC and Celite, respectively.
                  Biomass accumulation of 6.2×1010, 2.4×1010 and 8.0×109 cells per g of carrier was detected on Celite, AC and Compalox, respectively. The bacterial community structures on the carrier materials were revealed by Polymerase Chain Reaction and Denaturating Gradient Gel Electrophoresis (PCR-DGGE) followed by partial sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene. Two bacterial strains, Leptospirillum ferriphilum and a strain similar to a strain unofficially named “Ferrimicrobium acidiphilum”, were detected. Examination of the carrier material surfaces with scanning electron microscopy (SEM) coupled with energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) revealed that all carrier materials were covered with jarosite precipitates and that the bacteria were mainly retained on the jarosite covered areas. In conclusion, AC was the most promising carrier material for a large-scale biological ferric sulphate generating FBR based on its availability, durability and the achieved high iron oxidation rates.Microbial iron oxidation has been exploited in bioleaching, treatment of acid mine drainage ( Reactor configurations utilizing immobilized biomass have shown superior iron oxidation kinetics compared to reactors with suspended biomass and are, therefore, the most studied for industrial use ( The aim of this work was to study alternative carrier materials for biological ferric sulphate generation in a FBR. Diatomaceous earth-based Celite R-633 was chosen for this study because it had shown good results as a carrier material in fluidized-bed reactors ( Iron oxidation experiments were conducted in FBRs consisting of reactor and aeration units with volumes of 510 Carrier materials in the continuous-flow experiments included activated carbon (Filtrasorb 200, Calgon Carbon Corporation), diatomaceous earth (Celite R-633, Celite Corporation), and Al The FBRs were inoculated with microbial enrichment culture originating from the previous work by The batch FBR experiments were conducted in FBRs 4, 5 and 6 with 125 The batch FBR experiments were carried out by emptying the aeration tank and filling it with 300 Two batch FBR experimental setups were used; batch experiments with constant effective carrier volume ignoring the rate of the recycle flow and batch experiments with constant recycle flow rate. Ferrous iron was determined using a UV 1601 spectrophotometer (Shimadzu Europa) by colorimetric The FBR liquid temperature, DO and pH were measured five times a week. The liquid temperature and pH were measured by a WTW SenTix 41 electrode connected to a WTW pH330 meter. The DO was measured from solution above the fluidized carrier material bed ( The detachment of carrier bound microorganisms was carried out with the procedure used by Experiments with two sequential detachments from the same sample were carried out to verify the efficiency of the detachment procedure. After the first detachment-enumeration all the washing solution was removed from the sample. Then the sample was gently washed three times with 0.9% w/v NaCl solution at pH 1.5. Then all the liquid was removed from the sample and the detachment-enumeration protocol was repeated. The carrier materials surfaces and the adsorption of micro-organisms onto the carrier material were examined at Outokumpu Research Oy by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) (Stereoscan 360, Cambridge Instruments) coupled with an energy dispersive spectroscope (EDS) (INCA-energy ISIS-300, Oxford Instruments). For examining the carrier material surfaces, the samples were dried at 40 Polymerase Chain Reaction and Denaturating Gradient Gel Electrophoresis (PCR-DGGE) followed by partial sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene were used for the characterization of the microbial community. Cells were detached from the FBR carriers for DNA extraction as in the determination of attached biomass with the exception that the sonication time was reduced from 1 Continuous-flow FBR experiments were carried out to study the effect of loading rates on iron oxidation and on biomass retention and the results were as shown in To change the limiting factor of the experimental design from oxygen mass transfer to the carrier material characteristics the temperature of the FBRs was decreased from 35 Batch FBR experiments were conducted to compare the iron oxidation rates in the FBRs with AC and Celite. The results of the batch experiments with a constant effective carrier volume were as shown in The larger effective carrier volume in FBR6 compared to FBRs 4 and 5 decreased the iron oxidation rates presented per effective carrier volume in FBR6, even though iron was oxidized faster as presented per total reactor volume, as also seen by the higher O The results of batch experiments with a constant recycle flow rate were as shown in In FBR4 the decrease in the iron oxidation rate compared to the experiments with constant effective carrier volume was due to the increasing aggregate formation and the decrease in the recycle flow rate from 620 The biomass on the carrier materials was monitored throughout the experiments to explore the microbial attachment and retention. The experiment with sequential washings of the carrier materials was carried out to estimate the efficiency of the biomass quantification method. The biomass retention in different FBRs during the continuous loading FBR experiments was as shown in The cell detachment method used in this study has been previously used for activated carbon ( The effect of the carrier materials on the microbial enrichment culture composition was studied by PCR-DGGE followed by sequencing of the partial 16S rRNA gene. The enrichment culture used for the inoculation of the FBRs was dominated by The DGGE profile showed simple and similar community structures on AC and Celite carrier materials. With Compalox no detectable PCR-product was obtained. The nucleotide sequences of the fragment 2 showed 99–100% similarity with the 16S rRNA gene sequence of The AC and Celite carrier materials were examined by SEM-EDS before and after the FBR experiments. The SEM-EDS examination of the carrier biofilm showed attached micro-organisms especially in areas coated with potassium jarosite. The majority of the micro-organisms were attached on the porous and sheltered structures of the surface. This may be partly due to the fixation-dehydration process, but most likely the unsheltered surface areas were not optimal for the attachment because of the shear and flow forces directed to those areas within the FBR. The micro-organisms on AC and Celite had similar morphology. They were spirilla or rod shaped, straight or curved, and about 1 This study revealed high-rate iron oxidation of the The achieved maximum steady state biomass concentration in Celite was almost three times higher than in the AC carrier. The biomass retention in the Compalox carrier was limited. The quantities of attached cells to all studied carrier materials compared favourably to the results obtained in other studies with iron-oxidizing micro-organisms ( Microbial attachment onto carriers was influenced by the increasing quantities of precipitated jarosite as also shown in previous studies ( The determination of carrier bound biomass quantities has been approached by methods that include an initial detachment of cells from the carrier material by various chemical and physical means ( The enrichment culture used for the inoculation in this study was dominated by The iron oxidation rate in the FBR became limited by oxygen already at relatively low loading rates as also shown in previous studies ( The batch experiments showed that the recycle flow rate and the consequent percent of fluidization had a large impact on the iron oxidation rates in the FBRs. With higher fluidization percents faster iron oxidation rates were obtained. The faster oxidation rates were partly due to the higher oxygen mass transfer resulting from the higher recycle flow rates. However, a higher recycle flow rate also results in more efficient mixing and substrate diffusion, but on the other hand may affect the long-term biomass hold-up as the shear forces are increased. The results obtained from the batch FBR experiments with AC and Celite indicate that the optimum fluidizations were over 26% and 30%, respectively. The increase in the ferric/ferrous-iron ratio (redox potential) during the batch FBR experiments may also have affected the highest iron oxidation rates. The iron oxidation rate of an acidophilic iron oxidizing culture dominated by AC is inert and has a large surface area and pore volume. However, not all of the surface area and porosity are necessarily available for microbial attachment. The attachable area is determined by the balance between pores large enough for microbial invasion but small enough to hinder the wash out of growing cells from the pores, and the roughness of the surface ( High iron oxidation rates were obtained in this study for the FBRs containing AC and Celite. The achieved iron oxidation rate is the most important factor affecting the cost efficiency of a FBR ( The aggregate formation caused by the precipitating jarosite that occurred with AC and Celite in this work may lead to short-circuiting and thereby to reduced iron oxidation efficiency ( Because both AC and Celite showed high iron oxidation rates and biomass hold-up and were both relatively durable, it is the lower cost of AC that makes it the preferred carrier material for future scale-up of the unit process. Porosity and surface-area coupled with inertness of carriers allow efficient biomass hold-up of acidophilic iron-oxidizing micro-organisms. Furthermore, the jarosite precipitation on the carrier material surfaces during ferric sulphate generation changes the surface characteristics favouring microbial attachment. The fast dissolution of aluminium oxide under acidic conditions makes it unsuitable for this application. High iron oxidation rates of 27.6 and 25.7 This research was funded by Outokumpu Technology, Research Center, Pori and the European Commission (BioMinE Project 500329).