A semi-autogenous (SAG) or autogenous mills (AG) circuit commonly comprises a pebble (cone) crusher to deal with the critical size particles. The pebbles crusher is often oversized, and thus not fully utilized. The hypothesis put forward in this paper is that active control of the cone crusher’s eccentric speed and closed side setting (CSS) can increase throughput and/or energy efficiency of the SAG circuit. To verify this hypothesis, a dynamic model of a SAG mill-pebble crusher circuit was implemented. The dynamic unit models are based on results presented by several different researchers, whose results here have been combined and implemented in Matlab/Simulink.
                  Previous research shows that by controlling the cone crusher operational parameters, the product particle size distribution (PSD) can be altered during operation. However, few papers have been published about whether the changes of the pebbles crusher’s product PSD, lead to a higher performance of the SAG circuit. This paper examines the relations between the SAG mill and the pebble crusher in closed circuit while putting emphasis on controlling the pebble crusher in order to optimize the circuit throughput.In the last few decades, significant efforts have been devoted to studying comminution circuits due to their high energy consumption. The energy directly spent in minerals comminution was about 2% globally in the year 2000 ( Previous research shows that the particle size distribution can be changed with different cone crusher operating parameters ( It is reported that the feed ore size to mills can significantly affect the whole circuit’s performance ( In this paper, we put forward the hypothesis that adjusting the cone crusher operating parameters speed and CSS, can have a significant impact on the system's variables, such as recycling load, output tonnage and product particle size distribution. To confirm the hypothesis, three different flowsheets were studied, that included SAG-mills and pebbles crushers. The first scenario mainly examines the typical SAG-cone crusher circuit to validate the dynamic SAG model and basic interactions with crusher and screens. The second and third examples investigate more complex situations where two identical SAG mills and double cone crushers in parallel are considered. The system dynamics are compared and evaluated for different crusher settings. The dynamic model of an AG/SAG mill includes several interlinked sub-process modules, and these modules can be updated individually. As shown in Austin introduced a simple algebraic equation set that describes a time-independent breakage model, and treat the mill as a series of fully mixed reactors ( The energy applied in each section can be estimated as: In an AG/SAG mill, the particles undergo both impact breakage and abrasion breakage. Leung ( In this work, however, we use standard Broadbent-Calcott model for the appearance function instead of the JKMRC The transport function plays a very important role in the dynamic mill modeling. It has a significant influence on the particle size distribution, mill load, throughput, resident time and other parameters ( The discharge function for each particle size class in AG/SAG mills can be expressed as the maximum discharge rate ( Valery and Morrell ( The dynamic model of AG/SAG mill is implemented, which treat the mill as serial of perfectly mixed sections along with breakage/appearance function and mass transfer function. The method applies basic calculation rules and avoids utilizing too many empirical relations. This means that at each simulated time step, the fresh feed, product and mill operating parameters are considered. The status of all particles is calculated regarding breakage probability, motion behavior, position in the mill, discharge chance and so on. If the system reaches stable operation within a certain period, which is considered as steady state. This model is supposed to be based on the real plant data and back calculate the sub-process functions used before, which consequently leads to an extensive application and more accurate predictions. We are interested in the dynamic behavior of the entire system with the SAG mill and cone crusher operating in closed circuit. Therefore, in addition to SAG mill model, the dynamic simulation of cone crushers, conveyors, bins, and screens are also relevant. Asbjörnsson ( A small bin was modeled for the cone crusher chamber when the material accumulates and perfect-mixed after the crusher. The product particle size distribution of the cone crusher is shown in A simulation of a typical SAG-pebble crusher circuit was made to validate the hypothesis as well as to illustrate the capability of the dynamic model. The computational process was simulated with Matlab/Simulink as seen in Three runs of the simulation were made to study the influence of the cone crusher on the whole circuit.  It is interesting to note that although the feed rate to the circuit remains constant, the recycling load changes with the change of the cone crusher settings. The finer PSD of the crusher product the lower recycling load becomes. At the steady state when the feed rate is 480 tph, the recycling load is 96, 83 and 72 tph for ’no cone crusher’, ’CSS = 10 [mm], speed = 400 [rpm]’ and ’CSS = 20 [mm], speed = 280 [rpm]’, respectively.   In a second scenario, a more complex circuit was modeled. The circuit shown in The assumptions for this scenario are listed below. No wear is considered. The capacity of all components will stay the same, regardless of wear. Cone crusher1 always runs at 100% capacity and when the level in the bin reaches 300 tonnes, the second cone crusher will be switched on, also runs at 100% load. Bin1 and Bin2 are perfect mixing surge bins. The full load for Bin1 is up to 300 tonnes and Bin2’s storage capacity is neglected, it works like a perfect mixer. The ideal screens and splitters are used to separate the stream so as to keep the recycling load the same for both mills. The first graph in In The results also reveal the phenomenon previously mentioned in scenario 1. If the critical size rocks coming from the mill can be broken to a size class with a higher breakage rate, then these recycling particles are more easily ground to a smaller size. The finer recycling PSD could decrease SAG mill power draw in two ways: A finer feed (returned) size distribution leads to a finer product and less recycling load, thus the mill charge decreases. As the recycling particles are easier to break (higher breakage rate), these ores would have a shorter residence time. In the previous scenario, a constant feed rate to the circuit was given. Considering the SAG mill hold up level, a new scenario was presented in this section. A controller was implemented between SAG mill and feeder, so the SAG mill hold-up was controlled below a certain level i.e. a constant mill charge. The intention was to explore how much the final throughput would be changed by controlling cone crusher settings where the SAG-mills capacities are limited.   In this work, a flexible and concise dynamic AG/SAG model has been implemented and combined with existing models of crushers, screens, conveyor belts and surge bins. The dynamic behavior of the plant circuit has been investigated emphasis on different cone crusher settings. Three numerical examples have been demonstrated in the paper. The first simulation was a typical SAG-cone crusher circuit. It tested the dynamic response of AG/SAG model with feed size data, flow rate, in mill transportation, in mill particle size distribution and interactions with a cone crusher and a screen. The second scenario considered a more complex situation where two identical SAG mills and two cone crushers were included. The recycling load was more than one cone crusher can handle, so the second cone crusher was switched on and off to keep the surge bin storage from flowing over. The third scenario added a controller to the feeder in order to keep the SAG-mill charge level constant. The results show that significant dynamic fluctuations can be induced by the cone crushers’ on/off behavior. The cone crushers are thus acting as exciters of the circuit. Additionally, the cone crusher operating parameters, closed side setting and eccentric speed has a significant impact on the recycling load, the product tonnage as well as PSD. As can be seen from the second and third scenarios, the control system of the bin has not been considered. Thus, more studies on appropriate control strategies are needed and a more thorough investigation of validating the model using real plant date should be performed. This SAG mill computational model mainly includes four components: breakage rate, appearance function, transfer function and discharge rate. Each of these components can be updated with future experimental data. An extended data structure is under development to provide this dynamic model with more functionality, such as multi-materials, residence time distribution etc. The improvement for system dynamic model could include the crusher wear conditions ( The author wishes to acknowledge the academic support from