Bulong Operations processed a nickel laterite resource 30km east of Kalgoorlie, Western Australia, between April 1999 and October 2003. The Bulong refinery operated a direct solvent extraction process to recover nickel cathode from dilute leach liquor without the need for precipitation of an intermediate nickel product.
                  Before closing due to financial pressures, the Bulong refinery experienced significant modification and optimisation of the solvent extraction circuits. These modifications improved metallurgical performance to a level meeting or exceeding most design parameters and this paper documents the metallurgical performance of the Bulong direct solvent extraction process at the time of plant closure.
                  The solvent extraction process was capable of producing a nickel electrolyte suitable for electrowinning >99.8% nickel cathode, and a concentrated cobalt liquor suitable for recovering a saleable cobalt product. Typical nickel and cobalt recoveries from PLS to product liquors were 98.2% and 98.5%, respectively.The Bulong refinery was designed to process lateritic nickel–cobalt ore, producing nickel and cobalt cathode on-site. In June 2003 it was the world’s only commercial operation to have recovered Class I nickel from dilute leach liquor (<4 The Bulong process was designed without the benefit of extensive continuous pilot scale testwork and several process deficiencies were encountered. Initially the SX circuits were unable to achieve design availability, throughput, recovery and product quality. Subsequent process modification and optimisation greatly improved metallurgical performance. Despite this improvement, Bulong Operations was unable to overcome the considerable financial burden present since commissioning, and was closed in October 2003. The objective of this paper is to document the metallurgical performance of Bulong’s direct SX process prior to closure. It is hoped that the lessons learned and progress made at Bulong will be used to further develop direct SX, and establish it as a competitive technology for the winning of nickel. In June 2003 the nickel laterite resource at Bulong comprised 150 The leach plant consisted of ore preparation, pressure leaching with sulfuric acid, slurry neutralization, counter-current decantation (CCD) and solution neutralization to produce a mildly acidic sulfate based pregnant leach solution (PLS) containing low levels of iron, aluminium and chromium, and saturated with calcium ( A flowsheet of the Bulong refinery is given in The cobalt in loaded strip liquor (LSL) was separated from manganese and magnesium by sulfide precipitation with nickel, iron (III), zinc and copper co-precipitating. The barren liquor was sent to tails while the filtered sulfide product ( CoSX raffinate was directed to the nickel solvent extraction (NiSX) circuit where an organic containing Versatic 10 (V10) separated nickel from calcium and magnesium. Ten mixer-settlers were used in a four extract, two scrub, three strip, one V10 recovery configuration. NiSX raffinate ( Satisfactory performance of the CoSX circuit was critical to the success of the Bulong refinery. CoSX was the final stage for removing cobalt, zinc, copper and iron from nickel prior to NiSX and nickel cathode quality was therefore directly proportional to CoSX recoveries. Target Ni:Co in the nickel cathode was >700, which equated to <0.004 Similarly, the purity of LSL with respect to nickel needed to be sufficient to meet cobalt product specifications. Target Co:Ni in LSL >700 equates to a nickel concentration of <0.013 This requirement for both grade and recovery in CoSX demanded a high separation factor and this was achieved by using a selective organic extractant in a multi-stage counter-current process. The selectivity of C272 for metals in Bulong PLS is shown in Mixer-settlers were used for all contacting duty, with mixing occurring in a single primary mixer with a mean residence time of 1.2 The heart of the extraction circuit was the final stage, E5. Stripped organic (16% The stoichiometric composition of metals on the loaded organic was 71% Mg, 21% Mn and 5.5% Co. The advance O:A ratio was controlled to achieve a loading of 0.5–0.6 Under normal operating conditions the recoveries of cobalt, zinc and manganese were above target, at 98.5%, 99.6% and 99.9%, respectively. Copper recovery, however, was significantly lower at 80%. This resulted in CoSX raffinate copper concentration exceeding the 0.5 The copper pH isotherm ( The loaded organic was scrubbed in one stage at an advance O:A of 20 to selectively remove co-extracted nickel and meet the Co:Ni target of >700. The scrub liquor comprised a bleed of LSL diluted to ∼5.5 The scrub stage also performed significant washing of the loaded organic. Aqueous entrainment in the loaded organic phase was ∼0.9 Despite encouraging performance from the scrub circuit, Co:Ni on the scrubbed organic remained well below the target of 700. It is expected that with further optimisation the target Co:Ni in LSL is realistically achievable. To maximise the recovery of target metals in extraction the strip circuit was required to produce a stripped organic containing very low metal concentrations and a concentrated LSL for downstream cobalt recovery. The strip liquor comprised potable water containing 2 Owing to the strength of the C272–zinc complex ( Entrained organic in LSL was ∼150 LSL produced by CoSX was readily amenable to sulfide precipitation and cobalt recovery from LSL was consistently >99%. The stripped organic was washed with process water to reduce carry-over of entrained metals and acid from strip to extraction. Ammonia was added to maintain a pH of 5.5 resulting in extraction of >98% of all metal in the wash aqueous (including 6 Particular attention was given to the recovery of C272 from CoSX raffinate for two reasons: the high reagent cost, and the potential contamination of the downstream NiSX organic. C272 in NiSX is an effective calcium extractant, lowering the Ni–Ca separation factor and consequently reducing nickel recovery. Maximum nickel recovery from PLS was therefore directly dependent on good recovery of C272. The extraction raffinate from E5 contained ∼150 C272 recovery from diluent involved contacting the organic bleed with dilute aqueous ammonia at an advance O:A of 3.0 and pH 10. The high pH and low aqueous salt content favoured solubility of C272 in the aqueous phase thereby removing a majority of the extractant from the organic. The C272 depleted organic was returned to DW and the C272 rich aqueous stream advanced to the stripped organic wash stage in CoSX where the high salt content of the aqueous resulted in complete recovery of C272 to the CoSX organic. Additional C272 was recovered by periodically transferring DW organic to CoSX as make-up organic. The concentration of C272 in DW was thus maintained at <0.5% The DW raffinate also contained ∼150 The concentration of iron and chromium in PLS was entirely dependent upon the performance of the solution neutralisation (SN) circuit immediately upstream of CoSX. An ideal Bulong PLS contained negligible chromium and satisfied the nickel product Ni:Fe ratio (>5000, or <0.5 Final iron removal in SN was achieved by the oxidation of Fe(II) and precipitation of Fe(OH) Fe(III) was strongly extracted by C272 and was quantitatively removed in CoSX. Fe(II) extraction, however, was much weaker with typical recoveries of 50%. Consequently ∼0.6 Chromium contamination of PLS occurred under upset SN conditions with potentially significant consequences. Chromium removal in SN was via reduction of Cr(VI) (if present) to Cr(III) and precipitation as Cr(OH)  Any Cr(III) in PLS either precipitated in E1 (pH 5.5) and accumulated as crud or extracted permanently onto the organic. CoSX largely rejected Cr(VI) and only the portion that was entrained into the strip circuit became permanently loaded. As a result of irregular PLS chromium contamination, the CoSX organic contained ∼0.1 Due to the use of limestone and lime for upstream neutralisation, Bulong PLS was supersaturated with calcium. This resulted in the precipitation of gypsum on most surfaces that were in contact with PLS (pipes, pumps, agitators, control valves), causing hydraulic restrictions. Traditionally the precipitation of gypsum was greater in NiSX, and CoSX rarely restricted PLS throughput. However, following the successful control of gypsum in NiSX, this situation changed. To mitigate the formation of gypsum in the CoSX extraction circuit, the addition of a suitable antiscalent to PLS was investigated. After the success of antiscalent addition in NiSX, continuous piloting of the CoSX-antiscalent system was undertaken for 3 months. A favourable outcome resulted in the addition of the antiscalent to PLS beginning in March 2003. With an optimised dosage of 75 The formation of crud in CoSX was present since plant start-up. The crud sources were predominantly suspended solids and colloidal silica contained in PLS. An extremely irregular source was in situ precipitation of insoluble hydroxides when processing low pH PLS (<4.5). Crud was regularly removed from the settlers via vacuum (primarily E1). The slurry was filtered through a pre-coated plate-frame filter press, with recovered organic and aqueous being returned to CoSX. Whilst treatment of the symptom allowed CoSX to exceed design availability and throughput, elimination of the cause was the long-term goal. This would have been achievable via effective PLS clarification and filtration, and continuing tight PLS pH control. Sand bed filters were installed for final removal of PLS suspended solids. However, due to poor operability in the presence of gypsum scale, the units were decommissioned. Following the successful control of gypsum in CoSX, the opportunity to recommission the units arose. This was taking place at the time of plant closure. The NiSX circuit was required to separate and concentrate the nickel contained in CoSX raffinate and produce a rich electrolyte suitable for electrowinning, and a raffinate suitable for disposal. Magnesium and calcium were the major cationic impurities. As mentioned previously, contamination of the NiSX organic (15% With successful operation of the CoSX Cyanex recovery circuit, the concentration of C272 in NiSX was restricted to <0.5% The operating philosophy for NiSX was to adjust the extraction advance O:A to achieve a target of 0.05 The extraction pH profile was set to allow good nickel recovery, whilst minimising the co-extraction of calcium. This was particularly important in the latter stages (E3, E4), as calcium loaded here was displaced as the organic advanced, thereby raising the aqueous calcium concentration above saturation. The pH profile was as follows: E4 6.5 to restrict organic calcium to <0.3 E3 6.6 to restrict organic calcium to <0.3 E2 6.9 to ensure good nickel extraction; calcium was scrubbed due to the high nickel concentration. E1 6.8 to ensure <0.03 The loaded organic generally contained 7.5–8.5 Due to the limitation of 0.05 At pH 6.5 the extraction raffinate contained 150 The scrub circuit was required to selectively remove co-extracted calcium from the loaded organic to prevent saturation of the recirculating electrolyte. Target Ni:Ca on the scrubbed organic was 1800. Scrubbing of magnesium and washing of entrained chlorides were both important secondary functions. Scrub liquor was made-up by diluting a bleed of rich electrolyte with potable water. The design intent of the scrub circuit was for removal of magnesium only, as calcium extraction was not expected. The design aqueous flowrate was 100 Scrubbing of calcium necessitated a more efficient operation to ensure conservation of electrolyte and water. Scrub liquor was therefore made-up to 8 Recirculation of the scrub raffinate lowered the benefit of the two-stage scrub by lowering the nickel (and raising calcium) concentrations in the scrub liquor. Due to the size of installed equipment steady-state operation at <20 The stoichiometric organic loading remained virtually constant over the two scrub stages, with nickel displacing calcium and magnesium. Scrubbing efficiencies were 88% and 95% for calcium and magnesium, respectively. The scrub circuit consumed ∼1.5 Stripping of the NiSX organic was required to produce organic containing <0.01 A favourable stripping isotherm allowed the spent electrolyte to strip >99.8% of nickel from the scrubbed organic in three stages. A small amount of sulfuric acid was required in S1 to control the equilibrium pH at 3.0, which was needed to maintain stripping efficiency. Good stripping was important to prevent unstripped nickel entering the V10 recovery stage, which would strip the metal into the extraction raffinate. This was particularly important at times of low throughput when the acidity of the spent electrolyte was low (<15 The behaviour of residual cobalt and manganese in NiSX was essentially the same as nickel. Copper and iron, however, are strongly extracted by V10, and will only strip at low pH. This led to a small recirculating load of copper and iron within the strip circuit ( Entrained organic in the rich electrolyte aqueous was reduced from 100 At 85 The supersaturation of calcium in PLS was responsible for gypsum precipitation in the Co and NiSX extraction circuits. The additional extraction and subsequent scrubbing of calcium by the V10 organic resulted in a significantly higher rate of precipitation in NiSX. Control measures for this problem were: Cyanex recovery from CoSX raffinate to maintain <0.5% Restriction of the advance O:A to control calcium loading in all extraction stages. The use of lower pHs in E3 and E4 to minimise calcium extraction, thereby controlling gypsum formation in E2 and E3. Control of scrub circuit to prevent saturation of calcium in scrub and strip liquors. These measures greatly reduced scale formation rate, however the design NiSX throughput and availability targets remained unachievable. Screening and continuous piloting of various antiscalents took place in 2001–2002. Following the success of these tests, antiscalent addition to NiSX began in June 2002. The initial dosage of 75 NiSX chemical performance and phase disengagement times were unaffected by the antiscalent, however the crystal deformation mechanism of scale inhibition was thought to be responsible for a slight increase in the rate of crud formation. However, the increase in SX availability and throughput that occurred as a result of antiscalent addition has made this difficult to confirm. It is recognised that the application of an antiscalent in an SX system is not an ideal scenario. However, the simplicity of the process allowed it to be developed, tested and installed in a relatively short time frame, and with minimal capital cost. It was therefore a very cost-effective measure that dramatically improved plant throughput. Crud formation in NiSX occurred primarily in the extraction and V10 recovery (VR) stages. The extraction and VR cruds were distinctly different, and definitive formation mechanisms were not confirmed. It was thought that a majority of the extraction crud formed as a result of gypsum precipitation within these stages. The crud in VR, however, was not gypsum related, but was linked with the transfer of V10 into the organic phase. No crud filtration equipment was installed for NiSX. As a result, crud treatment comprised removal by vacuum pump, agitation and subsequent phase separation in a stirred vessel, aqueous/organic decantation, and return to process. Solids were disposed as an organic/aqueous slurry. As the rate of crud formation was relatively low, organic losses with crud solids were moderate. This section provides a summary of the typical unit consumptions for the major reagents used in the solvent extraction circuits, as well as the variables effecting consumption. All consumptions are given per tonne of nickel in cathode, assuming typical PLS composition as given in The use of acidic extractants in both SX circuits resulted in the liberation of acid. Anhydrous ammonia was used to neutralise this acid, thereby controlling pH. As no ammonia recovery was practiced at Bulong, consumption was directly proportional to total metal extraction. To function effectively the Bulong flowsheet dictates that all Ni, Co, Cu, Zn and Mn in PLS must be extracted from PLS. Additional ammonia consumption is incurred via the extraction of impurities (Mg, Ca), and recirculating metals from the scrub circuits. A breakdown of consumption by extractable metals is given in By far the greatest potential for reducing ammonia consumption, is reduction of magnesium co-extraction in CoSX. The high unit cost of ammonia places a large incentive on its recovery, whether for process re-use or as a saleable product. Sulfuric acid was consumed during organic stripping and the pH adjustment of NiSX raffinate for V10 recovery. In CoSX the scrubbed organic was stripped with 2 A majority of the sulfuric acid used for NiSX stripping was generated via the oxidation of water during nickel electrowinning. However, due to loss of acid in the electrolyte bleed, and electrolyte neutralisation to pH 3.2, make-up acid was required to control S1 pH. As electrolyte neutralisation is virtually constant, NiSX strip acid consumption was proportional to the electrolyte bleed, which was directly dependent on calcium co-extraction in NiSX. Sulfuric acid was also added to NiSX E4 raffinate to lower the pH from 6.5 to 3.0 for soluble V10 recovery. Consumption here was proportional to PLS flowrate. Eighty-two percent of acid was used in CoSX, 11% was used for NiSX stripping and 7% for V10 recovery. Overall consumption was 3.6 Organic losses were incurred via physical entrainment and solubility in the aqueous exit streams, evaporation, misting and crud disposal. Consumption was therefore dependent on: PLS and organic flowrates Settler performance (interface, crud content) PLS quality (crud formation) Ambient temperature (evaporation) Entrained organic from CoSX was recovered using Jameson flotation cells, which achieve ∼75% organic recovery under most operating conditions. Entrained and soluble organic in the nickel electrolyte was removed with activated carbon and not recovered. Virtually all mixers, settlers and weirs were open to the atmosphere, permitting high evaporation and misting losses.  Entrained and soluble loss of C272 was relatively low due to effective diluent washing of CoSX raffinate, and the use of Jameson cells on the major aqueous exit streams. The major loss was from the disposal of filtered (but unwashed) crud. V10 was predominantly lost as entrained and soluble organic in the raffinate and rich electrolyte. As previously mentioned, the absence of organic recovery equipment on these streams made consumption reduction difficult. Evaporation and misting losses were unacceptably high for all organic reagents due to the use of unenclosed contacting equipment. An antiscalent was added to the SX circuits to control gypsum formation. Addition was to PLS and NiSX feed streams. PLS dosage was 75 As reagent costs will vary between operations, only relative costs are given for the SX specific reagents ( All areas of Bulong’s direct SX process were progressively improved over the operation’s life. These improvements, however, were largely constrained by available capital and not an absence of attractive projects. Potential equipment and process modifications that are likely to further improve the performance of the direct SX process have been categorised and listed below for consideration by future project developers. A lower equilibrium pH, and an additional scrub stage would assist in achieving target Co:Ni, as well as reducing the extremely high recirculating load of cobalt. With a Co:Zn ratio of 9 in PLS, zinc is a significant consumer of acid and sulfide reagents, and adds additional cost to the cobalt refining process. Zn–Co separation is readily achievable using C272 ( This could be reduced by increasing the number of extraction stages in CoSX, and/or reducing the PLS pH. An improved understanding of copper extraction by C272 in the presence of chloride and ammonia is required to increase CoSX copper recovery. Removing copper post CoSX is possible by: Selectively stripping a bleed of NiSX S1 organic, Precipitation from the nickel electrolyte using NaHS, or Electrolyte removal using ion exchange. Improved oxidation and control of the PLS neutralisation process is required. Alternatively, selective V10 stripping or nickel electrolyte ion exchange could be used. Lead is introduced to the process via slow dissolution of the EW anodes, and its removal from nickel electrolytes is practiced commercially ( The key to increasing nickel recovery is increasing the Ni–Ca separation factor in NiSX. This can be done by: Further reducing the C272 transfer to NiSX, or Using alternative NiSX extractant(s) ( Allowing the scrub to operate as a single pass would permit higher calcium loading on the loaded organic, thereby reducing nickel in raffinate. Increasing PLS grade by reconfiguring the leach/washing flowsheet would allow a higher NiSX recovery. Nickel recovery from raffinate is possible (sulfide precipitation, ion exchange), however the large PLS flows make this option unattractive. By pre-loading the organics with a displaceable cation (e.g., Mg) using ammonia and a concentrated magnesium sulfate solution, a concentrated solution of ammonium sulfate can be produced for potential evaporation and crystallisation. Alternatively a standard lime boil could be performed on the NiSX raffinate for recovery of aqueous ammonia, however the low concentration of ammonium sulfate and high magnesium level make this option unattractive. General optimisation of the mixer-settlers would result in a reduction in organic entrainment, as well as crud formation rates, evaporation and misting losses. Benefits would be seen from optimisation of mixer impellor type and speed, picket fence design, settler roofing and flooring. Reducing crud formation in CoSX would be possible by improved PLS clarification and filtration, as well as incorporation of a PLS diluent wash to isolate a bulk of the crud to a C272-free organic. The use of standard crud treatment equipment, such as three-phase centrifuges, has great potential to reduce organic loss associated with crud. Bulk recovery of organic from the nickel raffinate stream would be possible with a Jameson cell or similar high throughput equipment type. The effective and efficient operation of the direct SX process is highly dependent on steady operation. This is primarily due to the coupling of NiSX with EW, where steady feed rates, grades and pH is paramount. The low Ni–Ca separation factor in NiSX also requires steady operation to prevent nickel recovery loss. Adequate PLS pondage should be installed to cater for anticipated upstream downtime. Stand-by equipment is required throughout the SX plant to allow maintenance to be carried out without effecting process operation. The production of good quality PLS, with respect to pH, [Fe], [Cr], [Si] and TSS is of paramount importance. Facilities for the recirculation of off-spec PLS should be incorporated to avoid treatment through SX. Solvent extraction columns should be considered for any direct SX process. The potential advantages to the Bulong process are especially relevant to the CoSX extraction bank. These include, but are not limited to: Increased number of stages for reduced Mg co-extraction. Higher tolerance to TSS for reduced crud formation. Elimination of misting and evaporative organic losses. A major improvement to the direct SX process as applied at Bulong could be obtained by initially separating Ni and Co from Mn, Mg and Ca. The concentrated and clean nickel loaded strip liquor would then be purified using C272, prior to conventional NiEW. Most of the process shortfalls encountered at Bulong would be eradicated by using this configuration. Major forecast improvements would be: Reducing ammonia and acid consumption by >40%, by preventing Mg and Mn co-extraction on C272. Reduction in C272 organic inventory, and C272 crud formation due to treatment of a concentrated and low TSS loaded strip liquor. LME specification nickel cathode production due to improved C272 copper and iron removal from a concentrated liquor, and coincident lead removal by C272. Simplified cobalt refining due to prior elimination of Mn and Mg, and higher concentration CoLSL. The key to this configuration is an extractant with suitable selectivity, and able to tolerate all elements listed in The operation of the Bulong direct SX process between April 1999 and October 2003 allowed many valuable lessons to be learnt and these lessons should not be forgotten as the global interest in direct nickel SX increases. While the closure of Bulong was not due to teething problems with the direct SX process, it certainly reinforces the need to adequately quantify process performance prior to plant design. At the time of plant closure, the Bulong SX circuits were meeting or exceeding most design parameters. Several process deficiencies uncovered during early operation were largely overcome by the application of relatively simple modifications. Most notably, gypsum precipitation within the NiSX circuit was all but eliminated by the addition of an antiscalent reagent. The Bulong direct SX process is capable of producing a nickel electrolyte suitable for electrowinning >99.8% nickel cathode, and a concentrated cobalt liquor suitable for recovering a saleable cobalt product. Typical nickel and cobalt recoveries from PLS to product liquors were 98.2% and 98.5%, respectively. I would like to thank the ex-management of Bulong Operations and the current plant owner, LionOre, for permission to publish this paper. Specific thanks are due to Greg Hayes, John O’Callaghan and Sarah Allen, former colleagues at Bulong, for their wealth of advice and support. The support of the WA School of Mines to the nickel hydrometallurgical industry is acknowledged. Specific thanks are due to Dr Don Ibana and Dr Daniel Helm for their advice and testwork assistance.