Multiple-porosity models are commonly used to describe the poromechanical behavior of complex porous solids occurring in earth and life sciences. From the characterization standpoint, the poroelastic constants of such materials may be determined from the poroelastic constants of their single-porosity constituents. The uniqueness principle of the poroelastic energy density function is herein used to construct and solve a system of equations between the described sets of poroelastic constants in a multiple-porosity material. The method systematically applies to an arbitrary number of co-existing porosities. The presented energy-based approach resolves the perceived closure problem that was reported for solids with more than two porosity systems.Biot's theory of poroelasticity ( The double-porosity and double-permeability poroelastic model ( A generalization of the theory to arbitrary number of coexisting porosities, namely, multiple-porosity and multiple-permeability poroelasticity, along with related analytical solutions, is provided in (  The focus of this work is on characterization aspects of multiple-porosity and multiple-permeability poroelastic media. The specific aim is to provide a systematic method for obtaining constants This paper presents a method to resolve the described closure problem. A general equilibrium state of uniform confining load Likewise, a general state of confining load The uniqueness condition on the potential energy density function calls for the following identity. The case of The described condition establishes a number of six second-order, algebraic equations. Of the obtained six equations, however, only four are independent. If the joints between the constituents in the multi-porosity composite material remain intact, the strain compatibility condition can be used to obtain the extra needed equations. This condition may be expressed as follows. Simultaneous solution of The systematic method that was introduced for double-porosity poroelasticity can be applied to the multiple-porosity problem. Suppose a general state of confining load, Assuming the joints between the constituents in the multi-porosity composite material remain intact, the strain compatibility condition can be used to obtain extra equations between the poroelastic constants. This condition may be expressed as follows. Simultaneous solution of the system comprising Substitution of A result of the described analysis is that the cross-storage coefficients, Conversely, the described coupling does exist under constrained confinement of the sample ( An implication of A mixed formulation of the multiple-porosity poroelastic constitutive relation may be suggested by describing the volumetric strain, A conspicuous distinction of the multiple-porosity case is that unlike the single-porosity solids, An alternative manifestation of the mixed constitutive relation describing the volumetric deformation of a multiple-porosity poroelastic material involves selecting the confining stress, The uniqueness condition on the potential energy density function of multiple-porosity poroelasticity is used to obtain the poroelastic constants of a material characterized by the theory. The compliance, stiffness, and mixed formulations of the constitutive relations describing the volumetric deformation of such materials are presented and discussed. It is shown that the mechanical coupling between two porosity systems in a multiple-porosity solid cannot be neglected under constrained strain conditions. Support from the Institute for Natural Gas Research at Pennsylvania State University is acknowledged. 