Periprosthetic femoral fractures (PFF) are increasing as a result of changes in population demographics and the increase in the number of total hip replacements performed. The overall incidence has been reported to range from 0.1% to 6% of all total hip arthroplasties. Management of these fractures is often particularly demanding, complex and expensive. In many cases, the surgeon has to solve the simultaneous problems of implant loosening, bone loss and fracture. A thorough understanding of the unique characteristics of the different fracture types, the principles of PFF treatment and a familiarity with the various fixation devices, grafts and prosthetic implants are all of paramount importance. Internal fixation is used either alone or as an adjunct to stem revision. The stability of the original implant and the configuration of the fracture itself are the basic factors that influence the decision-making process. The current study reviews the existing literature on internal fixation of femoral periprosthetic fractures.Fortunately, total hip replacement (THR) is an extremely effective procedure which is only rarely complicated by periprosthetic femoral fractures (PFF). However, with the rapid increase of the aging population and the increasing numbers of THRs being performed, the number of PFFs has been proportionally increasing worldwide and their overall incidence has been reported to range between 0.1% and 6% of all total hip arthroplasties. Periprosthetic hip fractures may involve the acetabulum, but most commonly the femur is involved (0.9% versus 2.5%, respectively). Management of these fractures is often particularly demanding, complex and expensive. In many cases, the surgeon has simultaneously to deal with the problems of implant loosening, bone loss and fracture. A thorough understanding of the unique characteristics of the different fracture types, of the principles of PFF treatment and a familiarity with the various fixation devices, grafts and prosthetic implants are all of paramount importance. The Vancouver classification Internal fixation may be used either alone or in combination with stem revision. The stability of the original implant and the configuration of the fracture itself are the basic factors that influence the decision-making process. The current study assesses the existing evidence on internal fixation of the PFF. Publications dealing with the different osteosynthesis systems used in the treatment of femoral fractures around a THR were retrieved via a Medline search. The OVID search engine has been used: The initial Medline query found 429 papers that included the predefined terms as keywords or in their abstract/title. After employing the exclusion criteria the secondary evaluation of the abstracts reduced the collected studies to 52 manuscripts. The retrieved data were divided into (1) case-series studies referring generally to the treatment of PFF including internal fixation methods; (2) manuscripts focused on a specific method of internal fixation (IF) and (3) comparative studies of different methods of IF. The first manuscript presenting the treatment and outcome of PFF is that of Parrish and Jones in 1964. Subsequently Taylor et al. published a series of 11 PFF that occurred intraoperatively over a 7-year period at their institution. Five of these fractures had supplementary fixation besides the stem prosthesis. Cerclage wiring of a proximal PFF was performed in four cases, with complete success. Their only non-union developed in a short spiral distal femoral fracture that was treated with obviously inadequate fixation using three lag screws. In 1981, the case series of Johansson et al. Bethea et al. Barfod et al. Cooke and Newman A high incidence of intraoperative fractures during biological ingrowth THR was shown by Fitzgerald et al. Schwartz et al. A statistical analysis of the existing evidence on PFF around cemented femoral prostheses, treatment options and their final outcome was reported in 1994 by Mont and Maar In 1996, Beals and Tower The large retrospective study of McLauchlan et al. A comprehensive comparison between revision arthoplasties and compression plate fixation for PFF was published in 1998. Initially these were described in 1913 These were introduced as an advance on cerclage wiring and Parham's bands. As a method of fixation that does not enter the medullary canal, they avoid any disruption of the cement mantle and the obstacle of a pre-existing intramedullary device. These self-locking straps were initially described in 1976. These modified plates were introduced by Ogden and Rendall in 1978. The comparative study of Mihalko et al. The first description of compression plating of PFFs was by French authors. The use of compression plating combined with cortical strut allografts was strongly advocated by Wang et al. In the study of Tsiridis et al. in 2005, The concept of minimally invasive percutaneous plating was applied by Abhaykumar and Elliott in seven PFFs. Subsequently, a prospective study of plate fixation of Vancouver B1 fracture types (fractures about the stem of hip implants, or its tip, with a stable femoral component), was published in 2005 by Ricci et al. The application of locking plates in a PFF around a THR is a relatively new concept. The advantages of these plates have been well documented in a number of studies referring to long-bone fractures Another report of locking plates in PFF was that of Berlusconi et al. The application of carbon fibre plates, initially designed for supracondylar femoral fractures, The original introduction of the Mennen plate was in 1979 as a “paraskeletal clamp-on plate system”. The following year, Uchio et al. A study of 14 PFFs treated with Mennen plates was published 2 years later and reported contrary results. Kaminemi and Ware The same disappointing results were shown by Ahuja et al. A multicentre, retrospective, descriptive study, analysing the Mennen plating practice of the Netherlands, was published the same year. These plate cable systems were initially presented as fixation options of PFFs by from Berman and Zamarin in a case report of 1993. The use of this plate–cable system was highlighted by the later study of Kaminemi et al. Tadross et al. A similar case-series study was presented by Venu et al. The necessity of augmenting the Dall-Miles systems by additional fixation means was clearly stressed by Tsiridis et al. The study of Sandhu et al. Several early studies reported the use of intramedullary nails and rods for the fixation of PFFs. In the original paper of Parrish et al. Following the same concept, Pankovich et al. The use of Charnley, Müller, or Minneapolis straight-stem femoral components wedged into Küntscher nails was described for mid-shaft PFF by Khan et al. The first study to specifically compare different fixation methods of PFF was that of Mihalko et al. in 1992. In 1995, Stevens et al. focused on three wiring techniques. The most commonly used treatment regimens of the 90s were tested and compared in the in vitro study of Schmotzer et al. The biomechanical study of Dennis et al. followed, assessing five different techniques of PFF internal fixation. The same authors, in a following in vitro study of cadaveric femurs, focused on a comparison of Ogden plate with double strut allograft internal fixation. Single and double compression plating configurations were compared in vitro. A biomechanical investigation of the degree of fixation of type B1 fractures was presented by Wilson et al. Fulkerson et al. Over the last few decades, PFFs in the vicinity of total or hemiarthroplasties of the hip have been recognised as an increasing problem affecting large numbers of the frail elderly population. The optimal management strategy still remains unclear, as evidenced by the large array of treatment options described in the literature and the lack of consensus. The aims of treatment are to achieve and maintain the best possible reduction, ensure implant stability, accelerate bone healing and allow the earliest possible mobilisation of these patients. The role of internal fixation in the spectrum of these treatment options remains ambiguous. It has been used as the solitary means for fracture stabilisation, Certain obstacles have been constantly identified that make internal fixation troublesome in the case of PFF. The stability of the femoral component of the pre-existing arthroplasty, the possibility of an underlying infection, the stem and cement obstructing fixation screws, the adequacy of the existing bone stock, the general medical status and high anaesthetic risk, and of course the comminution and displacement of the facture configuration are all factors that influence the surgeon's decision. Most recent authors identify the main indication for IF to be PFF associated with a well-fixed femoral stem (Vancouver types B1 or C). IF methods are used in these cases in order to expedite patients’ mobilisation and to optimise bone healing. These difficulties initially led surgeons to use cerclage techniques with steel wires, Consequently, the development of more versatile fixation methods and cable–plate systems such as the Ogden, Ogden plating provided a solution in the early years, and biomechanical studies tried to improve its rigidity by augmenting it with unicortical screws or strut allografts. Mennen plates were introduced as paraskeletal clamp plates. The diverging results may be attributed to the confusing of their limited indications. If used in unstable fracture patterns or in a PFF with a loose implant, failure of fixation and high rates of non-union should be expected. Their postoperative mobilisation protocol is very limited, as also are their indications. The Dall-Miles plate–cable, on the other hand, is evidently a more successful device which gives multiple fixation options to the surgeon. Despite its advantages it also has limitations, specific indications and in many cases probably should be enhanced with unicortical proximal screws and strut allografts. Standard compression plating has regained its place after the evolution of minimally invasive techniques and the recent development of locking plates. In the presence of an unstable femoral component, internal fixation is inadequate. Even if a plate–cable system augmented by strut allografts and bone grafting succeeds in establishing union of the fracture site, the presence of a loose stem will sooner or later require another operation for implant revision. In fractures distal to the tip of the stem, that do not interfere with the femoral component stability (Vancouver type C), treatment options include internal fixation methods. Extramedullary or intramedullary bridging of the fracture lines can both be applied. A retrograde nail cannot bypass the tip of the stem and thus a stress raiser is created between the two intramedullary devices. The high revision rates of B1 PFF, The place of internal fixation in the proposed treatment algorithms can be described in the following recommendations. Cerclage wiring should be abandoned and only cables should be used as supplements of fixation plates or onlay allografts. Dall-Miles is the most tested and safe system of the existing plate–cable systems. Vancouver types B1 and C can be treated by ORIF. MIPO and locking plate techniques will probably dominate the future ORIF setting of PFF. Intramedullary rods and nails can be applied for type C fractures, distal to the stem. Bypassing the defect by at least 1.5 times the cortex diameter is needed to minimise stress raisers. There is no conflict of interest.