Heavy minerals such as zircon, rutile, and ilmenite, have been observed to concentrate in the froth during the extraction of bitumen from oil sands. Consequently, the waste solids from this process are a rich source of both zirconium and titanium. While most of the zircon occurs as discrete particles, attempts at generating a high end concentrate of rutile have met with limited success. Thus, there is a need for further characterization of heavy minerals in oil sands. This work uses X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), thermogravimetric (TG) analysis, and X-ray fluorescence to analyze the coarse froth solids from an oil sands ore sample. XRD results reveal that the titanium bearing minerals present in the froth are rutile, anatase, brookite, and ilmenite. SEM results indicate the presence of quartz, intergrown with fine titanium-rich and iron-rich structures. Also present are a large variety of iron–titanium compounds, with iron compositions ranging from a few percent to stoichiometric ilmenite.Coarse solids make up the majority of tailings waste produced by the extraction of bitumen from surface mined oil sands. Moreover, the particle size of these solids means they are relatively amenable to further processing or other uses. It is therefore advantageous to characterize this fraction of the various waste streams to see what applications this material may have and what the potential liabilities may be. In particular, several studies ( Currently, Titanium Corporation is producing (albeit on a pilot scale) zircon, ilmenite, and leucoxene concentrates from froth tailings ( Understanding the morphology and mineralogy of the heavy minerals may allow the development of non-traditional processing methods that produce these higher grade products. This work aims to determine the morphology, composition, and associations of the minerals present in the oil sands froth. A low grade oil sand ore (1.5 Sub-samples of approximately 3 After XRD analysis, approximately 0.6 Thermogravimetric (TG) analysis was performed under N The remaining coarse solids from the primary froth were subjected to density separation using lithium sodium polytungstate (LST) heavy liquid with a specific gravity of 2.85. A portion of the heavy solids obtained from this separation were mounted in an electron probe mount (polished and carbon coated). This probe mount was analyzed in the back scattered electron (BSE) mode in a scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) detector. EDX analysis was performed on each particle, in a field of view, until enough images had been taken so that at least 150 particles per sample were analyzed. X-ray maps were also taken of these samples to evaluate the distribution of iron in leucoxene-type particles. The remainder of the sample was micronized and analyzed by the same XRD procedure as the other samples. Bitumen recovery is calculated according to Eq. Bitumen recovery was 89 XRD analysis of the ore and froth minerals revealed that the solids are predominately quartz with a significant number of minor phases. The results of the quantitative mineral analysis performed by XRD are shown in XRF analysis shows that the most valuable fraction of the froth solids is the 45–106 In addition to the complex mineralogy of the solids, there is still a significant amount of hydrocarbon contamination of the particles even after Dean-Stark cleaning, which removes the toluene soluble hydrocarbons. This is evident in the TGA curves (  Every particle in  Of greater significance is the number of titanium minerals classified as “variegated”. These minerals would be classified as well liberated in a standard liberation analysis, because they contain no obvious second phase that would be detectable except in a high contrast back scattered electron image. Even X-ray maps of these particles from the SEM do not reveal a variation in composition ( EDX analysis of particles, considered liberated by traditional liberation analysis, reveals that there is a significant number that contain impurities such as Mn, Fe, Ca, Si, and Al. Over 92% of the rutile particles observed contained extraneous elements. Similarly, none of the leucoxene or ilmenite particles were free of extraneous contaminants. Zircon on the other hand, was relatively pure with two thirds of zircon particles containing only Zr and Si. Oil sands froth contains many different minerals, the most valuable of which are the polymorphs of TiO The authors would like to thank Wally Friesen, Pam Munoz, and Kim Kasperski (CANMET) for their help with TG and TG-evolved gas analysis. The authors would also like to thank the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada and the Oil Sands Tailings Research Foundation (OSTRF) for research funding. Finally, the authors would like to thank Allison De Man and Jenny Thompson (University of Alberta) for their help in isolating the heavy mineral fraction and the Women in Scholarship, Engineering, Science and Technology (WISEST) program for funding their work.