This paper discusses universal learning network (ULN) and its application to control a class of nonlinear systems with long time delay. Two control architectures, model predictive control based on ULN model and single neuron PID (SN-PID) controller based on ULN predictor, are designed to control pH neutralization process, respectively. In addition, to verify the performance of ULN, two comparisons are also made. One is the generalization ability between ULN and back-propagation (BP) network, the other comparison is ULN predictor and Smith predictor, in which the same controller is used. Simulation results prove the applicability and effectiveness of the ULN model. The special architecture and its learning algorithm give ULN more representing abilities to model and control complicated nonlinear systems with long time delay.In modern industry processes, such as pH neutralization ( Model predictive control (MPC) ( It has been proven that neural network is an efficient method to provide prediction of the future plant response over the specified horizon. The predictions supplied by neural networks are passed to a numerical optimization routine that attempts to minimize a specified performance criterion in the calculation of a suitable control signal. Two types of neural networks, the feedforward neural network and the recurrent neural network have been used successively to identify an unknown system's dynamic behavior. When using the feedforward neural network, defining a suitable network structure is a difficult problem ( Universal learning network (ULN) ( In this paper, the ULN is adopted to identify the pH neutralization process. Comparison is made with the back-propagation (BP) network. Then, both MPC method and PC method combined with ULN model are used to further detect the effective application of the network in control system. Simulations show that the control result and the robustness of the system with ULN predictor are much better than those of the PID method and control system with Smith predictor. It is proved that the predictor based on ULN model can be effectively used in nonlinear and long time delay system. In the following sections, Section Universal learning network consists of a number of inter-connected nodes. They may have any continuously differentiable functions in them, and each pair of the nodes could be connected by multiple branches with arbitrary time delays. Networks having time delays of multiple-length can be converted to those having unit-length time delays only by inserting an appropriate number of additional nodes between the nodes. The structure of the network is shown in The generic equation that describes the behavior of ULN is expressed as Eq. The ULN operates on a discrete-time basis. Each pair of nodes The criterion of universal learning network is Eq. The weights of ULN are adjusted by back-propagation ∂ Model predictive control (MPC) and predictor control (PC) can be used to control the nonlinear time delay process with the required constraints. In the paper, ULN model predictive control and ULN predictor control are discussed. Both of them are designed to remove the effect of long time delay. The structure of MPC based on ULN model is shown in Supposing the time delay is Using gradient decent method to optimize The critical issue of realizing the nonlinear predictive control scheme is the derivation of the highly complex system model. Artificial neural network can deal with nonlinear problem, but the value of time delay in traditional neural network is not arbitrary, which limits the application of neural network in such system. In this work, considering ULN has the property that the time delay in ULN can be set arbitrarily, the network is chosen as predictor and the complexity of the realization can be reduced greatly. The general structure of the control system using ULN predictor is showed in In this work, the controller in the control system is chosen as a class adaptive PID controller, which is based on a single neuron. Single neuron is a simple neural network. The meaning of input and output of the single neuron is equivalent to a normal PID controller, while the weights in the single neuron can be adjusted adaptively by optimization algorithms. Thus, it can be viewed as an adaptive PID controller and named as a single neuron PID controller, for short, SN-PID controller ( In the network, the input and the output are formulated in the following equations: From Eqs.  In the above equations, The problem of effectively manipulating pH neutralization process is existent in a number of industries including mineral processing, wastewater treatment, chemical processing, etc. In this section, the SN-PID controller is applied into pH neutralization process to verify the performance under different conditions. Meanwhile, for the performance evaluation of this method mentioned above, it is compared with another Smith predictor, in which the SN-PID controller is also applied into the control system. The difference of the two control system rests with the predictor, the former uses a ULN as the predictor and the latter uses a normal Smith predictor. pH neutralization process can be described by a static equation and a dynamical nonlinear equation showed as Hammerstein models ( From these equations, it can be concluded that the system contains 20 steps time delay. The sampling time is 1 Usually, it is more practical and more effective than using experiments with open-loop identification to measure the input/output variables of the plant operated with the linear controller such as PI/PID controller for providing very good training data for the neural network. By PID controller to build the control system, we can get the closed loop input and output serial of the plant. The curves of teacher signal are shown in The ULN described in Section In addition, two situations are considered in the choice of time delay between each node: (1) the time delay of the branches connected to the output nodes should be equal to or little greater than the practical time delay of the plant, which ensures the output of the predictor synchronize with the output of the plant and (2) for the branches connected to other nodes, the choice of time delay has big degrees of freedom. Considering the case of prediction, recent delays are more important than older delays, the time delay is usually a small value, which requires lower functional complexity. After 50,000 epochs training, the training error and the generalizing error drop to a very low value. The two error curves are plotted in From the above figures, it can be seen that the ULN has identified the plant well. The ULN model can embody the nonlinear character and dynamic character of the long time delay process. Therefore, the trained ULN can be used as predictor and provide the future outputs according to the current inputs and the node states. A feedback proportional to this predicting signal will be sent to the controller to eliminate the effect of long time delay. In order to validate the predictive control method based on ULN model proposed in this paper, the simulations are done from two aspects. One is the model predictive control and ULN predictor based on an optimal controller signal The desired signal of the system is a square wave signal. The performance with this controller is compared with a normal PID controller. In order to test the robustness of the control system, add a disturbance The similar simulation and comparison are implemented between two PC methods. One is SN-PID controller based on ULN predictor described in Section Similarly, adding a disturbance In the nonlinear industrial process, the practical time delay of system is usually unknown or continuously changeable. Therefore, the identified model is required to keep the stability under different possible time delay. From Section To compare with the performance of the two predictors, the time delay is changeable during the control process, and the simulation result can be seen in In this paper, a special type of the recurrent neural network—universal learning network, is used to identify the nonlinear dynamical system with long time delay. Different control methodologies are applied into a nonlinear system. Cooperated with ULN predictor, MPC and PC methods are discussed, and the comparison between ULN predictor and Smith predictor is also made. To test the anti-disturbance ability of the control system, the system with different predictors is simulated under the disturbance. The simulation results showed that the overshoot and the responding time are reduced by ULN predictor; additionally, the controller is also provided with good robustness. It is proven that the ULN model can embody the character of the system very well, and the predictor based on ULN model can be effectively used in nonlinear and long time delay system. This research is supported by the projects (60374064 and 50139020) of the National Natural Science Foundation of China. All of these supports are appreciated.