There has been an increased interest in materials research and applications associated with high magnetic fields. The conductor wire for long pulse, high field magnets must possess high strength to withstand Lorentz forces and high conductivity to minimize the temperature rise of the wire resulting from current flow. It has been well documented that heavily-drawn, copper-niobium microcomposites possess these properties Spitzig et al. Cu-15 wt. % Nb (Cu-15.6 vol.% Nb) was double consummable arc melted in an atmosphere of ultra high purity argon. Following the second melt, the ingot was 7.6 cm in diameter and 34.3 cm long. The ingots were subsequently machined to 7.0 cm in diameter and canned in a copper can with a 7.6 cm outer diameter prior to extrusion. The Cu-Nb was then extruded at 750°C to a 2.5 cm diameter rod and cold drawn to 1.5 mm. This corresponds to a logarithmic strain η = 7.8 (including a cold drawing strain of η = 5.7), where η = ln (A The microstructure of the bundled Cu-Nb wire modified during hot isostatic pressing and hot extrusion at 750°C would be refined during subsequent cold drawing.   The result that the strength of Cu-Nb microcomposites is primarily controlled by athermal obstacles supports the barrier strengthening model It is well known that the microstructure of heavily deformed Cu-Nb microcomposites is much finer than pure Cu processed in a similar manner because the recovery and recrystallization cycle is effectively blocked by Nb filaments The high temperature extrusion treatment in the present study is not as effective as cold drawing in refining the microstructure The substructural strengthening component, σ The overall strength of bundled Cu-Nb microcomposites, σ Based upon a study of the microstructural and mechanical stability of Cu-Nb microcomposite wires fabricated by the bundling and drawing process, the following conclusions can be drawn. The ratio of yield stresses (0.95) is close to that of Young’s moduli (0.93), suggesting that athermal obstacles significantly affect the yield strength. This observation favors the barrier strengthening model over the dislocation accumulation model to predict the yield strength. The yield strength of bundled Cu-Nb microcomposite wire was predicted by modifying the model of Spitzig and coworkers. The predictions of the model were in good agreement with experimental data. The authors acknowledge support of the United States Department of Energy (W7405-ENG36), the National Science Foundation, and the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (971-0803-034-2). We express appreciation for the collaboration of our colleagues P. Papin, R. Aikin, J. Montoya, and M. Hundley of LANL and J. S. Song, M. S. Lim, and J. H. Ahn of CNU. The authors are grateful to Dr. Don Parkin (CMS/LANL) for his support and encouragement.