The KCCL plant reprocesses a pyrite concentrate produced and disposed during the operation of the Kilembe copper mine (Uganda). This disposal was causing an environmental damage for the Queen Elizabeth National Park since the 1970s. The bioleaching process aims at extracting the valuable cobalt trapped in sulphide minerals by destroying the mineral matrix, thus avoiding further pollution from these sulphides. Both for economic and environmental reasons, the process has to oxidise a maximum of sulphides. A gravity circuit was to be introduced to recycle the sulphides remaining after bioleaching, and a simulation study was undertaken to check the effects of this recycling: increased recovery, accumulation of “refractory” minerals in the closed loop.
                  For the simulation of the bioleaching/gravity circuit of the KCCL plant, the objective of bioleaching modelling was to establish a link between a particle size and its capability to be bioleached, to study the impact of the gravity section position inside the bioleaching circuit. Tests were carried out at lab-scale, which proved a relation between the dissolution kinetic and the particle size. That validated the possibility to use a shrinking-core approach for the modelling of the dissolution.
                  The model theory is presented and simulation of different plant configurations, aiming at reducing the sulphide and heavy metals content in the treatment wastes, are described in the paper.Within the frame of the FFEM project entitled “Reduction of pollution and restoration of the contaminated ecosystems of the Queen Elizabeth National Park and Lake George in Uganda.” BRGM has been involved in a sub-project concerning the optimisation of the heavy metals treatment plant. The process used by the KCCL treatment plant addresses environmental and economic objectives. Firstly, it aims at extracting the valuable cobalt, trapped in sulphide minerals, from dredged mine tailings left behind by a closed mining activity ( The part of the FFEM project in which BRGM has been involved was devoted to improving sulphides and heavy metals recovery from the process. Plant samples collection and preparation have been carried out during July–August 2001, mostly to evaluate the capacity of the gravity section to concentrate sulphides and heavy metals. A first step in data treatment consisted of compiling mass balance around the main pieces of equipment of the circuit, with the aim to determine the efficiency of the sulphides and cobalt recoveries. To improve the sulphides and heavy metal recoveries, the use of the existing equipment in different configuration appeared to be the most interesting option. The optimisation was then not only concerning the gravity section but the whole configuration of the bioleaching The simulator allowed the tests of different configurations, which aimed at optimising the position of the gravity section in the bioleaching circuit. These results represent an advance in the know-how of processing bioleaching residues using a gravity process. The process of the KCCL upper plant is presented on a bioleaching section comprising three stages of reactors (BIOCOs), in which the bacteria oxidise the pyrite and thus liberate metals (Co and Fe); a gravity section for the recovery of heavy particles (sulphides, containing heavy metals), which have not been oxidised during bioleaching. These heavy particles are recycled to the BIOCOs feed, with the aim of improving their oxidation rate; a neutralisation section for the precipitation of iron; a belt filter from which the final solids residues is sent to the tailings pond; an iron removal section, to precipitate the final remaining iron. This section uses limestone and air addition for the precipitation of iron oxides. The final liquor, which is recovered from the upper plant, is then sent to the bottom plant consisting of a solvent extraction and electrowinning circuit. To evaluate the potential presence of sulphide refractory to bioleaching, laboratory tests were carried out to compare the bioleaching ability of the fresh pyrite to the one of the gravity concentrate, recycled to the BIOCO feed. Besides the targeted results, these tests also provided data for the modelling task. A special analysis of the bioleaching kinetics has been realised to establish if a link exists between the leaching kinetic and the particle size. Based on the evolution of cobalt concentration in solution for each particle size treated and for both feed sample and recycled sample, the evolution of cobalt recovery has been calculated and fitted using a first order kinetic function  For initialising the series, Experimental cobalt recovery is calculated following the standard formula, For each size class of the two samples, parameters We observe on The batch shrinking core model follows in fact the law The kinetic constant has been calculated by regression for each size class. Generally the regression is better using the shrinking core model than the first order kinetic model. The fit of the recovery variation is closed to the first order kinetic but reaches the maximum recovery after a finite time. The graph giving the kinetic constant versus the inverse of the particle size is similar to As shown by This model, usually called “shrinking core model”, has been largely studied and particularly by The feed size distribution function The integral The output size distribution produced by the monosize distribution for a perfectly agitated tank is then The product An actual particle size distribution can be represented as a finite set of monosize populations by a sampling method. The particle size range is divided into a great number of equal finite elements The translation from a size distribution using standard sieve series to the above size range sampling is made using a log-linear interpolation of the cumulative distribution and a Gaudin–Schuhmann fit for sizes below the finer sieve. The choice of The quantity of dissolved material is given by This model has been implemented in the simulation software USIM™ PAC and used to reproduce as well as possible the current behaviour of the bioleaching process.  According to the accuracy of experimental data, this good correlation shows the ability of the shrinking core model to represent the bioleaching of pyrite and chalcopyrite. The problem of the coarser particles rapidly dissolved can be solved in two ways: (i) using two types of pyrite with two different kinetic constants or (ii) using a de-agglomeration model distributing a part of the upper size classes into the lower size classes using the same size distribution. The identification of the model and its parameters is possible using laboratory test data and plant data in the different stages of the bioleaching circuit (primary, secondary and tertiary BIOCOs). The kinetic constants are then obtained by reverse simulation for parameter determination. Concerning gangue, it seems to have dissolution and precipitation in the same time. It is very difficult to evaluate the respective part of these phenomenons, as the partial flowrates of gangue are slightly the same between input and output. So the kinetic constant associated to the gangue is taken as null.  A sampling campaign has been conducted for the measurement of the size distributions and for the size-by-size chemical analysis on various streams. The leaching model has been calibrated by adjustment of the kinetic constants (μm/s) associated to pyrite and chalcopyrite as given in the following table: The calculated kinetic constants for pyrite are of the same magnitude for the different tanks. Apart the difference due to measurement accuracy, the electro-chemical conditions can explain the variation of the kinetic constant. In the case of chalcopyrite, the main reason of the big variation is the measurement error and consequently the effect of the mineralogical model. The cyclone battery is represented by the Plitt model calibrated on the sampling campaign results. It takes into account the difference of cut-size between pyrite, chalcopyrite and gangue. Similarly, the gravity circuit is represented by a general gravity separation model calibrated on measured data. The simulation of the circuit gives a 87.6% recovery of cobalt so 12.4% of remaining pyrite in the circuit output. This result is largely above the actual recovery. The main reason is the fact that the coarse particles are dissolved more slowly during simulation than actually and the recycling (so the cobalt recovery) is overestimated. To compensate the difference in the coarse particle behaviour, the simulator overestimates the dissolution of fine particles and then of cobalt recovery.  The laboratory tests have shown the possibility to represent the bioleaching of pyrite and chalcopyrite by a shrinking core model, which has been inserted into the USIM PAC software. This model has been used to simulate the existing plant. The comparison between measured data and simulated results shows a singular behaviour of coarse particles of pyrite during the laboratory test as well as in the plant. This phenomenon is certainly at the origin of the difference between the observed cobalt recovery and the simulated one. Some works have to be conducted to take it into account in the model and to be able to evaluate different configurations of the circuit for optimisation. The authors are grateful to BRGM’s Direction of Research for the authorisation to publish this paper under the reference No. The authors acknowledge the financial support from FFEM (French Global Environment Facility), which contributed to this paper through a project entitled “Reduction of pollution and restoration of the contaminated ecosystems of the Queen Elizabeth National Park and Lake George in Uganda”.