Rhenium is a unique, valuable and extremely rare chemical element currently used as an alloying element in high-temperature superalloys for aerospace and industrial gas-fired turbines and also as a catalyst in petrochemical industry. Moving towards a more competitive and sustainable economy requires access to this metal in adequate quantities and at competitive costs. However, minerals containing rhenium are generally found in very small quantities and are currently not commercially viable sources. Thus, the method and route for the extraction of primary rhenium is dependent on other metals (copper, molybdenum and uranium) of which rhenium is a by-product. In addition, focusing on alternative sources such as recycling of rhenium from waste alloy scrap and catalysts, is continually gaining attention in the research community. This paper has focused on the assessment of secondary sources of rhenium. The historical cost and also supply interruption indicators of rhenium were examined and assessed. Finally, opportunities of recovering and reusing existing stocks through Industrial Ecology are discussed.Reserves to production ratio (R/P) <20 years Or R/ R/ Or uncertain data R/ No monopolistic situation Element not traded on metal exchange Semi- monopolistic (below) Element not traded on metal exchange Semi-monopolistic production Uncertain Traded on metal exchanges No monopolistic production Element is toxic Ores contain low grade toxic or radioactive substances that might get enriched during processing Risk of bioactivity is not refuted Low toxicity known Uncertain data Toxicity has been put/is in the process of getting into jurisdictional context No toxicity No handling problem known Element is produced as by product The Element is main product and complex refining technologies are required Uncertain data Element is main product Technology proven No substitute of materials level available Substitute available but itself considered critical Substitute available with degradation in performance No substitute available on materials level but on systematic level Substitute available No Recycling technology in mass operation Material concentration in the end of life production is low Recycling technology in place and logistics as limiting factor Uncertain data Recycling technology in place Global recycling rate > 50% Rhenium (Re) is one of the rarest and most dispersed naturally occurring elements in the Earth's crust, with estimates of average crustal abundance ranging from 0.2 to 2 part per billion (Re) [ The fact that rhenium is an important alloying element in gas turbine blade superalloys has turned this transition metal into a strategic material with several countries wishing to establish secure supplies of it. In addition to its strategic importance, increases in its consumption, its high cost and low material resources have contributed to interest in the development of recycling processes for rhenium [ Several authors reported on the different technologies for the production of rhenium from mineral deposit ores [ Re is a silvery-white coloured transition metal and is element number 75 in the Periodic Table. It consists of two isotopes The world mine production of rhenium from the main known sources has been estimated to be 48 t [ A list of rhenium bearing minerals is shown in Even though rhenium has an affinity for sulphide phases, its concentration in most sulphide minerals is relatively low. The rhenium content of most molybdenites is generally within a range of a few ppm to several thousand ppm Re, although contents as high as 4.7 wt% Re occur in molybdenite at the Pagoni Rachi prospect [ Rhenium is generally traded in the form of ammonium perrhenate (APR). The Minor Metals Trade Association (MMTA) published specifications for basic-grade APR to contain a minimum of 69.00% Re and <0.05% by weight of impurities like Si, Fe, K, Mo, Al, Ca, Cu, Mg, Mn, Ni, Na, P and S, together with a maximum water content of 0.10% [ Rhenium's unique properties have made it a vital part of the superalloy industry, most prominently in nickel superalloys used in both aerospace and industrial gas-fired turbines and also as a catalyst. Molymet's dominance has emerged by virtue of this strategic position, controlling the main world supply of rhenium via the recovery of rhenium units from the flue of their large molybdenite roasters. Production of rhenium here in 2012 was 24.68 t that accounted for >55% of world primary supply [  Rhenium supply is derived as a by-product from molybdenite sludges, which themselves are a by-product of mining porphyry copper deposits. Thus, the supply of rhenium depends on factors that impact global copper production, or even the distribution of copper production among different deposits. Clearly as more copper and molybdenum are extracted, more rhenium concentrates will be available as well. Many factors can potentially interrupt supply of materials. However, by- product metals or companion metals typically have greater risk to supply disruption because the infrastructure may not be well established. Supply of raw materials can be threatened by different factors such as reserves, trade, ecological impact, processing, substitutability and recyclability. Rhenium is produced commercially from deposits associated with copper and molybdenum. Typically, rhenium exists in mixed copper/molybdenum deposits and is firstly separated from copper (accompanied with molybdenum) deposits using conventional concentration technologies such as froth flotation [ Rhenium heptoxide is extremely volatile and has a vapour pressure of (P After scrubbing, the aqueous rhenium is typically recovered using solvent extraction or ion-exchange processes. Generally, the end product produced by these methods is ammonium perrhenate (NH In addition to being produced as a by-product of the extraction of molybdenum, it is possible to recycle rhenium after usage. Processing of rhenium-laden manufacturing scrap and end-of-life materials, such as catalysts and superalloys, may present opportunities to source rhenium as a recycled material. A number of potential recycling approaches have been proposed which may include the utilization of primary processing techniques, as well as the implementation of end-of-life recycling programs. The following subsections illustrate a number of current technologies that might be used to recover rhenium from secondary sources. Waste alloy scraps may be recycled using an oxidative pyrometallurgical roasting technique. The scrap material is first subjected to roasting at a high temperature of 1000 °C, under an oxidizing atmosphere to produce rhenium heptoxide (Re The potassium perrhenate is further subjected to purification by filtration and also dissolution and recrystallization. After purification, the salt is dried and sent for reduction under a hydrogen atmosphere at approximately 350 °C. The experimental work of Heshmatpour and McDonald [ In a similar study, Olbrich et al. [ On the other hand, Stoller et al. [ Petroleum-reforming catalysts containing rhenium and platinum on an alumina substrate are extensively used in the refining industry for the improvement of the octane level of fuels. Following use and deactivation, an effective method for the recovery of rhenium and other PGM metals is necessary. Two routes have been reported to be able to achieve this; these are illustrated in 1. Complete dissolution of the alumina substrate. 2. Selective dissolution and recovery of rhenium and platinum. Complete dissolution of the alumina substrate can be conducted using sulphuric acid which also dissolves rhenium and to some extent, platinum [ Sodium bicarbonate may also be used as a lixiviant in place of sulphuric acid. The proposed advantage of this process is the complete removal of the ion exchange circuit unlike the above process using H The methods used to selectively recover platinum and rhenium from spent catalysts without completely dissolving the alumina substrate vary from calcination of the catalysts to selective leaching in alkaline or acid conditions at ambient and elevated temperatures [ Considering the inherent scarcity of rhenium, the oligopolistic nature of the industry described in 4.1 with implications for stability of supply and the recovery in its demand, it is useful to return to the opportunities represented by a move to a circular economy, defined in In The operationalization of these concepts features therefore the identification of organizations that can recover, recycle, share and supply rhenium. For example, components of industrial symbiosis networks would include: logistics organizations able to collect start and end of life scrap from various sources, such as petrol refineries and aero engine manufacturers. Organizations able to invest in plant and processes as illustrated in Marketing organizations able to identify additional applications for Re, such as the therapeutic applications described in An important design criterion of these industrial symbiosis networks is the reduction of geographical concentration described in Rhenium is a unique, extremely rare and strategic chemical element currently used as an alloying addition in high-temperature superalloys in aerospace, industrial gas-fired turbines and as catalysts in the petrochemical industry. Porphyry mineral deposits are expected to continue to be the main source of primary rhenium production for the foreseeable future, even though overall rhenium grades are low compared to other types of deposits, but rhenium production is feasible because of the large ore tonnage processed. As a result of increasing demand, it is expected that there will be dependency on recycling as well as a source as a by-product of molybdenum extraction. Another way to meet the increasing demand may be the reprocessing of rhenium-laden manufacturing scrap and end-of-life materials, such as Pt The global rhenium market is expected to grow at a CAGR of over 7% during the period 2018–2022, while superalloy turbine parts for aero engines and industrial gas turbines will remain by far the largest end-market for rhenium at over 80% of total rhenium consumption. Given the oligopolistic and geographically concentrated nature of production and associated risks for security of supply, it is essential that additional, more geographically dispersed sources of supply be identified. This could be achieved for example through circular economic networks. Systems and networks designed according to the concepts of Industrial Ecology and Symbiosis offer opportunities to manage rhenium stocks in a cost-effective, resource efficient manner. Further research opportunities should be sought for the development of higher efficiency for both production and recovery processes in order to maintain rhenium supply. As reported in this paper, rhenium recycling presents a prime opportunity to source a rare and important material and research should focus on identifying spent products and industrial sectors that could potentially supply rhenium. Optimised sourcing and supply operations need to be established according to principles of Industrial Ecology and Symbiosis that may involve rhenium (i) as waste from processing and manufacturing and from (ii) faulty or returned products so that disassembly and recovery may take place as part of circular economic processes. Similarly, research should identify which products could be the best sources of rhenium for recycling. Both products and industries should be prioritized as acquisition targets, i.e. products and companies that could be approached or sourced with a view to develop a supply chain of recycled rhenium. Finally, research should explore how industrial ecology and symbiosis systems could assist the design of the said supply chains, including the establishment of specialist waste processing companies that could collect waste materials and operate recovery processes for rhenium as explained in the sections above. The financial support of