Sodium sulfate has proven to be an effective additive for enhancing the reduction and metal aggregation during the carbothermic reduction of Ni laterite ore. In this study, the effect of Na2SO4 on the non-isothermal reduction kinetics of Ni laterite ore with solid C was investigated. The kinetic parameters and mechanism function were determined. The reduction mechanism was also analyzed by combining X-ray diffraction analysis with evolved-gas analysis. The results indicated that the reduction process was divided into three stages on the basis of the conversion degree. The average activation energy was 323.0 kJ/mol for the initial stage of α = 0–0.40, 161.2 kJ/mol for the middle stage of α = 0.40–0.80, and 161.3 kJ/mol for the decaying stage of α = 0.80–1.00. Three-dimensional diffusion equation was determined as the mechanism function in the initial and middle stage. The chemical reaction function exhibited the best fit in the decaying stage.>72% of global Ni resources are Ni laterite ores, which presently constitute the predominant source of Ni. The utilization of laterite ore has attracted increasing attention owing to the declining supply of sulfide ores and the growing production of stainless steel [ The effectiveness of magnetic separation significantly depends on the reduction of iron and nickel oxides, as well as the size of the ferronickel particles formed. Thus, various additives (Na The reduction of nickel and iron oxides is the first step for the aggregation of metallic particles before magnetic separation. Hence, it is of great significance for investigating the carbothermic reduction kinetics of laterite ore to improve the reduction rate of targeted metals. The kinetics of the non-isothermal reduction of nickel oxide by H All the aforementioned kinetic studies were focused on the reduction process in the absence of additives; few studies have investigated the effects of additives (particularly sodium sulfate) on the reduction kinetics of laterite ore. Considering the favorable effect of sodium sulfate on intensifying the reductive roasting and magnetic separation, the objective of the present study was to examine the reduction kinetics in presence of sodium sulfate. Graphite was used as the reductant to exclude the effect of volatile components. Thermogravimetry and a mass spectrometer were employed for in situ detection of the evolved-gas composition. Model fitting was performed to determine the mechanism function of the non-isothermal tests. The reaction mechanism was also discussed according to X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of reduced samples at each stage and the changes in the gas composition. In this study, Ni laterite ore was obtained from the Philippines. Graphite powder with a purity of >99.9% and a particle size of <13 μm was prepared as the reductant. The pretreated laterite ore was ground to ensure that 100% of the sample had a particle size of <0.074 mm. Then, 6 wt% Na TG experiments were performed using a Setaram Evo TG–DTA 1750 apparatus. An approximately 20-mg sample was loaded into a columned alumina crucible (Φ 6 mm × 8 mm), which was placed in the TG apparatus. After the temperature programming was set in advance, TG experiments were conducted under Ar with a flow rate of 20 mL·min Many representative methods for investigating non-isothermal kinetics were summarized by Dickinson [ Non-isothermal reduction experiments were performed at three different heating rates: 10, 15, and 20 K/min. The TG curves were obtained, as shown in The ion currents of CO and CO The mass loss during reductive roasting was mainly composed of CO The detailed calculation method was presented in our previous research [ The relationship between the conversion degree (α) and the reduction temperature at a heating rate of 20 K/min is plotted in The activation energy under the conditions of different conversion degrees was calculated on the basis of the KAS model, as follows: This formula indicates that at the same conversion degree, ln(  The model-fitting method proposed by Coats and Redfern was used to obtain the probable mechanism model. According to the formula below, ln[  The non-isothermal reduction process in presence of sodium sulfate comprised three stages: the initial stage ( The Coats–Redfern equation can be expressed as The anti–Jander equation was determined to be reaction function for the middle stage, where three-dimensional diffusion was also the dominant mechanism. Its differential form is The Coats–Redfern equation can be expressed as For the decaying stage, the equation corresponding to the chemical reaction mechanism had the largest correlation coefficient. The differential form and Coats–Redfern method can be expressed as follows: According to the foregoing discussion, the reduction of the laterite ore was complex; thus, the reduction process cannot be captured by a single model. The KAS method based on different heating rates is reliable in such cases. After Although solid graphite was used as the reductant during heating, the solid-state reduction was inhibited, and the gas–solid reaction involving CO was predominant. The reaction process included not only the reduction of nickel and iron oxides but also other reactions that occurred simultaneously, according to the reduction stages in The results in When the conversion degree increased to 0.80, distinct diffraction of FeNi was observed, and the diffraction of iron oxides disappeared. Most of the iron oxides were converted into the metallic state, and the reduced sample was composed of FeNi, FeS, Fe As the carbothermic reduction finished at The evolved-gas composition during heating was in accordance with the phase transformation during reduction. The mass loss together with the generation of CO The determined activation energies were not constant during the reduction process, indicating that the reduction of the laterite ore with sodium sulfate did not follow a single mechanism. In the first stage ( The kinetics of the non-isothermal carbothermic reduction of laterite ore in presence of Na The mass loss during the reduction process was a function of the reducing temperature regardless of the heating rate. The phase transformation and evolved-gas analysis exhibited good agreement with the mass loss and conversion degree. Non-isothermal reduction of laterite ore can be divided into three stages based on the different conversion degrees. The average activation energies were 323.0 kJ/mol for the initial stage of α = 0–0.40, 161.2 kJ/mol for the middle stage of α = 0.40–0.80, and 161.3 kJ/mol for the decaying stage of α = 0.80–1.00. The most probable mechanism function in the different stages was determined via the Coats–Redfern method. The three-dimensional diffusion function The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors wish to express their thanks to the