Chemical and process industries utilize stirred media mills for efficient fine grinding of solids. Stirred media mills, also referred to as stirred ball or stirred bead mills, generally have a good ability to produce fine particles with a relatively narrow particle size distribution. Wet grinding with vertical stirred ball mills is typically carried out for slurries containing particles smaller than 200μm, such as industrial minerals and pigments. Filtration is an important unit operation, which is performed in order to reduce the water content of the slurry after grinding and concentration, and prior to drying and transportation. Pressure filters are used to obtain the maximum dryness of the product. A number of properties of solids affect the filtration performance. The particle size and shape, the width of particle size distribution, and the net surface charge of the particles are among the factors having a significant influence on the filtration characteristics.
                  In this study, the dependency of the pressure filtration properties of wet ground calcium carbonate (GCC) slurries on the grinding result obtained by a stirred media mill is investigated. After grinding, subsequent filtration experiments were carried out with a laboratory-scale pressure filter. Average specific cake resistances, porosities of the filter cakes, and cake compressibility parameters were determined from the filtration data. The results showed clear correlations between the particle size data and the related filtration properties. Interesting observations were also made regarding the average porosity of the filter cakes and the uncertainty of the experiments.The separation of mineral particles from a liquid in the industry is always affected by the upstream process conditions applied during size reduction by the grinding circuit. One of the most important characteristics of ground solid material is the particle size distribution (PSD) of solids, which depends on the material Fine and ultrafine wet grinding of minerals, pigments, coatings, pharmaceuticals and other materials using stirred media mills is increasing The operational parameters of stirred media mills have a significant influence on the properties of the ground powder product. The most important properties of the product include particle size distribution Cake filtration is an important unit operation in a large number of different applications in minerals processing and chemical industries. Filtration is typically performed after grinding and enrichment operations. The objective of filtration is to remove excess liquid from the slurry to improve the overall economy of the process, e.g. by minimizing the amount of water that is to be evaporated in the final drying stage. When there is a need to produce as dry a cake as possible, pressure filters rather than vacuum filters are likely to be applied. Depending on the product requirements, cake washing, squeezing and desaturation of the cake by the use of pressurized gas can also be performed in many pressure filters. The operational conditions in the filtration stage are selected on the basis of the properties of the slurry, i.e., a high-pressure difference is often helpful for relatively incompressible mineral cakes, while super-compressible materials are more readily filtered by using low pressures. Various particle sizes are used to characterize the PSD of the solids in the slurry to be filtered. For a monomodal distribution with a relatively regular shape, particle sizes of the undersize distribution, such as The aim of this study is to investigate the effect of fine grinding with a stirred media mill on the average specific cake resistances and other filtration properties of ground calcium carbonate (GCC) slurries in a pressure filter. GCC was ground under different conditions to produce slurries with various size distributions of the solids, to be able to associate the grinding results with the pressure filtration properties. The topic has not been widely discussed in the literature, in spite of its importance for the minerals and pigment industries. Laboratory-scale equipment was used in both the grinding and filtration stages to minimize the variance resulting from the experimental procedure. At a glance, particle size distributions look relatively simple, but the complexity in the particle size measurement techniques and related calculations may cause misunderstandings when the results are finally interpreted. The particle characterization methods applied in this study are therefore described thoroughly. The filtration equations used for the calculation of the average specific cake resistance, cake porosity, and approximation of the cake compressibility are also introduced. Several different techniques have been developed for the measurement of particle size distributions. These techniques include, for instance, sieving, measurement of settling velocity of particles, laser diffraction, and direct image analysis. Because the number of small particles in mineral powders, including GCC, is much higher than the number of large particles, a number-based distribution cannot be used to describe the particle system properly. In this case, volumetric PSD is more applicable. The diameters of By converting the volumetric distribution to surface area distribution, the so-called surface mean diameter The volume mean diameter The different particle sizes concerned in this study are illustrated graphically in The specific surface area per unit volume The specific surface area relative to the mass of particles, referred to as The calculation of the average specific cake resistance is performed with filtration equations that utilize Darcy's law. The flow through a filter cake and filter cloth can be calculated from In order to determine the average specific cake resistance from experimental data, Eq. The average specific cake resistance The average specific cake resistance in the filtration of incompressible cakes is theoretically related to the Sauter mean diameter of particles and the porosity of the filter cake by the Kozeny–Carman equation: The compressibility index of the filter cake The batches of slurry for the experiments were prepared by dispersing ground calcium carbonate (GCC, Nordkalk Oy, Finland) in water. The mass and solids content of the slurry were 2.5 The slurries were then ground with a laboratory-scale stirred media mill, using 3 The experiments were carried out according to a three-level full-factorial experimental design with five repetitions for the center point, as shown in An in-depth discussion about the effect of grinding variables on the obtained grinding result is out of the scope of this paper, and the results presented in After grinding (within 24 The filter utilized in this study was a laboratory-scale pressure filter with a chamber volume of 350 The accumulation of filtrate during the experiments and the exact pressure in the filter chamber were recorded. Utilizing the recorded data together with the measured cake dimensions, mass, and moisture content, it was possible to calculate the average specific resistance and the approximate average porosity of each cake. The approximate cake compressibility indices were determined on the basis of experiments performed with the same slurry under different pressures. Because the aim of this study was to clarify the effect of the grinding result on the pressure filtration properties, the effects caused by each grinding variable are not discussed. In the future, a more detailed analysis of the interactions between the grinding variables and filtration characteristics will be performed by utilizing regression models. The results show that the obtained particle size after grinding correlated clearly with  Further, when the same average specific cake resistances as above are plotted as a function of the Sauter mean diameter ( The average specific cake resistances and the weight-based specific surface areas of the solids are presented in The void fraction of the filter cake is called porosity (Eq. Another factor to be considered here is the filtration pressure, which has an influence on the particle arrangement during the cake formation and compression stages. Typically, filter cakes are more or less compressible, which in practice means that an increase in the filtration pressure causes a reduction in cake porosity. In a special case, when all particles are spherical, of the same diameter, non-compressible, and in a stable point contact with each other, the porosity is not affected by the particle size or pressure. The dependency of the average porosity On the basis of The third reason for the decreasing average porosity with increasing representative particle size observed in It is relatively clear to see in In cake filtration, it is typical that an increase in the average specific cake resistance is caused by a filter cake with a decreased porosity. Neither the particle size nor the width of the PSD had an influence on the compressibility index The uncertainty resulting from the experiments themselves can be associated with the two process stages, grinding with the stirred media mill and filtration with the pressure filter. The total error generated in the grinding stage was evaluated by comparison of five repetitions performed for the center point of the experimental plan. The variation of the different representative particle sizes obtained by repeating the same experiment is presented in As shown in When the experimental uncertainty caused by the filtration stage is also taken into account, the relative error becomes larger. The accumulation of error during the experiments can be seen by comparing the relative standard deviations presented in The dependence of the pressure filtration properties of ground calcium carbonate slurries on the grinding results obtained by a stirred media mill was investigated in the study. The results showed that the average specific cake resistance