Lithium-metal primary batteries, widely used in portable electronics, contain lithium, manganese, and carbon, which can be recycled to conserve resources and prevent environmental damage. This study investigates the thermal response of active material under ambient conditions and its effects on manganese dissolution in organic acid. Thus, spent lithium metal batteries were manually dismantled, the lithium they contain was dissolved in a mixture of distilled water and isobutyl alcohol, and the steel and active cathode material were mechanically separated. The thermal exposure of active material comprising MnO2 and C resulted in carbothermal reduction with products Mn3O4 and MnO. The composition of product at optimum condition (800 °C, 30 min) comprises 60 wt% Mn, 21.5 wt% O, and 18.5 wt% C in the form of MnO, Mn3O4, and C. Manganese extraction increased significantly on thermal treatment, yielding 81% at optimum condition. Therefore, thermal treatment for the indigenous reduction of MnO2, followed by leaching in an organic acid, is proposed for lithium and manganese value recovery from spent coin cells. The activation energy for thermal dissociation of active material has been identified as 20.96 kJ/ mol, and mass balance for the process followed has also been investigated.Coin cells are primary lithium metal batteries (LMBs), which are extensively used in portable consumer electronics such as watches, cameras, calculators, radios, computers, transmitters, sensors, and medical implants ( Various combinations such as physical processing, reduction, calcified roasting followed by acid leaching, or magnetic separation were also employed for the Mn extraction from Mn-Fe ore ( Therefore, this study investigates the reduction of the complex MnO Spent coin cells (500 g or 300 pieces) were procured from the watch shop in a local market. A steel case of spent LMBs was opened, and all parts of the cell (steel case, separator, electrode material, and grid with steel parts) were immersed in a distilled water and isobutyl alcohol mixture for the selective dissolution of lithium metal ( X-ray diffraction (XRD; Rigaku) was carried out at 1°/ min with diffraction angles of 20-100° during phase evaluation, and to evaluate the associated phase decomposition/transformation. Phases were identified using Xʹpert Highscore Plus software, and the weight percentage of the different phases (calculated during XRD quantitative analysis) was determined using Rietveld refinement in MAUD (Material Analysis Using Diffraction) software. The morphology and composition were investigated using Scanning Electron Microscopy and Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (SEM-EDS; Carl Zeiss Ultra Plus). The lithium Organic acid leaching is usually employed for manganese extraction because it is simple and environmentally friendly ( With these equations, it was found that citric acid leaching of cathode material occurred at 1 M, 40 g/ L, 90 °C, 120 min. This investigation revealed that direct leaching of the cathode material yielded an Mn extraction of 9.2% because MnO Thermal treatment of cathode material can be considered a conventional carbothermal reduction of manganese dioxide because of the sufficient carbon values. The standard compounds of manganese oxides are MnO TG of active material with a heating rate of 10 °C/ min under ambient atmosphere shows a weight loss of 25.6 wt% up to 1000 °C, as shown in Active material was subjected to heat treatment in a muffle furnace at 250, 400, 600, and 1000 °C based on the DTG peaks (235, 387, 599, and 982 °C), for 30 min to understand the phase transformation of MnO The thermal treatment of cathode material revealed that MnO Citric acid leaching was carried out for the thermal exposure product at 1 M, 40 g/ L, 90 °C, 120 min, and the effect of temperature and time for thermal exposure on Mn extraction is shown in The reaction kinetics of Mn-extraction was also investigated for the thermal exposure in the temperature range of 600–900 °C for 15–60 min followed by citric acid leaching at 1 M, 40 g/ L, 90 °C, 120 min. Experimental results were analysed using the different kinetic model or shrinking core model. The selection of the kinetic model is essential for determining the rate of reaction and controlling step for a reaction ( Various methods, such as solvent extraction, precipitation, and ion exchange, are used for separation and recovery of Mn from the solution ( Lithium was selectively dissolved in distilled water and isobutyl alcohol mixture and is the exothermic and quick reaction because of the high solubility of LiOH in aqueous solution (K A combination of thermal treatment and organic acid leaching for the recovery of manganese and lithium values from discarded coin cells was systematically investigated. The carbon in the active material acted as a reductant, and the carbothermal reduction of MnO  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to thank the Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, for providing Faculty Initiation Grant funds via FIG-100714.