Gasification has been deemed as the most promising method for the thermochemical conversion of Shanxi high ash coals, although the use of these high ash coals leads to high consumption of coal and oxygen, low syngas yield and cold gas efficiency. In order to improve gasification efficiency, it is necessary to reduce the ash content of these Shanxi high ash coals. In this work, three representative Shanxi high ash coals were floated with ZnCl2 flotation agent to obtain floated coal samples with different ash contents. The mineral evolution during coal washing and its effect on ash fusion characteristics were thoroughly investigated. A radio frequency oxygen plasma furnace, X-ray diffraction (XRD) and SIROQUANT were used to analyze the variation of mineral compositions of the floated coals. Quartz (SiO2), kaolinite (Al2(Si2O5)(OH)4), calcite (CaCO3), and tobelite (NH4Al3Si3O10(OH)2) were main mineral which were found in Shanxi high ash coals, and the high contents of quartz and kaolinite led to high AFTs (ash fusion temperatures) of these coals. As mineral content decreased, the contents of quarts, kaolinite, and calcite in the floated coals were obviously lowered, and this resulted in the decrease of S/A (mass ratio of SiO2/Al2O3) of the coal ashes. The ash fusion temperatures of Shanxi high ash coals were therefore significantly influenced by the extent of coal washing. Furthermore, the content of amorphous material in coals increased obviously with the decrease of ash content. These results have important implication in the selection of the appropriate coal washing procedure prior to gasification of these coals.The ash fusion temperature (AFT) of gasification feedstock is an important parameter for all gasifiers. For fluidised-bed gasifiers, the upper operating temperature is determined by AFT to avoid ash agglomeration There are large reserves of Shanxi high ash coals in Shanxi province, China, which account for 40% of the coal reserve in Shanxi. The use of these high ash coals reserves is important for the security of energy supply, and therefore Shanxi high ash coals are expected to remain as a key energy source in the future. Gasification has been deemed as the most appropriate method for the utilization of these high ash coals, since it allows a more efficient and more environmentally friendly conversion of these coals To lower the ash content of the gasified coal, a common practice is to float the coal or wash with water or acid to remove some of the minerals originally present in the coal. Flotation is the most effective technology which is applied to reduce the sulfur content or ash content, and some excluded minerals can be removed by flotation In this work, three representative Shanxi high ash coals were floated with ZnCl Shanxi coals were rich in quartz and kaolinite, and some coals have a significant content of tobelite and calcite Coal ashes of the three coals were prepared according to Chinese standard (GB/T1574-2001). Briefly, the coal samples were placed in a muffle furnace, heated to 500 In order to obtain coals with different ash contents, the coals, SH9, FH9, and SH15, were floated with ZnCl The ash fusion temperature measurement of the coals were carried out by an automatic system with a maximum temperature of 1550 To analyze the mineral compositions of SH9, FH9, SH15 and the floated coals accurately, the organic matter in these coal samples was removed by oxygen plasma oxidation in a K1050X plasma furnace (Quorum Technologies Ltd.). The coal samples were ashed until the mass fluctuation was below 0.001 The mineral in the ashes and the LTAs of the raw and floated coals were quantified by SIROQUANT software. The full-profile Rietveld method was used to refine the shape of a calculated XRD pattern against the profile of a measured pattern. The total calculated pattern is the sum of the individual phase calculated patterns. In order to determine the content of amorphous in the ashes and LTAs, zinc oxide (ZnO) was added into the ash samples. Briefly, an accurately weighed ZnO around 10% by weight of each individual ash sample was added into the ash sample. The mixed ash with ZnO was ground in an agate pestle and mortar until a homogeneous color and texture was achieved. The XRD patterns of the mixtures were recorded using a Bruker D2 X-ray powder diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. A step size of 0.02° at the speed of 4° (2θ)/min over 5–90° was applied. A routine within the SIROQUANT system can then be used to calculate the proportion of amorphous material in the ash sample, without the ZnO, using a correction based on the weighed-in proportion of the ZnO added prior to the XRD run. This method has been introduced in detail by Ward and French As shown in As can be seen from As shown in As can be seen from The ash content decreased, the S/A of SH9, FH9, and SH15 floated ash decreased due to the decrease of SiO As shown in The chemical compositions of a coal ash depend on its mineral compositions As shown in   In this work, three representative Shanxi high ash coals were floated with ZnCl The ashes of Shanxi high ash coals are rich in SiO As the ash content of Shanxi high ash coals was reduced, quartz, kaolinite and calcite were the main mineral removed from Shanxi high ash coals, which therefore influences the chemical compositions. The AFTs of Shanxi high ash coals were significantly affected by the content of coal washing. As the ash content decreased, the contents of quartz, kaolinite, and calcite in the floated coals were clearly affected. Meanwhile, the content of amorphous material in the floated coals increased obviously with decreasing the ash content. The authors acknowledge the financial support provided by Joint Foundation of