Self-compacting concrete (SCC) can achieve compaction into every part of the formwork through its own weight without any segregation of the coarse aggregate. Lightweight concrete (LWC) can reduce the dead load of the structure by incorporating the lightweight aggregate (LWA). In recent years, more and more studies have focused on combining the advantages of SCC and LWC to produce lightweight self-compacting concrete (LWSCC). As one of the most important mechanical properties, uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) values need to be tested before field application of this new material. However, conducting UCS tests with multiple influencing variables is time-consuming and costly. To address this issue, this paper proposed, for the first time, a beetle antennae search (BAS) algorithm based random forest (RF) model to accurately and effectively predict the UCS of LWSCC. This model was developed and verified using data from LWSCC laboratory formulation. Results show that BAS was efficient in searching the optimum hyper-parameters of RF. The proposed BAS-RF model achieved high predictive accuracy indicated by a high correlation coefficient (0.97). In addition, by measuring the variable importance, we conclude that temperature was the most sensitive to UCS development, followed by scoria content and water-to-binder (w/b) ratio, while UCS was less sensitive to fiber content. This pioneering work provides a simple and convenient method for evaluating UCS of LWSCC at varying temperatures.Concrete is a widely used construction material all over the world thanks to its properties of availability, versatility and economy In spite of the advantages, segregation issues are often caused by the low-density of LWA. This problem can be addressed by introducing a relatively large amount of chemical admixtures, powders and improving the quality of LWA, like the manufacturing process of self-compacting concrete (SCC), resulting in an increase in velocity at fresh age and compressive strength at post-curing age As UCS is one of the most important mechanical properties of LWSCC, the effect of the influencing variables on the UCS of LWSCC is required to clarify. In most cases, UCS of LWSCC is commonly obtained by laboratory tests. However, it is time- and money-consuming due to the need of preparation and test of a large number of specimens with a variety of influencing variables. To solve this problem, some indirect estimation methods were proposed to predict the UCS of LWSCC. For example, multiple regression This study makes several contributions to the literature as follows: The predictive performance of RF for predicting UCS of LWSCC with various influencing variables exposed to elevated temperatures was evaluated; BAS was firstly applied to tune hyper-parameters of RF; The relative importance of different variables that influence the UCS of LWSCC was determined to improve the prediction capability. Random forest (RF) algorithm has been extensively applied for classification or regression tasks by building a large number of classification or regression trees (CART) and combining bootstrap and aggregation ideas Beetle antennae search (BAS) is a robust meta-heuristic algorithm which performs excellently on optimization tasks The models were trained and validated on the 70% dataset that were split randomly and tested on the remaining 30% test set. The prediction accuracy in these datasets were evaluated based on the widely used performance measures in previous literatures: correlation coefficient (R) and root-mean-square error (RMSE) To minimalize the bias related with the random partition of the training and validation data, a Dividing the dataset into Training the ML model on the Validating the prediction accuracy on the left-out subset; Repeating Steps 2 and 3 for Averaging the The hyper-parameters in RF include the number of trees in the forest (tree_num) and minimum required samples at a leaf node (min_samples_leaf). The hyper-parameters were tuned on the 70% dataset using 10-fold cross validation. In each fold, the 70% dataset was randomly split into 10 subsets, in which 9 subsets (training set) were applied for the beetle to search the optimum hyper-parameters of RFs for 50 times, and for each time, the RMSE value was calculated on the other subset (validation set). After 50 iterations, the RF model having the smallest RMSE with respect to the validation set was selected in this fold. After 10 folds, the best RF model with optimum hyper-parameters was selected. Since the procedure itself can cause some overfitting to the validation set, the performance of the selected RF model is supposed to be confirmed by assessing its performance on the 30% dataset (test set). In this study, to develop a predictive model for the LWSCC, comprehensive laboratory-based dataset containing 131 distinctive data instances with eight input variables was collected from Aslani and Kelin In this study, general purpose cement (GPC) containing 7.5% limestone addition as per AS 3927 The macro-synthetic polypropylene (PP) fibres with crimped structures and steel (S) fibres with hooked anchorage were employed in this research to reduce shrinkage and control cracking. Their mechanical characteristics are illustrated in Scoria was introduced into LWSCC composites as LWA to replace part of the natural aggregates. The physical properties for scoria are listed in In this study, the superplasticizer complying with AS 1478.1 The binder content (450 kg/m Prior to preparation procedure, all aggregates were soaked for 24 h firstly and then cured for another 24 h to eliminate their influence on w/b ratio. After that, the aggregates were mixed with the binders and the mixtures were stirred sufficiently for 5 min in a blender. Then, water and fibres were added into the blender to blend for another 5 min. After homogeneous blending, 390 cylindrical specimens (three specimens in a batch) were casted in the cylinder mould with 100 mm diameter and 200 mm height by pouring the cementitious materials into moulds directly without further compacting. After 48 h, these specimens were demolded and cured in a curing room for 28 days with 95% humidity and 20 ± 2 °C temperature. In this study, we tested UCS of the specimens exposed to different temperatures: 100, 300, 600 and 900 °C, respectively. The high temperature performance is significant for fibre reinforced composites, rubberized composites and SCCs To test 28-day UCS values of the specimens at elevated temperatures, three specimens in a batch with the same mix proportion were tested in accordance with AS1012.14 The obtained UCS values are shown in As mentioned above, BAS was applied to tune the hyper-parameters of RF (tree_num and min_samples_leaf). After hyper-parameter tuning, the BAS-RF model was trained on the training set and then its performance was evaluated on both the training and test sets, as displayed in In this study, two baseline algorithms, i.e.: multiple linear regression (MLR) and logistic regression (LR) were introduced in comparison with the BAS-RF model. Their predicted errors on the test sets were compared using a box plot ( Furthermore, a Taylor plot was applied to compare the realistic characteristics of the three models by measuring the distance between each model and the point marked “actual” (see After the BAS-RF model with optimum hyper-parameters was obtained, the importance of each input variable should be measured using the trained model. The predictive performance of the model is significantly influenced by high-importance variables which are drivers of the outcome. In comparison, a model may be fitted much faster if variables with low importance are excluded. In RF construction process, the out-of-bag (OOB) samples were not applied for construction, but for calculating the specific variable importance. Firstly, the RMSE on the OOB sample was measured. Then, by randomly shuffling the values on the OOB sample and maintaining the other variables unchanged, the reduction of prediction accuracy on the shuffled sample was calculated. This paper proposed a BAS-RF model for forecasting the UCS of LWSCC. To construct the model, BAS was applied to search the optimum hyper-parameters of RF. The predictive performance of the BAS-RF model was evaluated on a dataset obtained in laboratory with 8 input variables. The following results are obtained in this study: The UCS of LWSCC decreased significantly at high temperatures (600 °C and 900 °C), which may be caused by the dehydration of concrete. BAS algorithm is efficient in searching optimum hyper-parameters of RF. The proposed BAS-RF model achieved high prediction accuracy indicated by a high correlation coefficient of 0.97 on the test set. In addition, the very low RMSE values on training and test sets indicate no overfitting was produced. The variable importance obtained by BAS-RF model indicates that temperature was most sensitive to UCS development, followed by scoria content and w/b ratio, while fibre had the least influence. This research can be extended to predict other properties of concrete such as durability, tensile strength or slump. However, if a larger dataset with more influencing variables can be obtained in the future, the generalization ability of the BAS-RF model can be further improved. Thus, the future work will focus on building a more extensive dataset considering more variables such as time duration, cement type and admixtures. The authors claim no conflicts of interest. The first author is grateful to