Patients with chronic kidney failure—defined as a glomerular filtration rate persistently below 15 mL/min per 1·73 m2—have an unacceptably high mortality rate. In developing countries, mortality results primarily from an absence of access to renal replacement therapy. Additionally, cardiovascular and non-cardiovascular mortality are several times higher in patients on dialysis or post-renal transplantation than in the general population. Mortality of patients on renal replacement therapy is affected by a combination of socioeconomic factors, pre-existing medical disorders, renal replacement treatment modalities, and kidney failure itself. Characterisation of the key pathophysiological contributors to increased mortality and cardiorenal risk staging systems are needed for the rational design of clinical trials aimed at decreasing mortality. Policy changes to improve access to renal replacement therapy should be combined with research into low-cost renal replacement therapy and optimum clinical care, which should include multifaceted approaches simultaneously targeting several of the putative contributors to increased mortality.  National or international programmes for prevention of deterioration of chronic kidney disease to chronic kidney failure. National or international programmes for a holistic approach to cardiovascular risk in patients with chronic kidney disease. National or international education programmes for the general population and health-care personnel, covering prevention of chronic kidney disease and alternative treatments after chronic kidney failure (including transplantation). Developing nations are important targets because of the expected increase in incidence of chronic kidney failure and the low availibility of resources for treatment. Legislative changes that encourage kidney transplantation. Improved care before dialysis and logistics before transplantation. Increase in the number of nephrologists and other necessary health-care personnel in developing countries. Avoidance of negative attitudes about non-renal treatment for patients with chronic kidney failure.   Definition of the optimum moment to start dialysis, especially in the elderly and people with failed transplants. Definition and implementation of strategies to decrease early mortality after the start of dialysis. Definition of optimum logistics for dialysis centres, including size, caseload, and patient–doctor contact times. Characterisation of risk factors for sudden cardiac death and arrhythmia and exploration of corrective strategies. Optimisation of vascular access management. Definition of the optimum medical and interventional management of each cardiovascular cause of death. Optimisation of immunosuppressive regimens to reduce cardiovascular, infection, and cancer risk. Low-cost treatments: investment in low-cost RRT techniques and exploration of the effect of infrequent dialysis. Definition of the optimum dialysate composition regarding sodium, potassium, calcium, and bicarbonate. Definition of the optimum glycated haemoglobin range in patients on RRT. Identification of the causes and study of the effect of the lower than expected use of drugs to reduce cardiovascular risk and treat diabetes in patients on RRT. Optimisation of the dialysis schedule to reduce the peak mortality rates on particular days of the week. Optimisation of management of chronic kidney failure in elderly patients and role of different RRT modalities. Investigation of the role of inflammation and other new biomarkers in patient risk staging and individualisation of treatment. Optimisation of mode and timing of nutritional support to delay RRT and decrease mortality. Optimisation of management of lipid abnormalities in chronic kidney failure. Optimisation of non-RRT care for chronic kidney failure. Optimisation of management of different aspects of chronic kidney disease mineral bone disorder, including magnesium concentrations and the effect of warfarin. Optimisation of supplementation strategies for vitamin D and water soluble vitamins. Optimisation of diuretic use. Further refinement of dialysis dose assessment and effect on mortality. Optimisation of patient education techniques. Optimisation of the use of stimulation of erythropoiesis and target haemoglobin concentrations. Optimisation of the use of convective treatments, including haemodiafiltration, and long and frequent dialysis. Exploration of adsorption as extracorporeal treatment. Exploration of sex differences in risk and cause of death, sex-individualised treatment, and the role of testosterone supplementation. Optimisation of use of implanted cardioverter-defibrillator devices. Optimisation of replacement of all renal functions: renal bioreplacement therapy. Increase of the pool of transplantable kidneys: bioengineered kidneys. RRT=renal replacement therapy. This is the first in a Chronic kidney failure is defined as a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) persistently below 15 mL/min per 1·73 m At age 40 years, the lifetime risk of chronic kidney failure is one in 50. Haemodialysis is the most frequent form of RRT. Mortality is highest during the first 3 months of haemodialysis (27·5 deaths per 100 person-years during the first 120 days Cardiovascular death encompasses several causes with divergent pathogenic mechanisms from atherosclerosis to heart failure and sudden death. Sudden cardiac death accounts for up to 25% of haemodialysis deaths and occurs most often towards the end of the long inter-haemodialysis interval and in the 12 h immediately after haemodialysis. Infection is the second most common cause of death in chronic kidney failure. Mortality from septicaemia or lung infections is 50 and 15 times higher, respectively, in patients on dialysis than in the general population. Mortality on RRT is highest in the USA, lowest in Japan, and intermediate in Europe and Canada ( Despite an increase in age and comorbidities in the RRT population, mortality in patients on RRT has decreased in recent years over all age strata, although more slowly than in the general population ( Several factors contribute to the high risk of death in chronic kidney failure ( Kidney failure results in accumulation of damaging molecules (uraemic toxins), volume overload, electrolyte abnormalities, metabolic acidosis, and neurohumoral and metabolic abnormalities that progress as renal function declines. Uraemic toxins, including trimethylamine-N-oxide, have been linked to cardiovascular risk in the general population, Dialysis-related factors, such as the use of central venous catheters for haemodialysis, increase the risk of death from infection and cardiovascular causes. These risk factors contribute to processes precipitating death. Chronic kidney disease results in accelerated ageing, particularly of the cardiovascular system. Both atherosclerosis and arteriosclerosis contribute to cardiovascular mortality. Chronic kidney disease mineral bone disorder is often complicated by fractures or vascular arterial calcification. Negative mineral bone balance and accumulating mineral content in arteries (ie, vascular calcification) are closely and reciprocally related. Sympathetic nerve activity, which contributes to hypertension and cardiovascular events, is markedly increased in chronic kidney failure due to activation of central sympathetic tone by diseased kidneys. The immune system is altered in chronic kidney failure. Innate immune activation leads to systemic inflammation whereas immune suppression predisposes to infection and cancer. Patients with chronic kidney failure are at high risk for protein energy wasting because of anorexia, inflammation, hypothalamic appetite sensor dysregulation, unpalatable diets, or fear of kidney disease progression. Factors predisposing to cancer include acquired renal cysts, immunosuppressive drugs, viral infection, diabetes, and diagnostic ionising radiation. Large observational databases, including the United States Renal Data System, the ERA-EDTA Registry, and the Dialysis Outcomes and Practice Patterns Study, have identified many hypothesis-generating risk factors for mortality in RRT ( Several RCTs have addressed overall and cardiovascular mortality in chronic kidney failure. Interventions tested so far have mainly focused on drugs that might reduce the risk of atherosclerotic complications, for example, myocardial infarction and stroke. However, most cardiovascular deaths in chronic kidney failure are attributable to non-atherosclerotic complications, especially sudden death, Several RCTs that assessed the effect of different therapeutic approaches on mortality in patients receiving treatment for chronic kidney disease have reported negative outcomes in the past few decades ( In patients with renal disease, the outcome after lowering cholesterol depends on chronic kidney disease stage and treatment. Findings from a meta-analysis of 51 099 patients showed a marked reduction in all-cause mortality for patients with chronic kidney disease treated with statins before starting dialysis, no effect in patients on dialysis, and uncertain effects after renal transplantation. The search for an optimum haemoglobin target has been marred by the constraints of trial design. Thus, although higher achieved haemoglobin concentrations were associated with lower mortality in observational and RCT cohorts, Regarding chronic kidney disease mineral and bone disorders, a meta-analysis Findings from a meta-analysis The dose of dialysis and the size of molecules removed represent old but still tempting targets for treatment of chronic kidney failure. Findings from the Hemodialysis (HEMO) study All-cause and cardiovascular death were reduced in patients on haemodialysis who had severe heart failure and reduced ejection fraction and who were treated with carvedilol and renin-angiotensin aldosterone system blockers (secondary endpoints) Findings from a meta-analysis Chronic kidney disease has been generally recognised as a major cardiovascular risk factor, independent of the amount of kidney failure. The risk of death and cardiovascular risk are increased even in early stages. eGFR decreases with ageing even in the absence of major confounding factors such as diabetes or hypertension. As a result, many of the apparently healthy elderly in developed countries are categorised as having mild chronic kidney disease. Whether this age-related decline of kidney function conveys an additional cardiovascular risk on top of that linked to age per se is unknown. In addition to preventing progression to chronic kidney failure, key issues to be tackled to decrease mortality due to chronic kidney failure range from optimisation of care before progression to chronic kidney failure to improvement of access to RRT. Optimisation of care before chronic kidney failure can delay the development of chronic kidney failure and ensure that patients are in the best possible clinical condition when they reach chronic kidney failure, with improved nutrition, better controlled bone mineral metabolism, and milder cardiovascular disease. Thus, optimised care will control comorbidities and prepare patients for RRT initiation in a timely manner. Optimised care will avoid the need for central venous haemodialysis catheters, and, if possible, will allow pre-emptive kidney transplantation to be planned. All of these factors have been associated with improved outcomes. Optimisation of non-RRT care for chronic kidney failure might improve survival and quality of life for patients who do not have access to RRT or who are unwilling to receive RRT. Patient education and frequent physician contact are important. Correction of acidosis In the IDEAL (Initiating Dialysis Early and Late) trial, Patients on dialysis remain uraemic. Haemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis provide a time-averaged creatinine clearance of around 10 mL/min. This is even lower in patients who receive haemodialysis once or twice weekly for economic reasons. The kinetics of urea are used to assess the dose of dialysis. However, increasing thresholds above standard targets do not benefit either patients with haemodialysis or those with peritoneal dialysis. Urea kinetics can be considered as a baseline parameter of dialysis adequacy, but many other aspects such as nutritional factors or residual renal function should be considered. The endocrine function of the kidneys is not substituted by dialysis. Thus, substitution of hormones, such as erythropoietin, which can be expensive and risky, and calcitriol, may be needed. Additional factors secreted by the kidneys, such as Klotho, are not yet sufficiently characterised and are not available for supplementation. In healthy individuals, blood purification by normal kidneys is based on the function of glomeruli, which passively filter water-containing solute, and on active tubular transport. However, dialysis replaces only the function of the glomerulus. Therapeutic options that have functional similarities to tubules, such as adsorption or hybrid organs containing tubular cells (renal bioreplacement treatment), are experimental. Enhancement of tubular cell pump function might improve removal of renal excreted solutes and protect against the solute's cardiovascular effects. Successful kidney transplantation is cost effective, replaces all renal functions, and is associated with improved survival. Living donation has better outcomes than optimum dialysis RRT-linked complications are estimated to be the primary cause of death in 2% of patients on RRT. Absence of differences on mortality in trials of drugs for treatment of chronic kidney disease or its consequences has been suggested to show that in patients on RRT the intervention comes too late. This finding led to a pessimistic attitude and insufficient interest by non-nephrologists in drug treatment to reduce mortality. In observational studies, drugs such as β blockers or diabetes treatment in patients with diabetes with glycated haemoglobin greater than 9% were underused, Large trials with focus on factors underlying the high risk for sudden death and on non-cardiovascular mortality in chronic kidney failure are urgently needed. In view of the disappointing results of previous RCTs, their high costs, and the multifactorial pathophysiology of chronic kidney disease and its complications, future attempts should target several factors simultaneously. A way forward would be the implementation of randomised registry trials through structures such as the ERA-EDTA Registry. The population of patients who need RRT largely exceeds available health-care resources. In countries in which health-care costs are not fully reimbursed to the patient, RRT costs can exhaust family reserves. In developing countries, limited resources, infrastructure, and adequately trained health-care personnel present severe challenges that are difficult to overcome. In developed countries, transplantation and home dialysis are most cost effective. However, home strategies are not widely used despite patient and physician preference. In most countries, living and cadaveric donor transplantation rates lag behind demand, and some patients die on the waiting list. The community at large might profit from a shift from benefit-driven renal medicine to patient-driven and society-driven incentives. Research on adequacy and technical improvement of RRT remains important, but should become more socioeconomically oriented by distribution of specific RRT types, including kidney transplantation, and by directing efforts to test and use less expensive solutions, thus directly tackling the real costs of RRT and how to decrease them. Education of the general population, doctors, and health-care planners remains vital. The Only a combination of health-care policy changes, education, and research will reduce the high rates of mortality from chronic kidney failure. Chronic kidney disease is often not regarded as a key non-communicable disease.  We searched the Cochrane Library, Medline, Embase, and Database of Systematic Reviews (up to Nov 30, 2013). We used the search terms “mortality” or “survival” or “malnutrition” or “wasting” or “infection” or “cardiovascular” in combination with the terms “dialysis” or “end stage renal disease” or “chronic kidney disease” or “chronic kidney failure”. We mostly selected publications from the past 5 years, but did not exclude commonly referenced and highly regarded older publications. We also searched the reference lists of articles identified by this search strategy and selected those we judged relevant. Review articles are cited to provide readers with more details and more references than there is room for in this Review. Additional publications were proposed by the authors.  All authors contributed to the design and concept; did the searches needed for their assigned sections; wrote a section; read, revised, and critiqued the successive versions; and approved the final manuscript. AO coordinated the Review and integrated the sections and comments.  AO has received honoraria from Fresenius, AbbVie, Sanofi, Shire, and Novartis. AC has received honoraria from Amgen, Fresenius, Sandoz, and Vifor. DFo has received honoraria from Abbott, Amgen, Astellas, Baxter, Fresenius Kabi, Keryx, Sanofi, and Shire. DG has received honoraria from AbbVie, Amgen, Astellas, Fresenius, Keryx, Sandoz, and Sanofi. FM has received honoraria from Shire and Amgen. ZAM has received honoraria from Sanofi, Fresenius, Vifor, Abbott, and Chigai; and research support from Fresenius, Baxter, Amgen, and Sanofi. PR has received honoraria from Baxter-Gambro, Fresenius, and Relypsa. RV has received research grants from Fresenius Medical Care (except for Fresenius Kabi), Baxter Healthcare, Gambro, Roche, and Amgen; and is President of the ERA-EDTA. AW has received honoraria from Abbott, Amgen, Roche, Teva, Fresenius, Boehringer Ingelheim, Affymax, and Vifor. CZ has received honoraria from AbbVie, Sanofi, Amgen, and Shire. GML has received honoraria from Amgen, Sandoz, and Sanofi. DFl and MK declare that they have no competing interests.  AO receives support from Programa Intensificacion (ISCII, Spanish Government), RETIC REDINREN 012/0021, and CYTED IBERERC. 