The paper presents results of investigations aimed to find relationship between grinding media wear rate and lithology of ores processed in copper production. Laboratory wear tests of grinding media were carried out for “pure” lithological components, natural copper ores and artificial mixtures prepared in the laboratory. Test samples were characterized in terms of lithology, and the results were used for interpretation of results of grinding media consumption. Based on the laboratory tests results a new wear function of grinding media consumption related to lithology of ores was established.Particle breakage in a ball mill is achieved by the collision of balls, or by balls sliding past one another The charge profile shows three zones that are typical for the action: The grinding zone – where ball layers sliding over one another grind the material trapped between them. The tumbling zon – where balls are rolling over one another and breaking the material in low-energy impact. The crushing zone – where the balls are in flight re-entering the ball charge and crushing the material in high-energy impact. As a result of these actions, ball mill wear occurs. The wear is actually associated with the mentioned comminution mechanisms with adhesive wear found in the crushing and tumbling zone and abrasive wear in the grinding zone. Wear is proportional to the energy dissipated in these zones. One of the most significant problems in the copper production industry is maintaining good efficiency of ore grinding and low cost of this process. The two key factors affecting the costs are the energy consumption and grinding media wear. With respect to grinding media, worldwide steel consumption alone was estimated at over 600,000 Considering such significant amount of the grinding media consumption, numerous investigations and measurements are being performed Development of ball mill wearing models (based on energy balance, wearing theory and discrete models based on numerical simulation of the ball mills operation) and Physical measurements of wearing effects of the balls and liners (laboratory and on-site measurements) One of the fundamental investigations dated from 19th century is those performed by Bond Pn(  Other models use a similar method for expressing the breakage rate and breakage distribution functions and are principally the same. Their differences lie in the manner in which they represent the material transport mechanisms. To express the ball wearing in mills, in general, two main parameters are used to characterize the ball consumptions in relation to milling time constant of a mill (referring to ball consumption) – the ratio between the total mass of the charge ( tonnage constant of the mill – the ratio between total mass of the charge ( For more efficient estimation of ball consumption per unit of time or unit of milled material numerous investigations have been performed in the last century and they are based on the research of Prentice and Davis who respectively posted the basis of “surface” and “volume” theory of balls wearing By mid-40׳s last century a good approximation was developed in form of so called marked-ball test Today, the most widely applied methods for monitoring and measurements of wearing of both grinding media and liners are the following Laboratory tests in small-size mills with physical measurement of the wearing effects and on-site measurements in real industrial condition based on measurements of filling degree by crash-stops and grinding out and lifter geometry, measurements of mill electrical power consumption, geometrical measurements of liners, marked-balls tests, and in-mill dynamics based on load-angles measurements, The on-site measurements are used widely today in industry There are also numerical methods applied for virtual simulations of the grinding process All above presented methods evaluate consumption without going in details of the wear phenomenon essence and reasons of rate consumption variation. They do not define the relationship between the grinding media wear and the lithology of the material processed (ore). They enable the evaluation of the phenomena of wear, which is directly linked to the lithology. In one of the World biggest copper producer KGHM Polska Miedź S.A., the following methods are used to monitor wear in grinding process grinding media – constant measurements of mill electrical power consumption and liners – wear per unit of time monitored periodically by geometrical measurements. None of these methods allow prediction of the impact of ore lithology changes to the grinding media wear. These methods enable evaluate (with some accuracy) the effect of these changes. In order to enable a proper planning of grinding media usage, it is necessary to establish a method that allows prediction of the rate of grinding media consumption as a function of changes in ore lithology. Such a method has a great importance considering large variations of the ore lithology processed in the KGHM Polska Miedź S.A., which are presented in Based on the above review of the state of knowledge and analysis of the wear phenomena associated with the process of grinding, it was found that there is need to develop a method for predicting grinding media wear as a function of the lithological composition of copper ore. This method is based on the following assumptions: the three lithological ore components: sandstone, dolomite and slate decide on the rate of grinding media wear, the impact on wear is different for different lithological components, and the grinding media wear indicator will refer present consumption of grinding media to the forecast one. In order to establish relations between wear rate and different types of ores lithology, the following steps were performed: Determination of lithology of ores used in the investigations. Laboratory wear tests of grinding media for different types of ore, pure components and their mixtures. Establishing relations between wear rate and different types of ores lithology. Development of method for predicting grinding media wear as a function of the lithological composition of copper ore. Details of investigations are presented in the following sections. The main objective of the study was to determine the characteristics of the ore types present in samples taken from the production lines Polkowice, Rudna and Lubin. These characteristics are used in laboratory and industrial tests of grinding media wear. Natural samples of ores obtained from mines were initially crushed to obtain particles size <2.0 The lithology of copper ores was determined by microscopic examinations of polished preparations (samples). As a results of investigations the percentage of the three main lithological components such as sandstone, dolomite and slate is defined for each of the production lines. Results are presented in It must be noticed, that significant differences in average lithology presented in In order to determine the influence of individual lithological components on grinding media wear, a program for laboratory tests was developed. Key information and test results are presented below. The main aim of laboratory tests was to find a relation between lithology of tested samples of ore and grinding media wear. Wear tests were performed in a laboratory mill filled with ball grinding media. Wet grinding was performed, which is typical for copper ore milling. Details of equipment used and tests data are presented The ten marked steel balls and ten cast-iron balls were monitored for weight loss during the whole experiment with accuracy of 0.001 After each run, the balls were weighed. In addition, fractions passing and remaining on the sieve of 100 The following “pure” lithological components of ores, natural compositions of ores and artificial mixtures were selected for laboratory tests “pure” lithological components of ore: sandstone, dolomite, and slate. Natural copper ores processed in the KGHM Polska Miedź S.A. (see Laboratory mixtures made of “pure” components with composition presented in In order to determine relations between lithology of tested samples of ore and grinding media wear the following assumptions were made: As a comparative parameter for all tests, grinding time to achieve the assumed grain size was chosen. The threshold grain size was taken as 90% of the particles of size less than 100 Grinding time for each sample was determined based on the approximation of the results of the sieve tests conducted before test and after each of two grinding times ( For the determined grinding time, normalized wear (weight loss) of steel and cast-iron balls was calculated with the use of wear approximation curves. Using regression methods, standardized wear indicators of grinding media were estimated as variables of lithology composition of the grinded samples. Based on the above laboratory test program, wear tests were performed for “pure” lithological components of ores, natural compositions of ores and artificial mixtures. As listed above grinding of each ore was performed for two grinding cycles: In the next step and according to the methodology described above, the grinding time for each sample was calculated based on the assumed grain size threshold ( 90% of the particles of size less than 100 In order to determine function describing relations between wear rate of grinding media and lithology of ores, nonlinear regression has been used. Regression analysis allows to summarize a set of data obtained from experiment and fit them to a model that will accurately describe the data in certain range. The regression function describes the influence of individual components of ore (sandstone, dolomite, slate) on wear rate of grinding media. This effect is different for the three considered ores׳ components and it is shown in It is found that the dependence of grinding media wear and lithological composition of ore is not linear. Therefore, the non-linear regression analysis was used to determine the searched relation. The average normalized wear of steel and cast-iron grinding was assumed. Regression was done for three variables, assuming that a percentage of all components equals 100% Regression analysis was performed using software DataFit. As a result of regression analysis, function of standardized wear fY of grinding media in relation to lithology of ore was obtained The standardized wear regression function in the form of 3D graph is shown in The regression function can be used as a tool for forecasting of grinding media consumption by comparing the values obtained for the currently known lithology of ore and the value obtained after substituting the anticipated lithology. Substituting the function lithological percentages of ore ingredients we can get the value of grinding media wear, expressed in units of weight. Such a comparison was made on the basis of predicted lithology of ore to be processed by KGHM Polska Miedź S.A. company. The predicted lithology was estimated with consideration of geological tests continuously carried on in areas of copper mines, designed for future excavation. In The main objective of the study was to determine the influence of lithology on the consumption of grinding media and development of wear indicators describing relationship between lithology and consumption of grinding media. Based on review of the state of knowledge and analysis of the phenomena associated with the process of grinding, it was found that there is lack of models and methods involving grinding media consumption and copper ore lithology. However it is possible to develop a generalized method of predicting consumption as a function of the lithological composition, which will be a type of wear indicator. Based on the laboratory tests such method was developed and presented in this paper. This method is based on the following assumptions: (a) the three lithological ore components sandstone, dolomite and slate decide the rate of grinding media wear; (b) the impact on wear is different for different lithological components; and (c) the grinding media wear indicator will refer present consumption of grinding media to the forecast one. On the basis of grinding media consumption of for “pure” lithological components, natural copper ores and artificial mixtures, regression wear function Based on the performed investigations the following conclusions are given: The largest share in the grinding media wear of the three “pure” lithological ore components was sandstone. Percentage average share in the wear for sandstone (S), dolomite (D) and slate (Sl) is as follows: As a result of wear tests with the use of natural ores and artificial ore mixtures prepared in the laboratory, it was confirmed that the sandstone ore has the largest share in the wear rate of grinding media. Developed regression wear function On the basis of ore lithology forecasts of KGHM mines, estimation of grinding media consumption was made (see In all three mines it is predicted to decrease sandstone ore content in the feed while increasing the share of dolomite. This will reduce the consumption of grinding media for about 8%. As a part of the work lithology of ores processed in KGHM Polska Miedź S.A. was specified. This information can be used as a source data for other investigations. Verification of regression model determined in laboratory investigations was done by authors of this paper. It was aimed to determine the relationship between real industrial consumption of grinding media and consumption calculated with the use of regression function