This paper uses the first-order fully mixed model to argue that operating a bank of cells with a flat cell-by-cell recovery profile yields maximum separation between two floatable minerals with constant relative floatability for a target bank cumulative recovery. The bank optimization problem thus translates into a local problem of selecting cell manipulated variables, such as air rate, to reach that recovery profile. Some properties of the bank that emerge from the analysis are discussed. Recovery profiling appears to contribute to the success of air profiling recently reported.Flotation circuits are arrangements of stages which typically comprise several cells in series referred to as a line, row or bank. The series arrangement reduces short circuiting and provides for transport to approach plug flow and thus minimizes retention time for a target recovery ( Xstrata Brunswick Division tested various strategies of distributing (profiling) air to the final (fourth stage) Zn cleaner bank of seven cells. It was found that an increasing profile gave the best performance (down-the-bank grade-recovery relationship) ( Analysis of the Brunswick case concluded that the improvement was due to reduced entrainment of non-sulphide (non-floatable) gangue in the first cells in the bank because the low air rate restricted water recovery. There was no difference in relative floatability of the two floatable minerals, sphalerite and pyrite, and thus it appeared there was no impact on their separation. Air profiling, however, could be considered as recovery profiling, the different air profiles distributing material differently down the bank, which opens the question addressed in this paper: does the recovery profile influence separation of floatable minerals? We address the question as an optimization problem. Two floatable minerals A and B are considered. The optimization problem is formulated to maximize the (technical) separation efficiency ( Making the common assumption of first-order flotation kinetics and fully mixed isolated cell, the recovery of mineral A and B in cell By rearranging Eq. To gain insight into the optimization problem, a bank composed of one, two and three cells is first analyzed. Then, the analysis is extended to the general problem consisting of a bank of This case does not entail any optimization problem since the end constraint In this case, two degrees of freedom are available to solve the optimization problem, i.e,  The general problem is to optimize operation of a bank of An efficient method to deal with the optimization of serial structured processes is dynamic programming (  The state variables are those variables that carry all the information about the operating condition of the stage. In our case, the selected state variables are the cumulative recoveries of mineral A and B in each cell: The decision or control variables are the available degrees of freedom to be manipulated in order to modify the operation of any stage. In our case these are the recovery of mineral A in each flotation cell, The dynamic programming technique requires that the state variable of any stage depends only on the previous state and the decision variable of the actual stage. In our case, this is satisfied by the following transformation equation: Constraints on a decision or state variable may appear from operational objectives, actuator constraints, etc. Four sets of constraints are considered in our optimization problem. The first one is an equality constraint imposing a target cumulative (bank) recovery of mineral A; the second is that cell recoveries are bounded between 0 and 1; and the last set of constraints relates cell recoveries of mineral A and B with the relative floatability. The optimization problem is formulated as maximizing the separation efficiency, determined by the difference between the cumulative recoveries of mineral A and B at the end of the bank subject to the transformation equations and constraints considered above. To this end, cell recoveries will be manipulated to yield an optimal recovery profile. Considering the flat recovery profile, The analyses has shown that the way material is distributed down the bank (the recovery profile) influences separation between floatable (i.e., true-floating) minerals. For the case of constant relative floatability examined here the maximum separation at a target bank recovery is given by a flat recovery profile. There is a question how robust is the model (Eq. The first-order fully mixed kinetic model is the basis of many, if not most, analyses of flotation systems ( Frequently a constant rate constant is used ( While model choice and assumptions may attract debate, the notion of recovery profiling merits consideration. While not aware of recovery profiling being practiced we do know that the related concept mass recovery profiling is being explored for bank control ( The picture, however, is not complete until entrainment is included. It was evident at Brunswick that the increasing air profile had reduced entrainment by restricting recovery in the first couple of cells of the bank whereas the current analysis only hints that separation between the two floatable minerals sphalerite and pyrite was also enhanced. A bank property in our favour is that if to control entrainment the first cells are operated below optimum for maximum separation efficiency A from B this is less detrimental to separation efficiency than a strategy calling for increased recovery of A in the first cells. We continue to explore ways to include entrainment in the modelling effort. It may be possible to introduce a relative floatability of mineral to water which is independent of physical variables ( Using a conventional first-order fully mixed model a flat cell-by-cell recovery profile has been found optimal in the sense of maximizing the separation efficiency of a bank for a given target cumulative recovery when the relative floatability is constant. The optimal solution is independent of the value of the relative floatability as long as it is constant down the bank. Air profiling is an efficient way to control recovery profile and may help explain the success of this strategy. Exploring the model it is found that separation efficiency increases with number of cells in the bank up to ca. 6 with diminishing gains above this number. A bank with six cells operating with the flat recovery profile will exceed the separation efficiency achievable in a single cell. Funding for this work is under the Chair in Mineral Processing co-sponsored by Vale Inco, Teck Cominco, Xstrata Process Support, Agnico-Eagle, Shell Canada, Barrick Gold, SGS Lakefield Research, COREM and Flottec under the Collaborative Research and Development program of NSERC (Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada) and through the AMIRA International P9N project also under the Collaborative Research and Development program of NSERC.