Based on 74 ore-processing plants and their energy meter's coordinates in Zaruma-Portovelo, we determined the energy consumption profiles for each ore-processing plant following the methodologies of Gonçalves (2016) and Cabezas (2016). In doing so, the total energy consumption in comminution processes was calculated. Data shows the rising trend of increased energy consumption for ore processing in Zaruma-Portovelo. Data can be further used when i.e. aiming to re-design sectorial reforms towards transparency in the mining sector. in which the reported data could backup the need of cross-sectorial coordination between ARCOM and ARCONEL as well as for strengthening the state in capturing a larger share of revenues from the extractive sectors (Gaudry et al., 2020). Finally, the scientific community may benefit from this data, particularly those working on energy efficiency and prospective energy consumption and planning related to the extractive sector (Gaudry et al., 2020).Ecuador's legislation differentiates between “small-scale mining” and “artisanal mining”. “Small-scale mining” is defined as an alternative to generating job opportunities in under developed areas, and simultaneously capable of generating productive chains by activating local networks of economic activities. The aspects that differentiate it from “artisanal mining” are depth of location of deposits, amount of investments in mining, installed capacity of exploitation, and benefit of processing ( Although “Artisanal and Small-scale Mining” (ASM) provides innumerable benefits to the rural inhabitants and governments of the developing world, it is also responsible for a wide range of environmental and socioeconomic issues ( The Ecuadorian city of Zaruma is located in the Province of El Oro (see In other places also the informal mining is growing. The rural parish of La Merced de Buenos Aires (LMBA), about 800 km north of Zaruma, there has been arrival of thousands of illegal miners during 2018 to extract as much ore as possible for gold production ( In this context, the present paper attempts to (a) understand the consequences of the banning of urban mining in urban areas of Ecuador and its impact on Zaruma, (b) highlight shifts in economic activities in Zaruma from informal mining to ore-processing, (c) understand the degree of dependence of Zaruma on ores illegally mined LMBA and (d) in lack of official data, present an alternative method to estimate the informal mining and quantity of ore processed in Zaruma during 2010–2018. The organization of the rest of the paper is as follows. Mining activities in Zaruma-Portovelo have been recorded since 1557 ( As changes in the mining regulation were introduced by 1951, the Ecuadorian State transferred SADCO to the cooperative operations of the Illegal transactions between informal miners and processing plants started to rise. In order to legalize and formalize such cooperatives, the Ecuadorian Institute of Mining (INEMIN) implemented a scheme in 1985 where former concessions like SADCO and CIMA were divided into small companies. Since 1988, along with favourable gold prices, “small-scale mining” activities sustained an increasing trend and boom until today ( By 2005, Zaruma-Portovelo represented 60% of the national gold production ( Mining activities are the main source of income of Zaruma ( By October 2016, Zaruma's local authorities reported about 250 m Local authorities of LMBA reported that in February 2018 around 3000 people arrived with extraction purposes while governmental authorities reported seizures of about 1500 tons of ore being transported illegally to southern provinces ( Additionally, of all governmental ore seizures between May 2018 and May 2019, about 30% has been extracted illegally by mining groups in LMBA (El Transportation to processing plants and sold directly at US$80-US$100 per bag of approximately 100 kg or Transported and processed by processing plants and selling the obtained gold. The high profits derived from both retail paths have increased the presence of armed groups in LMBA ( In order to calculate the energy consumption of ore-processing plants, we first identified the total number of potential ore-processing plants and obtained their energy metre code as well as their energy consumption as described below. According to the technical report published in 2014 by the Ecuadorian National Institute of Geological Mining and Metallurgical Research (INIGEMM), we identified an initial sample of 65 potential ore-processing plants in Zaruma-Portovelo ( Once verified, we expanded the sample of potential ore-processing plants by including additional inferred ore-processing plants within the exclusion zone. Based on the resulting 185 potential ore-processing plants, we requested the monthly energy consumption between 2008 and 2019 from ARCONEL, as well as their electricity tariffs (see Supplementary material Table 1). In the next step we obtained the monthly electricity consumption as well as the associated electricity tariff, and limited the original sample of potential ore-processing plants to 74 (from 185) by filtering those with an industrial electricity tariff only (thus ore-processing plants without an “industrial” electricity tariff were excluded) (See Having obtained the above-mentioned data we proceeded to determine the energy consumption profiles for each ore-processing plant following the methodologies of We also calculated the EUII, which measures the intensity of electricity use per unit of processed ore, by using the formula of the Chilean Copper Commission ( Additionally, Person´s correlations were calculated between any pairs of variables namely ECCI and EUII, ore processed and EUII, ore processed and ECCI, number of processing plants and total annual energy consumption, number of plants and ECCI, and total annual energy consumption and ECCI. A significance level of <0.05 was considered significant. From 2011 to 2014, there was a 45,05% increase in the ECCI of the total amount of processing plants. However, in the following years (from 2014 to 2017) it diminished by 13,13% and from 2017 to 2018 it increased again by 14,5% (see It can be assumed that the number of processing plants would have had a similar development, however, this was not the case for all the previously mentioned time periods. From 2011 to 2014 there was indeed an increase in the number of processing plants from 48 to 57, but during 2014–2017 the number of processing plants remained the same while the ECCI diminished. Finally, from 2017 to 2018 there was a marginal reduction in the number of processing plants from 57 to 56, nonetheless the ECCI increased (see Between 2011–2014, there had been increase in energy consumption from 82.255 kWh to 100.472 kWh. However, between 2014 and 2017, the energy consumption decreased from 100.472 kWh to 87.273 kWh, while between 2017 and 2018 the energy consumption again increased from 87.273 kWh to 101.792 kWh (see Due to the limited availability of data provided by ARCOM on the amount of ore processed, the evaluation of the EUII was done for the years 2013 to 2017. For this period the ECCI per plant presented little variations. Between 2013–2014 there was an increase of 3,93% but between 2014 and 2017 a decrease of 13,13%. However, the amount of ore being processed did not follow the same pattern. Between 2013 and 2014, there was a reduction of 50,39% in the amount of ore being processed and between 2014 and 2017 there was an even further decrease of 73,27%. As a result, the EUII increased from 5 kWh/ton to 31 kWh/ton between 2013 and 2017 (see We expected the ECCI to be directly proportional to the amount of ore being processed, i.e. the more ore processed, the higher the energy consumption. However, we found that this did not hold true in all the periods evaluated. With the decrease in the number of ore-processing plants, and an increase in ECCI, it is possible to argue that processing plants are processing more ore than what is being reported. According to Gonçalves, 18.480 and 20.832 tons of material was processed by each plant in 2013 and 2015, with an estimated annual ECCI of 78.593.625 kWh and 88.596.540 kWh respectively. However, the real amount of ore processed in 2013 was 21.000 tons and 5.452 tons in 2015 ( It needs to be noted that each of the plant's reports, as a private entity, the amount of ore that is being processed to ARCOM. This means that ARCOM receives and collects the information from several ore plant's owners without further check and verifications. This suggests complementarity with the electricity consumption billing. Monitoring and measuring energy consumption are based on the electricity bills and tariffs, while ore-processing reports could reflect mistakes or intentional omissions. Omissions could be interpreted as operations related to illegal mining e.g. ore-processing from LMBA, tax evasion, etc. One of the main features of contemporary development politics and extractive policy in Latin America is the prominent role of the state ( Our results could not determine a correlational dependence link between Zaruma and LMBA. However, locals reported that a considerable amount of ore came from different parts of the country to be processed in Zaruma. The omission of information by the processing plants suggests a symptom of a larger problem. The increase in illegal mining activity in places such as LMBA can be an example of how these activities can influence the development and territorial organization of both the sectors where the material is extracted as well as the places where it is processed. According to our results, even though the extraction activities seemed to diminish in recent years, there is a rising unreported trend towards ore processing services from other parts of the country. Considering that Ecuador has committed to joining the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) ( The presented methods of evaluation of energy consumption and EUII in relation with the amount of ore processed in Zaruma proved to be an efficient indirect method for estimating the amount of ore processing, and their indirect support of extractive activities elsewhere. It is found that the link between Zaruma and LMBA developed new territorial dynamics that balanced the initial unintended disequilibrium from the regulations aiming to diminish mining activities in Zaruma. While the focus on Zaruma and LMBA serves as an example, our results highlight how processing plants have become a complementary engine for economic development in Zaruma. This in turn, while contributing to the sustainability of Zaruma's mining tradition, causes unintentional social and environmental issues in LMBA. At the national and international scale, Torres-Lopez (2015) highlighted that Ecuador's customs reports reveal a very high underreported gold production. During 2010–2014 the Central Bank of Ecuador (BCE) registered 22 tons of gold production. However, 62,4 tons of gold were exported in the same period (Torres-López Finally, while most the efforts addressing ASM consequences have focused on regulatory measures, the presented methodological approach towards the estimation of ore processing through energy consumption may contribute towards global traceability efforts, from both the legal and financial instrument's perspective, with much more accuracy than the reports presented to ARCOM. From an energy efficiency and public-private partnership perspective, EUII in ore-processing plants could be discussed within the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM). CDM allows emission-reduction projects in developing countries to earn certified emission reduction credits ( Further application that may solve the question of ore-origin, could consider laboratory tests and methodologies that trace ore-origins back to their source. Complementary to the proposed method, multiple interdisciplinary research lines that could help validate and reduce the negative impacts, build on control capacities and foresee potential urban-rural linkages are possible and are suggested. Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 