The paper “Fabrication of a green porous lignin-based sphere for the removal of lead ions from aqueous media” by Li et al. addresses the topic of synthesizes of porous adsorbent for lead ions. The porous lignin-based sphere (PLS) adsorbent in this study has exhibited remarkable adsorption performance toward lead ions. Since preparation of porous biopolymer-based gel beads is the key to large-scale adsorption process of metal ions, this study is of high interest to researchers in this area. The authors made significant errors in their experiment that provide a highly misleading perception on the structure of PLS adsorbent. We offer the following comments: The authors synthesized PLS adsorbent by a simple gelation and solidification method. In a typical experiment, solution containing 0.4 g sodium alginate and 0.05 g lignosulfonate was mixed with crosslinking agent, and then dripped into calcium chloride solution for gelation. It is worth noting that the dosage of sodium alginate was much higher than lignosulfonate, and the calcium chloride solution is generally used to cross-link sodium alginate, so the adsorbent is more alginate-based than lignin-based. The FTIR spectra illustrated that PLS is more similar to sodium alginate rather than lignosulfonate based on the characteristic peaks. The authors point out that lignin has very low adsorption capacity towards metal ions due to its structure and PLS adsorbent was compared to lignin regarding the structure and adsorption performance. However, the PLS adsorbent should be compared to alginate-based adsorbents, which have significantly higher metal uptake capacities [ The authors reported that the PLS adsorbent had a large amount of mesopores (d = 20.7 nm) with a high porosity of 87.66% and a total pore volume of 0.416 cm The gelation temperature used for PLS adsorbent was 80 ℃, which is also questionable. It is reported that higher gelation temperature would results in poor mechanical strength [ In short, the original authors provided a synthesis method that is not commonly used to prepare porous materials [