Recent investigations indicated that using nanobubbles (NBs) in flotation separation of fine particles (<25 μm) has several advantages; however, a detail study on performances of various flotation parameters (such as hydrodynamic variables and particle properties) and their impacts on recovery of coarse particles (>100 μm) in the presence of NBs have not been fully understood. This work was explored how NBs can change impacts of Reynolds number, conventional flotation bubbles (CBs), air flow rate and particle sizes on flotation recovery of coarse particles (−425 + 106 μm). Several flotation experiments were carried out by using pure quartz in the presence and absence of NBs. Kendall’s tau (τ) as an accurate statistical method was introduced and applied through the provided dataset from the experiments to assess the impacts of NBs. In the absence of NBs; τ assessments demonstrated that there are negative correlations between particle size, air flow rate, Reynold number and recovery (τ ∼ −0.81, −0.18 and −0.12, respectively), and a positive relationship between CBs and recovery (τ ∼ 0.08). In general, results indicated that recovery of coarse particles was increased by ∼14% (on average) in the presence of NBs; however, the magnitude of relationships was not changed (just correlations between Reynolds and CBs vs. recovery were changed: τ ∼ −0.17 and 0.13, respectively). Assessing the simultaneous impacts of Re and CBs on recovery showed that in the presence of NBs; the highest recovery (on average) may receive in lower Re values and higher CB sizes in comparison with in the absence of NBs. Taking all these interactions into consideration, it can be concluded that increasing the rate of bubble-particle attachment and decreasing the impact of Re can be the main reasons for the enhancement of coarse particle recovery in the presence of NBs.The study of application of nanobubbles (NBs: bubbles with <1 μm diameters) is one of the fast growing topics in modern technologies (ultrasound imaging, wastewater treatment, medicine, energy systems, etc.). Potential of NBs in the improvement of flotation performance has recently attracted many attentions [ It was well understood that the efficient separation via froth flotation is dependent on various parameters. Particle size can consider as one of the most important parameters in flotation. In general, froth flotation was designed for processing of fine particles (−100 + 25 μm); however, when the liberation degree is above 100 μm, coarse particle flotation may have several advantages such as: decreasing the cost of grinding, filtration, thickening, drying, and increasing the plant throughput. Typically, recovery of coarse particles is low where during flotation they are detached from the bubble surface in high turbulence zones, and hydrodynamic variables (such as air flow rate, impeller speed, Reynolds number, etc) play an essential role in their particle-bubble collision and attachment [ Therefore, this investigation is conducted to better understand impacts of hydrodynamic parameters on flotation recovery of coarse particles in the presence of NBs. Comparative flotation tests in the presence and absence of NBs are used to statistically assess effects of hydrodynamic parameters (Reynolds number, CBs and air flow rate) and various particle size fractions on flotation recovery (R) by Kendall’s tau (τ) methods. τ has been typically used to assess dependency between variables in several areas [ Froth flotation tests were performed by using coarse quartz particles (−425 + 106 μm, purity over 99.9%) in the presence and absence of NBs and in a mechanical flotation cell to develop the require dataset for statistical measurements. Hydrodynamic cavitation process was applied to generate NBs by using Methyl Isobutyl Carbionyl (MIBC). NBs were prepared by using water and 22.4 mg/l MIBC at the natural pH of 8.5 in a conditioning tank ( Two different series of flotation experiments were conducted in the same condition but in the absence and presence of NBs. Flotation tryouts (supplementary database) were carried out in a Denver laboratory flotation machine with a 2 liters cell and a feed with 10% solid. Three different size fractions of quartz samples (−212 + 106, −300 + 212, −425 + 300 μm), in the presence of dodecyl amine (50 g/t) as a collector and MIBC as a frother (22.4 mg/l), were used for flotation tests. Different hydrodynamic conditions were examined; air flow rate: 30, 60 and 90 l/h, 7 and 9 cm impeller diameters for pulp agitation, impeller speeds: 900, 1000, 1100, 1200 and 1300 rpm for the impeller diameter of 7 cm and 554, 604, 665, 725 and 786 rpm for the impeller diameter of 9 cm. As Reynolds number can be used to explain the pulp turbulence during flotation, Eq. Kendall’s tau (τ) correlation was used through the flotation experimental database (supplementary database) to measure the impact of NBs on the flotation parameters in various conditions. It was reported that to assess databases with limited number of records, τ is more accurate than other typical correlation assessment methods (such as Spearman’s and Pearson’s correlations) [ τ ranges from -1 to +1 and the absolute value of τ indicating the strength of the monotonic correlation between the two parameters [ Results of flotation tests ( Kendall’s tau (τ) assessments through flotation experimental data indicate that particle size has the highest negative correlation (τ ∼ −0.80) with the flotation recovery of coarse particles (  Kendell tau assessments indicate that in the presence of NBs, impacts of Re and conventional flotation bubbles on recovery can considerably change ( Statistical measurements illustrate ( Study the impacts of nanobubbles (NBs) in the flotation of coarse pure quartz particles (-425 + 106 μm) indicated that recovery, on average, was increased in the presence of NBs where the flotation recovery in the absence and presence of NBs was 53 and 67%, respectively. Kendell tau (τ) assessments of flotation experiments through various conditions demonstrated that particles size has the highest negative effects on flotation recovery (τ ∼ -0.80). τ analyses indicated there is a negative relationship between air flow rate and recovery in the both absence and presence of NB (τ ∼ −0.17). In general, there is a negative correlation between Reynold number (Re) and recovery which this τ value was changed in the presence of NBs (τ: −0.12 vs. −0.17) which means in the presence of NBs; the highest recovery can achieve in a lower Re value than their absences. In contrary, there is a positive relationship between size of conventional flotation bubbles (CBs) and recovery. This positive dependency was increased in the presence of NBs (τ: 0.08 vs. 0.13). Analyzing the simultaneous impacts of CBs and Re on recovery showed that in the presence of NBs, recoveries can enhance in a wider range of Re values and CBs in comparison with the absence of NBs. Based on these outcomes, it can be concluded that in the presence of NBs, receiving the highest recovery (on average) would be possible in the low turbulent agitation (Re: 66000–75000) and the potential of true flotation (bubble-particle attachment) is increased (beside of neglect changes of other important variables) which can be the main reasons for enhancing of flotation recovery. Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: