Background
                  Proximal humeral fractures with substantial metaphyseal comminution are challenging to treat. In the elderly with osteoporotic bone, arthroplasty sometimes remains the only valuable option; however, the minimally required length of stem fixation is not known. The aim of this study was to investigate the primary stability of cemented short- and long-stem prostheses with different intramedullary fracture bypass lengths.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Osteoporotic composite bone models of the humerus (Synbone, Malans, Switzerland) with 3 different fracture levels (group A, 6 cm distal to surgical neck; group B, 7 cm distal to surgical neck; and group C, 8 cm distal to surgical neck) were prepared with a cemented standard short (S)– or long (L)–stem prosthesis and were tested for torque to failure. As a reference, we used models with intact bone (group R-O) and a short-stem prosthesis implanted at the surgical neck (group R-P). The radiographic bypass index (BI) was calculated before testing (fracture level to stem tip [in millimeters]/outer cortical diameter at fracture level [in millimeters]).
               
                  Results
                  The resulting BIs of each group were as follows: 1.7 in group A-S, 3.4 in group A-L, 1.4 in group B-S, 3.2 in group B-L, 1.0 in group C-S, and 2.9 in group C-L. Compared with group R-O, the torques to failure of groups B-S and C-S were significantly lower, whereas only group C-S was significantly weaker than group R-P (P < .01). Comparing short- and long-stem bypasses of different fracture heights, we found that only group C-L showed a significantly higher resistance to torque (P < .01).
               
                  Conclusions
                  A short-stem bypass with a BI of 1.7 was sufficient for primary stability tested by torque to failure in this biomechanical setting. For smaller BIs, a long-stem prosthesis should be considered.The treatment of comminuted proximal humeral fractures with extension of the comminution into the metaphysis or even diaphysis is challenging. These fractures are rare, and there exists only sparse information about classification and treatment strategies in the literature. In younger, active patients, open reduction–internal fixation with a long proximal humeral plate is usually the treatment of choice. In elderly patients, however, with poor bone stock and severely displaced head fragments, either hemiarthroplasty or reverse total shoulder arthroplasty is a good alternative surgical treatment. Besides the problem of fixation in osteoporotic bone, the planning of such a fracture arthroplasty is challenging because the humeral length has to be restored in the absence of anatomic landmarks. Radiographs of the entire fractured humerus and entire contralateral humerus help to plan the length in comparison to the uninjured side ( We were not able to find information about primary stability dependent on the prosthetic bypass for shoulder arthroplasty in the literature. In one study about stem bypass in hip prostheses, the authors found, surprisingly, that a bypass that was too long resulted in decreased primary stability of the bone. We used torque to failure in artificial osteoporotic bone as a fracture model because torsion represents the most common mode of fracture in the humerus. Forty complete humerus composite bone models (5010 Humerus; Synbone, Malans, Switzerland) were tested. These bone surrogates simulate weak osteoporotic bones with uniform conditions for testing. Two different lengths of cemented fracture prosthesis stems (Anatomical Shoulder Fracture System; Zimmer, Warsaw, IN, USA) were used: a short (S) stem (width, 7 mm; length, 13 cm) and a long (L) stem (width, 7 mm; length, 17 cm). These 2 stems were tested at 3 different fracture levels each and compared with 2 reference groups regarding maximum torque to failure and different fracture patterns. We reamed the humeri with a Zimmer standard 9-mm reamer, which belongs to the planned cemented 7-mm stems, aiming 1 cm below the tip of the prosthesis. A cement restrictor was not necessary with the use of these bone surrogates. The stems were marked at the planned depth and implanted until the mark reached the fracture level. Standard bone cement (Biomet, Warsaw, IN, USA) with a vacuum-assisted device was used. The result of the implantation was controlled fluoroscopically ( In group A, the first level of resection (fracture) was chosen 6 cm distal to the surgical neck. This resulted in a 4-cm short-stem bypass (2 cortical diameters), which is known to yield sufficient fixation in hip arthroplasty. In the additional two groups, the resection level was chosen 1 cm further distal in each group; this resulted in a 2-cm bypass in the group with the shortest short-stem bypass, which was assumed to be too weak. Hence, in group B, the resection (fracture) level was chosen 7 cm distal to the surgical neck, and short stems (group B-S, n = 5) and long stems (group B-L, n = 5) were implanted, aiming for the same height of the prosthesis as in group A. In group C, the level of resection (fracture) was chosen 8 cm distal to the surgical neck. Again, 5 humeri each were prepared with cemented short stems (group C-S) and long stems (group C-L). Group R-O was the first reference group and consisted of 5 intact proximal humeri without prostheses. The second reference group (group R-P) consisted of 5 humeri with a resection (fracture) at the surgical neck and a cemented short-stem prosthesis representing a standard fracture prosthesis ( Before testing, all humeri were radiographically controlled (by fluoroscopy) and the BI was calculated for each humerus to avoid any magnification error ( A uniaxial material testing machine (Zmart.Pro; Zwick/Roell, Ulm, Germany) was used with a torsion conversion fixture, as used before. The torsional preload was set to 0.38 Nm for all objects, from which torque was increased with a speed of 0.5°/s up to failure. Because there were no comparable data available, a pilot study of 3 samples per group was performed for sample size calculation with a power of 80% (α = 5%). This resulted in sample sizes of n = 5 and n = 3 for our groups with special clinical interest (group A-S vs group A-L and group C-S vs group C-L). A 2-tailed The exact short- and long-stem bypasses and radiographic BIs for each group, as well as the results of testing, are shown in Compared with the reference group with the short-stem fracture prosthesis implanted at the surgical neck (group R-P), only group C-S was significantly weaker; none of the other groups showed any significant difference ( When we compared groups with the same fracture height (short vs long), the long-stem bypass in group C sustained significantly higher torque to failure whereas the long stem in group A was significantly weaker. As a further distinction between the short and long stems of groups A through C, the maximum torque to failure decreased the shorter the bypass with the short-stem prosthesis (groups A-S to C-S) and increased the shorter the bypass with the long-stem prosthesis (groups A-L to C-L) ( The mean curves of torque to fracture (torque vs rotation) of all groups are depicted in The mode of failure was an oblique fracture with a spiral wedge in the distal third ( Comminuted fractures of the proximal humerus with extension into the diaphysis are rare and challenging to treat. To our knowledge, this study is the first to address this problem specifically with a biomechanical investigation. Furthermore, neither humeral stem loosening nor periprosthetic fracture is a very common problem for shoulder prosthesis, This biomechanical investigation confirms that the intramedullary cemented stem bypass distance has a significant effect on the bone torsional properties in the presence of different fracture heights of the proximal humerus. It also shows that a longer bypass does not necessarily result in higher resistance to torque. In this setting, the most stable situation was found with a BI of 1.7 (4 cm), which corresponded to approximately 2 cortical diameters. The mean torque to failure and the mean torque/rotation curve of these specimens were comparable to those in both control groups (unprepared bone and prepared bone without metaphyseal bone loss and short-stem prosthesis), which suggests similar elastic and plastic deformity properties. Whereas a BI of 1.4 was significantly weaker compared with the control group of unprepared bone, the smallest short-stem BI of 1.0 resulted in a significantly lower stability compared with both control groups, with significant benefit from a long-stem prosthesis. Despite the fact that the mean torsion to fracture of the short-stem group with a BI of 1.4 was not significantly lower compared with the long-stem group with the same fracture level (BI, 3.2), it was still considered to have a prosthesis-cement link that was too weak because the stem was pulled out in 3 of 5 specimens. There are several treatment strategies described for the situation of severe proximal humeral bone loss in the case of tumor surgery. However, no minimal stem bypass is clearly mentioned. In this study, a higher BI did not always result in increased stability. These results are comparable to those of Larson et al, This study has several limitations. First, we used a non-validated composite bone model with mechanical properties different from human bone. We chose this because it was also used as an osteoporotic model in other studies This biomechanical investigation on osteoporotic bone surrogates suggests that a cemented proximal humerus short-stem BI of 1.7, which corresponds to approximately 2 cortical diameters, is sufficient for primary stability as tested by torsion to fracture. For a shorter bypass, the use of a long-stem prosthesis is of potential benefit, which is clinically relevant because possible revision surgery might be complicated by long cemented stems. The use of a radiographic BI is a simple tool for preoperative planning. We thank Markus Graf for the construction of the torsion conversion fixture. Bernhard Jost reports that he received consultant payments from Zimmer Switzerland, who provided the stems and the corresponding instruments for this study; he did not receive any financial payments or other benefits directly related to the subject of this article. All the other authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.