The extraction of Ga(III) by Cyanex 923 (a mixture of four trialkylphosphine oxides) and Cyanex 925 (bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl) octylphosphine oxide) in kerosene from hydrochloric acid medium was studied. Different parameters affecting the extraction of the investigated metal ion such as hydrochloric acid, chloride ion, extractant, and metal ion concentration were separately studied. The stoichiometry of the extracted metal species was found to be 
                        
                           
                              
                                 GaCl
                                 3
                              
                              2
                              L
                           
                           ¯
                        
                     , where L refers to Cyanex 923 or Cyanex 925. The stripping of the extracted metal species was found to be efficient with 1M HCl solution. The results indicated the possibility of the separation of gallium from some interfering ions namely: Zn(II) and Cu(II). The method developed was applied to the recovery of Ga(III) from a synthetic solution similar in composition to that resulted from the cyclotron containing gallium, zinc and copper from hydrochloric acid medium.Gallium has emerged as an important strategic metal. It is extensively used in the manufacture of semiconductor devices for photovoltaic cells and computers since it provides efficient optical transitions as well as high electron mobility ( Most of the chemicals and reagents used were of analytical reagent grade (A.R.). Zinc, copper, and sodium chloride were Merck products, and hydrochloric acid from BDH. The extractant Cyanex 923 is a mixture of four trialkyl-phosphine oxides namely dioctyl-hexyl-phosphine oxide (≈ Distilled water was used for the required dilution. During batch experiments a good shaking was carried out for 5 The influence of hydrochloric acid concentration in the range (0.5–7 The effect of initial Cyanex 923 or Cyanex 925 concentration on the extraction of 1 In order to understand the stoichiometry of the extracted complex in the organic phase, the chloride concentration was investigated in the range (2.0–6.0 The effect of initial Ga(III) concentration on its extraction by 5 The loading capacity of Cyanex 923 or Cyanex 925 was studied by shaking 1.0 The effect of phase ratio (O/A) on the extraction of Ga(III) from 5 The stripping investigations were carried out using hydrochloric, nitric, oxalic and citric acid to choose a suitable stripping agent that can strip 0.292 and 0.44 As Ga(III) is found with Zn(II) and Cu(II) in 5  Cyanex 923 or Cyanex 925 in kerosene can extract Ga(III) from aqueous chloride solution with slightly higher extraction in favor for Cyanex 925 as it has higher loading capacity in the same extraction condition. The extraction was found to increase with the increase in the extractant and chloride concentrations. The increase in hydrochloric acid molarity from 0.5 to 5 The slope analysis method of the data obtained from the extraction of 1.0 Both Cyanex 923 and 925 are mixtures of trialkyl phosphine oxides, the trialkyl group in the former has straight chains, while those in the latter have branched chains. Cyanex 925 is not commercially available but is used in this work to compare it with Cyanex 923. The extraction by Cyanex 923 or Cyanex 925 is fast, and the recovery takes around 30 Cyanex 923 or Cyanex 925 could be used efficiently in the separation of Ga(III), Zn(II) and Cu (II) from a simulated solution similar in composition to that resulted from the cyclotron during the production of gallium with an efficiency of 92%. Cyanex 925 is a more powerful extractant than Cyanex 923 for given conditions but Cyanex 923 is recommended because it is commercially available. The authors are grateful to Prof. Dr. J.A. Daoud for her inspiration and fruitful discussions throughout the course of this work.