Quartz is the dominant gangue mineral in siliceous phosphate ore. To obtain efficient concentration of phosphate minerals, the flotation separation of quartz and collophane using AY as a collector was studied in this paper. The adsorption mechanism of the collector on the surface of quartz and collophane were investigated by measuring zeta potential, contact angle, adsorption density, surface tension and analyzing FTIR spectra. It reveals that AY displays a stronger collecting ability for quartz relative to collophane at pulp pH7, resulting in a separation window for the two minerals. When the dosage of collector was 50mg/L, phosphate minerals could be concentrated from 23.96% to 30.18% P2O5 with a great recovery of 98.24%. Mechanism studies show that the interaction of the amine collector with quartz and with collophane is mainly through electrostatic attraction, whereas the cationic collector prefers adsorbing on the negatively charged quartz. This is also supported by measurement of minerals contact angle and collector's adsorption density. AY as a collector has a selective absorption on quartz rather than collophane.Phosphate ore is a vital non-renewable resource, and so far there is no substitute for phosphate ore as the main raw material in the production of phosphatic fertilizers and phosphorus-based chemicals Flotation is the most widely used treatment for the concentration of these siliceous phosphate ore Many researchers studied the reagents toward enhancing flotation performance of quartz. Such as collector of α-Bromodecanoic acid was reported as a potential one for flotation of quartz, the quartz recovery could be 99.5% when pulp pH was higher than 11.5 The aim of this work is to investigate the flotation behaviors and adsorption mechanisms of quartz and collophane by using an amine collector AY. The collecting capacity and selectivity of the collector were evaluated by micro-flotation of pure mineral and artificially mixed minerals. Furthermore, the adsorption mechanisms of the collector on quartz and collophane were systematically investigated by measuring zeta potential, adsorption density, contact angle and surface tension plus the FTIR spectra analysis. The hand-picked samples of pure quartz and collophane were obtained from a phosphate mine in Guizhou province, China. The mineral samples were crushed and ground in an agate mortar and then screened to obtain fine particles with a size fraction of 45 to 75 The cationic collector AY which is a mixture of various amines was supplied by Guizhou Key Lab of Comprehensive Utilization of Non-metallic Mineral Resources, China. The collector solution was prepared by mixing equimolar mixtures of AY and hydrochloric acid (HCl), and it was used as a 1 Micro-flotation tests on pure minerals and artificially mixed minerals were carried out as a function of the collector concentration and pulp pH in a XFGCII flotation machine (mechanical agitation) with a volume capacity of 40 Collector adsorption on the mineral surface was measured by the solution depletion using an automated total organic carbon (TOC) analyzer (TOC-LCPH, Shimadzu, Japan). When there is only AY in the solution, TOC concentration and the real AY concentration shows a perfect linear correlation. The linear correlation coefficient Zeta potential measurements were conducted with zeta potential analyzer (Delsa™ Nano C, Beckman Coulter, USA). The mineral samples for flotation were further ground to 5 Experiments on the contact angles of quartz and collophane before and after treatment with the collector were carried out using the Washburn method The mineral samples of pure quartz and collophane were further ground to − The surface tension of flotation solution was measured by an automatic tension apparatus (JK99D, China). 2.0 The flotation results of pure quartz and collophane as a function of collector concentration and pH are shown in The flotation recoveries of both quartz and collophane as a function of pH at collector concentrations of 160 The flotation of pure mineral shows that collector AY has a higher affinity for quartz compared to collophane. The affinity of this collector was further demonstrated by the flotation of artificially mixed minerals of quartz and collophane. Mixture sample was prepared by mixing quartz and collophane samples at a mass ratio of 2:3, of which the P Effect of collector concentration on the flotation of the mixed minerals is shown in The flotation of the mixed sample with 50 Quartz and collophane flotation behaviors by using AY as a collector were explained by zeta potential tests, FTIR spectra analysis, contact angle measurements, adsorption density measurements and surface tension measurements. The surface charge of particles is affected by pulp pH value, and then influences the adsorption of collector on mineral surface. Therefore, zeta potential measurements are usually employed to explain the flotation separation process In the absence of the collector, the zeta potential of both quartz and collophane decrease with an increase in pulp pH and shows a similar trend. A negative surface charge without isoelectric point (IEP) is observed for quartz in the pH range studied, the result is in agreement with previously studies In the presence of the collector, the zeta potential of quartz and collophane is significantly upper positively shifted; this indicates that the cationic collector adsorbed on quartz and collophane surfaces. Most importantly, the zeta potential of quartz is obviously higher than that of collophane at pH The FTIR spectra of quartz and collophane before and after interaction with the collector at pH After conditioning with AY as shown in The spectra of collophane and collophane treated with the collector are shown in It is concluded from FTIR spectra results that there is no new adsorption peaks on quartz surface except for the natural peak after treated with the collector, and the characteristic peaks of quartz remain unaltered indicating no chemical adsorption but electrostatic interaction between the collector and quartz surface. It is also observed that there is no change in peak positions of collophane and collophane treated with the collector suggesting no interaction on the surface of collophane. The results of FTIR spectra indicate that AY adsorbed on quartz and collophane surfaces mainly through physical adsorption. Contact angles measurement was carried out for samples of quartz and collophane which were treated and untreated by collector as a function of pH. Contact angle results are presented in The contact angle of quartz treated with the collector is obviously higher than that of collophane in the pH range studied. This indicates that the collector has a higher affinity for quartz compared to collophane, and the adsorption of the collector makes quartz more hydrophobic than that of collophane. As a result, selective separation of quartz from collophane is possible using the collector AY. In the pH range of 3-7, the contact angle of quartz increases with the pH, a minimum contact angle of 44° and maximum contact angle of 54° are observed at pH The adsorption density of the collector on quartz surface as a function of collector concentration at pH The effect of pH on the adsorption of the collector on quartz and collophane surfaces is shown in Surface tension is one of the most important factors in a flotation process The surface tensions of the collector solution after interaction with quartz at different pH values are presented in The amine collector AY has been proven to be efficient for flotation separation of quartz against collophane. Micro-flotation of pure minerals indicates that there is an obvious floatability difference for quartz and collophane by using AY as a collector. The results of artificially mixed minerals flotation further demonstrate that AY can separate quartz from collophane selectively. A concentrate grade of 30.18% P The zeta potential and FTIR measurements show that AY collector adsorbed on quartz and collophane surfaces mainly through electrostatic attraction. More important the collector favors the negatively charged surface of quartz, rather than collophane. As shown in contact angle testing, contact angle of quartz treated with the collector is obviously higher than that of collophane. Moreover, the adsorption measurements also demonstrate that the adsorption density of the collector on quartz surface is greater than on collophane. It is found that pulp pH is a critical factor in flotation separation of quartz and collophane by using AY as a collector. Poor flotation efficiency at extreme acidic condition attributes to the relatively low adsorption density, contact angle and surface tension. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by the