The growth characteristics of a strain of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans isolated from mine water with ferrous ion, sulfur, or pyrite mineral as sole source of energy have been established. The electrokinetic behaviour of the bacterial cells was investigated and the cell surface groups were characterized by diffuse reflectance FT-IR and FT-Raman spectroscopies. The surface charge on the iron-grown cells (i.e.p., pH 2.0) is different from that on the solid-substrate-grown cells (i.e.p., pH 3.0–3.5) and the surface charge depends on the growth history of the bacteria. The FT-IR and FT-Raman spectra revealed a higher amount of protein content on the surface of the sulfur- and pyrite-grown cells compared to the iron-grown cells. These results suggest that the altered surface charge on the cells is due to differences in the protein content synthesized by bacteria exposed to different growth conditions. Direct and indirect mechanisms are reported to be involved in the oxidation of sulfide minerals and the contribution of each mechanism is still unknown. The direct mechanism concerns the adhesion of bacteria to the surface of sulfide minerals, inducing the oxidation process Therefore, both indirect leaching and biobeneficiation bacterial attachment are very important requirements. Hence, the surface properties of both bacterial cells and mineral particles are important parameters. Since The adhesion of bacteria to the sulfide minerals results in the modification of surface properties to that of the bacterial cell surfaces Pure crystalline pyrite sample was purchased from Gregory, Bottley and Lloyd, London. The sample was crushed and finely ground in an agate mortar. The ground material was wet-sieved. The −38+5 μm fraction was employed during the growth of bacteria in the presence of minerals whereas the finer fraction of −5 μm was utilised in spectroscopic and electrokinetic investigations. Cultivation of the isolated strain on either soluble ferrous ions or elemental sulfur or pyrite was accomplished in the liquid medium containing 3 g L Oxidation of ferrous ion in the presence of bacteria was monitored by measuring the content of ferrous, total iron (Fe Cells grown in ferrous iron, sulfur and pyrite were filtered through Whatman filter paper to remove cells from the suspended solid materials. The liquid containing the cells was then centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 10 min and the cell pellet was obtained. It was washed thrice in dilute sulfuric acid (pH 2) in order to remove any trapped ions and stored for use in zeta-potential measurements. Some portion of the pellet was freeze-dried so as to record the FT-IR and FT-Raman spectra. The zeta-potential measurements of The infrared spectra of the samples were recorded using a Perkin-Elmer 2000 Fourier transform spectrometer with diffuse reflectance attachment. The radiation was measured with a TGS detector against a non-absorbing KBr matrix, used as a reference. The samples for diffuse reflectance were prepared by dispersing 10 mg of the sample in 100 mg of KBr. Typical measurement time while recording the spectra was about 4 min (60 scans) at a resolution of 4 cm The FT-Raman spectra were recorded using a Perkin-Elmer 1760 X. The samples were excited with 600 mW of unpolarized intensity-stabilized 1064 nm radiation from a Spectron SL 301 Series Nd:YAG laser. The spectra were registered at 4 cm The growth characteristics of The cells growth curve in elemental sulfur is presented in The growth curve of the cells grown on pyrite is shown in Pyrite oxidation Direct: Indirect: In addition to the above oxidation reactions, the formation of hydronium jarosite, H The zeta-potentials of the four types of The diffuse reflectance spectra of the The FT-Raman spectra of the cells grown in ferrous ions and in sulfur and pyrite substrates are displayed in The following major conclusions can be drawn from the above study:  Surface properties of Electrokinetic study has revealed that the solid substrate (S Higher protenaceous compounds are generated on the The financial support for the project, “Bio-mineral and Bio-hydrometallurgical Processing”, undertaken in collaboration with the Department of Metallurgy, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India, by The Swedish Foundation for International Cooperation in Research and Higher Education (STINT) under the STINT Fellowship program is gratefully acknowledged.