In carbon-in-pulp and carbon-in-leach circuits, among different organic and inorganic compounds present in the gold cyanide solution, flotation reagents play the main role in the fouling of activated carbon. In this study the effects of different types and variable concentrations of flotation and dewatering reagents on the kinetics of gold sorption onto granular activated carbon (GAC) were evaluated on the basis of kinetic rate constant (i.e., k value) of an empirical rate equation. The lower the k value, the greater is the fouling effect. It was observed that the k value rapidly decreases by increasing the concentration of collectors including potassium isobutyl xanthate (PIBX) and potassium ethyl xanthate (PEX) up to 20mg/L and at higher concentrations, the k value gradually leveled off to 53h−1 for PIBX, which is 46% lower than the 99h−1 for PEX. At low concentrations (i.e., up to 15mg/L) of methyl isobutyl carbinol, the k value gradually reduced and at higher concentrations, the decrease is found to be more pronounced. The fouling effect of flocculant was negligible and it would be even insignificant at high concentrations. The combinational effect of flotation reagents on the kinetic activity of GAC towards gold sorption was synergistically better. The cumulative adsorption of flotation reagents onto GAC in a continuous circuit within 28days resulted in 40% decrease of k value, although it was still above admissible limit of 80–100h−1.Since carbon regeneration and elution processes were employed efficiently in carbon-in-pulp (CIP) or carbon-in-leach (CIL) circuits in the 1980s, the use of GAC as adsorbent of gold cyanide complex from leach pulp has come to the forefront ( One of the main challenges for using of GAC in CIL or CIP circuits is the lack of selectivity towards adsorption of gold cyanide complex (    The type and dosage of reagents in flotation circuits are variable and generally set to maximize the recovery of all sulfide minerals ( Analytical grade sodium cyanide (NaCN), sodium hydroxide (NaOH), potassium iodide, silver nitrate, hydrochloric acid, methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) and di-isobutyl ketone (DIBK) were obtained from Merck Co., Germany. PIBX and PEX were supplied from New Brunswick Co., USA and Trialkyl methyl ammonium chloride (Aliquat 336) were provided from Henkel Corporation. The commercial grade anionic polyacrylamide flocculant was obtained from Nasaco International Limited Co. Industrial grade coconut shell GAC, produced through a steam activation process by Haycarb Com., Sri Lanka, was employed. All solutions were made up with double distilled water. For preparation of gold stock solution, accurately weighted gold pieces, cut from a pure gold plaque provided from Pamp S.A. Switzerland, were added to 500 A size fraction between 2 and 2.36 A two step process was used to evaluate the fouling effect of flotation and dewatering reagents. Initially, 1 In order to evaluate the cumulative effect of flotation reagents on the kinetic activity of GAC towards gold sorption, two circuits were set up and run continuously for 28 In batch fouling tests, solutions were direct analyzed for gold by AAS. In the case of continuous circuits, gold analysis of solutions was performed using AAS after pre-concentration by extraction of gold from 50 In this investigation, the fouling effect of flotation and dewatering reagents was evaluated through a k value. The k value is the kinetic constant of an empirical rate equation as given in Eq. Eq. change in gold loading onto GAC for time zero to time t (g/t). gold concentration in solution at time t (mg/L) kinetic constant or k value (h empirical constant dependent on GAC time of adsorption (h) The plot of log(Δ[Au] For good-quality GAC without aging, the k value is in the range of 700 to 1400 The k value of GAC with aging in a sodium cyanide solution was assigned as a control k value. For the GAC used in this research, the control k value was determined as 515 Xanthates are heteropolar surface-active organic compounds which are made of two parts. One part is an anionic polar group and another one is an uncharged non-polar hydrocarbon chain containing two to six carbons ( In two parallel series of batch fouling tests, the fouling effects of PEX and PIBX were investigated over a wide range of concentrations from 4.29 to 85.7 The adsorption of gold cyanide complex onto GAC is a multistage process, which consists of the mass transport of gold cyanide complex across the solution film surrounding the carbon particle to the outer surface of the carbon particle, transport of the gold cyanide complex along the activated carbon pore walls by surface diffusion, and finally the adsorption reaction ( The presence of xanthates in a gold cyanide solution form a film of solvent on the external surface of activated carbons and do not penetrate significantly in the interior pores of GAC since they are relatively large molecules and probably inaccessible to the meso and micropores of GAC ( In all of the same concentrations, the k values for PIBX-fouled GAC are lower than the PEX-fouled GAC indicating that the longer hydrocarbon chain xanthates have a more fouling effect. This can be explained by the fact that the adsorption of longer chain xanthates on the surface of GAC makes them more hydrophobic and inhibits solution diffusion. Frothers are hetero-polar surface-active organic molecules consisting of a nonionic polar group exhibiting hydrophilic character and a hydrophobic non-polar hydrocarbon group (  Anionic polyacrylamide is one of the widely used flocculants in dewatering circuits which is a synthetic polymer with different polar groups and has a molecular weight of millions (  In a gold processing plant which flotation circuit acts as a pre-concentration process, several flotation reagents are simultaneously present in cyanidation pulps. The combinational effect of several flotation and dewatering reagents on the k value was evaluated through the batch fouling experiments. The types and concentrations of reagents in each test were reported in The control k value of 515 The k value of 300 The individual deactivation of several fouling agents and their combinational deactivation are listed in Batch fouling tests showed that a much lower deactivation of GAC occurs at low concentrations of flotation reagents. The aim of continuous fouling tests is to evaluate the cumulative effect of flotation reagents at low concentrations on the kinetic activity of GAC towards gold cyanide complex within a 28-day period, similar to the residence time of carbons in industrial circuits. Hence, two continuous circuits were run in parallel and the details are presented in  At first glance, as shown in The xanthate analysis of the effluent of circuit 2 revealed that all of the xanthate which added to the feed solution has been adsorbed onto GAC within a period of 28 In order to clarify the cumulative effect of flotation reagents on the kinetic activity of GAC towards gold cyanide complexes, the k values for the GACs of both circuits after aging for 28 days were determined. For this purpose, at the end of operation of circuits 1 and 2, the GACs were separated from the working solutions, air dried and a 1 g portion was added to a solution containing 10 PEX and PIBX had a significant fouling effect on the GAC and at higher concentrations of xanthates, the fouling of GAC occurred to a greater extent. MIBC at low concentrations (i.e., < The combinational effect of organic foulants revealed that high dosage of organic reagents severely decreased the gold sorption kinetics so that the k value fell below admissible level of 80–100 The presence of flotation regents in the feed solution of continuous sorption experiments did not affect the gold loading of GAC for the first few days. After which by gradual accumulation of flotation reagents, the gold loading capability of GAC decreased steadily and further deactivation with higher rate was observed for the last 6 This study showed that deactivation of GAC towards gold sorption increases by increasing the concentration of flotation reagents in the sorption vessel. In gold processing plants in which the flotation circuit is a required pre-cyanidation process, it is possible to keep the k value above admissible level of 80–100