Rockbursts frequently occur in deep underground excavations in a sudden or violent ejection of blocks of rocks from excavation walls. In addition to understanding rockburst mechanisms, rockburst control is an important issue for the safety of mining operations. Bolts and anchors are efficient measures to control rockbursts and permit the efficient exploration of underground excavations in mines. As mining depths increase, anchor and bolts with larger extension and higher loading capacity are needed. This paper introduces a Constant Resistant Large Deformation (CRLD) bolt which has been developed at the State Key Laboratory for Geomechanics and Deep Underground Engineering (GDUE), in Beijing, China. Static and dynamic tests were developed for this type of bolt. Advancements in Hopkinson tests were recently developed for CRLD bolts and Split-Hopkinson Tension Bar (SHTB) experiments for these bolts were performed. This paper presents the SHTB equipment and the results obtained with one and two CRLD bolts, as well a deep analysis of the obtained results. To better understand the complex nature of the problem, numerical simulations using several softwares were done for the case of one bolt, which had the dual goal of verifying the experimental and numerical results. In addition, the numerical predictions permit one conducting analysis the behavior of the bolt while targeting the development of large deformations. Finally some relevant conclusions are drawn.In deep underground excavations, rockbursts frequently occur in a sudden or violent manner. The evolution of a rockburst is generally recognized as a process of crack initiation, propagation, and coalescence of internal fractures in the rock masses. A comprehensive understanding of the rockburst mechanisms, due to their sophisticated and nonlinear nature, have so far left unsolved and thus the precise predictions and mitigation measures, because of its sophisticated and nonlinear nature. High stresses is the major feature for burst conditions, however geological factors can also be a major contributor ( Over the past years, rockburst phenomena have been investigated by many researchers ( Tunnel construction is increasing worldwide. There have been several types of accidents including rockburst during tunnel construction that resulted in delays, cost overruns, and sometimes even more severe consequences. There are cases where excessive deformations have occurred inside the tunnel. This happens for example due to high in situ stresses and due to specific swelling and squeezing grounds ( Bolts and anchors are efficient measures for the control of rockbursts in underground excavations, as well as to control large deformations that may occur during excavation. Bolts and anchors have been widely investigated by many researchers worldwide and different types exist. The Cone bolt type of anchor bolt was developed by a Canadian company and is a good (typical) example ( This paper introduces state-of-the-art advancements in anchor and bolt technology at GDUE that resulted in CRLD bolts or anchors to be developed. The CRLD bolts or anchors have the ability to accommodate larger deformations of the adjoining rock masses at great depths in response to external forces ( Bolts are a major method used in rock support in many practical situations. However, in high stressed rock masses and for large deformation situations, bolts can break if they are not able to adapt to the induced large deformations. A new bolt or anchor with constant working resistance under large deformations and impact loads has been developed at GDUE, designated by CRLD bolt. The bolt consists of two parts, the constant resistance element and the bolt rod.  Elastic deformation stage: In this stage, the deformation energy of the surrounding rocks can be converted to the bolt rod in the bolt assembly through the baffle plate and inner anchorage segment. In the case of a relative deformation with the surrounding rock where the axial force caused by the rock deformation is less than the rated constant resistance for the CRLD bolt, the bolt will not elongate. Instead, the bolt will resist the deformation and failure of the rock by solely relying on the elastic deformation of the constant-resistance element or bolt rod itself ( The structural deformation stage: in this stage, the axial force on the rod will be increasing and may be equal to or larger than the rated constant resistance of the CRLD bolt. This leads to the frictional-sliding displacement of the constant-resistant body along the sleeve track, i.e., the CRLD bolt elongates. While elongating, the bolt keeps the constant-resistant characteristics and the deformation and failure of the rock mass is resisted by its elongation, i.e. structural deformation of the constant-resistant element will occur ( Ultimate deformation stage: In this stage, the deformation energy of the rock mass in the abutment to the excavation has fully been released. The external loads will be smaller than the rate constant resistance, and the constant-resistant body will stop sliding due to fractional drag. By doing so, the surrounding rock mass is stabilized once again ( The CRLD bolt can withstand pulse type energy impact many times over while retaining its supporting performance and is thus suitable for rockburst support. In order to evaluate the anti-impact properties of this anchor, dynamic load impact tests of the CRLD bolt were carried out using the dynamic load test system developed by the research team at GDUE ( During development, the CRLD bolt or anchor has been tested both in situ and in the laboratory. The maximum extension of the bolt rock for CRLD is about 1000 A mathematical model was developed for the CRLD bolt by An analytical load-elongation curve of the CRLD bolt is illustrated in The Elongation and Impact Experiment System developed for the CRLD bolt consists of the following ( At the GDUE laboratory, the CRLD bolts were considered isolated ( The data acquisition system consists of a data acquisition device, an electrical charge amplifier, data analysis software and sensor components. Before starting the experiments, a segmented calibration was performed for each bolt specimen in the axial and radial directions, including measurements of the total length of bolts, the constant resistance device and the sleeve pipe, diameters of the sleeve pipe and the rod. Nine points were considered (after each 5 rings of the sleeve pipe) in the axial direction, and 2 diameters were calibrated (a-a′ and b-b′) in the radial direction ( When starting the single bolt experiment, four levels of gas pressures were applied (1.5, 2.0, 2.5 and 3.0 The basic geometric and material parameters of CRLD bolt experiment systems are shown in Experiments were performed for four cases with single bolts and one case with double bolts. The results of the experiments are presented in the next section, along with a critical analysis of the findings. Changes in the diameter expansion of the sleeve pipe were measure at nine points of convex and concave of the outer surface of the pipe, as indicated in The diameter of the convex inner thread can keep a stable value for each sample and the value of the expansion of the sleeve pipe and thickness of the convex thread remain the same. The change in value of the diameter of the convex outer thread is 0.65 The above experimental data shows that it is a relative slipping process between the rod and the sleeve pipe under impact which means that the constant resistance device expands and elongates. When reaching a certain impacting time, the rod is pushed out of the sleeve pipe and the final elongation corresponds to the length of the rod. To illustrate single bolt experiments, the elongation curve of the specimen MG-15-1 is shown in Based on the forces obtained on the four single bolt specimens, the relationship between bullet velocity (correlated with the relation to gas pressure shown in The rebar inside the sleeve pipe was elongated generally with much more smaller displacements under the impact tensile loading than those under the static tensile loading; after a certain number of tensile impacts, no noticeable fatigue damage in the sleeve pipe and rebar of the bolt were observed. In the double bolt experiments, it is worth noting that an un-synchronized motion phenomenon was observed in the two specimens upon impact, which was due to manufacture deviation and uneven forces. In the double bolt experiments, 77 impact times were considered, including gas pressures of 1.0, 1.5 and 1.8 The typical force-time curve of the experiment is shown in The CRLD bolts satisfy a negative Poisson’s ratio (NPR) effect under static and dynamic conditions. Materials with NPR ratio can expand (or shrink) in the perpendicular direction when they are stretched (or compressed) in that direction ( According to the working principle of the CRLD bolt, in the experiments with a single bolt the horizontal strain is defined as the ratio of the expansion value (Δ Longitudinal strain is defined as the ratio of the final elongation value (Δ The ratio of the horizontal strain to the longitudinal strain is the equivalent negative Poisson’s ratio of the CRLD bolt: The NPR effect of the CRLD bolt specimens are shown in The results of Numerical simulations of the SHTB impact test with CRLD bolts, by using the Finite Element (FE) method, are an adequate tool for evaluating of the complex tests performed with these large deformations bolts, permitting one to determine the soundness and the accuracy of the experiment data. These numerical models also permit one to reduce the experiments performed once the simulations parameters were calibrated, as well as to better analyze and understand the behavior associated with the deformation process. Complex numerical dynamic 3D simulations were only possible in the last years. Examples include applications developed by The 3D model was developed only for the one bolt test. A CAD (Computer-Aided Design) software was used for the geometric modeling. A FE mesh was setup, as well as the defining the boundary conditions and mechanical properties. The data obtained was converted to be used by a FE calculation software that permits one to optimize the errors of the mesh and adjust parameters if needed. Then, when necessary, a new mesh was generated and the process was repeated several times until an optimal mesh was obtained. Once the iterative process was finalized, LS-DYNA calculations were done. Finally, the results which included displacements, stresses, strains and energy, were analyzed. A flowchart of the calculation process is illustrated in The main components of the system in order to get the 3D geometric model are: bullet, impact bar, sleeve pipe, rod, pallet and screw. The sleeve pipe and the pallet could be considered as a single rigid body component. A schematic of the 3D geometric model is shown in The surface contacts were set automatically without permitting their penetration. The initial conditions for the model include the impact tensile system of gas source velocity relationship were introduced in the numerical simulations, as well as the coefficient of kinematic friction which was set to 0.18. As previously mentioned, LS-DYNA was the FE software used for the dynamic analysis and numerical simulations of the Hopkinson tests. FE method is based on the solution to differential equations for a prescribed geometry and can be viewed as an application of the Raileigh-Ritz method and in order to solve the dynamic equations. The software uses the Newmark time integration method and is based on explicit formulation of the fundamental differential equations of dynamics. For this integration, it is necessary that the time increments be very small taking into consideration the characteristic element dimensions and smallest transit time of dilatancy waves to cross any element of the FE mesh ( Numerical calculations were performed for increasing gas pressure from 0.5 Because most of the experimental results obtained in the impact tests used the velocity of 12  Also the impact forces were validated with experimental results for bolt MG 15-1 that were measured by a cell force as illustrated in An analysis of the numerical results of the FE simulations was performed. This included the data analysis of the expansion, tension and impact forces of the reference calculation C For the reference simulation C The range of deformation of area A was significantly greater than that of areas B and C; the thickness of area A became smaller, while deformation in areas B and C were insignificant. This compares well with the experimental results, which also showed that the concave thickness of the sleeve pipe becomes thinner and expands in radial direction. Before this impact, area C had an initial deformation because of the impact effect of the previous one impacts. After this impact, area C continued to be squeezed. The expansion of the CRLD bolt came from the elastic and plastic deformation of elements, which can verify the NPR effect of the CRLD bolt caused by the structure deformation.   In this section, the results of the different numerical calculations ( For axial displacements, the figure shows that for an initial bullet velocity equal to 5.5 Radial displacements for calculation C  Efficient measures exist to control rockbursts in underground excavations and large deformations that can occur during underground excavation. Bolts have been widely researched, and there are a large variety of types. However, mining depths continue to increase which require supporting systems to have larger extension and higher loading capacities. A special bolt was developed at GDUE, Beijing, designated as a CRLD bolt, which allows large deformations while keeping constant resistance during elongation. This paper introduces the state-of-the-art developments of the CRLD anchor and bolt technology. The maximum extension of a CRLD bolt is about 1000 Numerical simulations were used to verify the accuracy and complement the results of the complex experimental tests. These were done using the FE method. In addition, the numerical simulations were used to better understand the behavior of the bolts during the elongation process. A 3D model was set up for the case of one bolt case following an iterative process for generating the mesh that optimizes errors. The von Mises yield criterion was adopted and the surface contacts were set in an automatic way. The software for the dynamic analysis is based on the solution to differential equations using an explicit formulation. Six calculations were done for different velocities of the bullet and for each calculation five equal impacts were considered. One scenario was adopted as a reference (bullet velocity of 12 The findings of the analysis of the experiments performed at GDUE and the numerical simulations on CRLD bolts, as well as previous research on the bolts by GDUE, led to the main conclusions: Control of rockbursts is a very important issue in mining engineering and for this purpose a special CRLD bolt was developed at GDUE, which permits constant resistance and large deformations. The performance was experimentally tested through the development of special static and dynamic equipment. The dynamic tests performed consisted of weight-dropping tests and Hopkinson dynamic tests. Large deformations that occur in deep underground structures, such as in mines, require the design of appropriate support systems that can minimize consequences and mitigate risks. These deformations occur due to high stresses and due to swelling and squeezing grounds, as well as mining exploration methods such as longwall activities. CRLD bolts can provide a solution in these circumstances. Laboratory testing equipment was developed to study the behavior of CRLD bolts under static and dynamic loading conditions. Particular emphasis was placed on the development of SHTB equipment for dynamic tests. Special devices were designed to perform elongation and impacting of single and multiple groups of bolts. Several samples were tested with this new equipment and the experimental results helped in better understanding the behavior of these bolt. Additionally the Hopkinson bar apparatus permitted the characterization of the dynamic response of other materials or devices at high strain rates and will be integrated in the research program at GDUE and at CUMTB. The expansion, elongation and impact force results from of the experiments on single and double bolt systems show a slipping process between rod and sleeve pipe under the impact forces and consequently a constant device expansion and elongation. The CRLD system remained stable under important impact forces which is a key property of these bolts. In the double bolt experiment, un-synchronized motion phenomena were observed in the single test performed, and so cannot be considered as significant. It is suggested to perform more tests for a better interpretation of this observed behavior. CRLD bolts exhibited negative NPR under static and dynamic conditions and can meet the requirements for large deformations. Compared with positive Poisson’s ratio material, the NPR values have stronger physical and mechanical properties, and so are better suited as structural and functional materials. Numerical simulations of single bolt tests were setup by using FE method in order to evaluate the complex SHTB tests and to verify the accuracy of the experimental data. Also the numerical simulations allow one to reduce the tests performed once calibrated. They enable one to better understand the behavior of the CRLD bolts associated with the deformation and rupture process. The results of the FE numerical simulations (namely the data concerning expansion, tension and impact force for the different calculations), were compared with the experimental results, and both results were in good agreement. The applicability of the FE numerical solutions and the potential use of these methods were emphasized. In the future, more complex numerical simulations for the cases of bolt groups can and should be performed in practical situations in the field. The authors would like to express their sincere gratitude for the financial support from the Special Funds from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51574248) and National Key Research and Development Program (2016YFC0600901). They also acknowledge Dr. Karim Karam, PhD from Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), for the English checking-editing reviewing.