The formation kinetics and mechanism of tricalcium aluminate hexahydrate (TCA) in synthetic sodium aluminate solution with high alkali concentration (caustic Na2O from 235 to 295 g·L−1) and caustic ratio (from 3 to 7) were studied by XRD, FTIR, SEM-EDS and PSD methods. Over high caustic alkali concentration, caustic ratio, lime addition and reaction temperature inhibit the formation of TCA in high-alkali aluminate solution. The optimum synthesis conditions of TCA were established, and the corresponding formation efficiency of TCA and the caustic ratio of solution after reaction are 77% and 21 respectively. The formation process of TCA is controlled by the internal diffusion, and the apparent activation energy is 6.03 kJ·mol−1. The formation kinetic equation of TCA is: 1 − 2α/3 − (1 − α)2/3 = 1.11 × 10−3 × e−6030/RT
                     ×t. The synthesis product at equilibrium is mainly comprised of TCA as well as minor Ca(OH)2 and CaCO3, and the morphology of TCA is agglomerates of cube particles, which is quite different from those in low and medium alkali solution.Tricalcium aluminate hexahydrate (3CaO·Al The preparation, structure and properties of TCA were widely studied in the past decades ( All the above research focused on the formation process of TCA in low and medium alkali concentration solution with low caustic ratio referring to the Bayer process, but the formation process in sodium aluminate solution with high alkali concentration and caustic ratio has not been reported. The authors proposed a new hydrothermal process based on an effective desilication product of iron hydrogarnet (3CaO·Fe The synthesis experiments of TCA were performed in three necked flasks using synthetic sodium aluminate solution and industrial lime in a water bath (DZKW-S-4) with a temperature control accuracy of ±1 °C, and the stirring speed is 400 rpm by a mechanical stirrer with overhead agitation. The sodium aluminate solution was prepared from industrial sodium hydroxide and gibbsite. The content of active CaO in lime is 95%. The effects of different reaction conditions on the formation of TCA were studied. The data obtained were the average values from triplicate tests. The concentrations of initial caustic alkali (in form of Na The solid-liquid separation was carried out after the reaction. The filter cake was washed by hot deionized water followed by drying at 90 °C for 24 h, and the concentrations of caustic alkali and alumina in the filtrate were determined by the acid-base titration and EDTA titration respectively ( The mineral composition of synthetic products was measured by an X-ray diffractometer (XRD, Philips X'Pert PW3040–60) using CuKα1 radiation, and the scanning speed is 5 The formation of TCA in synthetic sodium aluminate solution with different initial caustic alkali concentrations from 235 to 295 g·L The effect of initial caustic ratio on the formation of TCA is shown in The reaction results of TCA with different lime additions are shown in The formation efficiency of TCA and the caustic ratio of solution after reaction with different temperatures are presented in The TCA formation process with different reaction durations were finally studied, as shown in According to the above analyses, in order to obtain the largest TCA formation and caustic ratio, the optimum synthesis conditions of TCA were obtained as follows: The reaction of calcium oxide in sodium aluminate solution belongs to a simple liquid-solid reaction with solid products ( The kinetic experiments were carried out under the following conditions: According to the Arrhenius equation as listed in Eq. Therefore, the formation kinetic equation of TCA is as follows: The XRD patterns of synthetic products with different durations are shown in The FTIR spectrum of synthetic product when the reaction time is 2 h is shown in The SEM images of synthetic products reacted for different durations are shown in As shown in The PSD curves of synthetic products under different reaction conditions according to Part 3.1 are presented in In this study, the formation kinetics and mechanism of TCA in synthetic sodium aluminate solution with high alkali concentration and caustic ratio were firstly studied, and the differences from the low and medium alkali concentration and caustic ratio were also discussed. Over high caustic alkali concentration, caustic ratio, lime addition and reaction temperature inhibit the formation of TCA in sodium aluminate solution with high alkali concentration and caustic ratio. The optimum synthesis conditions of TCA in sodium aluminate solution are as follows: The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors greatly appreciate the financial project supports from the