Heap leaching is a process extensively used by the mining industry to recover metals from large quantities of submarginal material resources. Understanding flow through a packed particle bed is important to enhance the performance of heap leaching with respect to design and operating considerations. The microstructure and connectivity of pore space are important features to describe detailed fluid flow phenomena in heap leaching operations. In this regard, a milli-CT scanner was used to determine the complex pore structure of a packed column before and after bioleaching of copper ore. The 3-D reconstructed images of complex pore structures obtained from the milli-CT scans were used for the analysis of saturated flow inside the leaching column based on lattice-Boltzmann (LB) simulations.Currently, heap leaching finds important applications in the recovery of copper and gold from their ores because of its low cost, short construction time, operational simplicity, good performance, and environmental advantages. Characterization and analysis of heap leaching systems should involve both the study of chemistry/biochemistry and the study of the mechanics of the heap leaching system. Optimum design of the chemistry, utilization of reactants (acid, air, microorganisms, bacteria population, iron), is limited by our current understanding of the mechanics of the system. The mechanics of heap leaching systems include such issues as particle size/exposure/liberation, particle texture/composition, and fluid flow phenomena inside the packed bed of particles which constitute the heap. Understanding the behavior of fluid flow through the packed particle bed is important to enhance the performance of heap leaching from design and operating considerations. The microstructure and connectivity of pore space are important features to describe detailed fluid flow phenomena in heap leaching operations. In this regard, a milli-CT scanner was used to determine the complex pore structure of the packed column before and after bioleaching of copper ore. The analysis provides important information regarding the chemical and structural changes that are occurring in the system during the bioleaching process. The 3-D reconstructed images of complex pore structures obtained from milli-CT scans are used for the analysis of saturated flow inside the leaching column based on the lattice-Boltzmann (LB) simulation method. The Philips Tomoscan 60/TX CT scanner ( During the last decade, rapid development of computers and computational algorithms has made possible direct simulations of complicated fluid flow phenomena. Among the promising new methods are lattice-gas automata (LGA) ( For application of flow through porous media, the LB method is easier to implement in 3-D. The LB methods with a simple BGK collision operator ( This paper presents the study of fluid transport phenomena in a packed leaching column using milli-CT scanner to characterize the complex three-dimensional pore geometry. On this basis the lattice-Boltzmann (LB) method is used to simulate and to establish a fundamental relationship between pore microstructure and effective transport coefficients. 3-D digital maps of the irregular interconnected pore structure of the actual packed column as obtained from milli-CT scanner analysis are used with the lattice-Boltzmann method for flow simulation. Darcy’s law, an empirical equation, is commonly used to describe one-dimensional fluid flow through uniform incompressible porous media. Knowledge of pore microstructure of the packed column and its correlation to macroscopic particle matrix properties is required to model the leaching process from a fundamental point of view. Darcy’s law is defined as Presently, LB models are used as common tools to study transport phenomena through pore space ( The permeability of a simple cubic array of spheres, at low Porosity, the simplest property of a packed particle bed, is defined as the volume fraction of pores. The porosity can be used to predict the permeability defined in Darcy’s law. The porosity of a packed particle bed can be used to predict the relative permeability from pore-scale network modeling or from lattice-Boltzmann simulations. Quantitative information on the porosity of a packed particle bed can be determined from the CT data. To facilitate the pore geometry analysis, the original gray scale CT data were threshold to extract the pore features as shown in  The spatial boundary between the pore and the particles was established due to the large difference in densities. Threshold techniques were used to differentiate and classify the original 2-D reconstructed tomographic data. Based on the sequential 2-D data set of pore space, the porosity was determined along the height of the column. The porosity is defined as the ratio between void area and the total area of each cross section. The running average porosity, shown in  Two 3-D reconstructed images of complex pore structures obtained from sequential stacking of 2-D X-ray CT measurements from the test column before and after leaching were used for this study. Both data sets (before and after leaching) were selected from the central portion of the column (size 11.23 Both blocks (1940 The estimated permeabilities from LB simulation of the column before and after leaching are found to be about 1.34 A milli-X-ray CT scanner was used for measurement of the complex pore structure of a packed particle column before and after bioleaching of a copper ore. Total scans for the whole length of the 1.5-m column were 451 scans before leaching and 393 scans after leaching. Porosity obtained from the column before leaching was about 41% at the top and gradually decreased to about 38% at the bottom due to the load of the packed particle bed. After leaching, postmortem analysis of the column clearly reveals that fine particles have accumulated as a core and/or cone at the bottom-center of the column. Two 3-D reconstructed images of the complex pore structures were obtained from the milli-CT scans, before and after leaching. The main finding from this initial flow research using lattice-Boltzmann (LB) simulation is that most of the saturated flow occurs in a small fraction of the available pore space. Of course a reduction in flow channels was observed after leaching due to the accumulation of fine particles in the lower center of the column. Permeability values were calculated based on porosity and compared with the value estimated from LB simulation. The permeability was estimated to be on the order of 14 Compañía Minera Zaldivar, a subsidiary of Placer Dome, and Placer Dome Technical Services Limited provided support for this research program.