Mining activities lead to important physical, chemical and biological effects on soil properties, generating severe impacts in the establishment and maintenance of vegetation. Assisted phytoremediation can be considered an environmentally friendly approach for soil remediation. In this study, two mining soils (PORT and GAM) were treated with 10%, by mass, of the following amendments: manure biochars prepared at 450 °C (BMW450) and 600 °C (BMW600), hydrochars prepared by hydrothermal carbonization (HTC) of manure at 190 °C (HWM190) and 240 °C (HMW240) and manure waste (MW). Brassica napus was used as a phytoextraction species. After 45 days of plant growth, soil samples were widely characterized, including microbial biomass carbon, enzymatic activity and metal content. In addition, plant biomass production, bioconcentration factor, translocation factor and metal uptake were determined. Experimental results showed that addition of biochars improved the As uptake by Brassica napus in both soils but just in the roots increasing bioconcentration factor between 22.1 and 39.5% for GAM soil and between 28.6 and 53.4% for PORT soil. Brassica napus cannot be considered as Zn accumulator in GAM soil samples and in the case of PORT samples, only the addition of BMW600 and HMW240 enhanced the phytoextraction process of Zn on the roots. Soil enzyme activity improved in hydrochar amended soils.Traditional mining activities typically increase trace soil metal concentrations, leading to long-term risks related with metal uptake by plants, animals and humans. Additionally, the leaching of metals from soils to surface or groundwater has been associated with important environmental impacts ( Several techniques have been traditionally used for the treatment of mining polluted soils, including metal immobilization ( More recently, phytoextraction combined with biochar has been proposed as a promising alternative to classical amendments ( Despite the useful properties of manure wastes as raw material for biochar preparation, the economic implications of drying a feedstock with an elevated water content can render pyrolysis unattractive. In consideration of this, hydrochar, which is produced by hydrothermal carbonization (HTC) of wet manure, could be a potential alternative to biochar. HTC of biomass is performed in water solution, at low temperatures (180–260 °C) and under autogenous pressures ( Biochar and hydrochar exhibit several differences in physical, chemical and structural properties. Typically, hydrochar is more acidic, with poorly developed surface area, but a greater abundance of meso- and macro-pores ( The ultimate aim of remediating mining contaminated sites includes restoring soil quality, including fundamental functions such as carbon and nutrient cycling. Soil microorganisms play a key role in these processes. Consequently, soil biochemical properties are useful and sensitive indicators for the evaluation of soil quality. In particular, soil enzymes catalyze processes in the biogeochemical cycles of C, N, P and S. Since improvements in biochemical properties are fundamental to the success of remediation, it is imperative to explore the changes of the microbial community in char (biochar and hydrochar) assisted phytoremediation. Some studies have shown the potential of Two mining soils were selected from two different Spanish mining areas, Gamonedo (GAM) and Portman (PORT). The soils samples were obtained at the following coordinates: Latitude: 43° 19′57.9573′′ N, Longitude: 4° 5′ 2.8573′′ W for GAM and Latitude: 37° 35′ 24.1593′′ N, Longitude: 0° 51′ 39.6248′′ W for PORT. Soil samples (GAM and PORT) were air-dried, crushed and sieved through a 2 mm mesh prior to analyses. MW was collected from a rabbit farm located in the practice field of the Universidad Politécnica de Madrid (UPM). Two biochars and two hydrochars were prepared using manure waste (MW) as feedstock. A thermal treatment equipment designed by our research group in collaboration with Demede enterprise ( The two hydrochars were prepared as follows: 1.0 L of wet MW solution with 30% solids content was introduced in a Teflon recipient inside the Hastelloy reactor. The difference between the final temperatures of two thermocouples was demonstrated to be 20 °C. Samples were heated to 190 or 240 °C and the final temperature was maintained for 6 h under autogenous pressures leading to production of HWM190 and HMW240, respectively. After cooling down to room temperature, the aqueous solutions were filtered and the solid fraction washed with 0.5 L of distilled water to reduce potential phytotoxicity ( The pH and electrical conductivity (EC) were determined with a soil:water ratio of 1:2.5 (g mL The effective cation exchange capacity (CEC) was determined using the standardized protocol ISO 23470 ( Oxidizable organic carbon (Coxi) was determined by the Walkley-Black method ( Two soils were amended at a rate of 10% (w/w) with the feedstock (MW) and the four chars (BMW450, BMW600, HMW190 and HMW240). Six treatments were prepared per soil (GAM or PORT), five with amendments (MW and four chars) and the untreated soil that was used as control. Mixtures were introduced in corresponding pots (volume of 500 mL). The mesocosms were filled first with a gravel layer (100 g), followed by 300 g of the respective mixture. In half of the mesocosms 10 seeds of After 45 days of plant growth, the leaves, stems and roots were separated and weighted in order to obtain the wet weight of the plant biomass produced. The dry weight of biomass was determined after heating biomass samples at 80 °C during 24 h. Soil microbial biomass (C-biomass), dehydrogenase, phosphomonoesterase and β-glucosidase activities were determined after 45 days of incubation experiments. C-biomass was assessed by the difference between the carbon content of the fumigated and unfumigated samples (following chloroform fumigation-extraction method) with a commonly used factor (Kc = 0.45) for soils amended with organic materials ( GMea = (phosphomonoesterase x β-glucosidase x dehydrogenase) This index offers unifying information from variables possessing different units and range of variation. It has been established as an adequate index for estimating soil biochemical quality after the addition of different amendments, including biochar ( Metal content, pH and EC of controls and amendments soils were determined after incubation experiments following the same methodology used for soils (soil: water ratio of 1:2.5 g mL Determination of metal content in leaves, stems and roots was performed following the 3051a USEPA method. In this case, the acid extraction was completed with HCl diluted with 50% distilled water in order to preserve the plant tissue ( The bioconcentration factor (BCF) was determined as the ratio of metal concentration in the plant and metal concentration in the soil, indicating the capacity of the plant regarding the accumulation process ( BCF-1 represents the ratio between the metal concentration on aerial plant parts (leaves + stems) and the metal concentration on the soil. BCF-1 = Metal in the leaves and stems mg kg BCF-2 that represents the ratio between the metal concentration in the roots and metal concentration in the soil BCF-2 = Metal in the roots mg kg Hyperaccumulators are characterized by BCF values > 1 ( The translocation factor (TF) was calculated as follows: TF= (Metal in the leaves and stems mg kg The TF indicates the ability of the plants to translocate metals from roots to aerial parts ( The significance of the differences among means was assessed by analysis of variance (ANOVA). Duncan’s multiple range test (  A wide characterization of MW, biochars and hydrochars was performed in a previous work ( Biochar and hydrochar are carbon rich-materials that could improve the organic carbon content in soils. Pyrolysis or HTC significantly transforms the organic matter of MW (   The biochemical properties of soil samples after incubation period were evaluated by phosphomonoesterase, β-glucosidase and dehydrogenase activities ( The addition of hydrochars and manure waste increased the activity of β-glucosidase in GAM and PORT samples (    The present study does not allow a complete understanding of the underlying mechanism underpinning these findings. Pyrolysis can affect the speciation of Zn in manure. In this sense, The BCF-1 for As indicates that Finally, the determination of BCF-1 and BCF-2 for Pb in GAM and PORT soils (  The addition of manure waste and its corresponding biochars and hydrochars did not increase Phytoextraction was soil-specific E. Cárdenas-Aguiar: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing. G. Suárez: Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation. J. Paz-Ferreiro: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing. M.P.J. Askeland: Investigation, Writing - review & editing. A. Méndez: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing Supervision, Funding acquisition. G. Gascó; : Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing Supervision, Funding acquisition The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Authors want to thank to Spanish The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at