Comminution and classification are very important unit operations in processing of minerals from the very course down to the fine particle size range. The processing properties of minerals such as the resistance against breakage, the tendency to agglomerate and the flow properties as well as the application properties such as the liberation of metals or the mechanical behaviour of fillers are affected by the size, size distribution and morphology of the particles received from the comminution and classification processes. As the European Symposium on Comminution and Classification which took place in September 2013 in Braunschweig (Germany) has shown still many challenges exist and have to be solved not only in the fields of mineral processing, fundamentals of breakage and communition models, but also in the area of fine and ultrafine grinding in chemical, pharmaceutical and other industries. This issue of the International Journal of Mineral Processing focuses on topics important for mineral processing like the reduction of energy consumption as well as the operating behaviour of high pressure grinding rolls, tumbling mills, vertical mills and wet and dry operated stirred media mills. Moreover, the breakage behaviour of single rocks and smaller particles and its relation to the rock/particle shape and texture as well as the performance of enhanced classification processes are topics of this issue. Nowadays one of the main research tasks is the development of mills and classifiers which can produce finer particles and/or offer significantly higher energy efficiencies. For these developments the knowledge of the micro-process of stressing a particle or a particle bed is very important. Moreover, multi-scale grinding models have to be developed which are able to predict milling results based on mill characteristics and on breakage behaviour of the product material. The big challenge is to determine the breakage behaviour in the fine size range and, on the other hand, the numerical determination and description of the stressing characteristics and operating behaviour of real production mills. Based on such a detailed knowledge the development of predictive models and the design of new mills should be possible. I like to thank the authors for their contributions of this special issue of the International Journal of Mineral Processing which document the nowadays relevant research topics in comminution and classification of minerals. With best regards,