The present study explores the ability of Rhodococcus opacus bacteria strain for the removal of nickel(II) under different experimental conditions. The effects of relevant parameters such as solution pH, biomass loading, ionic strength, and temperature on nickel(II) biosorption capacity were evaluated. Although the tests were carried out using synthetic solutions, the results are representative of typical waste effluents from chemical, dyestuffs, battery manufacture, porcelain enameling, metallurgical industries and electroplating circuits. The sorption data followed the Langmuir, Freundlich, Temkin, Dubinin–Radushkevich, and Sips isotherms. The maximum sorption capacity was found to be 7.63mgg−1 at pH 5. Thermodynamic parameters have also been evaluated and the results show that the sorption process was spontaneous and endothermic in nature. The dynamics of the sorption process were studied and the values of rate constants for different kinetic models were calculated. The activation energy of biosorption (Ea
                     ) was determined as 12.56kJmol−1 using the Arrhenius equation.The toxicity produced by lowest concentrations of heavy metals ions in industrial wastewaters is a subject of public concern, since these ions can reach the food chain. Nickel(II) may be found in wastewaters discharges from metallurgical processes, textile, storage batteries, pigment, fertilizers, mine drainage, ceramic, dye house effluent, and electroplating ( There are several methods for treating wastewaters containing heavy metals such as chemical precipitation, ion exchange, membrane filtration, and electrodialysis ( Biosorption is one of the most promising technologies for the removal of heavy metals from industrial wastewaters. Microorganisms including bacteria, algae, fungi and yeast uptake metal either actively, bioaccumulation, and/or passively, biosorption ( The aim of this work was to study some fundamental mechanisms of the biosorption of nickel(II) onto Based on a preliminary study of The zeta potential of The pH of wastewater has a large influence on the extent of biosorption. The adsorption capacity of All biosorption experiments were carried out in a single run basis. Metal ion solutions were prepared by dissolving analytical grade NiCl To study the equilibrium of nickel biosorption by The Langmuir equation describes the adsorption of gas molecules on a planar surface, which is related to the gas pressure ( The empirical Freundlich model can be applied to non-ideal adsorption on heterogeneous surfaces as well as multilayer adsorption and is expressed by the following equation ( The Temkin isotherm assumes that the drop in the heat of adsorption is linear rather than logarithmic, as implied in the Freundlich model ( The mean adsorption energy  Kinetic studies were carried out at a constant pH of 5, initial nickel(II) concentration of 5 Infrared absorption spectra were recorded on a Nicolet FTIR 2000 spectrophotometer. A KBr matrix was used as reference and deuterated triglycine sulphate (DTGS) was the detector. The data acquisition was performed through the absorption mode. The All bacterial cells are surrounded by a cell wall which can be composed of peptidoglycan, (lipo-) polysaccharides, (lipo-) proteins, enzymes and mycolic acids. Most of these macromolecules have shown functional groups like carboxyl, sulfate, phosphate or amino groups. Some of these groups demonstrated anionic or cationic charge thereby the bacterial wall presented amphoteric properties.  It is well recognized that the pH of the aqueous solution is an important parameter in affecting biosorption of heavy metal ions (  The biosorption of Ni The effect of pH can be explained both in terms of the pH at the isoelectric point (pH At pH 3, the maximum nickel(II) removal efficiency was only 19%, whereas at pH 6.5 the removal efficiency increased to 32.2%. The maximum biosorption capacity of To determine the effect of biosorbent dose, different amounts (2.0–5.0 The Langmuir, Freundlich, Temkin, Dubinin–Radushkevich, and Sips adsorption constants evaluated from the isotherms with correlation coefficients are also presented in From On the other hand, the From the Dubinin–Radushkevich isotherm the value determined for The values of The equilibrium time is a function of several factors, such as type of biosorbent (number and kind of functional groups), size and form of biosorbent, physiological state of biomass, as well as the metal involved in the biosorption system ( There have been several reports ( The pseudo second-order model ( The intraparticle diffusion model ( The value of 12.56 In environmental engineering practice, both energy and entropy factors must be considered in order to determine whether a process will occur spontaneously or not. The nickel(II) biosorption can be assumed to occur by the following process, which represents a heterogeneous equilibrium. For such equilibrium reactions, the Gibbs free energy variation (Δ The biosorption standard entropy, Δ The FTIR spectra of unloaded and metal loaded The band at 3414  The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support given by FAPERJ, CNPq and CAPES.