Stabilizers are commonly used in the production of very finely ground particulate materials. Doping with such additives is an absolutely essential process step in the production of ultra-fine and nano-fine solids; in all cases, the additives work as inhibitors that prevent the re-agglomeration of fine particles. Such additives, which are well known in both dry grinding and wet grinding processes, help to decrease the enormous energy consumption of cement production. This paper describes the essential features of stabilizers used in Portland clinker grinding processes. The results of milling experiments employing twelve commercially used and experimental additives are described. Their effectiveness in producing ultrafine (0–30μm) particles varied widely. Novel acrylate-based grinding stabilizers showed considerable promise for the production of very fine cement clinkers.The amount of energy used in cement flour production is immense. About 110 Portland cement consists of Portland clinker and a small addition of plaster or anhydrite, which defers the onset of cement sludge hardening. The original raw material for the Portland clinker production is lime marl, e.g. the mixture of lime and clay occurring in nature. The functional components of Portland clinker are β-dicalcium silicate – belite Non-ground clinker does not have the qualities of Portland cement – it can be subjected to boiling in water for many hours without changing its qualities. Clinker must be ground finely to be able to react with water. More finely ground cement has a larger specific surface and the reactive area with water is thus larger. Contact with both fine additives and gravel and sand surfaces is improved, the initial hydration of clinker minerals is made easier, and the distribution of hydration products is accelerated. It is recommended to keep the particle fineness expressed by the specific surface in the range 2150–2400 On the other hand, cement that is too fine will get wet and will clot more easily when stored. Used in concreting, it displays the tendency to segregate by water erosion, the onset of hardening gets shorter, and the hardening time gets longer. Despite the higher initial firmness of cement that is too fine (under 10 The overall grinding energy input can be divided into the following groups of effects ( From the viewpoint of the clinker disintegration process, grinding efficiency is usually specified only within the percentage limits of one-tenth of a unit. Clinker grinding processes exhibit a rapidly growing energy consumption and drop of mill performance with the growing fineness of the grinding stock. Grinding stabilizers are additives that make the process of grinding both energetically and functionally easier. The stabilization of grinding systems usually works on the principle of decreasing the surface energy of the grinding stock Separation of the newly forming surfaces, which is implemented by quick passivation of the superficial groups by linking an appropriate substance to these groups. Long-chain molecules are usually suitable, as the repeated mutual contact of the forming surfaces is prevented. Fatty acids and their salts are widely used as treatment agents for surfaces with a predominantly basic character. The bond with the unsaturated fatty acids occurs through OH groups on the surface and is accompanied by the liberation of water. Stearic acid CH  where Derivatives of orthotitanic acid, where the titanium bonds are implemented over O Passivation of the surface groups by a chemical reaction ( Passivation by abducing the electric charge from the surface of an electrically conductive medium. The use of clinker grinding on the basis of this principle is implemented mainly in the “dry” or “semidry” form by water or the addition of 1–2% of basic residues (our sample No. 7), or by the grinding modes in pneumatic steam mills. Solid substance addition also ranks among these grinding stabilizers (polymers demonstrating ion conductivity, such as mixtures of stabilizers, which contain a conductive mixture – iron filings, graphite and so on). The hydration process consists of a series of complex of reactions among clinker minerals, calcium sulfate and water. The real structure with a decreasing quantity of pores is gradually formed. The whole process can be divided into four stages ( A laboratory ball mill ( The diameter of the grinding chamber The milling stock (200 The milling times ranged from 10 to 1000 The Portland cement clinker was obtained from the Mokra cement plant of the Heidelberg Cement Group (CMC Stock Holding Co.). Clinker in the size range 0.16–5 On the basis of the analysis we can specify the main surface group of our Portland clinker material sample as shown in The grinding stabilizers used in our experiments are specified in A He–Ne laser particle sizer LA-500 ( A total of 168 milling runs were undertaken to evaluate the effects of stabilizer type and concentration, and grinding time. Particle size analyses of the products obtained were undertaken to determine: Yield of the demanded fraction 0–30 Yield of the fraction 0–8 The yields of the required 0–30 On the basis of the results obtained, we can summarize the following: The grinding process without any additive present (curve No. 1 in The use of TEA stabilizer (No. 2 in The performance of grinding processes with fatty acid stabilizers (No. 3 in PEG activators (No. 4 in Commercial grinding stabilizers based on fatty acid salts and phosphates (activator No. 5) are well known in Europe in the Rtg clinker quality-control area mainly. The 72% yield in the 0–30 The titanate and phosphite combination (Stabilizer No. 6) is a very effective grinding aid with a high yield of 87%. However, the required grinding time is long and the price relatively high. The unique electro-conductive grinding stabilizer, No. 7 – water – exhibited both an attractive yield and low price as well. However, the danger of the resulting surface hydration of the clinker and the consequent decline in its value is too high. The acrylate-based stabilizers (Nos 8, 9, 10 and 11), offer attractive properties, but the high price and the problematic process properties are serious disadvantages. The acetates (Stabilizer No. 12) behaved well in our tests, but the yield of nearly 80% in the range of 0–30 Twelve commercial and experimental stabilizers were employed in the laboratory grinding tests described in this paper. Their effectiveness in producing clinker particles finer than the required 8 We thank Jiri Lerch, the Plant Quality Manager of CMC Stock Holding Co. (Heidelberg Cement Group), Cement Plant Mokra, for providing us with the representative clinker samples.