The use of chloride in the heap leaching of sulfide minerals requires the regeneration of the oxidants copper(II) and iron(III). While this is possible in a sulfate system by the use of bacterially catalysed oxidation of iron(II), this can only economically be achieved by chemical reaction with dissolved oxygen in chloride systems due to the sensitivity of bacteria to high concentrations of chloride ions.
                  The kinetics of the reduction of dissolved oxygen by copper(I) in acidic chloride solutions has been studied under possible heap leach conditions. The results confirm some published data that the rate is second-order in copper(I). The rate increases with increasing acid concentrations but decreases with increasing chloride and copper(II) concentrations. Peroxide has been shown to be a detectable intermediate and a modified mechanism has been proposed which is consistent with the kinetic data. The use of the derived rate equation in a modified rate expression for the copper-catalysed auto-oxidation of iron(II) has been derived.An alternative approach to the heap leaching of primary and secondary copper sulfide minerals involves the use of chloride ions as the lixiviant ( The kinetics of the reduction of dissolved oxygen by iron(II) and copper(I) in acidic chloride solutions have been previously studied with the former being considerably slower than the latter ( A previous paper ( Note that in these and subsequent equations, the use of the generic symbols Cu(I), Cu(II), Fe(II), and Fe(III) are used. This is necessary as each of these species comprises both the aquo-ions and the various chloro-complexes, the relative proportions of which will vary with the chloride ion concentration. The inhibiting effect of iron(III) ions in terms of the above equilibrium was demonstrated and the effects of the copper(II) concentration, acidity and chloride ion concentration on the rate described. An overall kinetic model was developed which was reasonably consistent with the published data on the individual reactions involved in this mechanism. The application of the model to the prediction of maximum possible leach rates for copper sulfide minerals in aerated systems under ambient conditions was reported. As part of this mechanism, a previously reported ( The kinetics of the oxidation of copper(I) by dissolved oxygen(DO) is too fast to be studied by the previously used technique of monitoring of the DO concentration using a DO probe given the relatively slow response of this system. In an alternative method, the mass-transport controlled current due to the oxidation of copper(I) at a rotating (1000 All reagents were analytical grade. For the regulation of pH, copper and chloride ion concentrations, HCl, CuSO As shown in the previous paper ( A typical plot of the current due to the oxidation of copper(I) during an experiment is shown in Although the second order plots showed good linearity for 60–70% oxidation of copper(I), there were consistent increases in the slopes of the plots at longer times. Furthermore, several consecutive runs in the same aerated solution gave rise to increasing rates and greater deviations from second order. These effects are shown by the plots in The observed second order rate constants were obtained for a number of experiments in which the initial concentrations of copper(II), chloride ions and acid were varied. The rate decreases with increasing copper(II) concentration as shown by the data in The mechanism previously used was that published ( Ignoring any chloride dependence, the rate equation, This equation does roughly describe the kinetic data in that at low concentrations of copper(I) in the presence of added copper(II), it predicts a second order dependence on the copper(I) concentration. However, although it also predicts that the rate should decrease with increasing copper(II) concentration, the dependence of the rate on the copper(II) concentration is not a simple inverse relationship as would be predicted from this rate equation. An alternative mechanism which is more consistent with the data is suggested as follows: Assuming that the equilibrium concentration of the intermediate (Cu.O The slightly different form of this equation from Eq. Under conditions of the present experiments, the oxygen concentration is constant in the aerated solution and [Cu(I)] Thus, a plot of [O The linear dependence of the rate constant on the acid concentration observed in The effect of temperature is very small as shown by the data at 15 On the basis of the above data at 25 A least squares fit of all the data to this equation at 25 As described above, the rate of oxidation of copper(I) by the intermediate peroxide is comparable in rate to that of oxidation by dissolved oxygen and the full rate Eq. The data for a run with 0.25 As outlined in a previous publication ( Thus, the catalytic effect of copper ions and the retarding effect of ferric ions on the rate can be explained in terms of the effect of these ions on the steady state concentration of copper(I) established through the assumed equilibrium step (Eq. The first term is the published rate expression for reaction (18) ( The rate of reaction (19) is rapid relative to reaction (18) or (20) and can be assumed to be in equilibrium ( In the presence of copper ions and low iron(III) concentrations, reactions (18) A revised rate equation and mechanism for the oxidation of copper(I) ions in chloride solutions has been established based on additional test work using a different technique for the study of the kinetics at low concentrations of copper(I) typical of those encountered in a heap leach process. Formation of peroxide as an intermediate in the reduction of oxygen has been confirmed and a preliminary analysis has shown that the rate constant derived from the data for one experiment is consistent with published data. The modified rate equation has been incorporated into a revised overall rate equation for the copper-catalysed auto-oxidation of iron(II) in chloride solutions. This revised rate equation more accurately describe the retarding effect of copper(II) concentration on the rate of this reaction. It is recommended that the modified rate equation be used in any kinetic modeling of a chloride heap leach process.