In order to investigate the usability of nanomaterials as a froth stabiliser in mineral flotation, an experimental study was performed using a froth column and a modified flotation cell. Four different nanomaterials, namely SiO2, TiO2, Fe2O3 and Al2O3, were used in the experiments. The froth column tests were carried out to measure the Sauter-mean bubble size and dynamic froth stability under different operating conditions. Single mineral flotation tests with or without the nanomaterials were performed using a pure barite sample. Results of the froth column tests show that despite of the increasing froth height, the bubble coalescence in the froth or bursting on the surface can be decreased considerably by using the nanomaterials. The effect of the increase in froth height on the Sauter-mean bubble size and the bubble coalescence was found to be negligible by using the nanomaterials in all pH values used. These effects of the nanomaterials could not be attributed to both signs and magnitudes of their surface charges.
                  It was determined that the nanomaterials used in this study did not contribute to the flotation efficiency at shallow froth. Contrary to this, the nanomaterials, in particular nano-sized Fe2O3 and Al2O3, provide a significant increase in barite recovery (7–11%) at deep froth, which means that selection of the type of the nanomaterials to be used in flotation is also important. As a result of the use of the nanomaterial, the decrease in the flotation performance at deep froths was found to be negligible.The structure and stability of a froth phase are critical in determining its ability to transport the hydrophobic mineral particles into the concentrate launder. Therefore, the separation efficiency and selectivity of the flotation process relate directly to froth stability, bubble coalescence and bubble size distribution ( It is well known that froth stability is defined as a function not only of the type and concentration of the frother used in the flotation but also of the characteristics of the particles present in the froth ( Colloidal (nano-sized) particles act in many ways like surfactant molecules, particularly if adsorbed to a fluid–fluid interface. Therefore, they have been incorporated into surfactant-stabilised aqueous foams for many years, and their influence on the formation and stability of the foam is very dependent on the surfactant type, particle size and concentration ( As mentioned previously, sufficiently hydrophobic fine particles irreversibly adsorb to the air–water interface because of their high adsorption energy and they create a strong steric barrier against bubble coalescence. This leads to resistance during froth drainage, allowing very stable froths to be produced. Mineral flotation is effective for particle sizes below about 100–120 Abovementioned findings and discussions reveal that in order to prevent bubble coalescence and to stabilise froth phase in a flotation cell, the nanomaterials can be used effectively in mineral flotation. The aim of this study is therefore to evaluate the usability of the nanomaterials in mineral flotation by means of examining their effect on the Sauter-mean bubble diameter, froth stability and flotation performance. If the nanomaterials as a froth stabiliser can be used effectively in the mineral flotation, the froth stability becomes a controllable factor, and it can be adjusted easily to the desired level during the flotation. In this way, the separation efficiency and selectivity of the flotation process could be enhanced considerably using a simple method like this. Flotation chemicals (frother; Oreprep F-507 and collector; Aero 722) were supplied from Cytec Industries, USA. Hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide, sodium silicate and dextrin were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. In single mineral flotation tests, a pure barite sample (− De-ionised water (Milli-Q purification system, Millipore) was used in all experiments. Four kinds of nanomaterials were purchased from SkySpring Nanomaterials Inc., USA. Some properties of these materials used in the experiments are given in Several methods can be used to determine froth/foam characteristics ( 0.25 Before the experimental programme, the use of the nanomaterials in the pulp phase was envisaged as one of the plausible methods. In such a case, it can be expected that the nanomaterials may cover the mineral particles and/or they can be rendered hydrophobic by the collector. These mechanisms are related directly to the surface charge of the nanomaterials. For these reasons, the zeta potential of each nanomaterial was measured in order to interpret the results obtained from the trial tests and the planned single mineral flotation experiments. Zeta potentials of the nanomaterials were measured by a Malvern Zetasizer Nano Z and the results were presented in In this study, the bubble size was measured by a photographic technique. When equilibrium was reached, bubbles near the froth column wall or the cell wall were photographed just below the top level of the froth by using a digital camera (Casio EX-F1), which was connected to a personal computer where the images were stored and analysed. The size and number of the bubbles were determined using a commercial image analysis software (Kameram 2.2.0). The Sauter-mean bubble diameter ( Effects of the nanomaterials on the Sauter mean bubble size and the maximum froth height are illustrated in In order to bring out the relative (or net) effect of each nanomaterial (N As seen in It is clear that selection of a suitable method for using nanomaterials in the flotation tests is very important. The nanomaterials can be used effectively in a flotation test by several ways: i) the nanomaterial's suspension can be added directly into the pulp phase like the flotation chemicals, or ii) it can be added into the froth phase like wash water. However, it was determined that there were no significant differences between the results obtained from the trial tests performed by using these methods. At the end of the trial tests, it was concluded that adding of the supplementary foam containing the nanomaterials into the froth phase was to be the suitable method (see  The effect of the nanomaterials on relative flotation rate constant and relative to the Sauter-mean bubble size is given in Even if part of the bubbles rising from the pulp phase to the froth phase would be coalesced, as a result of the use of supplementary foam containing the nanomaterials, many small bubbles are located in the froth phase. Since these bubbles which are resistant to coalesce were added to the froth phase, the froth has become more stable. Thus, the Sauter mean-bubble diameter close to each other was obtained, as seen from  The results obtained from the froth column tests indicate that the effect of the increase in the froth height on the Sauter-mean bubble size or the bubble coalescence becomes negligible by using the nanomaterials in all pH ranging from neutral to basic. These effects of the nanomaterials are not attributable to both signs and magnitudes of their surface charges. Different methods for the effective use of the nanomaterials in the flotation tests can be applied. In this study, adding of supplementary foam containing the nanomaterials into the froth phase was found to be a suitable method to use the nanomaterials in the flotation tests. It was determined that the nanomaterials used in this study did not contribute to the flotation efficiency at the shallow froth. Contrary to this, the nano-sized Fe Since single mineral flotation tests were carried out in this study, it is evident that the results of this study cannot be related to selectivity of the flotation of a real ore, the particle size distribution of feed, etc. Therefore, the future work may branch into several directions. The first is to study whether effective use of the nanomaterials in real ore flotation (oxides, sulphides, etc.) is possible. Ongoing works in our laboratory are focused on this topic. Secondly, the results of this study reveal that the nanomaterials could be used effectively in column flotation. It seems that improvement in the performance of the flotation columns could be more pronounced than those of mechanical flotation cells. The authors gratefully acknowledge the