The Orthopaedic Trauma Association (OTA) recently proposed a new classification of open fractures. In 1795, when Desault coined the term “débridement”, open fractures were fatal, either from bleeding or from infection. After the advances in asepsis, roentgenography, and antibiotics over the next century and a half, Cauchoix, writing in the French literature, described the three types of skin wounds associated with open fractures and noted their association with soft tissue necrosis. In 1969, Gustilo et al. reported on 511 open fractures in an eleven-year period. Tscherne and Oestern further distinguished four grades of open fractures which ranged from inside-out puncture holes to subtotal/total amputations. Gustilo, Mendoza, and Williams subclassified type III open fractures. Byrd and Spicer modified the Gustilo classification in 1985 to include the energy of the deforming force, the boney vascularity, and the injury to the bone and soft tissues and defined four types of injuries. Horn and Rettig, and then Brumback and Jones, raised many questions about the lack of reliability of the Gustilo classification. Despite its common usage and familiarity to many orthopaedic surgeons, the Gustilo classification has left many questions unanswered. Is the classification pre-debridement or post-debridement? Is it preoperative or intraoperative? Is it reproducible? How can it be used as a basis for treatment when the classification itself is often based on treatment? Can the Gustilo classification stratify injuries with regard to outcomes and prognosis? Why doesn’t the arterial injury have to be at the level of the open fracture with type IIIC injuries? How do trauma system resources and systems variables affect the classification? Lastly, how do performance variables influence the use of the classification? In contrast to the open fracture classifications, several scoring systems were developed which emphasised surgical decision-making with limb-threatening injuries when deciding between limb salvage and amputation. These include the predictive salvage index which focused on the vascular injury as a prognostic indicator. Several recent studies have looked at the potential usage of the OTA open fracture classification (OTA-OFC) for assessment of limb viability. Barber et al. analysed the predictive ability of each of the OTA-OFC categories in 185 patients who underwent amputation, had vacuum-assisted closure, had antibiotic beads placed, or had >2 debridements following open fractures of the lower extremity. The many unanswered questions and unresolved issues with the Gustilo classification, combined with the changing nature and epidemiology of contemporary open fractures, created a need for the development of a new open fracture classification. The OTA recognised this need and charged its Classification Committee with this project. This Committee used rigorous scientific methodology including an extensive search of electronic databases, and evaluation of 34 factors by an expert panel. A consensus was subsequently achieved on five essential categories of open fracture severity assessment: skin injury, muscle injury, arterial injury, contamination, and bone loss. A clinical feasibility study was performed and revisions were made which resulted in the final version of the OTA-OFC which was published in August, 2010, in the A prospective study performed by the Major Extremity Trauma Research Consortium (METRC) illustrated better stratification of open fractures using the OTA-OFC compared to the Gustilo classification. One of the most powerful opportunities for the new classification is the potential to define the correlation between the injuries in various anatomic locations and the treatment variables (e.g., need for multiple debridements, need for antibiotic beads, need for negative pressure wound therapy, need for amputation, etc.), development of complications such as infection, and functional outcomes. The collection of this data will provide a way to start looking at the validity of the classification. The Orthopaedic Trauma Association Board of Directors has recently charged the Classification Committee with designing a multi-centre study to collect enough data to assess reliability, validity, and ideal usage of the open fracture classification. Lastly, the OTA Research Committee is developing a request for proposals for a multi-year topic-directed grant to assess the OTA-OFC. Once there is sufficient data about the OTA-OFC with regard to reliability, validity, and outcomes, it is likely that the ideal way to use and apply it will become evident. Wang et al. proposed that the OTA-OFC be used in a way similar to the Enneking classification for bone lesions. If other classifications are any indication, the OTA-OFC classification has too many potential combinations. The main challenge for the new classification of open fractures with its five categories, each of which have three subtypes, is that it may be more complicated to use in clinical practice than the five types of the Gustilo classification (types I, II, IIIA, IIIB, IIIC). Perhaps five is the magic number. Gustilo went from his original three types (I, II, III) to a total of five when he subdivided his type III's. Ironically, in a analogous way, Sunderland revised Seddon's classification of nerve injuries into three types (neurapraxia, axonotmesis, neurotmesis) into five types, when he subdivided the three types of axonotmesis. The OTA-OFC classification is robust, objective, and evolving. As more data becomes available regarding its reliability, validity, correlation with outputs and outcomes, and usability, the conversation will likely continue about how best to grow and develop the classification. Meanwhile, please consider using the OTA-OFC in your daily practice and joining those who are generating the data. We now come back to the question, “Are we there yet?” The short answer is that it certainly looks like we are closer than we have ever been.