Between June 1994 and December 2000, 80 displaced acetabular fractures were treated by open reduction and internal fixation, where possible by a single surgical approach. We report our results in 72 patients (73 fractures) who completed a minimum follow-up of 2 years. The average age of patients was 39.5 years (range 15–76 years). Thirty-four fractures were classified as simple and the remaining 39 were complex fractures. Twenty-four patients were recorded to have posterior dislocation of the hip joint at the time of initial presentation and at surgery eight patients were noted to have varying degrees of damage to the head of the femur. The average time to surgery was 11.7 days (range 1–35 days); 80% of cases were operated within 2 weeks period. The average follow-up was 45.5 months (range 24–96 months).
                  In 67 fractures (92%), only a single approach was used (Anterior Ilioinguinal 26 cases; Posterior Kocker–Lagenbach 41 cases). Five fractures needed an extensile triradiate approach and only one case required a combined anterior and posterior approach. Congruent reduction was achieved in 89% of cases. Main complications included deep infection in two patients (2.7%) and severe degenerative changes in three patients (4.2%). A total of four patients (5.5%) required a total hip replacement. There were no cases of deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism. Heterotopic ossification grade III was seen in three (4.1%) cases and none were grade IV. At the latest follow-up the average Harris hip score was 85 (range 20–100).
                  We conclude that in the majority of cases internal fixation is possible through a single approach provided patients are referred early to a specialist unit. This results in satisfactory outcome with reduced morbidity and complication rate.Open reduction and internal fixation, as for any other intraarticular fracture, is now a standard treatment for a displaced acetabular fracture. In a comparative study, nonoperative treatment of the displaced acetabular fracture has been shown to give far inferior results compared to operative treatment (30% good results versus 86% good results). Between June 1994 and December 2000, 79 consecutive patients (80 fractures) underwent operative treatment for a displaced acetabular fracture. Patients were either directly admitted through the emergency department or referred from other hospital for operative treatment of the acetabular fracture. All patients in this series were operated by the senior author (ADC). Inclusion criteria for this study was a minimum follow-up of 2 years or poor clinical result requiring further surgery before 2 years. We therefore excluded seven patients, who failed to complete a minimum follow-up of 2 years. A total of, 72 patients (73 fractures) were followed, which included 66 male and six female patients. The mean age at the time of injury was 39.5 years (range 15–76 years). Forty fractures involved the right side and 33 involved the left. The mechanism of injury was road-traffic accident in 47 patients, fall from height in 18, sports related injury in three and five fractures were due to other reasons. Thirty-seven patients (50%) sustained various other associated injuries ( A single surgical approach was selected on the basis of fracture pattern aiming to achieve reduction and fixation using one approach. The Kocher–Langenbeck approach was used for posterior wall ( Postoperatively, all patients were put on continuous passive motion to initially allow about 45 degrees of hip flexion, which was gradually increased to 90 degrees over next two to 3 days. Active hip movements were started after fifth postoperative day. All patients were mobilised nonweightbearing for 6 weeks to 3 months using walking aids, which were then gradually discarded. All patients received indomethacin 25 Post-operative radiographs were used to determine the congruency of fracture reduction. All fractures with a displacement of 2 The average time to surgery was 11.7 days (range 1–35 days). Fifty-eight (80%) of cases were operated within 2 weeks of injury. Of the remaining 15 cases, 4 were delayed due to associated injuries, whereas 11 cases were referred late to our unit. In 67 fractures (92%), only a single approach was used ( The mean postoperative stay in hospital was 26.5 days (range 12–272 days). About 66% of patients were discharged within 3 weeks ( In 65 (89%) cases, congruent reduction was achieved and in the remaining 8 cases the reduction was considered incongruent. Four of these eight patients had sustained a central fracture dislocation of the hip joint with severe comminution of the quadrilateral plate and one patient with both column fracture was operated 32 days after injury. This patient was initially treated with an anterior external fixator and by the time he was referred to us the pin sites were grossly infected. The fracture fixation had to be performed through a posterior approach to restore some anatomical congruity. In patients with a simple fracture pattern, congruity was achieved in 33 out of 34 patients as compared to 32 of 39 cases with a complex fracture pattern. None of the patients in this series lost reduction after surgery and there were no cases of implant failure. Overall 20 cases (27%) showed heterotopic ossification of varying degrees ( Radiographs indicated 42 excellent results, 21(30%) good and 4 (5.7%) fair results. Three patients (4.2%) developed avascular necrosis of the femoral head with severe osteoarthritic changes requiring a total hip replacement. Two of these patients had posterior dislocation of hip with associated damage to the femoral head and the acetabular articular impaction. The third patient had sustained a severely comminuted both column fracture after falling from a height of 300 feet. All local and systemic complication are listed in At the latest follow-up the average Harris hip score was 85 (range 20–100). Overall there were 75.3% good or excellent results (     In our series, 75% patients had good or excellent results in the medium term, which is comparable to that reported in other studies. Avascular necrosis of the femoral head has been reported to be in 3–10% of patients in various studies. Management of displaced acetabular fracture requires adequate exposure with minimal morbidity of the approach itself. An ideal approach would allow visualisation of both columns and the joint surface with minimal complications. Extensile approaches around the hip joint have reported a high rate of complications. We conclude that medium-term results of internal fixation of displaced acetabular fractures at our centre are satisfactory. If patients are referred early, single approach surgery is possible in the majority of cases, which reduces postoperative morbidity and complication rate.