An experimental study of the combustion of superfine aluminum powders (average particle diameter as ∼ 0.1 μm) in air is reported. The formation of aluminum nitride during the combustion of aluminum in air and the influence of combustion conditions on the structures and compositions of the final products are addressed. The experiments were conducted in static air at 1 atm. Superfine aluminum powders were produced by exploding an electrically heated wire. Such a superfine aluminum powder is stable in air, but once ignited can burn in a self-sustaining way due to its low bulk density (∼0.1 g/cm3) and low thermal conductivity. During combustion, the temperature and radiation were measured; also the burning was recorded by a video camera. Scanning electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction and chemical analysis were performed on both the initial powders and final products. It was found that the powders ignited by local heating and burned in a two-stage self-propagating regime. The products of the first stage consisted of unreacted aluminum (∼70 mass %) and amorphous oxides with traces of AlN. After the second stage, the AlN content exceeded 50% and the residual Al content decreased to ∼10%. A qualitative discussion is given of the kinetic limitations for the oxidation of AlN due to rapid condensation and encapsulation of gaseous AlN.Aluminum powders are widely used in of propellants and pyrotechnics of various types Recently superfine metal powders (average particle diameter a The SFAP was obtained by the WEE method Four grams of superfine aluminum powder were poured onto a steel saucer (see XRD and chemical analysis showed that the product of the first stage, after rapid quenching in argon, consisted of unreacted aluminum and amorphous aluminum oxides, with some traces of AlN; The formation of a large amount (>50 mass %) of AlN (actually AlON) has been observed The final products of SFAP combustion in air are formed at a high temperature ∼2800 K, as shown in The presence of the AlN phase in the final products contradicts thermodynamic calculations (the nitride ought to be further oxidized in air). The accumulation of AlN must be due to the chemical binding of atmospheric nitrogen. The stabilization of large quantities of AlN (> 50 mass %) at high temperatures occurs only by encapsulation of the nitride: otherwise suboxidation of nitrides would occur. At low temperatures (in the first stage, T <1400 K) oxidation proceeds by diffusion of the oxidizers through the layer of products. Such behavior in the combustion of a metal in a gaseous oxidizer is well known for SHS of synthesized materials system Thus, at low temperatures (see This work has been supported by the cooperative research program of No.lab.03-15-003 by the Korean Institute of S & T Evaluation and Planning (KISTEP) and also supported by the Korean Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF) through the Research Center for Machine Parts and Materials Processing (ReMM) at the University of Ulsan. The authors also are grateful to Drs D.V. Tikhonov and A.V. Sergienko for useful discussions.