Fatigue cracking due to fracture damage is one of the major structural distresses prevalent in today’s hot-mix asphalt (HMA) pavements. HMA resistance to fracture is governed by two fundamental mechanisms: the number of repetitive load cycles for microcracks to coalesce into macrocracks in a crack initiation process (N
                     i) and the number of repetitive load cycles for macrocrack propagation through the HMA layer thickness in a crack propagation process (N
                     p). To adequately model HMA fracture resistance, the fundamental mechanisms of these two processes must be understood. In this study, mathematical models for computing N
                     i and N
                     p were formulated based on continuum fracture-mechanics, the work potential theory, and pseudo-strain energy and surface energy concepts. Verification and sensitivity analysis of the models based on laboratory test data, with traditional Texas HMA mixes, yielded plausible results. Overall, the formulated models were found to be potentially promising as a fundamental means to quantitatively characterize the fracture and fatigue cracking resistance of HMA mixes. However, validation and calibration of the models with more HMA mixes and field data is strongly recommended.Fatigue cracking is one of the major structural distresses prevalent in today’s hot-mix asphalt (HMA) pavements, often costing highway agencies millions of dollars in maintenance and rehabilitation activities. Fatigue cracking reduces the HMA pavement service life and is undesirable. Therefore, appropriate material property characterization and modeling of HMA mix fatigue cracking resistance is critical to ensure satisfactory field performance. HMA is a complex composite material of asphalt–binder, aggregates, air, and other additives such as lime or fibers. When subjected to loading and changing environmental conditions, HMA exhibits non-linear visco-elastic and anisotropic behavior, ages with time, and heals during traffic loading rest periods. In order to cause load-induced damage in the form of fracture cracking in HMA, energy must be expended. Equally, energy must be expended to close up the fracture surfaces during the healing process. HMA mix resistance to fatigue cracking thus consists of two components: (1) resistance to fracture and (2) the ability to heal; processes that change over time. Healing, defined as the closure of fracture surfaces that occurs during rest periods between loading cycles, is one of the principal components of the laboratory-to-field shift factor used in most traditional empirical fatigue analysis models HMA fracture occurs through two processes: crack initiation and crack propagation. Crack initiation is defined as the number of repetitive load cycles for microcracks to coalesce into macrocracks and is denoted as Crack propagation refers to the number of repetitive load cycles for macrocrack propagation through the HMA layer thickness and is denoted as Using continuum fracture-mechanics, the work potential theory, and pseudo-strain and surface energy concepts; the objective of the work presented in this paper was to develop and formulate mathematical models for computing Over the past few decades, a number of approaches for characterizing the fracture properties of HMA mixes have been developed and some have gained widespread usage in the industry. Continuum fracture-damage mechanics constitute some of the most promising approaches for fundamentally characterizing the fracture properties of HMA mixes used in fatigue modeling. Unlike phenomenological-based approaches, their failure criteria are based on a direct relationship between crack development and fracture damage Continuum fracture-damage mechanics approaches are conceptualized on the fundamental theory that HMA is a complex composite material that behaves in a non-linear visco-elastic manner and requires energy to be expended to cause load-induced damage in the form of fracture (or fatigue cracking). The approaches utilize the visco-elastic correspondence principle, Paris’ model of fracture mechanics According to Schapery’s WPT based on continuum damage models for linear-elastic materials, the total work done during the damaging process is assumed to be path-independent; and therefore, the total fracture damage growth is considered to be solely dependent on the external loading To account for HMA’s non-linear visco-elastic nature, which is loading time-dependent, Schapery proposed the extended visco-elastic correspondence principle and introduced pseudo-elastic variables represented in the form of convolution integrals that exhibit time-independent boundary conditions. Under this extended visco-elastic correspondence principle, the primary variable of importance is the pseudo-strain energy function that is used to characterize the fracture damage process while at the same time correcting for the non-linearity and visco-elastic behavior of HMA In terms of continuum fracture-damage mechanics, the development of microcracks affects the stress–strain fields in a given media. Consequently, a stress intensity factor ( The two coefficients, Analogous to From Schapery’s modified WPT In order to cause load-induced damage in the form of fracturing, energy must be expended. From the fundamental principles of conservation of energy, this fracture energy must be equivalent to the strain energy that is released per unit area of the HMA cracked surfaces. The fracture pseudo-energy that represents the work required to separate a unit area of HMA material to form two separate cracked surface faces is governed by the model presented in Eq. The fracture surface energy parameter denoted as Δ According to Lytton et al. In this section, the mathematical derivation for the model to compute the number of repetitive load cycles to microcrack initiation ( Based on uniaxial repeated-direct tension (RDT) laboratory testing of numerous HMA mixes, a plot of DPSE- (where DPSE The cracked surface area (CSA) is given as a function of the HMA cross-sectional area ( And simplifies to: Divide by (1 The parameters The mathematical derivation of the model for computing the number of repetitive load cycles to microcrack propagation ( Where Based on this hypothesis as demonstrated in From elastic theory, the tire pressure ( In Eqs. Parameters Without consideration of the laboratory to field shift factors or accounting for HMA response behavior such as anisotropy, healing, and aging, laboratory HMA mix fatigue resistance can be assumed to be equal to the summation of Based on Lytton et al.’s study To verify the formulated models, five typical Texas HMA mixes were evaluated and results of two of these mixes were compared with calculations based on the traditional mechanistic–empirical (M–E) method and the flexural bending beam fatigue test (FBBFT)    For the computations shown in The computed Based on  As part of a sensitivity analyses, the relationships between  From The The In general, the greater the potential to relax the applied stress (with a related lower Based on The results shown in A high shear modulus is generally indicative of a relatively stiff and less ductile mix, with a high probability for poor fracture and fatigue resistance. Consistent with theoretical expectations and Eq. In consideration of the parameters evaluated, HMA mix fatigue resistance in terms of In this paper, models for crack initiation ( Sensitivity analyses further indicated that the HMA mix fatigue resistance measured in terms of Overall, the formulated models were found to be potentially promising as a fundamental means to quantitatively characterize the fracture and fatigue cracking resistance of HMA mixes in the laboratory. The models also indicated potential to be utilized for discriminating and ranking HMA mixes in terms of fatigue crack resistance potential in the lab. Preliminary and analytical verification of the models based on two mixes in the laboratory also indicated good correlation with other traditional HMA fatigue analysis methods such as the M–E and the flexural bending beam fatigue tests. However, more verification and sensitivity analyses with a different array of HMA mixes are strongly recommended to validate the models. Also, field validation of the models is strongly recommended. When applying the models, however, it is recommended to consistently use SI units for the model parameters. Furthermore, the This study was performed in cooperation with TxDOT and FHWA. The contents of this paper reflect the views of the authors who are responsible for the facts and accuracy of the data presented herein. The contents do not necessarily reflect the official views or policies of TxDOT or FHWA or any other agency. This paper does not constitute a standard, specification, nor is it intended for design, construction, bidding, contacting, or permit purposes. Trade names were used solely for information and not for product endorsement. The authors thank the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) and the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) for their support in funding this research study and all those who aided in the course of this research work.