In the present investigation efforts were made to study mechanically driven structural transformation in Sn reinforced Al–Cu–Fe icosahedral quasicrystalline (IQC) matrix nanocomposites. The sequence of structural transformation, phase composition, thermal stability and hardness of mechanically milled IQC-Sn nanocomposite powder were studied through X-ray diffraction (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), differential scanning caloriemtery (DSC) and nanoindentation techniques. The XRD result suggests the formation of nano-structured composites. The IQC phase co-existed with monoclinic Al13Fe4 (a = 1.549 nm, b = 0.808 nm, c = 1.248 nm, α = β = 90°, γ = 107.72°; mC102) and B2-type Al (Cu, Fe) (a = 0.29 nm; cP2) phase in IQC-Sn nanocomposite powder subjected to mechanical milling for 40 h. The structural transformation and fraction of IQC, Al13Fe4 and B2–Al (Cu, Fe) phase depends upon the volume fraction of Sn and duration of milling. The crystalline phases formed during milling transformed to a stable IQC phase along with the other crystalline phases during subsequent annealing treatment. The structural transformations occurring during milling have a remarkable effect on indentation hardness, which is in the range of ∼ 4–7 GPa. This suggests that IQC-Sn nanocomposite produced through milling with desirable mechanical properties may be used as potential coating materials for engineering applications.In the year 1984 with the discovery of quasicrystal (QC) in Al–Mn alloy by Shechtman et al. [ The narrow composition range and the difference in the density among the elements offers a considerable challenge for fabricating the stable IQC phase in Al–Cu–Fe alloy through melting and casting routes. However, nanostructured Al–Cu–Fe IQC may be synthesized through mechanical alloying (MA) routes with much less complexity in microstructure compared to that of the conventional processing routes [ In past three decades significant contributions were made by scientific community for understanding and explaining the structure of these QCs. Inspite of having very good properties, the inherent room temperature brittleness of these Al–Cu–Fe based IQC alloys limits its prospect as an engineering material for coating applications [ In the present investigation efforts were made to study the effect of mechanical milling and Sn content (up to 30 vol%) on structural transformation, thermal stability and indentation behaviour of Al–Cu–Fe IQC matrix nanocomposite powder. The duration of mechanical milling and volume fraction of Sn particles can affect the structural transformation of IQC phases and result in the combination of appropriate microstructure for better toughness and reasonable strength of the nanocomposites. An alloy of Al The sequence of structural transformation during various stages of milling was evaluated by X-ray diffraction (XRD), which was performed using an Empyrean (PANalytical) diffractometer with Co-K The thermal stability of the 40 h milled IQC-Sn nanocomposite powders were examined to study the phase evolution using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC 404 F3, Pegasus, Netzsch, Germany) under nitrogen atmosphere with a heating rate of 20, 30, 40 and 50 K/min. The phase evolution during differential scanning calorimetry was co-related with phases formed in the IQC-30Sn nanocomposite powder annealed for 10 h at 300 °C, 400 °C, 500 °C, 500 °C, 600 °C, 700 °C and 800 °C. The morphology of IQC-30Sn annealed nanocomposite powder was examined using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (NOVA NanoSEM 450, FEI) operated at 30 kV and also equipped with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The nanohardness (H) measurements of the individual IQC-Sn nanocomposite powder particles were carried out using standard Berkovich nanoindentor (TI950, Hysitron) at a peak load of 5 mN with a loading rate of 20 μN/s. The reported hardness of nanocomposite powders is at least an average of ten measurements. The detailed procedure for mounting, curing and indentation of nanocomposite powders were described elsewhere [ The powder XRD patterns show the sequence of structural transformation during mechanical milling of IQC-10Sn, IQC-20Sn and IQC-30Sn as evident from It is obvious from In the present investigation considerable efforts were also made to investigate the effect of Sn particles on structural transformation of minor crystalline phases during mechanical milling. The IQC phase coexists with the minor fraction of crystalline phases of Al The crystallite size and lattice strain for IQC-Sn nanocomposite powder are reported in The diffraction contrast image of IQC-10Sn, IQC-20Sn and IQC-30Sn are shown in For IQC-20Sn the BF, SAD pattern and DF image are shown in For IQC-30Sn the BF, SAD pattern and DF image are shown in The thermal stability and phase evolution during heating of IQC-Sn nanocomposite powder have been investigated through dynamic DSC at different heating rates of 20 K/min, 30 K/min, 40 K/min and 50 K/min. The dynamic DSC thermogram for IQC-10Sn, IQC-20Sn and IQC-30Sn are shown in  The variation of nanohardness (H) with milling time for the varying volume fraction of Sn in IQC-Sn nanocomposite powder is shown in As mentioned in the introduction, the Al–Cu–Fe IQC is the potential candidate that may be exploited as engineering structural material as a coating or reinforcement in aluminium matrix composite. However, the inherent room temperature brittleness of these Al–Cu–Fe IQC limits its application as a candidate material for coating applications to enhance the wear resistance and reduce the coefficient of friction. There are various strategies and methodologies for encountering the problem associated with room temperature brittleness of Al–Cu–Fe IQC. The fracture toughness of these IQC can be enhanced either by nanostructuring [ The sequence of structural transformation during mechanical milling of IQC-10Sn nanocomposite powder up to 40 h may be summarized as below:      However, the sequence of structural transformation during milling of IQC-30Sn nanocomposite powder up to 40 h is different from that of the IQC-10Sn, which may be summarized as below:      The ballistic movement of atoms due to high shear stresses generated during mechanical milling as a consequence of the collision between balls and powder particle leads to the structural transformation of the IQC phase. These may be corroborated by broadening of IQC and crystalline phases after milling as shown in The phase evolution during dynamic DSC at different heating rate may be evident from Disordered B2 [Al (Cu, Fe)] (major) + Disordered IQC (minor) (IQC-30Sn milled for 40 h). (∼239 °C): Melting of Sn reinforcement (∼300 °C): Al (∼439 °C): Al (∼579 °C): Al (∼721 °C): (Al The B2-type phase appears to be stable even after annealing of IQC-30Sn after 10 h at 800 °C. An investigation by Mukhopadhyay et al. reports the existence of minor phase fraction of B2-type phase along with major IQC phase after annealing at 800 °C [ The hardness for IQC-Sn nanocomposite powders is reported in The mechanically driven structural transformation of IQC-Sn nanocomposite powder as a function of milling duration and volume fraction of Sn has been analyzed in details. Further, efforts were made to co-relate the sequence of structural transformation with the hardness of IQC-Sn nanocomposite powder mechanically milled up to 40 h. It can be concluded from the present work as follows: The structural transformation of Al–Cu–Fe IQC phase (with a minor phase fraction of crystalline phases) transforms to Al The order-disorder transformation of the IQC phase in the IQC-Sn nanocomposite powder is dependent on the volume fraction of Sn reinforcement. The milling of IQC-Sn nanocomposite powder upto 40 h leads to the structural transformation of ordered to disordered face-centred IQC phase, i.e, simple icosahedral phase. The IQC phases in IQC-10Sn & 20Sn are ordered upto 20 h of milling, whereas for IQC-30Sn the IQC phase is ordered upto 30 h of milling This may be attributed to the change in the mechanism of milling leading to disordering among the atoms in IQC phase. The disordered B2-type Al (Cu, Fe) phase, i.e., BCC phase is formed after milling of IQC-Sn upto 40 h. Increasing the volume fraction of Sn also enhances the layering of crystalline phases (for IQC-10Sn) and B2-type Al (Cu, Fe) phase on IQC phase (for IQC-30Sn). The heating events in IQC-Sn nanocomposite powder are associated with phase evolution of crystalline phases.. The Sn reinforcement in IQC-Sn nanocomposite powder enhances the structural stability of B2-type phase even after annealing at 800 °C. The activation energy computed through Kissinger and Ozawa model are found to be very close to each other for various types of transformation. The structural transformation induced by milling in IQC-Sn nanocomposite powder affects the indentation behaviour and hardness to the tune of ∼4–7 GPa, as a function of milling duration and volume fraction of Sn reinforcement. This offers the possibility of synthesizing nanocomposite powders with suitable processing treatments for having good fracture toughness and optimal strength required for application such as coating materials for bearing application.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Authors would like to thank Profs. S Lele, R K Mandal, BN Sarma, B S Murty, and Drs B Mukherjee, Manish Kumar Singh and Mr. Vivek Kumar Pandey for many stimulating discussion. Authors thankfully acknowledge the support from