In the last ten years, the operational costs in the gold and silver cyanidation processes have increased, fundamentally, due to the treatment of ores which contains high cyanide soluble metals, such as zinc, copper, and nickel, among others, increasing the cyanide consumption along with the increase in cyanide price. Additionally, the high cyanide consumptions in gold operations have increased the cyanide contents in leach tailings, forcing the inclusion of processes to recover or eliminate cyanide. For these reasons, a membrane contactor operation to recover cyanide from gold mining, using gas filled membrane absorption is proposed in this study, performing laboratory tests in order to determine the throughput of this process and the most relevant parameters, which affect the cyanide recovery. Gas Filled Membrane Absorption (GFMA) process can extract cyanide, using an absorption solution of NaOH. In this process, previously reported for wastewater treatment, a hydrophobic membrane with its pores filled with air separates an aqueous stream containing cyanide and receives a solution with a high pH value. These aqueous solutions cannot penetrate into the membrane pores, promoting the cyanide transfer from the cyanidation solution to the receiving solution. The experimental results show cyanide recoveries higher than 90% in extraction times of approximately 10min, achieving an average cyanide transfer rate of 0.01kgm−2
                     h−1 and identifying the pH, feed flow rate and copper concentration as the most influential parameters on the performance of the process.
                  Furthermore, a phenomenological transport model was developed in order to explain the critical steps of the cyanide transfer in the GFMA process. This model was validated by means of the comparison with the experimental results of cyanide extraction with the presence of Cu(I) and Zn(II) ions, obtaining a statistical error lower than 10%. Thus, the gas filled membrane absorption process can recover cyanide, with similar performance to the current cyanide recovery processes, and could involve a smaller size of the equipment due to the high transfer surface area per volume that membrane contactors have.The extraction of gold and silver using cyanide to leach ore is a widely used process, fundamentally because of its simplicity and efficiency ( Furthermore, cyanide forms complexes with other metals, such as copper, zinc, nickel, and cadmium, which vary widely in their stability and solubility ( In this way, the presence of metals in ore increases cyanide consumption in cyanidation plants, thereby increasing operational costs and concentrations of cyanide-soluble metals in leach tails. The reduction of cyanide concentrations in the leach tails has been performed by cyanide destruction processes, which use reagents highly oxidative and very expensive such as ozone, hydrogen peroxide, Caro's acid, sulfur dioxide, and chlorine ( There are several types of cyanide recovery processes in different stages and scales of study, reporting mixed results. In general, cyanide recovery processes may be classified in terms of their feed characteristics, slurry or clear solution. Processes to recover cyanide from slurry have been mostly developed at laboratory or pilot plant scale, such as activated carbon process and ion exchange resin process ( The logarithmic exponent of the dissociation constant pK The AVR process recovers the cyanide through acidification, stripping with air, neutralization of effluent, and absorption of the HCN gas. The acidification stage generates dissolved HCN due to the dissociation of free cyanide described in Eq. HCN generated in the acidification stage remains dissolved in solution because the value of Henry's law constant is lower than 4.0 On the other hand, the treated solution is neutralized in order to return to the cyanidation process ( The SART process has been designed to regenerate cyanide from gold cyanidation processes with high cyanide soluble-copper contents, using sulfide (Na The SART process can achieve copper recoveries above around 80% and free cyanide regeneration above 80%, using sulfide stoichiometric addition higher than 100% ( The gas filled membrane absorption process (GFMA) has been applied to extract or recover solutes of interest, such as ammonia from wastewater ( The following common aspects summarize previous studies regarding the GFMA process for cyanide removal: All studies involved treatment of industrial wastewaters (electroplating, pesticide and insecticide) to reduce the final cyanide concentration lower than local regulations; therefore the cyanide recovery should be greater than 95%, depending on the initial cyanide concentration in the treated solution. Typical conditions of these studies involved cyanide concentrations ranging from about 500 to 5000 Cyanide recovery efficiency varied between 80% and 99.9% in operational times ranging from 16 to 400 Additional operations were integrated with the membrane process, such as ion exchange and coagulation ( Based on the results reported in the studies cited above, the GFMA process is potentially an alternative to recover cyanide from industrial wastewaters and could potentially be implemented in other industries that use cyanide, such as gold and silver extraction, which consumes 18% of total cyanide worldwide production, estimated in 1.4 Configuration of the GFMA process is inherently safe, since volatile HCN extracted from the feed stream is confined in the membrane pores and the potential for HCN escape is restricted. The motivation of the present work is the assessment of cyanide recovery from gold and silver cyanidation solutions using the GFMA process. In the membrane absorption process proposed in this work, a hydrophobic hollow fiber contactor is used to separate a feed solution containing cyanide from receiving phase of NaOH solution. The hydrophobic character of the membrane avoids the penetration of aqueous solutions into the membrane pores, which are filled with air. Thus, HCN transfer through the membrane is achieved according to the following sequence of steps, which are presented in Cyanide transfer through a boundary layer of feed solution to be treated at the membrane surface. Phase equilibrium between the feed solution at the membrane surface and the gas phase (air) retained in the membrane pores. HCN gas transfer through the air gap that fills the pores. Phase equilibrium between the gas filling the pores and the receiving NaOH solution at the membrane surface. The conversion of HCN into non-volatile cyanide in the receiving solution can be supposed to be instantaneous. Mass transport of absorbed cyanide into the bulk receiving solution. The GFMA process can be proposed as an attractive alternative for cyanide recovery in gold and silver extraction processes to conventional technologies, such as the SART and AVR processes, since the process offers a high volumetric efficiency (surface area for mass transfer/volume of equipment) opening options of a reduction in plant installations. This study reports the performance of the GFMA process using a synthetic solution which simulates a typical gold/silver cyanidation solution to establish key operating characteristics for the process. Feed to the gas-filled membrane absorption process must be acidic (pH Chemical equilibrium constants for Eqs. Finally, a mass balance for copper, cyanide and zinc provides a relationship between the concentration of total cyanide, copper, zinc and pH, which is represented by Eq. This equation is useful to estimate the concentration of metal-cyanides species as well as the concentration of HCN contained in feed solution as function of pH. The effect of the concentration of metals can also be quantified. Eq. The overall HCN transfer through the porous membrane can be described by the following equation:  In Eq. Here, The overall mass transfer coefficient can be represented as a global resistance, which involves the contribution of individual mass transfer steps (  The local mass transfer coefficient at the feed solution boundary layer in Eq. In Eq. Inside the membrane pores, the local mass transfer coefficient for the retained air phase can be described by molecular diffusion ( Here, Synthetic cyanide solutions were prepared to simulate typical solutions found in gold/silver cyanidation processes using NaCN 98% purity. Copper and zinc cyanide solutions were prepared from CuCN and ZnSO The extraction of HCN from feed cyanide solution and its recovery into the absorption phase may be reported as recovery efficiency, estimated as the percentage of the transferred amount of cyanide from its initial mass in the feed solution. Recovery is reported at specific points in time according to Eq. The cyanide concentration was analyzed at specific points in time in the receiving solution by means of titration with AgNO Previous tests to verify the reliability of the titration method showed that the cyanide balance can be done with accuracy higher than 95%. The phenomenological model of the GFMA process for cyanide recovery described in The effect of pH and temperature on the cyanide recovery in the GFMA process was assessed without metal content in the cyanide solution. Feed solution containing 2000 Cyanide recovery obtained for operating times longer than 20 The effect of temperature on the extraction percentage was assessed between 5 and 25 The effects of zinc and copper on cyanide recovery by the GFMA process were quantified by adding copper and zinc to the feed cyanide solution. Results from these tests are reported in Copper content in the feed cyanide solution inhibits cyanide recovery due to the formation of non-extractable CuCN. Formation of CuCN can be predicted by means of equilibrium constants in the dissociation equations for the copper–cyanide complexes (Eqs. The cyanide extraction rate shows a slight decrease when the concentration of copper is 100 Additional tests were carried out to analyze the effects of pH, temperature and feed flow rate on the extraction efficiency with presence of both zinc and copper. These results are shown in A pH decrease from 7.0 to 4.0 ( Moreover, the cyanide transfer rate does not seem to be largely influenced by the presence of metals. The experimental results of cyanide recovery as a function of time reported in A novel process for cyanide recovery from cyanidation solutions typically generated in gold/silver extraction has been proposed and assessed in this work using a gas filled membrane absorption process. Cyanide recovery percentages were higher than 90% in 10 A phenomenological transfer model based on a resistances-in-series approach was developed in this study. This model involves the classical mass transfer equations at the proximities of the membrane and the thermodynamic relationships related to the phase and chemical equilibrium. This theoretical description of the process was used to estimate cyanide recovery percentages as a function of time. An average RMS of about 10% was found, validating this model as an acceptable prediction tool for scaling up. This novel application could be an attractive alternative for cyanide recovery in gold/silver extraction, since under well-chosen conditions it could potentially reduce the investment and operational costs compared to current cyanide recovery technologies, such as AVR and SART processes. The high value of specific surface area available for mass transfer in membrane contactors is a significant advantage, which could potentially allow the reduction of equipment volume and size of installations. Moreover, GFMA process is potentially safer than other dispersive contact processes, since volatile HCN is retained and transferred through the membrane pores, reducing the risks associated to leaks of gaseous compounds. The next step of this research involves the test of the cyanide recovery by means of GFMA using an actual solution from a gold plant to confirm the results reported in this work.  Porosity of the fiber, dimensionless Packing fraction: Viscosity, kg/(ms) Density, kg/m Tortuosity of the fiber, dimensionless Area, m Molar concentration, mol/m Diameter, m Fibers thickness, m Diffusion coefficient, m Feed solution flow, m Standard enthalpy, J/mol Henry's law constant, Pa/molar fraction Cyanide transfer rate, kg/(m Local mass transfer coefficient, m/s Equilibrium constant, dimensionless Overall mass transfer coefficient in Eq. Membrane length, m Partition coefficient, dimensionless Number of fibers, dimensionless Overall transfer rate, mol/s Logarithmic exponent of dissociation constant, dimensionless Pressure, Pa Universal gas constant, 8.314 Reynolds number: Cyanide recovery in the GFMA process, % Schmidt number: Sherwood number: Time, s Temperature, K Velocity, m/s Feed tank volume, m Mol fraction in the liquid phase, dimensionless Mol fraction in the gas phase, dimensionless  Referred to the end of the module in Eq. Referred to thermodynamic equilibrium in Eq.  Referred to the end of the module in Eq. Referred to thermodynamic equilibrium in Eq. Referred to thermodynamic equilibrium in Eq. Referred to thermodynamic equilibrium in Eq. Referred to thermodynamic equilibrium in Eq. Referred to thermodynamic equilibrium in Eq. Referred to the gas phase Referred to the hydraulic diameter Referred to HCN Referred to the diffusion of HCN in air phase Referred to the diffusion of HCN in liquid phase Referred to i-specie Referred to the internal diameter Referred to the liquid phase Referred to the filled gas in the membrane pore Referred to the logarithmic mean driving force Referred to time n Referred to the external diameter Referred to time Referred to initial time Referred to time n Referred to tank volume at initial time Referred to tank volume at n time Referred to the pseudo-equilibrium interface Referred to HCN This work was supported by the projects