Published rate data are analysed for the chemical and electrochemical dissolution of silver metal from rotating discs in aerated/oxygenated cyanide solutions at ≈25 °C, pH 11 and different partial pressures of oxygen. The current status of the reaction mechanism is also reviewed. Speciation analysis of 0.01 mM silver(I) in 1–100 mM cyanide solutions shows that Ag(CN)2
                     − is the predominant complex (50%) at cyanide concentrations <20 mM. However, at higher cyanide concentrations, Ag(CN)3
                     2− (up to 60%) and Ag(CN)4
                     3− (up to 10%) can be formed. Thus, it is important to consider a silver(I):cyanide ion ratio of 2 or 3 in the Levich equation to calculate the diffusion coefficient of cyanide ion. Likewise, it is important to consider a silver(I):oxygen ratio of 1:0.5 to calculate the diffusion coefficient of oxygen. This indicates the reduction of oxygen to hydrogen peroxide in the surface reaction. Analysis of exchange current density data for silver oxidation as a function of cyanide concentration shows the involvement of between 1 and 2 cyanide ions in the surface reaction. The limiting rate of silver dissolution at high cyanide concentrations (2.5×10−5 mol m−2 s−1 at ≈21 kPa oxygen pressure) represents the maximum surface coverage by cyanide. This value is in close agreement with the rate constant of the surface reaction 4×10−5 mol m−2 s−1 based on the pure kinetic current of the mixed “charge transfer plus diffusion” model proposed by Li and Wadsworth [Li, J., Wadsworth, M.E., 1993. Electrochemical study of silver dissolution in cyanide solutions. J. Electrochem. Soc. 140, 1921–1927].Silver cyanidation has been reported to involve the chemical reactions shown in Eqs. The cyanidation process is widely used for gold extraction from ores and concentrates. Silver co-exists in most gold ores and is co-extracted during gold cyanidation. Scrap alloys from various sources such as discarded/recycled electronic materials also make an important contribution to the supply of gold, silver and other metals. Thus, the co-extraction of silver during gold cyanidation is an economical advantage. However, silver can be beneficial or detrimental to the kinetics of gold cyanidation depending on the mineralogy and the mode of occurrence.   review, compare, and contrast the rate data and reaction mechanisms of silver cyanidation reported by previous researchers, highlight the applicability (and limitations) of the diffusion models to rationalise the dissolution kinetics and the number of cyanide ions involved in the surface reaction, and determine a rate constant for the surface reaction that can be used to compare the kinetics of silver cyanidation by the two methods: chemical or electrochemical. The formation of Ag(OH) It is clear from   The Levich equation (Eq. At low concentration of cyanide, the rate of diffusion of cyanide is equal to the rate of surface chemical reaction representing the steady state ( Eqs. The free cyanide concentration denoted by In order to compare the effect of different rotation rates and cyanide concentrations on the anodic oxidation of silver, The excellent linear relationship with slope ≈1 for rates based on anodic limiting currents shows the validity of Eq.   The data points in sets B, C and F in While oxygen is essential for the chemical oxidation of silver, the differences in limiting rates between line D and lines B, C and F in Although the value of Previous researchers have reported the effect of oxygen partial pressure on the rate of dissolution of a rotating silver disc ( The effect of oxygen pressure is further exemplified in The effect of increasing oxygen pressure on reaction rate has to be quantified by considering the actual concentration of dissolved oxygen. According to the data reported by  Moreover, as the cyanide concentration decreases from 40 to 2.5 mM, the slope of some curves in Results reported by The results based on chemical dissolution reported by Based on rotating silver disc studies, the cyanidation reaction takes place according to Eq. the transport of reactants to the silver surface predominantly determines the rate, because the concentration of hydrogen peroxide increased with the amount of silver dissolved, while the addition of small amounts of hydrogen peroxide (up to 0.35 mM) during cyanidation with 57 mM NaCN at an oxygen partial pressure of 486 kPa made no significant difference to silver cyanidation kinetics; the difference between the theoretical ratio of A series of reactions, as given by Eqs.  Nevertheless, the values of Following the work of More recent work by  Intercept (at These two equations are important for the comparison of results from the two methods of dissolution: chemical and electrochemical, as the slope represented ( The reciprocal of the intercept, shown in Eq.  The substitution of slope  The product of oxygen reduction in Eq. According to the surface adsorption–reaction model, the limiting rate at maximum surface coverage  The literature data on the rate of chemical or electrochemical dissolution of silver in alkaline cyanide solutions of a range of concentrations and oxygen partial pressures have been reviewed to compare and contrast the kinetic models for dissolution. Results based on corrosion currents show excellent agreement with the Levich equation, especially at high cyanide concentration and low oxygen partial pressures, although the involvement of 2 or 3 cyanide ions in the reaction has to be taken into account in order to calculate the diffusion coefficient The limiting rate of silver cyanidation at an oxygen partial pressure of 21 kPa and 25 °C at high cyanide concentration is 2.5 Exchange current density If the stable Ag(I) species in solution is Ag(CN) Substitution of Eq.