A rock mass consists of intact rock and various forms of discontinuities (e.g. joints/fractures, bedding planes and folds). Presence of joints, which are caused by internal stresses developed due to the change in stresses and temperature in rocks, would significantly affect the mechanical properties of rocks such as, deformation modulus and Poisson’s ratio Different indirect methods are available for determination of equivalent mechanical properties of rock masses and calculation of elastic compliance tensor: experimental, analytical and numerical methods. The empirical methods ‘infer’ the rock mass properties from the rock mass classification or characterization results. Although it has gained wide popularity for practical applications for design, especially in tunneling, it often gives too conservative estimates for property characterizations, largely because it makes use of categorized parameters based on case histories Nowadays, a wide popularity is gained by computing growth in speed and precision which brings numerical methods to such a level that enables to emerge as a powerful tool for simulation of rock mass behavior in order to determine individual properties such as strength, deformability, systematic investigation of homogenization, and up-scaling schemes. What makes the numerical methods stand out is the merit that the influence of irregular fracture system geometry and complex constitutive models of intact rock and fractures can be directly included in the derivation of the equivalent mechanical properties of rock masses. Uncertainty, a common subject with variable values in all of the mentioned methods, is caused by the nature and unpredictable behaviors of the rock masses. Moreover, this subject has variable behaviors in different locations of rock and it is considerably affected by complex network of fractures. Therefore, the approach of an appropriate methodology according to the conditions and available equipment with the lowest degree of uncertainty in obtained results is one of the principle tasks of rock engineering works. The main purpose in numerical methodology of jointed rocks is a modeling based on reality, fractures complex geometry, and the interaction between joints and rock blocks. In the available continuum based methods such as Finite Element Method programs for calculating deformability of discontinuum media, there are interface elements or slide lines that enable them to model a discontinuous material to some extent. However, their formulation is usually restricted in one or more of the following ways: firstly, the logic may break down when many intersecting interfaces are used; secondly, there may not be an automatic scheme for recognizing new contacts; and, finally the formulation may be limited to small displacements and/or rotation. For these reasons, continuum codes with interface elements are restrictive in their applicability for analysis of modeling in jointed rocks. Also the Composite Element Method (CEM) is recently developed and used for calculating deformability parameters of fractured rocks in In field tests, there is a possibility of increase in the fracture size while the volume under loading increases. Larger volumes of rocks in situ contain much more fractures with varying sizes which contribute to the changes, often as reduction, in mechanical parameters of the fractured rock masses. Even if there is no change in fracture intensity with size increase, still the scale effect on mechanical properties will exist The following is the relation between stress The geometric parameters for generating fracture system realizations are based on the reported data in ref. The generated DEM models varying from 0.5 To properly represent the stochastic nature of DFN generation, 10 series of DFN models were generated to ensure that the calculated results were not dependent on one single numerical experiment and to produce more representative stochastic behavior of the fractured rock mass. From each generated parent network, increasingly large models were cut out from the center of the parent models, in sizes from 0.5×0.5 Since the shear strain and shear stress components associated with The components related to normal stress in the The generated DFN models were discretized with triangular zones of constant strains for distinct element analysis using the UDEC code, with the linear size of triangular zones varying from 0.005  The numerical results on effects of model size and fracture intensity on the Poisson’s ratio and deformation modulus which is normalized to elastic modulus of intact rock over about 84.6  The results of calculated normalized deformation modulus and Poisson’s ratio of 10 DEM models with different sizes and the fracture intensity value of 4.6 The calculated ‘CV’ values of deformation modulus and Poisson’s ratio show that the REV size exists within the model side length smaller than 10 From Mean values of The effects of model size on the existence of REV for deformation modulus and Poisson’s ratio of fractured rock masses were investigated using DEM modeling, when fracture intensity is variable. The models underwent a series of numerical uniaxial compression tests for large sized models of fractured rocks with different fracture densities. This numerical approach serves to study the size effect on mechanical parameters and compliance tensor of fractured rocks, which cannot be readily examined at the laboratory. The results show significant scale-dependency of the Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio of the concerned fractured rock with different fracture intensity values. As the value of fracture intensity increases, homogenization of the DEM models increases. The REV of mechanical properties can be approximated for all fracture patterns with different fracture densities. The results show that fracture intensity of the DEM models plays a key role in estimating the elastic mechanical parameters and behaviors of fractured rocks on the field scale. Such analysis cannot be performed based on laboratory testing results on rock samples of standard sizes, and numerical modeling can serve to provide more reasonable estimations, which require, on the other hand, reliable fracture and fracture system characterization. The results demonstrated that the deformation modulus and Poisson’s ratio significantly decrease when fracture intensity increases respectively. As can be seen in The authors would like to acknowledge the assistance of Mr. Siavash Norouzi.