The purpose of the present study was to examine the clinical results of surgery for intra-articular calcaneal fractures using a calcaneal locking plate and a bone spreader as a reduction tool. Ten patients with intra-articular calcaneal fractures were treated. An extended lateral approach was used. The reduction of the intra-articular fragments of the posterior facet was temporarily held using a bone spreader and Kirschner wires. Internal fixation was achieved with a locking calcaneal plate. Böhler's angle and Preiss' angle were assessed on the day of injury and the day of the final follow-up examination. The step off and gap of the posterior facet were assessed on the day of injury and the first week after surgery. The functional outcome was evaluated using the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society ankle hindfoot scale score. The mean Böhler's angle ranged from 2.1° ± 11.0° to 30.4° ± 5.0° (p < .0001), the mean Preiss' angle ranged from 23.5° ± 4.5° to 15.5° ± 2.9° (p < .0001), the mean step off ranged from 4.0 ± 1.9 mm to 0.1 ± 0.2 mm (p = .0002), and the mean gap ranged from 2.6 ± 1.0 mm to 1.2 ± 0.6 mm (p = .0035). The mean American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society Ankle-Hindfoot scale score was 89.2 (range 85 to 100) at a mean of 14.3 months after surgery. Our results suggest that a locking calcaneal plate can be used to restore and reduce an intra-articular calcaneal fracture and achieve good clinical results.The management of displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures remains challenging and controversial The purpose of the present study was to examine the clinical results of surgery for intra-articular calcaneal fractures using a calcaneal locking plate and bone spreader as reduction tools. We treated 10 patients (6 males and 4 females) with intra-articular calcaneal fractures consecutively at our hospital from April 2011 to October 2012. None of these patients were treated for bilateral fractures. The mean patient age was 62.9 (range 42 to 76) years. The mean follow-up period was 14.3 (range 7 to 23) months. Of the 10 fractures, 7 were graded as Sanders type 2, 2 as type 3ab, and 1 as type 3ac. Nine fractures were graded as joint depression fractures and one as a tongue fracture using the Essex-Lopresti classification. The mean period from injury to internal fixation was 11.4 (range 7 to 18) days. The inclusion criteria were primary surgery of an intra-articular calcaneal fracture and age >15 years. The exclusion criteria were age <16 years, open fracture, and bilateral calcaneal fractures. All the patients gave informed consent before inclusion in the study. The local ethical committee authorized the study, which was performed in accordance with the ethical standards of the 1975 Declaration of Helsinki as revised in 2013 An extended lateral approach was used, and the peroneal tendons were carefully retracted and dissected from the peroneal tubercle. A lateral wall fragment was identified and separated carefully in 1 piece. A bone spreader was placed underneath the articular fragment of the posterior facet and slowly opened until Böhler's angle was restored to that observed in an uninjured calcaneus. The reduction of the articular fragments was temporarily held with a bone spreader ( Böhler's angle and Preiss' angle were measured on the day of injury, 1 week after surgery, and at the final follow-up examination using plain radiographs. Preiss' angle was defined as the angle between the lateral wall and the line from the medial tip of the sustentaculum tali to the medial process of the calcaneal tuberosity on the axial view. The step off and gap of the posterior facet were measured on the day of injury and 1 week after surgery using computed tomography scans. Functional outcome was evaluated using the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) ankle hindfoot scale score The results are listed in the The results from the present study demonstrated good functional outcomes using a locking calcaneal plate combined with a bone spreader as a reduction tool for treating intra-articular calcaneal fractures. Several studies have compared the outcomes of operative treatment with those of nonoperative treatment for displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures A number of surgical methods have been reported, including ORIF using an extended lateral approach Several similar studies have compared minimally invasive techniques of percutaneous reduction and fixation using screws or Kirschner wires for intra-articular calcaneal fractures Regarding minimally invasive plate fixation using the STA, Cao et al Comparing ORIF with minimally invasive reduction and percutaneous fixation, Wang and Wei Several similar studies have compared the clinical results between the extended lateral approach and STA Regarding surgical treatment with external fixation, Talarico et al Locking plates have been shown to have advantages over conventional plates The locking calcaneal plate used in the present study was a low-profile plate (2 mm thick) and therefore easy to bend and contour to the calcaneus. Furthermore, it is gentle on the soft tissues because it is a low profile plate. Nonlocking screws were first inserted through the plate holes just under the subtalar joint and the corners of the tuberosity to compress the plate onto the lateral wall. The locking screws were then inserted through the other plate holes. In our series, the correction loss of Böhler's angle from the first week after surgery to the day of the final follow-up was only 0.4°. Anatomic reduction of the intra-articular fragments is the most important procedure associated with the functional outcome of calcaneal fracture treatment Tantavisut et al The rate of soft tissue complications using the extended lateral approach has reportedly been as great as 25% In the previous data, significant differences were not found in the occurrence of infection between the use of sutures and adhesive skin closure tapes One limitation of the present study was the small number of cases. A larger prospective study for the management of intra-articular calcaneal fractures using a bone spreader is necessary to confirm our findings. In conclusion, our findings suggest that a locking calcaneal plate can be used to restore and reduce an intra-articular calcaneal fracture and achieve good clinical results. Our study suggests that reduction techniques using bone spreaders are quite useful for reducing the articular fragments of the posterior facet of the calcaneus during plate fixation. We acknowledge Junji Kishimoto, PhD, for providing excellent statistical advice.