This paper evaluates a novel combination of geostatistical simulation and a blending pile emulator in predicting in situ grades variability and planning blending piles. The method generates multiple, equally probable grade scenarios for the deposit, which reproduce the values of the samples, the histogram, and the variogram of the attribute being simulated. For a given mining plan, the set of simulated scenarios will generate a group of equiprobable values for each homogenization pile. These results provide the averages to assess a range of possible values each pile can have. To validate the suggested methodology, the contents of P2O5 obtained by the short-term mining plan and sampled at the processing plant from a large phosphate mine in central Brazil were compared against the simulated values. The average values sampled at the mill and the average values predicted by the short-term mining plan were compared against the space of uncertainty (range of possible grade values) generated by the proposed methodology. By comparing the simulated interval against the forecasted value planned by short-term mine planning block model 96% of situations included the real values. The results matched adequately demonstrating that geostatistical simulation and pile emulation methodology are efficient tools that could be applied in predicting grades in situ variability and in planning blending piles.Profits in mineral industry strongly depend on proper planning at all stages of mining and ore processing, and every step of these processes depends on the results from the previous stage. These chains of events can be illustrated, for instance, by the processing plant. To maximize ore recovery, among various factors, the processing plant must be fed by a material as homogeneous as possible minimizing the variance of the head grades that can be achieved initially by a proper mining plan and optimal schedule and more effectively by homogenization piles. The key factor is to know the input grade variance to design a blending system capable of attenuating it. Estimation methods commonly used to predict block grades which form the geological model used for mine planning do not adequately measure the variance associated with these estimates. The performance of processing plants, for instance, depends on good planning and execution of the mine schedule. This performance is strongly associated with ROM grade variability which is an important factor influencing plant concentrate recovery. Therefore, it is critical to reduce the head grade variability. Blending piles play an important role in this task, as they substantially reduce the inherent variability of the deposit even when mining follows a schedule defined along a stationary mining route. In any blending pile the attenuation on variability depends on the equipment used and the way ore is deposited and recovered ( Prior to designing the blending pile it is necessary to know the grades of the material that will form the pile. These grades come from a geological block model mined according to a sequence determined by an optimal scheduling. Each block has its own grade and the grade pile is basically the average of the grade of each block forming the pile weighted by its mass. These block models however are obtained via classical interpolation algorithms, such as ordinary kriging ( Geostatistical simulations can be used to generate multiple, equally probable scenarios of the phenomenon; each scenario reproduces the value of the sampled data, their spatial continuity, represented by semi-variogram, and the histogram of the distribution, replicating the natural variability of the deposit. These scenarios provide a set of possible values for each block, which form a homogenization pile. Thus, there will be many values for the average of blending piles studied as there are various possible scenarios generated by the simulation algorithm used. The group of pile averages origins a so-called space uncertainty about the grades a given pile can have. Knowing the average estimate for the block and the error associated with the estimated value, it is important to know that the block size that will be mined also directly influences the average and the variability of the ore extracted, called the dispersion variance. The larger the block mined the smaller would be the changes in the grades among blocks, thus ensuring initial homogeneity. The volume  As the blending piles are fed into a system of successive horizontal layers of ore, the mass of each layer can be represented by a ΔR of the total mass R. Thus, the variability of the ROM material will be equally divided between the various mass intervals ΔR; If the homogenization pile is operated properly, then according to the way material is deposited, the variability between the different ΔRs is superimposed when the pile is formed; Due to the dimensions of the court on which the piles will be mounted and the dimensions of the mining blocks mined to form these piles, sometimes overlap may occur in a certain amount of material belonging to the same block in more than one ΔR. Thus, there will be changes in the grades between the vertical slices (∆K); however, these changes are smaller than the ones between ΔRs; The blending pile design should be studied according to the number of layers of ore deposition (N), the mass of each layer (ΔR), and the mass of each slice (∆K). The dimensions of the homogenization piles should be planned so that the variability between the slices reclaimed (∆K) is minimized. The proper pile design should take into account all variables of interest affecting grade variability during pile reclamation, i.e. mass of each layer (ΔR), number of layers (N), and number of vertical slices (∆K). The mass of each layer of deposition (ΔR) is relatively homogeneous, as the ore forming the layer is derived from one or a maximum of a few blocks from mine. The variability between these layers ΔR is significantly higher than the variability between the set of ΔRs forming the slices ΔKs. This fact is in agreement with the volume variance relationship established by The design of the homogenization system should be planned in order that the piles are formed with the highest possible number of layers available for deposition (N). Thus, the variability among theses layers will be reduced as one layer will be formed by one block or in a more unfavorable condition by a few blocks with a small variation in grade content if compared with layers made up of several blocks. Thus, the variability between slices ΔK will be significantly reduced. However, the increase in N imposed operational difficulties. Moreover, after a certain number of layers (N), the variability between them tends to a minimum and a constant value ( All these mentioned factors should be considered for the operation and planning of blending piles. This paper focuses on investigating the effectiveness of geostatistical simulations applied to predict the grades To validate the proposed methodology, 50 blending piles formed over 8 At the mine studied, there are two chevron type blending piles at the industrial area simultaneously, each weighing approximately 110,000 The simulated model is said to be conditionally simulated if it honors the values at sampled points and reproduces the same dispersion characteristics of the original dataset, i.e Simulation algorithms currently used in mining and petroleum industries are more appropriate than ordinary kriging to deal with matters related to data variability. Mine production plans, scheduling, and blending strategies require knowledge of the dispersion of relevant geological attributes ( The interesting aspect of conditional simulation is that simulated values can be generated in all geographical positions covering the whole deposit and not only at the sampled sites. The penalty for obtaining this denser grid of values through the deposit is an increase of the estimation error or, in geostatistical jargon, a higher variance of the estimation obtained through conditional simulation compared to the variance obtained using estimation methods. Sequential Gaussian simulation (sGs) ( The basics steps involved in the process of generating equally probable models are the following: Obtain a representative histogram for the input data and proceed with the transformation of the original values into a standard normal distribution; Proceed with variography using the normalized data; Select a grid node to be simulated randomly; Estimate the histogram of likely values at the grid node; Draw a random value from the histogram; Incorporate the value drawn (v) into the conditioning dataset; Repeat the previous steps until all grid nodes (equivalent to the volume defined by the samples used) have been visited; Restart (i) to (vii) to generate another simulation; Back-transform the simulated data into the original scale; Validate the results. To obtain multiple simulated scenarios for a grade block model is labor intensive and computationally demanding. The sequential Gaussian simulation algorithm was used to obtain 100 stochastic images for the P One hundred equally probable values were simulated at each block, allowing the calculation of 100 different average grades for each pile (formed by multiple blocks). Since these grade models are conditionally simulated, they should reproduce the values at the sampled locations, their histogram and variogram. From short-term mine planning, the zones mined and the origin of the ore forming each pile are obtained. These zones are delimited by solids or wireframes located at 10 different mining faces. These multiple mining faces are an initial blending attempt as distinct ores are combined to ensure P Given the optimal mining sequence, the set of blocks that would form each blending pile will return a 100 different simulated values for the pile average grade. This set of equally probable average grades comprises the so-called space of uncertainty about the grades and will be used to reconcile with the grades obtained at the plant and short-term mine planning. The first method to obtain a real grade to reconcile the predictions generated by the geostatistical simulation algorithm is to average P When a given pile is reclaimed at the industrial area to feed the processing plant, its real grade is accessed via averaging the grades from samples collected along time intervals. This average grade is the second possible value to be used as the benchmark or real grade to which the simulated values will be plotted against. Mineral deposits are made of a combination of ore and waste rock. Ore itself, may vary in its characteristics due to the heterogeneity of materials which compose it. Furthermore, the heterogeneity can be affected by methods of loading and transport and the types of procedures used in handling and preparation of the ore. According to The heterogeneity of constitution refers to the intrinsic characteristics of the material, i.e., it is the difference that exists between the constituent particles or fragments of a lot, when the comparison is made of a particular property. The homogenization or blending of the constituent particles of the lot shows no influence on the heterogeneity of constitution. The heterogeneity of distribution depends on the heterogeneity of constitution, but also on the spatial distribution of particles units within the volume occupied by the lot. This type of heterogeneity can be observed when looking at the various groups of neighboring units, such as fragments within the domain of a particular batch of material. Once the material is extracted and comminuted, these minerals become partially or totally free, depending on their release. Therefore, these minerals can always be relocated in search of a more stable configuration when subjected to gravitational forces or other forces that are designed to promote segregation or homogenization in mineral processing. Blending piles are used in an attempt to reduce the heterogeneity of materials, mining the ore from different mining faces where the grades are known in 3D block model, and constructed respecting grades spatial connectivity. After been mined the ore can be idealized as a 1D array rearranging minerals spatial distribution and improving homogenization. Blending piles are very efficient tools, but will never be able to generate a completely homogenous material. The simulated block model must be validated before being used for planning of homogenization piles and forecasting  In addition to the reproduction of the histogram, the block model generated by the algorithm must reproduce the spatial continuity of the grades, which can be seen in Given the validated simulated block model and the planned mining sequence, it is possible to calculate a set of equiprobable values for the P      If good practices are followed for grade estimation, the data used for interpolation are standard, i.e. samples are of same volume and collected with similar sampling methods. Otherwise, one is likely to obtain biased estimates, as samples of different variability are combined improperly. As short-term mine planning block model assumes samples from diamond drill holes and channel samples are of same support, the resultant estimates are the obvious consequences of this decision. Additionally, the interpolation technique used for grade estimation is inverse distance squared which is not as good as ordinary kriging ( Moreover, the method of the inverse square distance interpolation is efficient when applied to deposits of isotropic grades spatial continuity, where the grades do not change much within distinct directions. This does not apply to this apatite deposit. Consequently, ordinary kriging would be the proper alternative to interpolate the grades and geostatistical simulation a suitable tool to analyze the risk associated with this estimation process. Values predicted by short-term mining planning grade data were plotted against the ones derived from the grades sampled at industrial site. The influence of grade variability on plant recovery and ultimately in mine revenues is significant. The homogenization systems require the knowledge of the feed grades variability which the usual methods of estimation are not capable of predict. Conditional Sequential Gaussian Simulations proved to be adequate to map the The average values sampled at the mill and the average values predicted by the short-term mining plan were compared against the space of uncertainty (range of possible grade values) generated by the proposed methodology. When comparing the sampled averages with the range of possible values, represented by the group of piles average grades calculated through the proposed methodology, for 92% of the situations the simulated interval incorporated the sampled values. By comparing the simulated interval against the forecasted value planned by short-term mine planning block model 96% of situations included the real values. Geostatistical simulation proved to be an efficient tool to be applied in predicting the grades The authors would like to thank