A novel biosorbent based on pine (Pinus sylvestris) sawdust with chemical grafted thiourea groups was proposed for preconcentration of precious metals. A simple procedure was proposed for the synthesis of biosorbent by treating of sawdust with ammonium thiocyanate solution and a subsequent heat treatment at 160 °C. The biosorbent has been studied by thermogravimetry/differential scanning calorimetry (TGA/DSC), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR). The adsorption properties for precious metals ions (Au3+, Pd2+, Pt2+, Pt4+, Ir4+, Rh3+, Ru4+) extraction have been studied. Biosorbent quantitatively extracted precious metals from dilute solutions of hydrochloric acid (0.5–4.0 M). Iron and non-ferrous metals were not extracted in these conditions. The adsorbent showed high adsorption capacity for precious metals: 0.4 (Au3+), 1.7 (Pd2+), 1.0 (Pt2+), 0.8 (Pt4+), 0.45 (Ru4+), 0.55 (Rh3+), 0.4 (Ir4+) mmol/g.
                  Biosorbent was used for extraction and preconcentration of precious metals from industrial solutions of refinery. Enriched for precious metals desorbing solution was obtained as a result. It is possible to obtain precious metals powder by combustion of biosorbent after adsorption of precious metals.The industry produces many types of waste waters containing trace amounts of precious metals. The most effective method for extraction of precious metals and returning them to the process is adsorption method. A lot of adsorbents, differing both in matrix and functional groups, have been proposed for precious metals preconcentration ( Equilibration time of precious metals adsorption is significantly less for organopolymer adsorbents with fibrous structure ( Selectivity of the adsorption using complexing adsorbents is determined by the nature of functional groups, able to form stable complexes with a single element or with a group of elements. For preconcentration of precious metals the adsorbents with sulfur-containing complexing groups, for example thiourea or its derivatives, are the most suitable. The advantage of these sorbents is the possibility to separate precious metals from other non-ferrous metals by the adsorption from acidic media. The most famous industrially available sulfur-containing adsorbents for precious metals preconcentration are Lewatit TP-214 and Purolite S-940 with thiourea derivatives groups ( There is a significant progress in selective extraction of precious metals and their separation from predominant amounts of nonferrous metals and iron by mesoporous organosilica, magnetic nanoparticles (magnetic nanoparticles coated with silica, and modified with chelating groups), silicas chemically modified with thiourea derivatives groups (CMS) ( Developing of the selective adsorbents for extraction of precious metals from complex industrial solutions is an actual task. The novel adsorbent should be cost-effective and synthesized from available raw materials. Adsorbents based on organic natural materials, the biosorbents ( Sawdust is waste of wood industry. It consists of various organic compounds (cellulose, lignin, hemicellulose) with polyphenol groups that are able to bind heavy metal ions via various mechanisms ( To improve the adsorption properties of plant-based materials for metal ions extraction, it is common to modify them with various functional groups (phosphate, sulphate, citrate, amine, etc). ( Chitosan is used as a basis for biosorbents with thiourea groups for precious metals pre-concentration ( Development of synthesis of sawdust-based biosorbent with thiourea groups covalently bound to the surface and investigation of its adsorption properties for precious metals extraction were the purpose of the present work. Biosorbent was used for removal of precious metals from complex industrial solutions, for subsequent returning them into the process. HCl, HNO The stock solutions (1 g/L) of Au Stock solutions of alkaline, alkaline earth elements, and Fe The ICP Multielement Standard USP-III, 100 mg/L: Ir, Os, Pd, Pt, Rh, Ru purchased from Merck KGaA (Darmstadt, Germany) was used as multielement calibration standard for ICP-OES determination of precious metals. The ICP Multielement Calibration Standard 1 (As, Be, B, Cd, Pb, Mn, Se, Zn), ICP Multielement Calibration Standard 8 (Al, Ca, Cr, Li, Ni, K, Na, Sr), ICP Multielement Calibration Standard 10 (Al, Ba, Be, Co, Cu, Fe, V) purchased from High-purity standards (USA) were used as multielement calibration standards for ICP-OES determination of accompanying elements. A solution of AgNO The pH of solutions was adjusted by adding NaOH or HCl solutions. A 10% (w/w) thiourea solution in 1 M HCl was usedas a desorbing solution for precious metals. The metals distribution between the biosorbent and the solution was controlled by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry ( The pH of the solutions was measured using SevenMulti ionometer (Mettler-Toledo, Switzerland). Thermal analyses were performed by the simultaneous STA 449 C Jupiter thermal analyzer (Netzsch, Germany) combined with FT-IR spectrometer Nicolet 380 (Thermo Scientific, USA) and with the TGA/FT-IR interface. This setup allows one to receive the differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) data simultaneously, and the released gas phase composition. The temporal dependence of the optical density for each of the released gasses was obtained from IR spectra. The sample was placed into a platinum crucible and heated within the temperature range of 30–760 °C with a rate of 10 °C/min, the air blow of 50 mL/min. Scanning Electron Microscopy ( The EPR spectra were recorded with an Alexsys 580 instrument (Bruker, Germany). Bioadsorbents were analyzed by Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy ( Drying cabinet SNOL 58/350 and a muffle furnace SNOL 7.2/1100 (Utenos Electrotechnika, Lithuania) were used for drying and roasting. Deionized water (18.3 MΩ/cm) was prepared using E-pure D4642-33 (Barnstead International, IA, USA). A MasterFlex L/S (Thermo Scientific, USA) peristaltic pump was used for pumping fluids through the preconcentration cartridge with an adsorbent. The preconcentration cartridge (i.d. of 10 mm, height of 20 mm) was purchased from BioKhimMak (Russia); it was filled with 0.3 g of biosorbent. 50 g of sawdust ( A weighted portion of the biosorbent (0.100 g) synthesized at 120–170 °C was mixed together with 100 mL 0.02 M silver nitrate solution and shaked well for 6 h at room temperature. The solution was separated from the adsorbent by filtration, and the residual silver concentration in the solution was determined by titration with 0.01 M ammonium thiocyanate solution in the presence of iron-ammonium sulphate indicator. The end point of titration was detected by an appearance of red colour of the solution. The concentration of grafted thiourea groups was calculated from Eq. The adsorption of metal ions in a batch mode was investigated at room and elevated temperature (95 °C). From 10 to 1000 μg/mL of appropriate metal ion solution in 2 M HCl was put in a graduated test tube, and HCl or NaOH was added to adjust the required acidity. Then 0.1 g of biosorbent was added and shaked well for 10–360 min. The solution was separated from the adsorbent by decantation. In order to study adsorption in the batch mode at elevated temperatures, from 10 to 1000 μg/mL of the appropriate metal ion solution in 2 M HCl was put in a temperature-controlled cell (20 mL). A further procedure was the same as described above. The adsorption properties of biosorbent for precious metals extraction vs. phase contact time were analyzed using pseudo-first-order Eq. and pseudo-second-order model Eq. For desorption of precious metals in the batch mode, 10 mL of 10% thiourea solution in 1 M HCl was added to the adsorbent and shaked for 5–60 min. For the preconcentration of the metal ions in a dynamic mode at room temperature and at 95 °C, 100 mL of solution with the concentration of precious metal of 1, 50, 100 or 200 μg/mL in 2 M HCl was pumped through the temperature controlled column (inner diameter of 6 mm, height of 10 cm) containing 0.3 g of the biosorbent (the height of biosorbent layer of 7 cm), using a peristaltic pump with the flow rate of 1 or 2 mL/min. 2 M HCl media was used because in this solution the precious metals are represented by chloride complexes, and also because there is no adsorption of non-ferrous metals in 2 M HCl. For desorption of precious metals, 10 mL of 10% (w/w) thiourea solution in 1 M HCl was pumped through a temperature-controlled column. To determine the adsorption capacity of the biosorbent for precious metal ions extraction, typically, 10 mL of solution containing from 1 to 10,000 μg/mL of the prcious metal in 2 M HCl was was put into a graduated test tube, 0.1 g of biosorbent was added and shaked well for 60 min at 95 °C. The adsorption capacity (q, mmol/g) of the biosorbent was calculated from Eq. The isotherms of precious metals adsorption were analyzed using two traditional models Langmuir Eq. and Freundlich Eq. For preconcentration of precious metals ions from industrial waste water, 1 L of waste water was pumped through a temperature-controlled column at 95 °C filled with 0.3 g of biosorbent, at the flow rate of 1 mL/min. For elution the adsorbed nonferrous metals ions 20 mL of 1 M HCl was pumped through the column. Precious metals were desorbed by pumping of 20 mL of 10% (w/w) thiourea solution in 1 M HCl at 50 °С with the flow rate of 1 mL/min through the column. Decomposition of ammonium thiocyanate with heating proceeds according to scheme: The intermediate product of decomposition The assumption that wood modification occurs owing to ammonium thiocyanate decomposition was confirmed by the fact that sawdust or microcrystalline cellulose cannot be modified with thiourea itself at the same conditions. The optimum temperature for sawdust modification was estimated by adsorption capacity of the prepared at various temperatures (120–170 °C) biosorbents for Ag TGA/DSC study shows, that dehydration occurred during heating of a sample of biosorbent in the temperature range of 25–170 °C which caused mass reduction of 5.1% upon further heating of the sample decomposition of organic compounds took place ( Dehydration occurred during heating of a sample of unmodified sawdust in the temperature range of 25–130 °C which caused mass reduction of 3.2% ( Therefore, decomposition of organic compounds happens in the first stage, and burning of carbon product of pyrolysis happens in the second stage. During heating of unmodified sawdust sulfur- and nitrogen-containing compounds were absent in the gaseous phase, but they were present during thermal decomposition of the biosorbent. In the thermal decomposition of the biosorbent, sulfur-containing compounds (CS The sawdust was studied by infrared spectroscopy before and after modification The following bands are typical for the cellulose-rich plant materials ( In order to characterize the surface of biosorbents SEM images of their particles were used ( The sawdust particles have a well-developed network of microscopic canals, a cut of which represents the net structure. Due to well-developed surface of wood, it may be assumed that the materials prepared from it will have high adsorption capacity. Elemental sulfur is present on the surface of sawdust in the form of octahedral crystals ( The distribution of palladium and ruthenium on the surface of biosorbent after their adsorption was studied using X-Ray spectrum microanalysis, both in the areas without crystalline sulfur and in the areas with elemental sulfur covering or its crystals ( Chlorocomplexes of precious metals can be divided into the kinetically labile in the ligand exchange reactions – Pd The time of achievement of adsorption equilibrium depends on initial concentration of metal ions in the solution. For Рd Increase in temperature to 95 °C allows to reduce the phase contact time to 1 h to achieve quantitative (99%) extraction of Pt The quantitative extraction of Pd The adsorption of Au Quantitative extraction of Rh The kinetic dependences were analyzed by an example of Pd The calculated (q Since quantitative adsorption of precious metals was achieved only at elevated temperature, the adsorption capacity of the biosorbent was determined at 95 °C. Adsorption capacity of the biosorbent, determined from the horizontal section of the adsorption isotherms, was equal to (mmol/g): 0.4 (Au The adsorption capacity for Au almost four times less than quantity of attached thiourea groups. During complexation with thiourea Au  Two times lower adsorption capacity for Pt There are no redox reactions during Pd Experimental adsorption isotherms of precious metals by biosorbent at 95 °C were analyzed using Langmuir and Freundlich models. For the Freundlich model experimental points do not lie on a straight line, and the correlation coefficient has low values ( The effect of flow rate and temperature on the adsorption of 1, 50, and 200 μg/mL of Pd When a solution with a low concentration of Pd In the batch mode quantitative desorption of Au, Pd, and Pt from biosorbent was achieved using 10% (w/w) solution of thiourea in 1 M HCl at the room temperature, and Rh, Ru, and Ir at 50 °С; phase contact time was 20 min. Quantitative desorption (98–99%) of Au, Pd, and Pt was achieved by pumping of 20 mL 10% (w/w) solution of thiourea in 1 M HCl at room temperature with the flow rate of 1 mL/min. Desorption of Rh, Ru, and Ir in these conditions was <30%. Increasing the temperature of desorbing solution up to 50 °С allows to achieve desorption of 95–98%. Au, Pd, and Pt were quantitatively desorbed in these conditions too. In technological solutions contain a lot of non-ferrous and other metals. So, we study adsorption of Co The practical use of biosorbent should be considered from the point of view of its applicability for the isolation of precious metals in order to return them to technological process. There are two ways of returning precious metals in the technological process: by combustion of biosorbent after adsorption of precious metals; the result is a metallic pouder; obtaining of enriched for precious metals desorbing solution. The first way has been tested using Pd and Au. Biosorbent containing adsorbed Pd and Au was calcined at 600 The second one was tested using technological solutions of refinery. Technological solutions contained low concentration of precious metals (0.02–12 μg/mL) and high concentration of non-ferrous metals (g/L): Fe – 15, Zn – 5; мг/л: Cu - 30; Ni - 60; Co - 3; Cr - 1; Pb – 0.1; Mn – 30,) and anions: (g/L): SO Results of extraction and desorption of precious metals from technological solutions in dynamic conditions are represented in A simple procedure for synthesis of biosorbent from available row materials was suggested in the present work. Biosorbent is selective for precious metals extraction from acidic solutions; it has high adsorption capacity for precious metals. Biosorbent may be used for extraction of precious metals from technological solutions and returning them to the technological process as metal powder (after calcinations of biosorbent) or as enriched for precious metals desorbing solution with negligible concentration of non-ferrous metals. The reported study was funded by