High-pressure grinding roller presses have been used to an increasing extent in recent years for grinding cement because of their better energy utilization. However, the service life of the roller surfaces, an important factor in the cost-efficiency of high compression comminution, still needs to be improved. This formed the background for the introduction of a novel wear protection called HEXADUR®, in which a very hard, wear-resistant, roller surface is generated by a special combination and distribution of two different materials in a selected pattern. The new HEXADUR® wear protection system is based on a fundamental examination of the wear system occurring during high compression comminution.Various size-reduction devices are used for crushing and grinding mineral products. Due to their superior efficiency high-pressure roller presses offer significant benefits as compared with other methods (ball mills, rod mills). Nowadays, they are primarily employed for cement clinker grinding and beside that sometimes used in ore processing purposes (Fe-, Cu-, Au- and diamond ores). In these presses the feed material is crushed in the particle bed between the fixed roller and the hydraulically preloaded floating roller which rotates in the opposite direction. The cost efficiency of high compression comminution is closely linked to the wear resistance and availability of the roller surfaces. The composition, moisture content, grain size and the particle distribution of feedstock to be crushed are also of major significance here. Other important influences are the feed system and distribution in the roller gap Operators of high-pressure roller presses demand long service lives, cost-effective roller surfaces and the capability to plan shutdown times. This formed the background to the development of a novel wear protection concept called HEXADUR According to DIN 50320 and 50323 the wear system in roll grinding is three-body abrasive wear, characterized by a body and a counter-body (floating and fixed rollers), the material between them (feedstock), and the ambient medium (air). However, when the conditions prevailing in the gap between rollers are scrutinized in greater detail it is possible to identify two transient systems with different wear mechanisms ( Because of the column of material located above the roller gap, the roller surface in Area I is scratched by the coarse mineral particles at a rate which is a function of the peripheral roller speed. At a certain angle In contrast to the scratching process (abrasion) taking place in Area I the roller surface in Area II is affected by indentations caused by fairly small particles ( Case-hardened materials were used for a time after it had been found that the service life of flame hardened and tempered steel with 0.6 C (54 HRC) was completely inadequate. In the course of development work it turned out, however, that only Fe-based materials which contain a combination of hard phases and a matrix which can be hardened by martensitic transformation could resist the wear stresses in the roller gap. The hard phases act as obstacles to both scratching and the indentation attack by mineral particles and in this way they reduce the amount of material removed ( Whether scratching or indentation of feedstock particles in the roller surface is prevented is mainly a question of the hardness relationship between the mineral particles and the hard phase The practice of embedding hard phases in a hardenable matrix has been followed generally in wear protection schemes. However, there are limits to the amount used in individual manufacturing techniques used. There are weld deposits on Fe-base (5 Using powder metallurgical (PM) processing techniques volume fraction, size and even the distribution of hard phases can be achieved which is not possible with other manufacturing techniques. With such methods hard phase/metal powder mixtures, so-called MMCs, with hard phase contents in excess by 50 This unique surface protection is produced by applying a hard, highly wear resistant layer to the working surfaces of comminution rollers using the hot isostatic pressure (HIP) method. This layer which consists of two different materials is applied in a selected pattern to a base material of adequate strength. The surface is structured so that a highly wear resistant material (component A) covering a larger area is surrounded by an interstitial material (component B) with a selected lower wear resistance ( As a rule component A has a maximum hard phase content, but that of component B is distinctly lower. This gives the interstitial areas a higher fracture toughness, i.e. it improves the resistance to crack propagation, and prevents the fracture and spalling of extensive surface areas. Even if tramp material enters the roller gap, any resulting crack formation and propagation would be confined to individual segments of component A. The special surface structure is achieved by PM methods. The two component layer is applied to hot rolled tires by hipping an evacuated steel can filled with all components. After the HIP process the capsule is removed by cutting operation. Fine-tuning the material properties is accomplished by a heat treatment which must ensure that the applied layer materials have the desired hardness and toughness and that the base material has the required strength with adequate ductility. Finally the coated tyre is shrunk onto a ductile roller core. The selection of the base material has been based on many years of experience in briquetting and compaction technology. Because of its high strength characteristics (tensile strength The life of the rollers depends essentially on the wear resistance of the large-area component A. In cement grinding MMCs with FeCr carbides (M After a variety of laboratory trials the first results from the practical application of HEXADUR Whilst the welded roller had to be replaced every 2500 Based on a fundamental examination of material attack and removal, a novel, extremely wear resistant, surface has been developed and introduced into service on grinding rollers used in high-pressure roller presses. Initial applications in cement grinding have shown a 5–10 times higher service compared to traditional surface systems The excellent performance confined that the high manufacturing expense associated with powder metallurgy was cost effective. Based on the present investigation the multi-component HEXADUR