Aerated kaolin floc formation was studied in a continuous-flow, laboratory-scale system, and the flocs were separated from aqueous solution by flotation. Microbubbles were generated by the depressurisation of dissolved air in water, and flocculation was achieved in a Floc Generator Reactor (FGR). An aerated floc characterisation (AFC) technique was utilised for characterising the aggregates formed. Flocculation–flotation studies were performed using a non-ionic polymer (920SH SNF-Floerger®) added to a suspension flow (4L/min) at an air/solid rate (A/S) of 0.02mg/mg. The main results revealed the existence of an extra flocculation mechanism resulting from interactions between particles, bubbles and polymer-coated air microbubbles. The latter acted as “flocculation nuclei”, where particles aggregated by a sort of “bridge” with the polymer-coated-bubbles. These polymer-coated bubbles can interact with other bubbles, particles and/or flocs resulting in a large amount of bubbles (of different sizes, depending on coalescence) to the floc structures improving the rising rates of the aerated flocs. It is believed that these findings will contribute to the understanding of the formation of the light, aerated flocs and the rapid flocculation–flotation process for solid/liquid separation.Aerated floc generation has been well described in the literature ( Although important studies have been conducted on the formation of aerated flocs, only a few of those studies have included mechanisms. Thus, knowledge about the interactions among particles, air microbubbles and polymers should increase the potential use of flocculation–flotation processes in the environmental field (effluent control and water reuse). The advantages of employing these processes include a higher loading capacity and cost savings in a very rapid solid/liquid separation. The Flocs Generator Reactor (FGR) appears to have a great potential as an innovative helical mixing reactor for rapid aggregation. In this “flocculator”, the polymer is dispersed by the flow of slurry through the helical tubes, permitting both polymer adsorption and flocculation to take place simultaneously, in a very short amount of time (seconds). Air microbubbles are injected, and they can be attached, entrapped, occluded and coalesced inside of flocs, forming the so-called aerated flocs (aeroflocs), which readily float (or levitate) ( Our research group has recently developed a technique to characterise aerated flocs (multiphase systems), which was named aerated floc characterisation (AFC) ( In this context, Consequently, the air bubbles appear to grow enhancing the relative air volume inside the flocs, decreasing their density and leading to high up-rising rates. This fact has been proved by As a result, this finding led to further investigations involving interactions between polymers and bubbles in a continuous system for generating aerated flocs assisted by polymer-coated bubbles. Accordingly, the goal of this work was to evaluate these phenomena in kaolin dispersions, in a flow system constituted by an FGR, dissolved air flotation (DAF) and the aerated flocs characterization (AFC) rig. A high-purity kaolin (99% of kaolinite) sample was procured from Cadam S/A Brazil. The mean kaolin particle diameter was determined to be 0.9 A continuous ring system composed of a Flocs Generator Reactor (FGR) and dissolved air flotation (DAF) techniques was designed to conduct flocculation–flotation studies ( Well-dispersed suspensions of kaolin particles were prepared in 5 After 10 Condition I: a polymeric solution (1.25 Condition II: placing the polymer solution at different concentrations (0.5, 1.25, 1.5, 2.0, 5.0, 10 and 30 Condition III: conditions I and II together, using different polymer concentration ( After mixing the kaolin particles, the polymer and the air bubbles inside the FGR, the aggregates (floc-bubbles) moved to the flotation cell, for solid/liquid separation (aggregates/water) to take place. After system stabilization, the tube of the aerated floc characterization (AFC) technique was opened for sampling the rising aggregates, which were characterized by image capture and processing, as in The results obtained, following experimental condition I, generated aerated kaolin flocs having uprising rates ranging between 70 and 150 Therefore, the data show the importance of good mixing and turbulence inside the FGR, where polymers appear to interact simultaneously with particles and air bubbles. Additionally, the photomicrograph of the multiphase system allowed evidence for a new contribution to flocculation mechanism from interaction between particles and polymer-coated bubbles ( This mechanism of coated-polymer bubbles was confirmed by Based on several existing data indicating some interactions between polymers and air bubbles, the present work considers that the interaction arises from van der Waals and hydrophobic forces between air bubbles and hydrophobic moieties present in the backbone of the polymeric chains. This hydrophobicity of the polyacrylamides has been described by some authors ( Thus, such interactions and phenomena shown in the present work and other investigations appear to be very important to explain the presence of large amount of bubbles in aerated flocs causing an increase of the rising rates of these light aggregates. The captured images shown in  An attempt to improve the formation of the polymer-coated bubbles was made by injecting the polymer flocculant directly to the air saturator vessel just prior to the bubble generation in the nozzle (conditions II and III). However, contrary to expectations, this resulted in poor flocculation efficiency, causing high turbidity residual values (greater than 479 NTU). This behavior may be due to the strong interactions between polymeric macromolecules and air bubbles, resulting in a high adsorption and a lack of polymer molecules free to interact with particles to generate flocs. This consideration is consistent with data reported by The studies including addition of a non-ionic polymer (920SH) both in the flow line and inside the saturator vessel (mode of polymer dosage (a), (b) and (c)) showed removal efficiencies of 25%, 35% and 63%, respectively. These results may be due to the repulsion forces between air bubbles and kaolin flocs, both having the same polymer adsorbed. Herein, it is concluded that should the polymer concentration increases the repulsion between the polymer coated bubbles and the particles of the flocs also increases following the so-called steric effect ( In addition, the floating product obtained in these conditions (II and III) had a “plastic” aspect (because of the polymer–particle layer formed on the bubble surface) and a low moisture content. Despite flocculation was not efficient under these conditions (II and III), the captured images of the multiphase system clearly show the interactions between particles and air bubbles, very likely coated with polymer molecules. In this case, at the lower polymer concentration (10 Likewise, non-spherical polymer–particle-coated air bubbles were found ( A detailed experimental system was set up to characterize and validate the finding that polymer-coated bubbles act as “nuclei” or “bridges” between particles, flocs or other similar bubbles. These units assist in the formation of aerated flocs, with structures having a large amount of bubbles of varying sizes due to coalescence. Results obtained widen the knowledge of the mechanisms and interactions leading to aerated floc generation, which is responsible for rapid flocculation–flotation in water and wastewater treatment. The authors would like to thank the Cadam