In this study, the use of coal fly ash nanoparticles as a stabilizer to generate stable CO2 foams was explored. Considering the heterogeneous nature of fly ash, the samples were pretreated or separated into several different types of varying carbon content. The carbonaceous material present in the fly ash samples played an important role in generating stable oil/water (O/W) emulsions. As the carbon content in the fly ash sample increased, more emulsion was generated; also, the droplet size decreased and uniformity improved. A similar trend was observed in the CO2 emulsion tests. The fly ash samples containing carbonaceous material produced more emulsion phases with denser structures. It was difficult to generate stable CO2 foams without additives. However, fly ash nanoparticles combined with additives such as surfactants or collectors, specifically dodecyltrimethylammonium bromide and turpentine oil, produced stable and dense CO2 foams.CO CO One way to overcome this problem is to control the mobility using CO A solution to this problem is to use solid particles for stabilizing CO Application of this technology on a commercial scale requires inexpensive alternative nanoparticles that can be produced in the large volumes needed for foam stabilization in field-scale. One potential source is coal fly ash, which is produced as waste from coal-fired power plants and has essentially no economic value. Utilization of fly ash for this purpose would result in significant economic and environmental benefits. There are two key factors in using solid particles for CO The objective of this study was twofold. The first goal was to efficiently produce nanoparticles by a top-down method of grinding. Grinding is a unit process used for reducing the coarse feed sizes to fine product sizes. A major problem in grinding is the enormous energy required to produce submicron-size particles. Therefore, an increase in the efficiency of grinding will have a substantial beneficial effect on the energy consumption and costs. To accomplish this, appropriate mill selection and operation at optimum milling conditions are necessary. In this study, two-stage grinding was employed to produce fly ash nanoparticles. The second objective was to investigate the conditions necessary for effective CO The fly ash was obtained from a coal power plant in Korea. X-ray diffraction analysis showed that the fly ash was mainly composed of mullite and quartz ( Wet grinding is one of the top-down approaches used for the production of mineral nanoparticles. Among various ultrafine grinding devices, stirred ball mills are known to be advantageous for nanoparticle production owing to the ease of operation, simplicity of construction, high size reduction rate, and relatively low energy consumption Therefore, grinding was conducted in two stages using two different types of stirred ball mills. The first-stage grinding was performed in a small laboratory-scale attrition mill (KMAM-1B, KMtech, Korea), with the main purpose of reducing the size of the fly sample particles to 90% passing 10 The second-stage grinding was conducted in a beads mill (Fine mill 0.15, Daega Powder System, Korea). This apparatus had a built-in centrifugal classifier in the chamber to prevent grinding media leakage, which allows usage of very fine grinding media. The mill was loaded with 0.4 The energy consumption of the grinding process was measured directly using a power meter (WT-130, Yokogawa Electric Corporation, JP). The net grinding energy was determined by deducting the idle energy consumed with an empty chamber from the measured values. Nanoparticle slurries obtained from the second-stage grinding were diluted with de-ionized water at various solids concentrations. The slurries were then mixed with equal amounts of different oils (alkanes with 6–10 carbon atoms) in a 20  The tests were conducted in the following sequence. First, the cell was purged with CO The ability of the fly ash nanoparticles to form stable CO  The grinding media size is one of the critical factors for determining the grinding efficiency. For a given media charge, the number of grinding media increases as the media size decreases. Thus, the rates of breakage of smaller particles are higher for smaller media sizes. However, as the media size decreases, the collision force decreases, which reduces the fineness of the ground product. Therefore, there may be an optimum media size for the production of submicron-sized particles.   The formation of a crude oil-in-water emulsion could help reduce the reservoir fluid viscosity and improve the displacement efficiency of viscous oil As seen in the figure, the droplet size decreased as the particle concentration increased. A decrease in the size of the emulsion droplets results in an increase in the total droplet surface area, and this enables additional particles to be accommodated at the interface. For comparison, additional tests were conducted using Bioterge AS-40, one of the most commonly used anionic surfactants in the EOR industry. The results are shown in Aqueous slurries of fly ash nanoparticles were prepared at various solids concentrations up to 10 The experimental results showed that none of the fly ash samples were able to form a stable CO  Adsorption of surfactants on solid particles often relies on the electrostatic attraction. DTAB is a cationic surfactant that is attracted to negatively charged solid surfaces. Zeta potential measurements of the fly ash samples revealed that the thermally treated fly ash samples were highly negatively charged (~ The experimental results showed that fly ash nanoparticles produced by grinding can be effectively used for O/W emulsions and CO Notably, the fly ash particles were not able to form a stable CO This work was supported by the International Cooperation of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) grant funded by the Korea government