Successful direct electrochemical reduction of mixed powders of terbium oxide (Tb4O7) and nickel oxide (NiO) to the intermetallic compound, TbNi5, is demonstrated in molten CaCl2 at 850°C by constant voltage (2.4–3.2V) electrolysis. The reduction mechanism was investigated by cyclic voltammetry using a molybdenum cavity electrode in conjunction with characterisations of the products from both constant voltage and potentiostatic electrolysis under different conditions by XRD, SEM and EDX. It was found that the reduction started from NiO to Ni, followed by that of Tb2O3 (resulting from Tb4O7 decomposition) on the pre-formed Ni to form the intermetallic compound. The reduction speed increased with increasing the cell voltage, but the speed gain was counterbalanced by decreased current efficiency and increased electric energy consumption. At 2.4V, the current efficiency reached 63.2%, and the energy consumption by electrolysis was as low as 3.2kWh/kg TbNi5 when the oxide phase was converted fully to the metal phase (XRD) in 4h. The oxygen level in the produced TbNi5 could readily reach 1800ppm by electrolysis at 3.2V for 12h with the energy consumption being 18.9kWh/kg TbNi5.Terbium–nickel (Tb–Ni) based alloys and intermetallic compounds, including TbNi The recent successful electrochemical reduction of pure or mixed oxide powders to pure metals, alloys or intermetallic compounds in molten salts promises a more economical technology for the metallurgical industry Following a brief mention in a recent communication The commercially available powders of terbium oxide, Tb Tb A sealable stainless steel tube reactor was used for constant voltage electrolysis of the oxide pellets The sintered oxide pellets were wrapped with the Mo wire-mesh, and then attached to a Mo wire. This oxide cathode was then inserted into the molten salt and electrolysed for a prescribed time (0.5–12 The ball-milled NiO and Tb Potentiostatic electrolysis was carried out on sintered small rectangular pellets of the mixed oxide powders (about 11.0 The mixed oxide pellets (Tb:Ni However, under a low O The decomposition voltage of CaCl For practical applications, a lower cell voltage means a lower energy input. According to thermodynamic data, the decomposition voltages of NiO and Tb To investigate the electrochemical reduction of the mixed oxide pellets, different electrolysis voltages were applied at 850 It was recently reported The SEM images of the interiors of the pellets that were partially reduced at 1.5 During electrolysis of the mixed oxides, the formation of TbNi Comparing the results given in In practice, a higher cell voltage means a higher energy consumption but also a higher reaction rate which is often needed to increase production. In this work, the reduction of a 2 As mentioned above, at low voltages, i.e. 0.5 and 1.5 These observations are in general agreement with the electro-reduction taking place at the three-phase interlines (3PIs) linking the metal, oxide and molten salt phases The oxygen content in the metallised product depends strongly on both electrolysis voltage and time. Generally, a lower oxygen content can be achieved at a higher voltage and a longer time, but this also means higher energy consumption. For example, for electrolysis at 3.2 The metallic cavity electrode (MCE) used in this work is shown in the inset of As observed in our recent work  Further confirmation of the above analysis of the voltammetric features comes from 2 The TbNi It is also shown that the electrolytic process is satisfactorily efficient and suitable for industrial application. Electrolysis of a pellet of the mixed oxide (∼2.0 The authors thank the Natural Science Foundation of China for financial support (Grant Nos. 20125308 and 50374052).