It has been observed that a cloud of bubbles forms at the focus of any lithotriptor immediately following an incident shock wave. These bubbles expand, stabilize and collapse violently after about 250 to 500 μseconds. If they collapse near the kidney stone, high speed microjets are formed that erode the stone. If a second shock wave is sent shortly after the stable phase of the bubbles, their collapse can be intensified, increasing stone damage. Loske et al (page 2388) from Qro, Mexico studied the performance of a novel dual pulse (tandem) lithotriptor that generates 2 successive shock waves with an adjustable time delay. Four kidney stone models were exposed in vitro to 500 single shock waves with a standard lithotriptor. Another set of stones was exposed to 250 pairs of shock waves with the tandem lithotriptor. The time delay between the first and second shock wave was increased in steps of 50 μseconds between 100 and 600 μseconds. Rabbits were used in vivo to demonstrate that the novel device did not produce more tissue trauma. Enhanced fragmentation efficiency was obtained at a delay of 250 μseconds. The in vivo results indicated that the dual pulse shock wave generator did not increase kidney tissue damage. Tandem lithotriptors may improve the quality and rate of stone comminution. More in vivo studies will be needed to prove the safety of this technique in the treatment of urinary stones in patients. Previous reports suggest that the bladder epithelial barrier may be compromised in interstitial cystitis. Antiproliferative factor is a small glycoprotein made specifically by bladder epithelial cells in patients with interstitial cystitis that induces changes in expression of certain epithelial cell proteins and profoundly inhibits cell growth. Zhang et al (page 2382) from Baltimore, Maryland confirmed increased permeability and decreased tight junction formation of bladder epithelial cell monolayers grown from biopsies of patients with interstitial cystitis compared to cells from normal controls, and then determined the effect of antiproliferative factor on the permeability of normal bladder epithelial cell monolayers and expression of tight junction proteins. Antiproliferative factor treatment caused significant increases in the paracellular permeability of normal bladder epithelial cell monolayers and the attenuation of tight junctions compared to controls, similar to changes seen in interstitial cystitis cells. Antiproliferative factor treatment also decreased the expression of the tight junction proteins zonula occludens-1 and occludin. Because of its apparent effects on bladder epithelial cell tight junctions and paracellular permeability in vitro, antiproliferative factor may contribute to the leakiness of the bladder epithelial barrier seen in interstitial cystitis. Recent advances in optical imaging have demonstrated the potential for early epithelial cancer detection. Optical coherence tomography is a fiberoptic imaging technique that can provide high resolution cross-sectional images of tissue morphology at a depth of 2 to 3 mm. Due to a limited field of view, the time required for elaborate optical coherence tomography of the mammalian bladder may be excessive. Studies on 5-aminolevulinic acid (5-ALA) induced fluorescence cystoscopy show high sensitivity for bladder cancer diagnosis, but the relatively low specificity remains to be improved. Wang et al (page 2376) from Baltimore, Maryland combined the advantages of these 2 imaging modalities, optical coherence tomography and 5-ALA induced fluorescent cystoscopy, to enhance the specificity and efficacy of early bladder cancer diagnosis. Bladder tumors were developed in rats and imaged by white light, 5-ALA fluorescence, optical coherence tomography and histology. The specificity of fluorescence detection was significantly enhanced by fluorescence image guided optical coherence tomography. The sensitivity of fluorescence detection and fluorescence image guided optical coherence tomography was 79% and 100%, respectively. Fluorescence image guided optical coherence tomographic cystoscopy has the potential to diagnose early bladder cancer with high sensitivity and specificity with a drastically reduced imaging time compared to that of white light guided optical coherence tomographic cystoscopy. The number of patients with spinal cord injury who receive botulinum-A toxin for detrusor hyperreflexia is increasing. However, procedures regarding when to start the toxin, dose intervals and volumes injected have not been standardized. Temeltas et al (page 2393) from Izmir, Turkey investigated whether there is a difference between the effects of botulinum-A toxin on histology and bladder function in rats with spinal cord injury when the drug is administered early or late after bladder injury. Rats were randomly allocated into 5 groups of sham operation only, spinal cord transection, spinal cord transection followed by application of botulinum-A toxin 7 days later, spinal cord transection followed by application of botulinum-A toxin 28 days later, and spinal cord transection followed by saline application 28 days later. On cystometric examination botulinum-A toxin caused an improvement in baseline pressure, and the frequency and amplitude of uninhibited detrusor contractions. Histologically botulinum-A toxin led to decreased fibrosis and hyperplasia. No significant histological or cystometric differences were noted when botulinum-A toxin was delivered early or late after injury. Epidermal growth factor (EGF) is secreted mainly from the submandibular glands. Submandibular gland ablation causes a marked decrease in male fertility, which suggests that EGF influences spermatogenesis. Kurokawa et al (page 2415) from Nagoya, Japan investigated the effect of EGF in combination with orchiopexy on the cryptorchid rat testis in which tubular deterioration had become partially irreversible. At age 10 weeks unilaterally cryptorchid rats underwent orchiopexy with or without EGF administered into the cryptorchid testis. At 14 days testicular recovery was assessed based on the maturity of spermatogenesis and the number of apoptotic germ cells per seminiferous tubule. Spermatogenesis maturity was significantly higher and the number of apoptotic germ cells tended to be smaller in the orchiopexy with EGF group. The study suggests that EGF administered with orchiopexy may be more effective in restoring spermatogenesis than orchiopexy alone.