The recovery of vanadium from stone coal acid leaching solution by coprecipitation, alkaline roasting and water leaching was studied. A method used to recover vanadium from stone coal acid leaching solution was developed, and it primarily included vanadium coprecipitation with iron in the solution, vanadium extraction by alkaline leaching from the precipitate, and vanadium pentoxide preparation with the alkaline leaching solution. Experiments found that the vanadium in stone coal acid leaching solution can be effectively enriched in the precipitate obtained by adding 3.64g NaClO3 per liter solution with initial pH 1.73 under stirring for 0.5h at 95°C. By roasting the mixture of 25g of the precipitate with 22.5g NaOH at 170°C for 1.0h, and then water leaching the roasted mixture at 98°C for 1.0h under stirring with L/S ratio of 3.3:1mL/g, 97.0% of vanadium was extracted from the precipitate. After purifying with MgCl2, the vanadium pentoxide with purity 99.3% was obtained by adding NH4Cl to precipitate ammonium vanadate from the solution at pH about 2.0, and then roasting the ammonium vanadate at 520°C for 2.0h. The essential components of the coprecipitate are KFe3(SO4)2(OH)6 and HNaV6O16·4H2O.Stone coal is an important material for vanadium pentoxide production. In China, the gross reserve of vanadium in stone coal is 118 million tons, accounting for more than 87% of the domestic reserve of vanadium ( The motivation for this study was the need to avoid the interference of iron and to reduce the discharge of the spent water in the production of vanadium pentoxide. The work presents the process of vanadium recovery from stone coal acid leaching solution by coprecipitation, alkaline roasting and water leaching. The acid leaching solution used in this study was prepared by decomposing stone coal with sulphation roasting–water leaching. The composition of the solution after alum crystallization was listed in Vanadium was titrated with ammonium ferrous sulfate ( The experiments were performed according to the flow sheet as shown in The vanadium in the solution can be oxidized from V(III) and/or V(V) to V(V) by NaClO All of precipitates obtained under different conditions were mixed by stirring in water, and then filtrated and dried. The composition of the mixed precipitate was showed in  The composition of the solution after vanadium precipitation at pH 1.73 was listed in The addition of NaClO The effect of reaction time between 0.25 and 4.0 The effect of NaOH addition on vanadium extraction from the precipitate was studied under the conditions of mixing 25  In order to study the influence of roasting time on vanadium extraction from the mixture of 25 After alkaline roasting under optimal conditions, the relationship between leaching temperature and vanadium extraction from the roasted precipitate was studied.  After alkaline roasting under optimal conditions, the relationship between liquid-to-solid (L/S) ratio and vanadium extraction from the roasted precipitate was studied as well. After adjusting the pH to about 8.5 with hydrochloric acid, the alkaline leaching solution was purified with MgCl Experiments found that the vanadium in stone coal acid leaching solution can be effectively recovered as vanadium pentoxide by means of coprecipitating vanadium (V) with iron (III) from the solution, alkaline roasting–water leaching for the precipitate, and then vanadium pentoxide preparation. After aluminum removal by adding (NH