The crystal growth of monetite (CaHPO4, DCPA), the least stable calcium phosphate has been investigated by the seeded growth method from solutions supersaturated exclusively with respect to this phase alone. The kinetics of crystal growth was measured at constant supersaturation at 37°C, pH 6.0. The measurements of the rates of crystal growth of DCPA showed a second order dependence on the relative supersaturation of the solutions with respect to DCPA, suggesting that the rate determining step is surface diffusion of the growth units to the active growth sites of the crystals. The heterogeneous crystallization of brushite (CaHPO4·2H2O, DCPD) on DCPA seed crystals in solutions supersaturated with respect to both DCPD and DCPA showed that DCPD nucleation and growth took place selectively by heterogeneous nucleation on the DCPA seed crystals. The same parabolic dependence of the rates on the relative supersaturation of the solutions with respect to DCPD was found, showing that the mechanism was the same as in the case of growth of DCPA on DCPA seed crystals. Seeding of solutions supersaturated with respect to both DCPA and DCPD at pH 6.0, 37°C with collagen type II in powdered form, resulted to the formation of an apatitic solid. The morphology of the crystals formed on the collagenous matrix suggested that the identified mineral was probably the result of rapid hydrolysis of metastable calcium phosphatephases. The formation of the mineral phase on collagen took place past long induction time periods inversely proportional to the relative supersaturation with respect to DCPD and showed that the collagen substrate did not stabilize calcium phosphate at the same conditions at which DCPA did.Dicalcium hydrogen phosphate anhydrous (Monetite, CaHPO4, DCPA) has been used in mixtures with other compounds both inorganic and organic for the preparation of calcium phosphate cements (CPC) applied in bone replacement already from the very early development of CPCs in 1974 The calcium phosphate system involves a number of crystalline phases with widely different solubilities in water Despite the fact that during the last decades significant effort has been done in understanding the formation of calcium phosphate minerals in aqueous media to our knowledge, there are no publications referring to the kinetics of crystal growth of DCPA directly from supersaturated solutions, either by spontaneous precipitation or on foreign substrates by heterogeneous nucleation. There are only reports concerning the transformation of amorphous calcium phosphate from highly supersaturated solutions into DCPA In the present work, the highly reproducible technique of seeded crystal growth of DCPA from supersaturated solutions at constant supersaturation was investigated Stock solutions of calcium nitrate and potassium dihydrogen phosphate were prepared from crystalline solids Ca(NO Monetite crystals were prepared by mixing 1 The solids crystallized (seed and grown seed crystals) were characterized by powder X-Ray diffraction (XRD, Siemens D5000, Cu Ka radiation, θ-θ arrangement), Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM, FEI Quanta 250 and LEO SUPRA 35VP with QUANTAX EDS Unit, Bruker), measurements of the specific surface area (SSA) by the BET nitrogen adsorption method (Gemini, Micromeritics), thermogravimetric analysis (ΤGΑ) (ΤΑ Q50, air 10 The experimental setup is shown in The supersaturated solutions were prepared directly in the thermostated double walled glass reactor, volume totaling 0.6 Changes of the solution pH as small as 0.005 units, triggered the addition of titrant solutions from the two mechanically coupled syringes of a syringe pump (New Era Syringe Pump NE 4500L) as may be seen in As may be seen, the rates were calculated directly from the slope of the curve in A series of measurements of crystal growth rates as a function of the solution supersaturation in solutions supersaturated only with respect to DCPA were done. Additional experiments, in stable solutions supersaturated with respect to DCPD and saturated with respect to DCPA were done, in order to examine whether DCPA seed crystals is a suitable substrate for the overgrowth of DCPD, in view of their excellent crystal lattice matching. Finally, solutions supersaturated with respect to DCPA were seeded with collagen type II solid (Sigma-Aldrich) at conditions similar to the corresponding for the growth of DCPA on DCPA seed crystals in order to examine the importance of the substrate in dictating the nature of the mineral phase forming. Collagen type II is the least abundant collagen but is fibrilar and is present in cartilage (articular and hyaline). This type of collagen has been suggested for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis The driving force for the crystallization of DCPA is the mean per ion Gibbs free energy change,ΔG, for going from the supersaturated solution to equilibrium: In eq. The use of the mean ion activity in the expression of the driving force for crystallization allows for the comparison of salts with different stoichiometries and makes it independent on the choice of chemical formula. The relative supersaturation, σ The calculations for DCPD were done with analogous expressions using a value for In Plot of the rate of crystal growth as a function of the square of the relative supersaturation with respect to DCPA, yielded the graph shown in As may be seen, there is a second order dependence of the rate of crystal growth of DCPA on DCPA seed crystals (r For a very large number of crystal growth processes involving sparingly soluble salts, the measured rates of crystal growth, R In equation The morphology of the DCPA crystals is shown in the SEM pictures shown in As may be seen, the size of the seed crystallites increased significantly as a result of crystal growth. It should be noted that no secondary nucleation was found since half and double the amount of seed crystals yielded the same rates of crystal growth expressed per unit surface area. Moreover, secondary nucleation is anticipated from larger crystals coming more easily in contact with the stirrer while smaller ones follow the path of the fluid and do not generate new nuclei The shift of the mean particle size and the increasing breadth of the size distribution of DCPA crystals corresponds to 60% growth of the inoculating seed crystals (i.e. if the inoculating seeds were 100 As may be seen in the FTIR-ATR spectrum, the characteristic bands at 990, 1058 and 1126 The thermogravimetric analysis pattern of DCPA crystals is shown in Finally, it should be noted that crystal growth rates were proportional to the amount of seed crystals inoculating the supersaturated solutions as may be seen in The solution supersaturation was next increased so that at pH 6.0 the supersaturated solutions were also supersaturated with respect to DCPD. The conditions of the series of experiments, done are summarized in It is interesting to note that the growth of DCPD took place even at very low supersaturations (just 1%) without lapse of any induction time, due to the fact that the two types of crystals show excellent lattice matching. The nucleation of DCPD on other calcium phosphates has been reported The large, plate like DCPD crystals formed on the significantly smaller size DCPA seed crystals as may be seen in the micrographs shown in The parabolic dependence of the rate of crystal growth as a function of the relative supersaturation suggested again in this case that the mechanism is controlled by surface diffusion. The XRD profiles of the precipitates, shown in The XRD profile of the composite solid showed clearly the characteristic reflections of DCPD, along with the reflections of the DCPA substrate. The FTIR-ATR profile of the DCPD on DCPA crystals shown in Finally, it was attempted to seed solutions supersaturated either with respect to only DCPA or solutions supersaturated with respect to both DCPD and DCPA with collagen II. This type of collagen is fibrilar and although it presents order at the molecular level, it is not crystalline. A number of studies have reported that calcium phosphate mineral phases may grow directly on collagen As may be seen, the solutions supersaturated with respect to only DCPA remained stable for periods up to 72 The XRD profile shows that the mineral formed was non stoichiometric HAP and it is very likely that this mineral evolved through the hydrolysis of transient phases, which the collagenous matrix failed to stabilize. Under the conditions investigated it was anticipated that DCPD would form, similar to the solutions seeded with DCPA seed crystals. The argument that can be made here is that the structural compatibility is the key factor. DCPA has a high structural affinity for DCPD while collagen is believed to have high affinity for HAP The morphology of the crystals deposited on collagen type II are shown in the SEM pictures in As may be seen the apatitic crystals morphology was expressed either in the form of prismatic crystals or as plate-like crystals which may suggest the formation of OCP precursor. Because of the morphological similarity of the crystals to OCP, the XRD analysis was repeated with scans starting from 3° 2θ angle. However, no reflection belonging to OCP was found. The plate-like crystals were perhaps pseudomorphic HAP. The line-scan shown in Further work is needed in this direction in order to clarify the series of events on collagen mineralization at this domain of supersaturation. The important message of the present work is the drastic effect of the affinity of the substrate on the nucleating phase and the underlying structural correlations. The experiments of the present work have shown the importance of the combination of substrate and of the solution supersaturation on the nature of the calcium phosphate phase that nucleates. At pH 6.0, 37 Partial support of this work from the programme “Development Proposals of Research Institutions- KRHPIS ESPA 2007–2013”, of the General Secretariat for Research and Technology, Hellas, is acknowledged.