The production of fine particles within the lower micron range by dry grinding processes is an industrially widely used but energy intensive unit operation. Thereby, the grinding efficiency is often enhanced by applying so-called grinding aids. Even though this class of additives is established in various industrial processes, the impacts of these chemicals on the properties of the product powder as well as on the grinding process are still not understood sufficiently. Especially product-specific grinding aid effects are described very rarely within the literature. For this reason, this study presents a systematic grinding aid investigation with a special regard to different ground materials. It was shown how additives from different substance classes influence the surface energies of different particulate products, and thus, their particle and powder properties. As a result, most of the investigated grinding aids indeed act highly solid-specific. It is further discussed how additive-induced changes of the powder behavior affect the stressing conditions inside the mill as well as the grinding result. While flowability-assisting additives mostly enhance the grinding efficiency within the used lab-scale vibration mill, rather low flowabilities may be beneficial for other mill types and combinations of process parameters. This study will therefore help to understand how to optimize grinding aid applications in terms of powder properties and grinding conditions.The production of fine particles in the lower micron range by dry grinding processes demands large amounts of energy. For instance, the cement industry alone consumes approximately 12–15% of the world’s total industrial energy, whereby the fine finish grinding of the cementitious products accounts for about 30% of the overall energy consumption ( In general, the efficiency of fine grinding operations can mainly be enhanced by either enhancing the existing grinding equipment and developing new machines or by improving the grinding behavior of the ground material ( A recently published study demonstrated that the influence of grinding aids on the particle and bulk properties of ground limestone (such as the product fineness, agglomerate sizes, powder flowability, media coating and particle surface energy) strongly depends on the chemical nature of the additive ( Therefore, the aim of this study is to investigate the impacts of four grinding aids from different substance classes on the grinding performance within a lab-scale mill as well as on several particle and bulk properties of the product powder. Five different inorganic materials were chosen as ground products in order to identify solid-specific grinding aid effects. The aim is to enable a more efficient selection of suitable grinding aids in terms of those powder properties, which are required for an efficient processing of a certain material in a given mill type. Similar to a previous study ( Furthermore, the temperature inside the milling chamber was measured directly after opening the beaker. It was found, that the temperature only varied in a small range without showing clear effects of the applied grinding aid. For instance, the temperature did only vary between 31 and 34 °C for limestone, while showing slightly higher values up to 37 °C for the other materials. Thus, the possible impacts of the temperature on the grinding aid performance are neglected throughout this manuscript. Within this study, four materials were ground to investigate and compare the effects of different grinding aids. Besides three heterogeneously structured products, namely cement clinker (ThyssenKrupp Industrial Solutions, Germany), pre-ground granulated slag sand (Peine-Salzgitter AG, Germany) and fly ash (S-FWK by E.ON Kraftwerke GmbH, Germany), one more homogeneous and chemically purer material (quartz sand Millisil W6 by Quarzwerke Gruppe, Germany) was also investigated. All materials were dried for 20 h at 80 °C prior to the grinding in order to remove moisture. The following manuscript is extended with additional experimental data from a previous limestone study ( Four chemicals (all Sigma Aldrich) from four different substance classes (amines, glycols, primary alcohols and carboxylic acids) were used as grinding aids in their pure form (see Wet laser diffraction measurements (HELOS, Sympatec, Germany) were used to determine the particle size distribution of the ground product samples. Therefore, the product particles were taken from the total amount of ground material and subsequently dispersed in ethanol as well as treated with ultrasonic for 60 s in order to reduce agglomeration. The statistical reliability of the analysis was increased by a threefold measurement of each powder sample. Within this study, the characteristic values x The product powders were characterized regarding their agglomeration tendency using two different kinds of dry particle size measurements. In a first instance, dry laser diffraction measurements were carried out with the HELOS system in combination with the dry dispersion unit RODOS. The pressure of the air stream for dry dispersion was set to 0.4 bar to establish moderate dispersing intensities. Thus, dry agglomerates having a medium strength are detected. In the following, they are described by the median value x A further agglomerate size of the powder samples was analyzed with the image analyzing system QICPIC (Sympatec, Germany). Therefore, the instrument was also equipped with a dry dispersing unit of the type GRADIS which basically consists of a vibration feeder and a free fall tower. Measurements with a low state of sample dispersion intensity, compared to the RODOS unit, are enabled herein, as the particles are only gently dispersed while falling through the tower. In this case, also lose agglomerate structures (see x A ring shear tester RST-XS (Dietmar Schulze Schüttguttechnik, Germany) combined with a 30 ml shear cell was used to characterize the powder flowability. The powder flowability index ff The ring shear measurements were performed at ambient conditions. At the beginning of the test, the powder was pre-sheared under a normal stress of 10 kPa to load the bulk material with a consolidation stress σ A surface energy analyzer SEA (Surface Measurement Systems, UK), which operates on the principle of inverse gas chromatography (IGC), was used to determine the specific surface energy of the powder samples. Each test run includes a specified drying step of the sample, the determination of the samples BET specific surface area and the final analysis of the surface energy. A detailed description of the surface energy analysis can be found in literature (e.g. ( The powder samples were analyzed directly after grinding. All measurements were carried out in silanized glass columns with an inner diameter of 2 mm at a temperature of 30 °C and a relative humidity of 0%. Prior to the measurement, the samples were dried for 6 h by a dry helium flow at a temperature of 70 °C. The BET surface was determined by multiple nonane injections leading to a relative gas phase saturation between 0.05 and 0.30. The dispersive component of the surface energy γ While the dispersive component γ Since surface energy is a heterogeneously distributed value, a characteristic value γ In order to describe the acid-base character of the raw particle surfaces, Gutmann acid-base parameters ( Identical column settings as described in the previous chapter were used for the measurements. The calculation was also based on the approach of Schultz (  As already discussed in a previous paper ( In  More significant trends can be identified considering the powder flowability ( Similar impacts of the grinding aids can be observed for the extent of agglomeration ( The impacts of the grinding aids on the product characteristics of ground quartz are shown in For most of the grinding aids, the powder flowability is steadily increased with rising additive quantities, leading to ff  Since fly ash is a heterogeneous particle mixture coming from combustion processes, further particulate residues within the material may be responsible for the observed reduced grinding aid effectiveness. In order to confirm this assumption, the residue on ignition of the raw fly ash was analyzed by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA, see In order to confirm the impact of these residues on the grinding aid effectiveness, fly ash samples were heated to 800 °C and subsequently ground in the vibration mill. Thereby, either no grinding aid or 0.10 wt-% of the four different additives were applied. Moreover, identical mill parameters to those used to grind the raw fly ash were chosen.  In order to examine the impact of the grinding aids on the particle-particle interactions, the specific surface energy of the product particles was determined by IGC. As the surface energy of the particles strongly contributes to the adhesive forces between the particles ( Among all reference samples, which were ground without any additive, the cement clinker exhibits the largest value with γ Furthermore, the extent of surface energy reduction relative to the corresponding reference sample also strongly depends on the ground material. For instance, the surface energy may be reduced by more than 58% in the case of limestone, while the maximal reduction is much lower for other materials like quartz (approx. 25%). However, a direct comparison between the different materials needs to be performed with caution, especially since the specific surface areas of the materials may vary. Constantly, fly ash induces higher surface areas (both with and without heat-treatment), which can be seen from the BET surface values (see reference samples in Apart from the fly ash samples, the four other materials show similar specific surface areas after grinding without any grinding aid. Obviously, the specific surface areas will be different for grinding with additive. However, the relatively narrow range of these reference samples (S A systematic grinding aid investigation was carried out with a special regard to different ground materials within this study. In a first instance, the surface energy of the product particles, which is significantly decreased for all of the ground materials by applying grinding aid molecules, needs to be considered. As it was already shown for limestone in a previous study ( A specific trend line can be identified for each material, which underlines that the powder properties do not only depend on the surface energy of the particles, but also on further solid-specific aspects. This becomes clear whilst comparing the individual trend lines of the ground materials. While limestone and quartz form the lower limit of the global trend described above (i.e. the lowest powder flowability at an equal surface energy), the samples of cement clinker, slag sand and pre-heated fly ash represent the upper limit. The different courses can mainly be explained by further parameters like the particle size distribution, particle shape and roughness or moisture content, which overlap the shown relation. Also, the different deformation behaviors of these materials may affect the contact area between the particles, and thus, the resulting adhesion forces. At high surface energies, the curves of the different materials come closer to each other, indicating a decreasing impact of these further parameters and a pre-dominant influence of the surface energy on the adhesive particle-particle interactions. As already discussed in chapter 4.2, the extent of the surface energy reduction by grinding aid molecules is not only affected by the chemical interactions between the anchor groups and the solid surface, but also by the actual coverage of the particle surface with stabilizing molecules. Grinding aid molecules with a higher number of anchor groups within the molecule may lead to a more complete particle surface coverage already at low concentrations. Thus, a lower total number of grinding aid molecules is needed to achieve maximum effects ( As explained above, maximum achievable effects are expected in the range close to a mono-molecular grinding aid layer. At this state, the observed effects are rather determined by the specific interaction between grinding aid and solid surface, and not by the degree of surface coverage anymore. High flowabilities are therefore achieved with high concentrations of HepAc for limestone, slag sand and the heat-treated fly ash. Also, a high amount of HepAc causes the strongest effect in the case of quartz. For cement clinker in turn, all of the used additives cause similar effects, but with lower concentrations for TEA and DEG. Interestingly, HepAc leads to steadily stronger impacts on the powder behavior compared to HexOH, even though both additives consist of linear molecules with similar geometries. These observations clearly show that the chemical nature of the anchor group is decisive to stabilize inorganic materials, especially as this group determines the reduction of the surface energy. Overlapping effects may further be caused by the molecular structure of the grinding aid, for instance by additional steric stabilizing mechanisms. As an example, the one-side adsorbing HexOH molecules generally achieve slightly higher maximum effects than DEG, even though both molecules adsorb on the particle surface mainly by alcohol groups as anchors. The results reveal that most of the grinding aid molecules have indeed a very solid-specific mode of action. Unfortunately, it is still difficult to predict this kind of solid-specific behavior. Solid materials with high surface energies seem to enable more pronounced grinding aid effects. However, the strong reduction of the surface energy with HepAc in the case of limestone, while causing only a moderate change of the powder behavior, underlines that the surface energy cannot be used alone to predict grinding aid effects. Generally, the chemical compatibility between the different functional groups within the grinding aid molecule and the particle surface can be assumed to determine the solid-specific behavior. This was recently shown for cement clinker surfaces by means of molecular simulations ( Even though the standard deviations of the values are partly high, distinct differences can be identified: While limestone, slag sand and quartz have higher acid than base parameters, cement clinker and the pre-treated fly ash show a significantly higher k As shown in a previous study, the grinding result of a dry milling process is strongly affected by the powder flow behavior of the ground material. Thereby, the grinding conditions inside the used mill, which are a consequence of both the major stressing mechanism (thus the used mill type) and the combination of process parameters, determine the product flow behavior needed to achieve maximum grinding efficiencies (  A global trend can be identified for nearly all of the materials: A stronger increase of the powder flowability leads to finer product particles during the grinding process. Especially for the grinding of limestone, slag sand and quartz with HepAc, it can be seen that this additive does not only lead to the highest powder flowability, but also to the best grinding results. In contrast to that, both similar powder flowabilities as well as product finenesses are obtained with 0.15 wt-% of all additives for grinding of clinker. In the present case, the used vibration mill obviously demands high product flowabilities to achieve the finest particles. For high powder flowabilities, the displacement of product particles out of the active grinding zone between approaching media is generally increased, which leads to lower amounts of stressed particles per stress event, but also higher stress intensities. Depending on both the stressing energy of the grinding media and the mechanical strength of the product particles, a high powder flowability may therefore lead to more efficient grinding conditions, as it can be expected for most of the conducted grinding experiments. However, excessively high powder flowabilities may also result in reduced grinding efficiencies, as it is exemplarily seen for the grinding of limestone with higher amounts of HepAc. Above a certain powder flowability, the optimum stress intensity is exceeded due to the enhanced particle displacement between approaching media. This critical condition may already be reached with lower powder flowabilities, especially for relative soft materials such as limestone. A decreased grinding efficiency can also be caused by excessively high grinding aid amounts. As soon as a monolayer of stabilizing molecules on the particles surface is exceeded, excessive additive molecules may lead to bridging effects between the particles, and thus, increasing adhesive forces. Consequently, the grinding efficiency may be affected negatively. However, in the present case the lower efficiencies are rather assumed to be caused by the powder flowability, as a significant increase of the particle agglomeration would mainly happen by liquid bridging. For liquid bridging in turn, much higher grinding aid concentrations than 0.15 wt-% would probably be necessary. Surprisingly, no benefit is obtained during the grinding of the raw fly ash with any of the investigated grinding aids. Even the slight increase of the fly ash flowability in the case of HexOH and HepAc does not affect the product fineness significantly. As discussed above, it can be assumed that finely dispersed carbon residues from the combustion process cover the actual ash particles. These fine carbon components presumably act as asperities on the particle surface, whereby they increase the distance between the particles, leading to an overlapping stabilization mechanism. It indicates that the large amount of present carbon residues act as a stronger grinding aid than the additional liquid chemical. As soon as the carbon residues are removed by heat-treatment, the grinding of the fly ash becomes less efficient. Simultaneously, the grinding aids start to develop their expected effects at this point. It clearly shows that the carbon content of the used fly ash as well as the morphology and distribution of these particulate residues also need to be considered regarding grinding aid applications in the field of fine grinding of fly ash. In special cases, a high content of fine carbon compounds inside the fly ash may qualify it as a grinding aid for the fine finish grinding of cement along with being used as a supplementary cementitious material. The use of such solid components as grinding aids will be considered in future studies.  In the case of cement clinker, all additives lead to similar results. Thereby, TEA and DEG demand lower quantities for the same results due to their higher density of anchor groups, which is why they can be seen as the favorable grinding aids for this material. It also explains the predominant role of amines and glycols as grinding aids in the cement industry. It needs to be noted that the impacts of the powder flow behavior may be totally different for continuously operated dry mills. In fact, it can be assumed that the stress mechanism between the grinding beads/balls will be influenced by the powder flowability in a similar way as it was shown in this study. However, the flowability will cause further overlapping effects, especially regarding the axial material transport through the mill, and thus, the residence times of the particles. Obviously, this will lead to different grinding aid effects than those seen in simple batch experiments. In previous studies we already revealed such differences between the fine dry grinding of limestone in a batch ( A systematic grinding aid investigation was carried out with a special regard to different ground materials within this study. For all of the ground materials, it was shown that the surface energy of the product particles is significantly decreased by applying grinding aid molecules from different substance classes, namely carboxylic acids, alcohol amines, glycols and mono-alcohols. It was confirmed that the resulting surface energies correlate with the powder properties of the ground material, such as the powder flowability. Thereby, the grinding aid effects were found to be very solid-specific. For the fine grinding of limestone, slag sand and quartz, the addition of comparatively high amounts of heptanoic acid caused the most pronounced stabilization effects. Generally, the grinding aid effects were lower in the case of quartz in comparison to the other materials. In contrast to that, comparatively high effects were achieved while combining cement clinker with additives from all four investigated grinding aid classes. As revealed for fly ash, fine particulate carbon residues from the combustion process may limit the grinding aid effectiveness. Thus, the carbon content within this kind of material must also be considered regarding an optimum grinding aid application. A prediction of the solid-specific grinding aid behavior while taking the chemical properties of the solid surface into consideration turned out to be difficult. However, global surface parameters such as the Gutman acid-base constants seem to be suitable at least to narrow down the choice of possible additives. The accuracy of these kind of predictions can be assumed to be higher for (chemically) pure and very homogeneous materials. Furthermore, it was confirmed that grinding aid molecules with a higher density of anchor groups within each molecule (e.g. alcohol amines and glycols) can already lead to an entire particle surface coverage at low concentrations, and thus, to a lower demand of grinding aid amounts to achieve maximum effects. In contrast to that, chemicals with only one anchor group per molecule (e.g. carboxylic acids and mono-alcohols) demand higher additive concentrations to accomplish the maximum effect. Thereby, it was clearly shown that the chemical nature of the anchor group is decisive for stabilizing inorganic materials, especially since this group determines the reduction of the surface energy. The grinding tests of this study revealed that powder-flow-assisting grinding aids are beneficial regarding the grinding efficiency, at least in the used lab-scale vibration mill, whereas excessively high flowabilities may lead to opposite effects. Mill types providing significantly higher stress energies (e.g. tumbling ball mills or vertical roller mills), may require lower flowabilities of the product powder to achieve the best performance. As shown before, varying combinations of grinding parameters within one and the same mill may demand different powder flowabilities, and thus, grinding aid formulations to achieve optimum grinding conditions ( We acknowledge the