This chapter reviews the production technology for a variety of magnesium processes developed over the past 150 years on a commercial scale. It discusses why processes vary considerably in the case of magnesium, unlike the case of aluminum production. As we all know, manmade materials are made by processes using the raw materials available, or which can be acquired at a low cost while converting them to a value-added material. Irrespective of the source of the raw material, additional energy matter is required to effect the conversion of the mineral into metal. The nature and cost of the energy and energy materials have been important factors in the choice of the process development of magnesium. Since magnesium is available from the lithosphere and the hydrosphere, various routes are available for extraction into metal. This chapter is written so as to take us through the history of commercial processes in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, before discussing the chemistry of process evolution, steps involved in production methods, and major equipment needed for different processes. Following this, future possibilities are discussed.  The same period saw the development of magnesium for structural applications, both in the USA as well as in Germany. Dow Chemical is credited with introducing Dow-Metal pistons for the automotive sector in the 1920s, while the Germans developed a magnesium alloy engine for Volkswagen in the 1930s, helped by I.G. Farbenindustrie's magnesium process. Herbert H. Dow also pioneered the introduction of magnesium into the construction of aircraft in the early 1920s ( Unlike for other metals, the processes used in the production of magnesium have gone through several historic changes – almost following the changes in the economic dominance history on a global scale – whether it be the world wars, or the cold war through the 1980s, or the emergence of the global economy in the 1990s, and through the recent commodity rise and fall during 2006–9. In 1935, John A. Gann, Chief Metallurgist of The Dow Chemical Co., noted the following ‘… our light metals occur only in the form of compounds so stable that their discovery, isolation, commercial production, and use were forced to await some of the modern advances in chemistry and engineering. Under such conditions, the evolution of a new industry is often a romance in which scientific and industrial difficulties and near failures add to the thrill of success’ ( All magnesium metal production processes go through the following unit process steps (see Raw material upgrading Removal of unwanted and undesirable impurities Removal of impurities undesirable in the finished metal Converting the purified raw material into metal and separation from other component products – along with processing and or reuse of other raw material components Melting, refining and casting metal and/or alloys Granular magnesium and alloys. Most of the metallic elements are usually extracted or reduced from their respective oxides, or oxide compounds. The lithospheric compounds from which magnesium is extracted are: dolomite (CaCO The hydrosphere – oceans, and terminal lakes − has magnesium as the second most abundant metallic cation in the salinity. Sodium, present in In 1808, Humphry Davy took moistened magnesium sulfate and electrolyzed it onto a mercury cathode. He also converted red hot magnesium oxide with potassium vapor, collecting the magnesium into mercury. Both processes produced magnesium amalgam, from which he made the metal by distilling out the mercury. In 1828, Bussy reduced magnesium chloride with potassium metal in a glass tube; when the potassium chloride was washed out, small globules of magnesium were present. Faraday in 1833 electrolyzed impure magnesium chloride in a molten state to get magnesium metal; but it took two more decades before Robert Bunsen made a commercial quantity in a small laboratory cell using molten anhydrous magnesium chloride. He noted the need to dehydrate the magnesium chloride for improving the electrolysis by avoiding sludge formation. Bunsen demonstrated in 1852 that it is easier to dehydrate magnesium chloride in a potassium chloride bath – this later led to the use of naturally occurring carnallite as a source for making magnesium. Commercial production of magnesium on a larger scale was initiated in 1886 – about the same time as the beginnings of the Hall–Heroult cell for aluminum. Since oxide magnesium ores, such as MgO, are found in high grade (90% plus purity), attempts were made to use this as feed material using a molten fluoride melt – similar to the Hall–Heroult cell during the late nineteenth century. But the high melting point of magnesium fluoride above 950 Molten dehydrated carnallite (KCl·MgCl  In 1938, Haughton and Prytherch noted that the extraction of magnesium followed three processes – electrolysis of fused chlorides, electrolysis of the oxide in solution of molten fluorides, and direct reduction of the oxide by carbon in an arc furnace with a hydrogen atmosphere followed by re-distillation in inert atmosphere. World War II brought the silico-thermic reduction of oxides to the fore. At this time, the production of magnesium was one third that of aluminum worldwide ( Unlike aluminum, the demand for magnesium took a precipitous drop following World War II, causing the variation of production technology processes. Carbo-thermic and fluoride-melt electrolytic processes exited commercial production. Silico-thermic processes took a backseat, until the mid 1990s, to the electrolytic conversion of magnesium chlorides. China entered the global economy in the early 1990s, interested in developing uses for its Some of the early history of processes in the first half of the twentieth century is given in articles or chapters in books (Emeley, 1967; Evans gives a concise summary of the evolution of commercial processes in the light metals aluminum, magnesium and lithium over the last five decades ( The articles by The Lloyd M. Pidgeon memorial session (2001) presentations of magnesium technology 2001 discussed advances in the Pidgeon silico-thermic process in China. R.E. Brown describes the 240 retort silico-thermic magnesium plant of the 1960s in Selma, Alabama. ( In the Magnola process, the Noranda magnesium plant of 1999–2001 used serpentine, the asbestos plant waste containing high magnesium content as the raw material. The magnesium is converted from a silicate form into molten anhydrous magnesium chloride and then electrolyzed in a multipolar cell. ( The book by Strelets, ‘Electrolytic production of magnesium’, is a compendium of electrolytic magnesium technology developed by the Germans, later improved by the Soviet Union by VAMI (the Soviet aluminum and Magnesium Institute) and the Soviet magnesium plants in Solikamsk, Russia, Zaporozhye, Ukraine, and Kazakhstan until 1970 ( The electrolytic process for magnesium production is well advanced for both magnesium chloride from raw magnesium feed stocks, as well as the Kroll process recycled molten anhydrous magnesium chloride. The latter continues in commercial practice through the present day. The multipolar cell developed by the Japanese producer Sumitomo Sitix – or Osaka Titanium in conjunction with Alcan, is described by Sivilotti in his paper in the Light Metal Symposium ( The economic comparison among carbo-thermal, silico-thermal and electrolytic processes as of 1967 was provided by engineers at the US Bureau of Mines ( The scientific basis of extraction defined by thermo-chemistry has been evolving side by side with changes in the commercial production of magnesium. Some of these are shown. There are two main chemical aspects in the extraction of minerals into metals. First, the minerals are usually mixed with other compounds and these have to be reacted or modified before the single compound can be energetically split into metal, and secondly removing the other elements forming the compound, as well as the new compounds formed if any. It should be noted that commercial processes consume 3 to 4 times the thermodynamic energy required for splitting the raw material into the finished metal. Magnesium oxide raw material can be obtained from (a) magnesium hydroxide,(b) from magnesium carbonate, or (c) from dolomite CaCO Unlike many non-ferrous metals it is difficult to reduce magnesium oxide with carbon. Magnesium oxide carbo-thermic reduction takes place above 1900 The product magnesium is in the gaseous state, as is carbon monoxide. This requires special separation techniques. Hansgirg developed the rapid quenching of the gaseous mixtures, along with other gases such as hydrogen or methane, to effect a condensation of magnesium. This process, even after 20 years of commercial operations and developments by Hansgirg, still continued to be difficult as there were considerable side reactions and back reactions resulting in further energy-intensive purification schemes. The use of calcium carbide as a reductant is also useful in making quality magnesium, as the oxygen from magnesium oxide is taken up by calcium rather than by carbon as shown in It should be mentioned that the reaction is carried out in vacuum retorts. It has also been surmised by Bleecker and Morrison that magnesium oxide can be reduced at high temperatures using metals like silicon or aluminum per These reactions require temperatures higher than 1400–1500 Several detailed studies have been made on the thermodynamics of the Pidgeon process as to why the reaction is possible on a fundamental basis. ( It should be noted that these metallo-thermic reactions are indirect carbo-thermic reactions, in that carbon is used to produce the reductant. Aluminum is made from aluminum oxide (electrolytic method) using carbon anodes. Silica and carbon make silicon reductant and carbon oxides via the electro-thermal approach. Prior removal of carbon oxide in the gaseous form provides the metal reductant which would make a solid or liquid product when taking the oxygen away from magnesium compound, allowing clean magnesium vapor to condense. The magnesium source from the hydrosphere typically is present in the ionic form in brines. From this one can either precipitate it as hydroxide or upgrade it as concentrated magnesium chloride. Earlier magnesium chloride based processes, such as the Dow process or the Norsk Hydro – Norway – both used an alkali – such as milk of lime (Ca(OH)  The hydrospheric magnesium ion present in brine can be concentrated to magnesium chloride rich liquor by evaporative crystallization. This involves removal of large quantities of sodium chloride, potassium chloride/sulfate salts by the initial crystallization. This process is economical wherever vast solar evaporation fields are available. This has been practiced by US Magnesium since 1972. The solar evaporation upgrading of the Great Salt Lake (GSL) brine – which is 3 to 4 times the concentration of magnesium in sea water, is described by Barlow ( The hydrospheric magnesium ions can be extracted as a double chloride salt carnallite, KCl·MgCl Magnesium oxide from rocks – magnesite, silicates, or magnesium oxide from hydroxides converted by carbo-chlorination into magnesium chloride – was also practiced in Germany before World War II, at Basic Magnesium plant in Henderson, Nevada during the World War II, and later in Norsk Hydro, Norway (during 1950–1987) ( From the basic thermo-chemistry information, it is known that several metallic elements cannot be made from their ions in aqueous solution. The free energy of reaction of water when converted to electromotive force gives a decomposition voltage of 1.23 volts for water into hydrogen and oxygen. Many of the reactive metal ions in solution have a greater decomposition voltage than the water splitting reaction – examples are aluminum, titanium, magnesium, alkali metals, etc. When solutions containing these reactive metal ions are electrolyzed in aqueous solution, one ends up forming the hydroxides of these metals at the cathode. Only when the cathode is mercury will these metal ions form an amalgam with mercury, requiring further distillation steps separating the metal. This was realized from the time of Faraday in the early 1800s, who then started developing an alternate avoiding water altogether in the In the case of the Hall–Heroult system for aluminum electrolysis, aluminum oxide is dissolved in the diluent sodium aluminum fluoride (cryolite), allowing molten aluminum to form on the carbon cathode. In the case of magnesium, the choice was made to use magnesium chloride, as it was difficult to find molten salt solvents which could dissolve magnesium oxide at a lower temperature than the fluoride melts. The chloride melts need to be free of oxides for efficient electrolysis. The melting point of mixed magnesium chloride, along with alkali and at times calcium chloride, is less than 500 In the case of magnesium oxide minerals processed by the silico-thermal route, the most undesirable material is the alkali metal silicate that stays in the calcined dolomite. This vaporizes along with magnesium (in the silico-thermal reduction) and the alkali condensate causes unwanted fires when the crown is removed from the retort, leading to higher metal losses. This is addressed partly by selecting high grade dolomite low in alkali impurities, and partly by retort condenser design. Chemical removal of these impurities is not practiced. In the silico-thermal process, it is easy to make several of the commercial grade magnesium products based on charge quality ( Even though Dow Magnesium and Norsk Hydro Magnesium are no longer in operation, these plants operated for several decades during the twentieth century, and this chapter would be remiss if the fundamentals used in these were not discussed. In the case of making magnesium chloride for the Other impurities which are removed from magnesium chloride solutions are boron compounds which typically come in sea water or marine evaporites. Parts-per-million quantities of boron can cause magnesium coalescence problems in the electrolysis step. The borates deposit high melting boride on magnesium metal formed on the cathodic surface which rises from the cathode in the form of droplets of molten metal instead of coalesced metal going towards the magnesium compartment. The Dow process adjusted the alkalinity of magnesium hydroxide precipitation to remove most of the boron. Final traces of boron were then removed by ion exchange from magnesium chloride solutions. Other processes utilize solvent extraction schemes to remove boron as very dilute boron compounds in solution in aqueous stripping solutions. Magnesium chloride originating from marine evaporites and other aqueous sources do not have many heavy metal impurities. But the magnesium chloride generated from magnesite or silicate sources using acid digestion contains heavy metals. These heavy metals, such as iron and nickel, can be removed by precipitation as hydroxides or as sulfides from magnesium chloride solutions, as required by the further downstream process of magnesium chloride purification. The limit of nickel in pure magnesium metal product is specified not to exceed 14 There are two types of magnesium chloride cells. Dow Magnesium cells used MgCl Most other types of electrolytic cells use anhydrous magnesium chloride as cell feed. Norsk Hydro cells used magnesium chloride prills, which had When magnesium chloride is evaporated and dehydrated, it forms several crystalline hydrates with increasing melting points for lower hydrates. Control of temperature of drying, as practiced by Dow, results in a mixture of MgCl These reactions indicate that keeping higher partial pressure of anhydrous HCl will suppress the hydrolysis, as practiced by Norsk Hydro in their essentially anhydrous magnesium chloride prill process. This technique, of using hydrogen chloride gas to make anhydrous magnesium chloride, was first applied by Herbert H. Dow in 1920, who later found it economical to electrolyze MgCl Use of other hydrolysis-inhibiting chlorides, such as potassium chloride or ammonium chloride, has been practiced in making the anhydrous magnesium chloride during the past 150 years by several intermediate process step variations. During the 1970s Braithwaite proposed using organic adducts of magnesium chloride glycolates, which are then dehydrated in a distillation tower, from which they are precipitated as a magnesium chloride ammoniate which has to be deammoniated in additional steps effecting the production of anhydrous magnesium chloride – this was later called Nalco process (  Details of the energetics and thermodynamics involved in this dehydration were developed by K. Kelly, USBM in the 1940s, long after commercial production had been in practice based on an empirical approach. But this study helped develop improvements in the dehydration process ( One should note that making anhydrous magnesium chloride from hydrated magnesium chloride is an energy-intensive process step, even though less than that required in the electrolytic step. This is somewhat analogous to calcination energy prior to applying the reducing energy in heating the retorts to reaction temperatures in the silico-thermic process. Here only highlights of the process equipment are given, as the information on details of the equipment required and energies involved in this process can be found in several of the references mentioned earlier. The batch retort Pidgeon process is labor intensive, besides requiring condensed energy in the form of ferro-silicon (which is formed by reduction of iron oxide, carbon, silica and electricity), energy for calcining dolomite double carbonate to double oxide, followed by thermal energy required for the silico-thermal reaction of heating the retorts to 1150–1200 The range of factors are shown in The retorts, being small in size, generate only a small quantity of material for each batch, requiring multiples of retorts in a plant sized for several thousand tons per year production. In addition, these high temperature and high nickel alloy retorts have only about a four month life, impacting the cost of production. Several Chinese producers have been attempting to develop Rima Corporation carried out the silico-thermic process in vertical reactor of multiple times the throughput of Pidgeon retorts. This modified Ravelli furnace interior has a steel resistive element surrounding the silico-thermal briquette charge which provides the heat to the reaction zone ( At present there are no Magnetherm processes in operation. The Magnetherm process equipment, being an electro-slag melting technology in vacuum, is a high throughput furnace, with vacuum connections to exhaust magnesium vapor continuously into the crucible condenser. Descriptions are given in references. Conventional aqueous reaction tanks and solid−liquid separation equipment are used in the purification of magnesium chloride solutions. The front end of the processes have evaporating vessels followed by either flash driers (Dow), spray driers (US Magnesium), or prilling towers (Norsk Hydro Canada) depending on the process chosen for dehydration of purified brines. It should be noted that considerable expense is involved in the feed preparation step where magnesium chloride is made anhydrous. Carbo-chlorination of magnesium oxide pellets bound with magnesium chloride brine is carried out on tall refractory lined chlorinator vessels with varying temperature zones, practiced by Germans prior to World War II, and then from 1951 until the mid 1980s by Norsk Hydro, Norway, each capable of servicing 1500 On a simpler note, in the fused salt electrolyzer molten magnesium chloride in a mix of other alkali and alkaline earth chlorides is electrolyzed between an anode and a cathode, with the design of the electrolyzer allowing the light magnesium metal deposited in liquid form to rise to the surface and away from the rising chlorine gas at the anodes to avoid recombination of magnesium and chlorine. Most industrial electrolyte melts are heavier than molten magnesium. Bunsen's 1852 concept of using inverted troughs or pockets cut into the cathode (he utilized a carbon cathode and a carbon anode in a crucible with a partition between cathode and anode) to help collect the ascending molten magnesium ( The cathode is made of mild steel, while graphite is used as the anode material. The molten salt is usually self-heated by the resistance-heating component of the electrolyzer, while kept inside a refractory lined vessel. The variations in cell design have followed all possible geometric arrangements of cathode and anode (top entry, side entry or bottom entry), as well as effective utilization of the gas lift action of the rising chlorine bubbles in causing the magnesium movement upward and away from the chlorine. The 1953 treatise, ‘magnesium extraction from fused salts’, Hock describes the various cells used in the 1860–1950 period – dividing the chapter into electrolysis in fluoride baths, and in molten chloride baths, followed by descriptions of cells based on natural and artificial carnallite (the Graetzel cell, the early Griesham cell, the Wintershall cell, etc.), and cells based on Dow Magnesium used gas-heated steel cells to allow interruptible power supply operations. The thick-walled steel container also acted as the main cathode connector to cathodic electrodes surrounding graphite anodes. The upper portion of the cell was refractory lined allowing chlorine gas release without corroding the steel. The cathodes surrounding the graphite anodes were totally immersed in the melt with magnesium collectors going to a separate magnesium chamber. The top-entry anodes were cylindrical graphite electrodes to facilitate periodic insertions of additional length making up for the consumption of carbon by the reaction of water in the magnesium chloride hydrate fed to the cell ( Norsk Hydro started with the multiple semi-walled (diaphragms) top-entry steel cathodes and graphite anodes hung inside refractory lined anode box compartment of the I.G. Farbenindustrie design. It took over 35 years to develop its 415 Kamp monopolar magnesium electrolytic cell with a single refractory partition wall between chlorine and magnesium compartments (diaphragmless). This was operated for about 16 years in their Canadian operation before being shut down in early 2007. These cells are self-heated – thermally balanced − and the shell is refractory lined, allowing side-entry cathodes ( US Magnesium and Russian producers each locally developed thermally balanced diaphragmless monopolar cells. Multipolar cells developed at the Japanese titanium producers each have a steel cathode–graphite anode pair with added bipolar graphite plates in the inter-electrode space. The electrolyte in most cases is a combination of alkali and alkali earth chlorides – NaCl, KCl, LiCl, CaCl In the early days of cell development molten magnesium was removed manually. In the early I.G. Farbenindustrie cells with top-entry cathodes, air was allowed to flow through the cathode compartment – which incidentally removed the chlorine containing fumes coming into the metal compartment. The molten metal was typically protected by the fluxing action of circulating molten salt over it in the cell. Still, a portion of it can become oxidized forming magnesium oxide/hydroxychloride resulting in sludge dropping to the cell floor. This sludge was removed manually. Even in the closed cells of the diaphragmless cells, some sludge gets formed from the periodic charging and metaling operations during which the lids are opened. These are removed on a very infrequent basis (once in several months) using mechanical devices. Excess electrolyte is typically removed along with the metal which is allowed to settle as part of refining molten magnesium. The chlorine gas is removed continually from the anode compartment. Pure chlorine is produced wherever anhydrous magnesium chloride or anhydrous carnallite act as cell feed. The anode gas has to be purified to remove condensable chloride salt which entrains with chlorine, followed by compression prior to reuse. It may undergo liquefaction making liquid chlorine if required. A part of the chlorine is reused in the dehydration step in plants which use carbo-chlorination. In the case of Norsk Hydro Canada, it chose to react anode gas chlorine with hydrogen gas to convert it to hydrochloric acid needed for the digestion of the magnesium carbonate feed stock it used to make the magnesium chloride. In the case of Dow cells, the anode gas is a mixture of hydrogen chloride and chlorine – all of which is converted to hydrochloric acid needed for digesting magnesium hydroxide. The process parameters, such as power utilization, cell life, etc., are given in several of the references mentioned earlier. Comparative tables excerpted from Use of continuous molten salt flow line feeding into a head cell and taking out the magnesium formed and excess electrolyte at an end cell was envisioned in the 1960s in the United States, but was not developed further commercially. This approach was modified and updated in Ukraine; a version practised in Israel. The operating parameters of such a commercial process are described by Shekhovtsov in his presentation of the magnesium electrolytic production process ( In the case of silico-thermal magnesium, the metal comes in a solidified form called crown from the retorts. This is added to a steel crucible, where it is melted along with mixed chloride salt flux. The molten salt acts as a heat transfer medium as well as a flux minimizing the oxidation of metal. This step is excluded from electrolytic plants which take out molten magnesium along with some cell salt. From this melt, molten magnesium is transferred to another crucible, allowing the salt to settle, pumping the clean magnesium into ingot molds for casting. Sometimes an inspissated flux which is essentially a mix of magnesium chloride – potassium chloride along with fluorspar (fluorite) and There are various designs of the refining cell, including special refractory lined (molten magnesium attacks most refractory oxides) compartmented vessels such as that adopted by Norsk Hydro. The Russians and Ukrainians developed an inverted steel bell-jar type continuous refining cell which carried out the receiving of molten magnesium, refining and pumping to casting conveyors. A variety of furnace designs with salt – which is electrically heated, onto which molten magnesium floats in a confined fashion used for magnesium refining − is described by Barannik ( Molten magnesium requires an inhibitive gas film above it during casting to prevent it from oxidizing. Sulfur flour and sulfur oxides have shown ability to provide this inhibitive gas film, which is as tenacious as the oxide film formed on molten aluminum providing the protection. Use of fluoride containing gases as inhibitive gases was initially proposed in 1934. It was not till 1980 that sulfur hexafluoride, a non-toxic gas, was proposed to give improved protection of molten magnesium with air/CO The ingots cast by these methods are typically 99.8–99.9% pure magnesium with about 0.03% iron, 0.01% aluminum as major soluble impurities. Thermal magnesium tends to have more silicon impurity in it, giving a bluish tinge to the ingots. In cases where lower iron is required in the metal by customers, it can be accomplished by carrying out a precipitation step using titanium or zirconium chlorides, followed by settling before casting. This would produce 99.95–99.97% pure metal. Higher purities can be achieved by distillation if needed. Instead of conveyor casting, some magnesium producers provide semi-continuous direct chill cast T-bars or billets, as in aluminum plants. These direct chill cast bars are further saw cut to desired weight as required by the customers. As about 20–30% of the magnesium is sold to the die-casting industry, primary producers providing alloy ingots of the common type – A chapter on magnesium production would be incomplete without a section on magnesium or magnesium alloy powder. Magnesium is not only a structural metal, but it is also a reducing agent, and a chemical reagent. Magnesium is used as a reducing agent making several reactive metals from their compounds – primarily from the halides. Examples are making beryllium, uranium, titanium and zirconium metals. It has been a chemical reagent in the production of organic compounds through the organo-magnesium Grignard reagent. During the past 35 years it has become a widely used desulfurizing agent for iron and steel production, consuming over 10% of the magnesium produced worldwide. Magnesium or magnesium aluminum compounds are used in pyrotechnics. In addition to the use of granular magnesium as a chemical reactant, magnesium alloy powders have been formed into structural near net shapes by unique powder metallurgical processing such as thixo-molding or rheocasting. Recently it has been found that these powder metallurgical processes can produce magnesium articles which have strengths about 80–120% greater than conventional casting techniques. Magnesium being a soft metal is easy to machine and rasp like ‘wood’. This approach has been widely developed where the melted and cast magnesium ingot is ground to powder in large tonnage. In the late 1970s and early 1980s processes were developed to make salt-coated magnesium which can be made from molten metal ( Molten magnesium can be atomized to making fine spherical shape powder which was adopted for pyrotechnics and military applications. Such atomization requires protective gas use during the atomization to minimize Mechanical machining of metals causes high strain deformations which result in nanocrystalline structures. Such nanocrystalline material can be used in making finished components having higher strength than castings which have a coarser grain structure. Conventional granular magnesium, made by mechanical machining for several decades for chemical applications, can now be easily applied to making high strength components. There have been multiple variations of processes suggested as well as engineered over the years in all aspects of magnesium production – variations in silico-thermal or alumino-thermal processes, near atmospheric pressure processes, etc. There have been many processes envisioned and tested, befitting Gann's 1935 definition of romance with magnesium. Only a few reach near commercial production, some have gone through pilot plant stages. Wynnyckyj studied a potentially low-cost continuous packed-bed reactor process where calcined dolomite and silicon are reacted using preheated hydrogen gas to carry magnesium vapor, which can be condensed into a liquid form outside the vessel while recycling hydrogen back to the reactor ( The Zuliani process, an atmospheric pressure variation of the Pidgeon process being developed in Canada is being piloted ( While the Magnetherm process is a silico-thermic process carried out in a molten slag, Austherm, Australia was developing an alumino-thermic reduction of magnesium oxide in a thermal plasma-arc furnace using scrap aluminum as a reductant during the late 1990s. This process, called the Heggie–Iolaire process, is one of several alumino-thermic processes being tested on a laboratory pilot scale (  While the Bolzano process, initiated in the 1980s using Ravelli furnaces, uses internal steel resistor elements, other methods of providing heat to the calcined dolomite–ferro-silicon charge, such as induction heating, have been tested on a laboratory pilot scale ( In the electrolytic production of magnesium, the important aspects of improvement relate to increased energy efficiency, cell component life, and higher throughput in terms of production per man hour. We have noted the multipolar electrode approaches taken by Sumitomo Sitix and Alcan in the 1980s earlier, to minimize electrical resistance from electrodes – thus improving the voltage efficiency of the cells. The paper by Neelameggham and Priscu discussed the energy reduction approaches in magnesium on a fundamental basis in 1985 ( A solid oxide membrane process, suggested by Uday Pal, has been developed over the past 10 years, whereby a dissolved magnesium oxide in a molten salt is electrolyzed using an oxygen ion conducting membrane tube, such as yttria-stabilized zirconia, between an inert anode inside the tube and an argon-sparged high-temperature-resistant metal tube cathode to separate magnesium forming at the surface of cathode and vaporizing above melt and then onto a condenser and oxygen forming out of the anode inside the solid oxide membrane (SOM). This is still on a bench scale, with the molten electrolyte being at as high a temperature as in the Pidgeon process, around 1150–1300 Other processes have been envisioned to use magnesium oxide as a raw material in the electrolytic approach – most of them see the lack of solubility of magnesium oxide as a stumbling block. Studies done on magnesium oxide solubility in molten salts indicate the difficulties in finding a suitable solvent at a temperature comparable to that of the mixed chloride electrolyte used with magnesium chloride feed stock. Fundamental analytical techniques used in finding the form in which magnesium oxide and hydroxy chloride impurities were shown by Harris’ It was noted in the 1970s that rare earth chlorides tend to dissolve magnesium oxide by a chemical reaction making a molten rare earth − oxy-chloride and magnesium chloride mix. Kuchera reported on the solubility of magnesium oxide in calcium oxide–calcium chloride melt ( Molten magnesium floats on top of the electrolyte in conventional magnesium electrolysis, as molten magnesium is lighter than the electrolyte. This particular aspect causes sludge formation and oxidation losses of 1–5% of the magnesium. Dean Several processes are discussed in the literature for using magnesium containing silicates whether natural (olivine) or man made (fly-ash containing economic quantities of magnesium), and carbonates by converting them to chlorides followed by electrolysis. There have also been several attempts made at low temperature electro-deposition of reactive metals and this quest will continue, probably leading to new methods.  The twenty-first century may see changes in the magnesium production process, not because of lack of raw materials or lack of process know-how, but from continued pressures in balancing the true market costs of process components, as it did in the twentieth and nineteenth centuries. The climate-control aspects of carbon dioxide release into the atmosphere in metal production have already made the producers move away from nontoxic sulfur hexafluoride inhibitive cover gas back to the originally practiced sulfur dioxide in a controlled fashion. There has been several life cycle analyses of magnesium production, along with downstream fabrication of parts for use in automobiles. Ramakrishnan and Koltun have provided an academic study on the greenhouse impacts of present day magnesium production processes (