Background
                  Tension-band wiring (TBW) has been accepted as the treatment of choice for displaced olecranon fractures. The aim of this study was to examine the effect of K-wire position on instability of the K-wires in relation to local complications and radiological and clinical long-term outcome.
               
                  Methods
                  We reviewed the early follow-up of 59 patients (mean age, 60 years) who underwent TBW osteosynthesis for displaced olecranon fractures. Follow-up information was available from medical records and radiographs. The main outcome measurements were proximal migration of the wires, gap, step, range of motion, and complications. Long-term follow-up included 21 patients (mean age, 58 years). Follow-up was available from a clinical visit and a radiograph. Visual Analogue Scale (VAS), Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS), Disabilities of the Arm Shoulder and Hand (DASH), EuroQol-5D (EQ-5D), and Broberg and Morrey osteoarthritis scores were obtained.
               
                  Results
                  Seventy-eight percent of the patients treated with intramedullary K-wires were found to have instability of K-wires, compared to 36% in the patients treated with transcortical K-wires. Patients with instability of the K-wires tend to develop osteoarthritis more often. There is a better functional outcome in patients where the osteosynthetic material is removed.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Instability of K-wires after TBW is more common after intramedullary placement of the wires resulting in proximal migration of the K-wires and gap appearance. There was a tendency of more osteoarthritis in the group of patients where instability of K-wires was identified. We would recommend the use of transcortical placed wires, as well as to have a low threshold in removing the implants.Transverse displaced fracture of the olecranon is 1 of the most common injuries involving the upper extremity and require operative intervention. Based on these complications, a modified technique was developed, where the 2 K-wires were passed through the anterior ulnar cortex (transcortical) ( The aim of this study was to examine the effect of K-wire position on the instability of the K-wires, local complications, and radiological and clinical outcomes. After approval from our institutions Ethical Committee, all patients who have been surgically treated between 2001 and 2006 with open reduction and internal fixation, according to the tension band wiring technique for an olecranon fracture, were identified through the hospital identification system. Patients who where skeletally immature (<16 years) at the time of operation were excluded. For short-term follow-up purposes, 59 patients who had a fracture of the olecranon treated with TBW, with a minimum follow-up of 3 months, were included in the study. This study consisted of 2 parts: early and long-term follow-up. Of the 59 patients who were identified, 12 were deceased, 9 were suffering from dementia, 6 could not be located, and 2 declined participation, thus leaving 32 patients for long-term follow-up. From this group, 21 patients attended our clinic for long-term clinical follow-up, while 11 patients were living overseas or out of state. This group was evaluated by phone. The early follow-up was available from medical records and radiographs following standard postoperative procedure of 2 weeks, 6 weeks, and 3 months clinical follow-up. The patients were divided into 2 groups, according to the treatment: (1) TBW with K-wires in the direction of the long axis of the ulna (intramedullary), and (2) TBW with K-wires across the anterior cortex of the ulna (transcortical). Thirty-seven patients were included in the intramedullary group and 22 patients in the transcortical group. A long-term follow-up (mean 59 months; range, 31-87) was available from a research-specific follow-up visit and a set of radiographs (anterior-posterior, lateral, and axial) for all 21 patients. The 59 patients included in the early follow-up had an average age of 59 years (range, 16-94) at the time of injury. Twenty-seven patients were older than 60 years (46%). The intramedullary group had an average age of 60 years (range, 16-94), and the transcortical group had an average age of 59 years (range, 17-93). Of the 59 patients, 28 (47%) were male and 31 (53%) were female. The intramedullary group had 19 males and 19 females. The transcortical group had 8 males and 13 females. No significant differences were found in sex and age when the individuals in the 2 groups were compared. The 21 patients included in the long-term follow-up had an average age of 54 years (range, 18-85) at time of injury and an average age of 58 years (range, 25-91) at time of follow-up. The intramedullary group had an average age of 51 years (range, 18-82) at time of injury and 56 years (range, 25-86) at time of follow-up. The transcortical group had an average age of 57 years (range, 33-85) at time of injury and 62 years (range, 40-91) at time of follow-up. Eleven (52%) were male and 10 (48%) were female. Also in the long-term follow-up, no significant differences were found in sex and age when the individuals in the 2 groups were compared. The 11 patients, who were interviewed by telephone, had similar characteristics. No significant differences in sex and age could be determined. Eighty-five percent of the patients were treated operatively within 48 hours after the injury. The standard technique used 2 K-wires of 1.6 mm and an 18-guage tension band, and differed only in the position of the K-wires. According to the preference of the orthopaedic surgeon involved, either transcortical or intramedullary K-wire placement was used. All wires were bent and impacted into the olecranon, as confirmed by the operation notes and postoperative radiographs. The postoperative treatment for all olecranon fractures was a plaster backslab for 2 weeks, followed by functional rehabilitation. The early follow-up consisted of a review from the medical records and the radiographs. The medical records were reviewed for age, sex, data, and time of surgery and accident, postoperative complications, range of motion at the standard procedure follow-up, associated lesions, extra treatments, and metal removal. On the radiographic follow-ups at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, and 3 months, the fracture side and details on the operative technique were determined. The radiographs were measured carefully to assess proximal K-wire protrusion, K-wire migration, gaps, steps, and K-wires protrusion through the anterior cortex of the ulna in the transcortical treatment. The long-term follow-up was an evaluation in a research-specific follow-up visit, which consisted of an interview, clinical examination, radiographs, and the completion of 4 commonly used questionnaires and elbow evaluation instruments: (1) Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) subjective pain score, Statistical analysis of obtained data was performed using SPSS 15.0 program (SPSS, Inc, Chicago, IL, USA). To assess differences between groups, Fisher’s exact test, chi-square test, and Student The fractures classifications were based on injury radiographs and intraoperative findings according to both the Mayo Classification Despite the standard protocol of intravenous antibiotics, 1 g Cefazolin, 30 minutes before the start of surgery, 7 (12%) patients developed a superficial infection after surgery. All could be resolved with a course of oral antibiotics. Only 1 of these patients had actually an open fracture. In 3 (5%) cases, a new injury on the affected elbow occurred. In 1 case, due to the new injury, the metal had to be removed. One transient ulnar nerve neuropraxia, which was apparent immediately after the injury, was noted. This resolved completely in 10 weeks. At the radiological early follow-up of all 59 patients, the proximal K-wires migration, gap, and step were measured to determine the instability of the K-wires. Wire failure was set at ≥5-mm proximal migration of the K-wire. In 23 patients, this wire failure was identified. Of these 23 patients, 20 had their wires positioned intramedullary and 3 transcortical. The intramedullary group had significantly ( Gap failure was set at a gap ≥2 mm between fracture fragments. A gap failure was found in 26 patients. No significant difference was found in gap failures between the intramedullary and transcortical groups. Step failure was set at a step ≥2 mm between fracture fragments. A step failure was found in 9 patients. No significant difference was found in step failures between the intramedullary and transcortical groups. Instability of the wires is determined by a gap failure, step failure, wire failure, or a combination of those failures. Using these criteria, 37 patients demonstrated instability of the K-wires. Of these 37 patients, 29 patients had intramedullary positioned wires and 8 patients transcortical. There was significant ( At early follow-up at 3 months, the average ulnohumeral arc of motion was 116° ± 22°, with an average flexion of 131° ± 11° and an average extension of −15° ± 17°. The average arc of forearm rotation was 156° ± 19°, with an average pronation of 78° ± 4° and an average supination of 78° ± 18°. Fifty-four percent of the patients were complaining about the osteosynthetic material at the 3-month follow-up. In 3 cases, the osteosynthetic material had already been removed at that stage. A final evaluation was performed at an average of 58 months (range, 31-87). Out of the 21 patients included in long-term follow-up, 16 patients showed signs of osteoarthritis according to the Broberg and Morrey Classification. Of these 16 patients, 13 had only minor signs of osteoarthritis (Grade 1). In the other 3 cases, there were signs of severe osteoarthritis (≥ Grade 2). Out of the 21 patients, 10 patients had a wire-failure. Of these 10 patients, 1 patient showed signs of severe osteoarthritis. No significant difference was found in signs of severe osteoarthritis when patients with and without wire failures were compared. Eight patients had a gap failure. Of these 8 patients, 2 patients showed signs of severe osteoarthritis. No significant difference was found in signs of severe osteoarthritis when patients with and without gap failures were compared. Four patients had a step failure. Of these 4 patients, 2 patients showed signs of severe osteoarthritis. When comparing patients with and without a step failure, there is a strong tendency towards more osteoarthritis when a step is present. Fourteen patients sustained instability of K-wires. Of the 14 patients with instability, 3 patients developed osteoarthritis. Of the 7 patients without instability, none developed osteoarthritis. This leads to a tendency towards more osteoarthritis when instability of K-wires is present ( In the 19 patients with a type B fracture according to the AO classification, 2 patients had severe osteoarthritis (≥ Grade 2) (11%). In the 2 patients with a type C fracture, 1 patient had severe osteoarthritis (≥ Grade 2) (50%). There was a strong tendency towards more osteoarthritis in the patients with fracture type C compared to the patients with fracture type B. The average ulnohumeral arc of motion was 128° ± 18°, with an average flexion of 141° ± 10° and an average extension of −14° ± 11°. There was an average improvement of 12° in ulnohumeral arc between early (3 months postoperatively) to late follow-up. The average arc of forearm rotation was 156° ± 15°, with an average pronation of 78° ± 8° and an average supination of 78° ± 12°. The average improvement of forearm rotation was 0°. In 12 (57%) patients, the affected arm was their dominant one. Compared to the unaffected arm, there was still an average restriction of 12° ± 15° ( The average score on the VAS for pain was 1.0 ± 1.8 points. The average score on the MEPS was 93 ± 12 points. The categorical ratings were 15 excellent results, 5 good results, 0 fair results, and 1 poor result. The average score on the DASH questionnaire was 12 ± 16 points. The average EQ-5D Health Index was 0.86 ± 0.19 and the average EQ-5D Health Scale was 77 ± 19. No significant differences were found in VAS, MEPS, DASH, EQ-5D Health Index, and EQ-5D Scale when the 2 groups were compared. Of the 21 patients included in the clinical long-term follow-up and the 11 patients interviewed by telephone, 19 patients (59%) experienced or had experienced problems from their osteosynthetic material. Most patients reported pain or prominence of the wires, which for some patients had led to problems with their job. In 20 (63%) patients, the osteosynthetic material had been removed. In 1 of these 20 cases, the removal of osteosynthetic material was to facilitate a revision surgery. The hardware was replaced with a new hardware. No significant differences were found when the 2 groups were compared. The group of 11 patients interviewed by phone had similar characteristics for time of injury, treatment, VAS score, removal osteosynthetic material, and the severity of fractures as compared to the 21 patients who returned to clinic for the long-term follow-up. While opinions vary as to the most desirable method to treat displaced olecranon fractures, there is no disagreement that a rapid return to stable motion is desirable. Our results, as well as other studies, The most commonly reported complication of the TBW technique was the prominence of the K-wires at the insertion site into the olecranon, leading to pain and, in 1 patient, to skin breakdown. Many authors have addressed this problem after TBW. We found that 3 out of the 14 (21%) patients, where instability of K-wires was identified, developed severe osteoarthritis, as compared to none of the patients with stable K-wires. Although due to the small numbers, this difference could only be classified as a tendency; it highlights that instability needs to be avoided. Transcortical placement of the K-wires seems the best way to do so. Similar to instability of the K-wires, our study and other studies Although transcortical placement of the K-wires, as demonstrated in our study, is the more stable fracture fixation, it poses a risk when the tip of the K-wires protrudes through the anterior ulnar cortex. We did not see complications related to this particular risk, but realize care needs to be taken. No significant differences were found in the long-term functional outcome when the groups were compared. This may be because of the relatively small number of patients in each group. Furthermore, other conditions (eg, shoulder problems) strongly interfere with the MEPS and DASH. The authors agree with Rommens et al, Because this cohort study is partly retrospective, there is a risk of selection bias. For example, fracture fixation was performed according to the preference of the orthopaedic surgeon on call. However, the prospective part makes our study strong, especially because the final evaluation occurred by 1 observer independent of the treating surgeon. Considering the strong tendency towards more osteoarthritis, based on instability of K-wires and the fact that instability of K-wires is more common in the intramedullary technique, we recommend a routine use of the transcortical technique. With the use of this technique, local complications can be minimized and a better long-term outcome regarding to osteoarthritis can be expected. We recommend having a low threshold removing the osteosynthetic material in patients where a limited range of motion is present. In our study, this led to improved functional outcome. None of the authors, their immediate families, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.