Fresh fruits are perishable products that may be exposed to fungal attack easily after harvesting. In this study, efficiency of different vaporized ethyl pyruvate (EP) concentrations [0 (control), 250, 500 or 1000 μL] on preventing/retarding fungal decay and maintenance overall quality of fresh strawberry and cherry packed in close-lid plastic containers was tested during 6 days of storage at 8 °C and 90% relative humidity. Physicochemical, textural and bioactivity of the fruits were also determined. Five hundred microlitres of EP (192 μL/L in air) gave favourable results for retardation of fungal decay and weight loss of the fruits. Ripening of the fruits was slower for the EP treated samples than that of the control, as understood by the total soluble solid levels of the fruits. EP treated fruits maintained their textural properties for longer (P < 0.05) periods than the control sample. Total phenolic contents and DPPH scavenging abilities of the fruits treated with EP were also comparable. In conclusion, this study confirmed that hurdle effect of vaporized EP and cold storage had great potential to retard fungal decay and maintain postharvest quality of perishable fruits such as strawberry and cherry without causing any negative effect on their colour and bioactivity properties affecting consumer preference.Considerable amounts of economic losses occur in the world annually because of decay of cherry and strawberry fruits caused by fungal plant pathogens ( Cherry and strawberry fruits are known as acidic foods with lower pH levels than 4.6 ( Ethyl pyruvate (EP), a stable lipophilic pyruvate derivative, possesses antimicrobial activity against food-borne pathogens in its vapour phase. EP treatment is an emerging non-thermal technology for reducing microbial load on the surface of fresh and processed foods. EP vapours have been demonstrated to reduce/prevent bacterial growth on fresh-cut produce ( Fresh strawberry ( Application of EP to the fresh fruits was performed according to the method described by Fungal decay of the fruits was evaluated visually during the storage period. Fruit samples showing partial or whole surface mycelial development were considered as decayed. Results were calculated as percentage of the decayed fruits. Weight of each container was measured following the EP treatment (day 0) and at the different sampling dates (days 3 and 6). Total weight losses were expressed as percentage loss of the initial weight recorded in the day 0 (n = 5). Prior to examinations, fruits were homogenized at 5000 rpm using a high-shear probe mixer (Ultra-Turrax model T25, IKA-Werke, Steufen, Germany) and cooled to lower temperatures than 25 °C and further agitated for 5 min to remove air bubbles. Physicochemical determinations were carried out using the fruit pulps. pH of the samples was determined using a digital pH meter (Inolab pH 7110, WTW, Weilheim, Germany). Total soluble solid contents (%) were measured using a portable refractometer (RHB-32 model Refractometer, JDSU, CA, USA). To determine the dry matter, the samples were placed in an oven to evaporate the water and weighed. Colourimetric titration method was used to determine acidity of the fruits. Colour measurements were performed using a chromameter (Konica Minolta CR-400, Osaka, Japan). Colour was expressed as Ten grams of the fruit pulp were mixed in 20 mL of methanol-water (80:20 v:v). The mixture was homogenized (Daihan HG-15D, South Korea) at 10.000 rpm for 2 min, shaken for 2 h at room temperature and centrifuged (Hettich Universal 320R, Germany) at 4.500 rpm for 5 min. Then the supernatants were filtered using a 0.45 μm filter. The extract obtained was diluted (1:40) before the analyses. Total phenolic contents (TPCs) of the fruits were determined according to the modified method of Antioxidant activity was measured by determination of DPPH scavenging capacities of the samples based on the method reported by Texture of the fruits was analysed using a TA.HD plus texture analyser (Stable Micro Systems, Godalming, UK) equipped with a 5 kg load cell. Conical probe (P/30 C) was used. Measurements were tried for strawberry using different trigger force levels, probes and strain levels. However, resistance of the strawberry was not enough for applied force due to the fruit softness. Fruit samples were kept at 4 °C for 30 min prior to the analysis since the temperature of the fruits increased during analysis at room temperature. Therefore, in order to eliminate temperature fluctuations directly affecting analysis results due to those factors, the fruits were stored at 4 °C for 30 min. The whole cherry samples were used in textural measurements. Strain level was selected as 20% that was adjusted based on location of the fruit seeds. Pre-test, test and post-test speed was selected as 1.5 mm/s, 1 mm/s and 10 mm/s, respectively. Triplicate samples of each EP concentration were analysed at each treatment time. Windows based S.A.S. 8.2 statistical analysis software (SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina, USA) was employed using two-way analysis of variance. Significant differences between means were verified by Duncan's multiple range at 95% significance level. Fungal decay (%) of the cherry and strawberry fruits treated with EP vapours are exhibited in Fruits such as cherry and strawberry are very susceptible to fungal attacks due to their rich nutrient composition and high moisture content (  Weight loss is mainly interested with moisture and moisture evaporation from the skin of fruits. Therefore, their textural properties play role on weight loss. In this study, vaporized EP was effective for decreasing water loss of all the fruit samples tested. This was also supported by the texture analysis results of the samples. As indicated, EP treatment provided better skin strength properties to the cherry fruit, which enabled it lower loss of weight. Weigh loss of strawberry was higher than that of cherry. The sugar/acid ratio in fruits forms their characteristic flavours. pH values of both control and EP treated cherry and strawberry significantly (P < 0.05) increased throughout the storage ( As indicated in Storage time had a significant (P < 0.05) effect on total soluble solids in EP vapour-treated cherries ( Colour is one of the important factors determining consumer perception when buying fruits. As can be seen in Phenolic contents of the fruits were presented in TPCs of the control and EP treated strawberry samples significantly increased until the 3rd day of the storage. Significant differences were not found in TPCs depending on the EP concentration at the end of the storage (P > 0.05). Significant increase in TPC of the strawberry during storage was also reported by Initial DPPH scavenging capacities of the cherry and strawberry were 49.43% and 29.053%, respectively ( Skin strength and elasticity magnitudes of the cherry fruits are listed in This paper confirmed that application of EP vapours significantly improved postharvest stability of strawberry and cherry fruits. Overall quality of vaporized EP treated fruits was higher than the untreated samples. In general, fruit stability was dependent to treated EP concentration and strawberry was found as more susceptible than cherry against fungal decay. As a conclusion, vaporized EP has the potential to be evaluated as a novel and health-wise harmless agent that can be used in maintaining postharvest stability and quality of fresh cherry fruits.