This study deals with the development of an innovative hydrometallurgical process for zinc recovery from Waelz Oxide, a concentrate of zinc and lead oxides obtained pyrometallurgically from the treatment of EAF dusts.
                  Its main objective is the production of a zinc sulphate liquor to be used as feedstock in electrolytic processes. The process requires different stages to achieve this goal. The first stage consists of a double-sulphuric-acid-leaching, achieving a 88% lixiviation of the zinc present in the Waelz Oxide. After the leaching, to fulfil the strict requirements of an electrolysis feed, some purifying stages, such as oxidation, removing more than the 99% of the iron present in the leach liquor, and cementation to remove cadmium, lead and copper were investigated. Finally, if the concentration of some metallic impurity is above the accepted level for electrolytic processes, an additional purification stage could be considered.
                  Through this process, sulphate zinc liquors with a zinc purity of around 99.75%, containing less than 135ppm of metallic impurities, could be obtained.In 2007, metallic zinc consumption all over the World was around 11.5 In the steel making process, which usually takes place in an electric arc furnace, dusts with a considerable content of zinc, 22–28%, (EAF dusts) are generated ( Due to the considerable content of zinc in the EAF dusts, they are commonly reprocessed to recover zinc. To achieve this, the zinc can be recovered both hydrometallurgically and pyrometallurgically. Even if pyrometallurgical processes present some advantages, nowadays, there are some factors that make hydrometallurgy an interesting way to recover zinc from EAF dusts, such as the following ones: hydrometallurgical processes are less intensive in terms of energy consumption ( Pyrometallurgical processes are classified taking into account the technology used. The main technologies are: plasma technology, converter technology, electric arc technology and Waelz technology (the most common one) ( The product obtained in the Waelz process is known as Waelz Oxide (WO), whose characterization is shown in the corresponding section. This study is based on the zinc recovery from this oxide. Once the Waelz Oxide, or other zinc concentrate, is pyrometallurgically obtained, the zinc is usually recovered throughout electrolytic processes. The utilization of other processes such as the Imperial Smelting Process is almost negligible. In the electrolysis, the final liquor requirements are especially restrictive for chlorine and fluorine concentrations, because their poisoning effect on electrodes ( In recent years hydrometallurgical processes to obtain zinc from EAF dusts have been developed, due to the necessity of reducing gaseous emissions, apart from other advantages of hydrometallurgical processing ( To produce electrolytic metallic zinc, an acid leaching step is required in order to lixiviate the highest possible zinc quantity. Sulphuric or hydrochloric acid liquors can be used in the leaching step. If hydrochloric acid liquors are used, a final ionic exchange step between Cl Once the leaching is finished, the liquor obtained is sent to the purifying stages. The first purifying stage is usually oxidation in order to remove the iron as ferric hydroxide sulphate, Fe(OH)SO All experiments were performed at atmospheric pressure and room temperature. These operation conditions were chosen in order to minimize the costs of a hypothetical industrial application of the process. It is possible that working at higher temperatures the process improves. Even though further studies will be required to investigate if operation at moderate temperatures, higher than room one, could improve the process performance. The leaching stage was studied using a 5 The reactor, stirrer and pH controller systems used in the purifying stages were the same utilized in the leaching stage. In the oxidation stage H In the cementation stage the zinc dust used as cementation agent had a purity of 96%. The filtration step, made after each stage, took place in a pressure filter (Millipore YT30-142HW). The samples obtained during the different process stages were analysed from liquid state in a Perkin Elmer ICP-OES model 2000-DV, so the solid samples must be broken down in an aqua regia – HF solution. All the samples were diluted in order to be in the calibration range. The Waelz Oxide and Double Leached Waelz Oxide are mainly mixtures of zinc, lead, iron and other metal oxides, see  The WO and the zinc oxides obtained by other methods, i.e. the zinc oxide obtained after roasting blend, present similar zinc concentrations. In the case of DLWO this zinc concentration is higher than in other zinc concentrates. The main advantages of using WO or DLWO are: (1) the zinc product is obtained from existing Hazardous and Toxic Wastes (HTWs) as the EAF dusts, not from a mineral, as in the case of roasting blend, and (2) in the case of DLWO chlorine–chloride and fluorine–fluoride concentrations are considerably smaller than in the other materials, i.e. EAF dusts, this is a key point in electrowinning processes because Cl As there are not any studies related to Waelz Oxide lixiviation in sulphuric acid media, some initial studies were carried out in order to determine some basic parameters such as the optimum leaching pH. The pH selection was based on theoretical studies, and the results so obtained were experimentally checked. Through these theoretical idealised studies, the maximum solubility of the zinc compounds present in sulphuric media was estimated. Theoretical results showed that the total leached zinc amount increased when low pHs were used, see Theoretically therefore, a pH as low as technically and economically possible is recommended. Given that it was theoretically zinc leaching would be better at low pH, the optimum pH value was chosen. To select the pH not only the leached zinc percentage was considered, the viability of an industrial application was also taken into account. Two pH values were selected for the initial experiments. The chosen pH values were 2.0 and 3.5. For pH 2.0 the percentage of leached zinc obtained was 82.7%, while for pH 3.5 the zinc recovery was 80.1%. From an industrial point of view, working at pH 3.5 is much easier than at pH 2.0. So, pH 3.5 was chosen as the most adequate pH value for the leaching stage. In this section three different leaching procedures were studied: single step lixiviation, Experimental tests were performed, with a S/L ratio of 75 In order to further optimize the two-step leaching processes, some experiments were performed to set the influence of pH control in the first step on the zinc leaching results. The zinc recovery was improved, keeping the pH constant at a value of 3.5 in both stages, as compared to the case in which pH was kept constant only in the second step, Different S/L ratios were tested at the same leach time and acid strength. Studying the solid/liquid ratio influence on the lixiviation it was observed that for high ratios the percentage of leached zinc was clearly lower than when lower ratios were used, Through XRD, it was observed that the leached zinc percentage was almost the maximum that can be recovered at room temperature, whereas the rest is found in a very stable zinc ferrite structure. Seventy five kilogram per metre cube was the optimum S/L ratio because a lower ratio did not generate better results. But, 150 After studying different lixiviation times for the first and the second stage, it was observed that the zinc leaching was completed after 60 and 30 The liquor obtained in the leaching stage was mainly formed by zinc and some metallic ionic impurities such as cadmium, iron, lead, etc., see Initially, a single cementation step was studied in order to determine if the iron could be removed by cementation or not. As the results showed that it was not possible to remove a significant portion of iron in this way, an oxidation stage was studied for iron removal as ferric hydroxide sulphate (Fe(OH)SO In this context it is important to minimize zinc losses with the precipitate. The first critical parameter studied was the oxidation pH. These studies were carried out using H When sulphuric acid liquors are used as feedstock in electrolysis, sodium ions presence represents serious limitations. When adding NaOH in the oxidation stage to keep the pH constant the acceptable sodium limit was exceeded. To avoid this problem, a combined oxidation, using H The reaction After some preliminary experiments, it was determined that to keep the pH constant at 4.0, 0.4 In the performed experiments it was observed that to maximize the iron elimination, 1.2 For the optimum conditions, the iron removal achieved was higher than 99%, remaining in the liquor around 0.3 The main aim of the cementation step is the removal of the metallic impurities whose reduction potentials are much higher than the zinc one, such as cadmium, copper or lead. Adding different amounts of zinc dust it was observed that the liquor zinc purity increased notably as the added zinc dust amount was higher, Studying different cementation times it was observed that 90 For the optimum conditions, the total impurities concentration that remained in the liquor was around 130 Comparing the final liquor composition with the electrolytic processes requirements, Zinc concentration in the liquor must be between 50 Therefore, providing that the problem related to the cadmium concentration can be resolved, the liquor could be used as feedstock for an electrowinning stage. In this study the recovery of the zinc present in a Waelz Oxide produced from the treatment of EAF dusts by lixiviation with sulphuric acid was investigated in order to produce a leach liquor suitable as feedstock for electrolytic processes. In the process presented in this paper, this lixiviation takes place in two steps, controlling the pH in both, using a 150 To decrease the metallic impurities concentration some purifying stages were used. In this study an oxidation step, using a mixture of H