The Avebury Ni deposit, which has a resource of 260,000 tons of Ni at a grade of 0.9%, is a unique example of a significant Ni sulfide deposit associated with an ophiolite sequence; the deposit is unique because it was formed by hydrothermal processes and also because ophiolites are generally considered unprospective for magmatic Ni sulfide mineralization. The deposit is hosted by Middle Cambrian cumulate peridotite and dunite rocks that were most probably formed from S-poor boninitic magmas. The mineralization, which consists principally of pentlandite, occurs in both serpentinites and skarns in the ultramafic cumulates. The ultramafic rocks are variably metasomatised as the result of the intrusion of the Late Devonian Heemskirk granite. Sulfide-rich and sulfide-poor portions of the ultramafic rocks are variably enriched in W, Bi, U, Pb, Mo, Sn and Sb relative to the primitive mantle. Modest to strong correlations between Cu, Au, Pd, REE, Sn, Mo, W and Ni provide strong evidence that the mineralization is hydrothermal in origin. In situ metasomatism of a magmatic Ni sulfide deposit is ruled out on the basis of poor or negative correlations between Ir, Ru, Rh and Pt when compared to Ni. Although the sulfide-free ultramafic rocks have high Ni contents, this Ni would have been unavailable to the ore-forming fluids as it was hosted in inaccessible sites, such as oxides and silicates. The strong correlations between Au, Pd and Ni suggest that the source of the Ni was magmatic sulfides somewhere at depth that not only have high Ni but also elevated Pd and Au contents.The Avebury nickel deposit, which is situated ~ The driving factor in the formation of the Avebury Ni deposit was probably the intrusion of the Late Devonian Heemskirk granite into the stratigraphic succession containing the Avebury ultramafic body. The “white phase” of the Heemskirk granite is characterized by exceptionally high initial Although the Avebury Ni deposit was originally interpreted to be a hydrothermal Ni deposit (e.g., Major, trace and Platinum Group Elements (PGE) data suggest that the Ni in the Avebury deposit was derived from magmatic sulfides somewhere within the hydrothermal plumbing system that produced the mineralization. The Avebury Ni deposit is located in the 700 Following the deposition of the Crimson Creek Formation and sometime before the Middle Cambrian (515–510 The Heazlewood River Complex is the largest and least dismembered of the Tasmanian mafic–ultramafic complexes that were emplaced during the Middle Cambrian ( The ultramafic complexes, including the Avebury ultramafic, were deformed during the Tabberabban Orogeny at ~ A number of styles of mineralization are associated with the Devonian granitoids including tin–tungsten and lead–zinc–silver ore deposits. Cassiterite occurs within stratabound massive sulfide bodies replacing carbonates of the Oonah Formation (Mt Bischoff, Queen Hill), Success Creek and Crimson Creek Groups (Renison, Montana). Disseminated cassiterite is also associated with greisenized granite in the southern part of the Heemskirk Granite. Skarn tin tungsten deposits occur adjacent to granite bodies (Tenth Legion, St Dizier, Kara), whereas lead–zinc–silver veins occur in haloes around granite bodies ( The Avebury nickel sulfide deposit is located on the western margin of the Late Precambrian to the Early Devonian Dundas Trough on the west coast of Tasmania ( Much of the ultramafic does not outcrop but is located between 50 to 150 The ultramafic rocks are hosted in volcaniclastic sediments of the Late Precambrian or the Early Cambrian Crimson Creek Formation and possibly the Cambrian Lower Dundas Group. The Crimson Creek Formation is a sequence of well bedded feldspar-lithic greywacke with minor pyrrhotitic black shales, siltstones and mudstones ( The ultramafic body at Avebury consists of serpentinized and metasomatized peridotite or dunite cumulates ( The whole sequence was moderately hornfelsed during the intrusion of the Heemskirk biotite–adamellite batholith at the end of the Devonian Tabberabberan Orogeny (354 The North Avebury orebody forms a subvertical to steeply north dipping tabular sheet on the northern perimeter of the thick North Avebury ultramafic intrusive ( The Central Avebury orebody is located on the southern side of the North Avebury ultramafic body ( The Viking orebody is located on the upper margin, and north and south limbs of a thick, semi-concordant ultramafic sill-like body ( Mineralized widths in all orebodies vary from 4 to 40 Mineralization at Avebury was focused along the ultramafic–host sequence contact but lenses of mineralized rock are also present within the ultramafic body. Ore assemblages are associated with two distinct gangue mineralogies, serpentinized ultramafics with minor disseminated chromite and magnetite and intensely metasomatized skarn assemblages dominated by amphibole, clinopyroxene and magnetite. The ore at Avebury consists of veins and coarse-grained disseminations of sulfides that can be hosted by both serpentinized ultramafic rocks and skarn-altered rocks. The sulfide assemblage is dominated by pentlandite with minor pyrrhotite and minor millerite, mackinawite, nickeline, gersdorffite and maucherite. The gangue assemblage is magnetite-rich, with up to 18% magnetite in both serpentinized ultramafics and skarn-type assemblages. The 14 samples used in this study were collected from the ore stockpile at Avebury as it was not possible to collect the samples The PGE data for the Heazlewood River Complex were generated by Radiochemical Neutron Activation Analysis (RNAA) by Twenty samples were prepared as singly polished thin sections for transmitted and reflected light microscopy and electron probe microanalysis (EPMA, The Avebury deposit displays a complex paragenetic sequence of minerals ( The least altered sulfide-poor serpentinites at Avebury preserve igneous textures and are recognizably ultramafic, although very few primary igneous minerals are preserved. Dominantly unmetasomatized ultramafics are fine-grained black serpentinites with minor disseminated chromite and magnetite but no sulfides. These ultramafics preserve evidence of cumulate textures, with serpentinite pseudomorphs after original olivine. The ultramafic units at Avebury also contain patches of talc as small, randomly oriented flakes that occur interstitially between olivine. Igneous chromite is also disseminated throughout the ultramafic rocks as crystals ≥ In places, a localized weakly developed preferred orientation has developed within more fibrous serpentinites, forming a matrix for disseminated anhedral magnetite crystals. No relict textures are preserved in the deformed ultramafics, although rare patches of olivine are present. Irregular flakes of serpentine are intergrown with anhedral grains and aggregates of magnetite. The more altered ultramafics also underwent carbonate development, resulting in a granular carbonate rock with poorly developed banding of finer and coarser carbonate emphasized by fine-grained magnetite. Within the carbonate, fibrous serpentine aggregates are present while talc is disseminated throughout; unlike the carbonate and magnetite, talc does not delineate any bands or have any preferred orientation. Serpentine is present within these carbonate bands as fibrous aggregates. Where the ultramafic is strongly mineralized, the gangue consists of fibrous serpentine in which large sulfide blebs are disseminated; these blebs are generally intergrown with and rimmed by magnetite, especially along cleavage planes ( More metasomatized ultramafics have been converted to pale gray or green rocks which contrast strongly in color with serpentinized but unmetasomatized ultramafics. Skarnification occurred after serpentinization and carbonitization, with locally intense metasomatism forming an amphibole–clinopyroxene dominated skarn assemblage ( Initial metamorphism of serpentinized ultramafics is characterized by an increasing modal abundance of amphibole, whereas more advanced metamorphism produces larger porphyroblastic amphiboles throughout. Amphiboles generally define a weak foliation; rarer fine-grained aggregates of amphibole are also present in these rocks. Amphiboles associated with sulfides have near-identical chemistry to those associated with more widespread alteration, metamorphism and clinopyroxene-dominated skarn formation. Chlorite is present in these units, along with prehnite in patchy and discontinuous veins. Small leucoxene aggregates within non-sulfide amphibole and disseminated magnetite are scattered throughout. Disseminated chromites in these units are angular to anhedral and, as is the case for many of the Avebury samples, are altered to magnetite; most chromites have magnetite rims that are larger than in the less altered ultramafic rocks ( Greater degrees of alteration produced a significant volume of intensely altered skarn dominated by clinopyroxene. The habit of the clinopyroxene varies from anhedral to euhedral although better formed crystals are often associated with voids or vugs. In some samples, coarser clinopyroxene patches occur within fine-grained groundmasses of the same mineral; the opposite, whereby fine-grained patches may occur within a coarser-grained groundmass, was also observed. Clinopyroxene is probably diopside (no EPMA of clinopyroxene was undertaken) and is partly altered to chlorite. Prehnite is also common in some skarns, where it can be more abundant than clinopyroxene, forming matrixes and radiating clusters. Clinopyroxene and opaques such as magnetite are disseminated within larger prehnite crystals and samples with prehnite contain minor disseminations of anhedral titanite (< Biotite and phlogopite mica are present in varying abundances. Biotite formed during alteration of clinopyroxene, potentially as a retrograde reaction, and is commonly associated with voids and with disseminated sulfides. Phlogopite is more common; where present in high proportions it generally fills interstitial gaps between clinopyroxenes and is generally smaller than the surrounding minerals. Some phlogopite also occurs with sulfide blebs. Larger crystals occur around voids; crystals proximal to these voids are larger than typical groundmass crystals. Accessory titanite may also be present in samples with phlogopite as individual grains or aggregates. Both biotite and phlogopite are replaced to varying degrees by chlorite. Rarer silicates present in the skarn include disseminated perovskite within clinopyroxene, and small patches of garnet intergrown with clinopyroxene and accessory opaques. The most altered units appear to have undergone a form of alteration development typical of greisen-textured hydrothermally altered units localized around granitic bodies (e.g., Nickel sulfides at Avebury are largely concentrated within the ultramafic immediately adjacent to its margins, with Ni grades diminishing toward the interior. Most of the sulfides are coarse grained and overprint any foliation. Ore minerals in both serpentinized ultramafic and skarn lithologies are dominated by pentlandite with minor pyrrhotite. Sulfides in the weakly mineralized ultramafic rocks occur as rounded patches intergrown with dunite, and are dominantly pentlandite. Some violarite is also present in these units, and sulfide patches are generally rimmed by magnetite. In the more altered ultramafics, pentlandite is again the dominant sulfide; it is disseminated throughout as small irregular patches. In some samples minor pyrrhotite and traces of sphalerite and chalcopyrite are intergrown with pentlandite-rich sulfide patches. Sulfide abundances are generally low within mineralized ultramafics (~ Skarn-hosted sulfide mineralization is similar in appearance to the mineralization present within the serpentinites, in that large blebs of sulfide appear to have coalesced to form massive to semi-massive sulfides. However, unlike the ultramafics, mineralization hosted by skarn units is much more heterogeneous in terms of the minerals present. While pentlandite is usually dominant and pyrrhotite is usually present, the majority of samples show replacement of pentlandite by violarite and pyrrhotite by pyrite ( Relative to the primitive mantle ( While all of the mineralized samples are enriched in both Cu and Ni relative to both the Avebury and Heazlewood River Complex serpentinites, their maximum Cu content is only 370 There is a strong correlation between the Ir and Ru contents of all Avebury samples, including the mineralized samples ( Three genetic models may be considered for the Avebury Ni deposit, The Avebury Ni deposit is a hydrothermal Ni deposit in which the Ni was sourced from the ultramafic or mafic rocks at depth below the deposit, being liberated from mafic minerals (olivine and orthopyroxene) by fluids associated with the intrusion of the Heemskirk granite. These rocks would have had very low PGE contents, similar to those of the Heazlewood River Complex as well as the boninitic and low-Ti tholeiites that overlie the Heazlewood River Complex. The NiS mineralization represents a very strongly metasomatized magmatic Ni–Cu–PGE sulfide deposit that was altered The Avebury Ni deposit is a hydrothermal Ni deposit for which the Ni was sourced from magmatic Ni–Cu–PGE sulfides in ultramafic or mafic rocks at a depth below the Avebury Ni deposit. Such hydrothermal NiS mineralization would be variably enriched in Pd but not in Ir. The very strong enrichment in all Avebury samples in metals such as Sn, Mo, Zn and W that are often transported in late stage hydrous fluids from granite plutons provides compelling evidence that such fluids were involved in the mineralization process at Avebury. The surprising thing is the very high content of many of these elements, even in sulfide-poor serpentinites that are quite distal to the granite. The mineralized samples at Avebury not only have elevated concentrations of Sn, Mo, Bi, Zn and W, but also other elements such as Nb and Ta as well as all the REE ( The correlations between Ni and elements such as Sn, Mo, and W that are often transported by late stage hydrous fluids produced by granite plutons such as the Heemskirk granite provides compelling evidence that such fluids were involved in the mineralizing process. The broad positive correlations between the REE (e.g., Yb), which in mafic and ultramafic magmas are generally incompatible, and Ni, a compatible element in mafic–ultramafic magmas, also suggest that Ni was introduced by the same fluids that caused skarnification of the serpentinites; a negative correlation between Ni and the REE would typically be expected within mafic–ultramafic igneous systems ( The broad correlation between Ni and Cu ( If the Avebury Ni deposit was a metasomatized Ni–Cu–(PGE) sulfide deposit, it would have PGE levels elevated above those of its original host rocks, as all magmatic Ni–Cu sulfide deposits contain appreciable to very high PGE levels ( This inverse relationship between Ni and Ir, Ru and Rh is very strong evidence that the Avebury Ni sulfide deposit is not a metasomatized magmatic Ni sulfide deposit. The strong correlations between Ir and Ru, as well as their large ranges in concentration, are almost certainly inherited from the pre-serpentinized ultramafic rocks, and are completely independent of the mineralizing process. We suggest that the Ir and Ru were originally incorporated into the Avebury ultramafic rocks as alloys that were unaffected by the metasomatic and mineralizing processes that modified the ultramafic rocks. The Ni liberated during serpentinization of the ultramafic rocks prior to intrusion of the Heemskirt granite is an obvious source for the Ni contained within the Avebury Ni sulfide deposit. Olivine in ultramafic rocks contains appreciable quantities of Ni (1000 to 3000 Although Ni is liberated during serpentinization of olivine, the liberated Ni will enter oxide and silicate phases if the ultramafic rocks are S-poor ( In addition, the sulfide-free ultramafic rocks at Avebury cannot provide the Cu, Pd or Au found in the Avebury sulfides, as sulfide-poor ultramafic rocks have very low Pd, Au and Cu contents. For example, sulfide-poor komatiitic dunites in Western Australia have Pd contents ranging from < The strong correlations of Pd and Au with Ni in the Avebury deposit, together with the elevated Pd (up to 55 It is possible that the magmatic sulfides that were the source of the Ni at Avebury were associated with the Avebury ultramafic, perhaps formed due to interaction of the magmas that produced the ultramafics with S-bearing crustal rocks. Another possible source of the Ni at Avebury is magmatic sulfides hosted in gabbroic sills similar to those at Melba Flats, where semi-massive to massive magmatic sulfides contain appreciable levels of Ni, Cu and the PGE ( It is not known what fraction of the Ni, Cu, Au, Pd and Pt were leached by the ore-forming fluids. This may mean that the magmatic Ni–Cu–(PGE) sulfide residue contains appreciable Ni, Cu, Pd and Pt. On the other hand, all of these metals may have been leached by the hydrothermal fluids but only a very small fraction of the metals in solution deposited along with the Ni. The remaining Cu, Au, Pd and Pt may have been deposited elsewhere, probably somewhere above the Avebury Ni deposit ( The presence of the Crimson Creek Formation above the Avebury deposit may have aided the concentration of mineralization at the top of the ultramafic body rather than the base by acting as an impermeable cap for hydrothermal fluids. This also may indicate why the mineralization at Avebury is found at the top of the ultramafic body (and proximal to the Crimson Creek Formation “cap”) rather than the base. This contrasts with the usual scenario in magmatic settings, where magmatic Ni sulfides are generally found at the base of ultramafic units due to gravitational settling of the denser sulfides. The distinct change in lithology between the ultramafic and skarns and the Crimson Creek Formation may also have induced precipitation of sulfide from the hydrothermal fluids. As described in These textures are also important in terms of determining the likelihood of preservation of Avebury-type mineralization. For example, if skarnification had continued then the majority of sulfides could have been destroyed. This suggests that areas within the contact aureole of granite intrusives, but not immediately adjacent to the granite, may be prospective for this type of hydrothermal Ni mineralization. The Avebury ore bodies may also represent the maximum distance from the Heemskirk granite that hydrothermal Ni mineralization can be found. This intense skarnification and potential loss of sulfide in the most skarn-altered samples may represent the reactions at depth or closer to the granite that originally mobilized magmatic sulfides and formed the deposit itself. The Avebury Ni deposit is a unique example of an economic hydrothermal Ni deposit of significant grade and tonnage that is hosted by the Middle Cambrian ultramafic peridotite and dunite cumulates within volcaniclastic sediments of the Early Cambrian Crimson Creek formation. The ultramafic rocks were variably metasomatized during intrusion of the Heemskirk granite, forming talc–serpentinite and clinopyroxene–amphibole skarn units, both of which may host ore grade nickel sulfide mineralization. Progressive alteration caused the disruption of pre-existing sulfides by amphibole growth at Avebury, indicating that some Ni sulfide mineralization was present before the onset of the most intense skarnification. The broad correlations between the concentrations of Ni, Cu, Au, and Pd and elements such as Zn, Mo, and W that are not generally associated with mafic–ultramafic rocks but are often transported by late stage hydrous fluids produced by granite plutons provide very strong evidence that the Avebury Ni sulfide deposit is hydrothermal in origin. While alteration of sulfide-free ultramafic rocks at depth is a possible source for the Ni at Avebury that was originally hosted by olivine or pyroxene and subsequently altered and metasomatized, these rocks cannot provide the Cu, Pd or Au found in the Avebury Ni sulfides; sulfide-free ultramafics generally have low to very low concentrations of these elements, as evidenced by similar, but unaltered, rocks within the Heazlewood River Complex. Hence, the Ni, Au and Pd in the Avebury deposit must have been sourced from magmatic sulfides that lay at a depth below the deposit. It is not known if these magmatic sulfides were massive, semi-massive or disseminated. It is highly probable, however, that only a small fraction of the Ni in those magmatic sulfides was leached by the ore forming fluids. The negative or absent correlations between Pt, Ir, Ru and Rh with Ni at Avebury suggest that these elements were not transported by these hydrothermal fluids and the concentrations of these elements were those in the original ultramafics prior to alteration; Ir, Ru and Rh were most likely present as alloys unaffected by alteration. Furthermore, the inverse relationship between Ni and Ir, Ru and Rh strongly suggests that the Avebury Ni sulfide deposit is not a metasomatized magmatic Ni sulfide deposit and that Ni has been added to these rocks. The results of this study suggest that the intrusion of granitic bodies into ultramafic rocks may only generate significant levels of hydrothermal Ni mineralization if existing magmatic Ni–Cu sulfides are encountered by the fluids in the convection cell created by the heat of the intruding granitic body. The authors wish to thank Murray Hitzman and two anonymous reviewers for their useful comments on the manuscript and Ignacio González-Álvarez for his editorial assistance. RRK thanks Tim Callaghan for assistance with a visit to Avebury as well as providing geological background.