A high performance anionic flocculant was synthesized by partial alkaline hydrolysis of polyacrylamide grafted tamarind kernel polysaccharide. Various macromolecular characterizations were employed to confirm that partial alkaline hydrolysis of grafted polyacrylamide chains does take place. The flocculation characteristics of the hydrolyzed and unhydrolyzed grafted products were carried out in kaolin suspension and municipal sewage wastewater and it has been found that hydrolyzed product outperforms the unhydrolyzed grafted TKP.Over recent years, scarcity of potable water is a vast problem, which necessitates the recycling of municipal wastewater and industrial effluents. Flocculation ( Recently water-soluble polymers of high molecular weight have drawn much attention because of their various practical applications. An extensive research work has been carried out on synthesized graft copolymers of polyacrylamide and polysaccharides to improve their properties ( In our previous investigation ( Polyacrylamide grafted tamarind kernel polysaccharide (TKP-g-PAM) was used as synthesized in our laboratory ( Partial alkaline hydrolysis of the best performing TKP-g-PAM ( One gram of the graft copolymer was dissolved in 100 Neutralization equivalent (NE) is the equivalent weight of acid which is being determined by titration with a standard base. Neutralization equivalent of an acid has been determined as reported earlier ( Intrinsic viscosities of polymer solutions were determined using an Ubbelohde viscometer with capillary diameter of 0.80 The elemental analysis of TKP-g-PAM and Hyd. TKP-g-PAM 2 was undertaken with an Elemental Analyzer (Make – M/s Elementar, Germany; Model – Vario EL III). The FTIR spectra of TKP-g-PAM and Hyd. TKP-g-PAM 2 were recorded in solid state using KBr pellets with a FTIR spectrophotometer (Model IR-Prestige 21, Shimadzu Corporation, Japan) between 400 and 4000 The thermal analysis of TKP, TKP-g-PAM and Hyd. TKP-g-PAM 2 was carried out with TA Instruments, USA (Model – Q10). Thermo gravimetric analysis was performed in an inert atmosphere of nitrogen. The heating rate was uniform in all cases (5 The flocculation efficiency of different polymer samples was measured using standard Jar Test Method ( The efficiency of the hydrolyzed TKP-g-PAM as flocculant for the treatment of municipal sewage wastewater was investigated. The experiment was carried out in four sets. In the 1st SET (SET 1) (control set), 500 The aim of the hydrolysis reaction of TKP-g-PAM was to straighten and expands the flexible polyacrylamide chains. As a result of hydrolysis, the –CONH Intrinsic viscosity results ( As on hydrolysis, some –CONH By comparing the FTIR spectra of TKP-g-PAM and Hyd. TKP-g-PAM ( Thermogravimetric analysis ( The flocculation characteristics of various grades of hydrolyzed products in kaolin suspension are shown in It is well known that municipal sewage wastewater constitutes an important part of the total wastewater from various sources. Flocculation is an essential phenomenon for purification of municipal sewage wastewater for its reuse, since flocculant decreases the total pollutant content from the wastewater. It can be seen that ( A new generation of polymeric flocculant has been developed in the authors’ laboratory based on hydrolyzed polyacrylamide grafted tamarind kernel polysaccharide. By hydrolyzing the grafted TKP to a certain extent, it is possible to enhance the flocculation capabilities of the virgin polymer. The authors acknowledge the financial support from Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 