The sorption of Cd(II) and Pb(II) from aqueous solutions by a low-cost sorbent (leonardite) was investigated. The effect of pH, contact time and initial metal concentration was studied. The sorption of the two metals was pH dependant, the optimum range being 5–6. Batch kinetic studies showed that equilibrium was reached after 2h. The sorption data were correlated with the Langmuir and Freundlich adsorption models. The maximum adsorption capacities obtained from the Langmuir isotherms were 0.45mmolg−1 (50.6mgg−1) and 1.21mmolg−1 (250.7mgg−1) for Cd(II) and Pb(II), respectively.
                  An extensive study of the competitive adsorption between both metals was performed under the same conditions of the individual experiments. The extended Langmuir model was used to fit the experimental data to a series of 3D response surfaces. For binary systems, the maximum adsorption capacities of Cd(II) and Pb(II) were calculated as 0.27mmolg−1 (30.6mgg−1) and 0.57mmolg−1 (118.7mgg−1), respectively. Cd(II) adsorption was found to be more sensitive than Pb(II) to the presence of a competitive sorbate.Environmental pollution by heavy metals is a serious and complex problem that has been, and still is, a focus of attention all over the world. Heavy metals are among the chief pollutants of surface and groundwater. Industrial and municipal wastewater frequently contains metal ions that can be harmful to aquatic life and human health. Cd(II) can be present in wastewater from metallurgical alloying, electroplating, photography, pigmenting, textile printing, chemical industries and lead mine drainage. Pb(II) is present in wastewater from storage battery manufacture, drainage from lead ore mines, paint manufacture, munitions manufacture, and petroleum refining. Cd(II) and Pb(II) are some of the most toxic metals to man Conventional methods for the removal of metal ions from wastewater include precipitation (using lime and caustic soda), alum and iron coagulation, ion exchange and adsorption on activated carbon The use of modified activated carbons and coal-based sorbents has been the subject of several research works Leonardite is a low-rank coal with significant amounts of humic materials, mainly humic acids. Humic materials are complex organic molecules that contain a wide variety of functional groups (carboxyl, hydroxyl and carbonyl) that can be involved in chemical binding. Moreover, because of these properties, leonardite tends to have a high cation exchange capacity. The low-cost and the availability of this material make it a promising candidate for pollution remediation in both soils and groundwater. Preliminary investigations on the capacity of leonardite to retain metal ions from aqueous solution have been previously reported The leonardite used as adsorbent in this study was supplied by Sociedad Española de Acidos Húmicos, S.A. (SEPHU All reagents used were AR grade. Metal stock solutions of 1000 Determination of Cd(II) and Pb(II) in the initial and remaining solutions was carried out by atomic adsorption spectrophotometry (AAS), using a Varian AA-1275 spectrophotometer, at the following instrumental working condition: acetylene fuel for both metals, current lamp (mA) 10 for Pb and 4 for cadmium, wavelength (nm) 283.3 for Pb and 228.8 for Cd and monoelement Pb and Cd Hollow cathode lamp (Varian Techtrom). All experiments were performed in triplicate. The repeatability of the determinations was <5% of the variation coefficient. The limit of detection was 0.001 The initial pH of Cd(II) and Pb(II) solutions (5 The solutions were agitated constantly in a Jar-test apparatus (ISCO, m JF/6) at 110 Batch experiments were conducted to determine the time needed to reach equilibrium. A 1 Different metal/leonardite mass ratios were prepared in glass flasks to determine the adsorption capacity of leonardite. These experiments were carried out with aqueous solutions of Cd(II) (concentrations between 1 and 500 In binary metal mixtures systems, the values of initial concentrations used for both metal ions were: 0.0314, 0.0786, 0.157, 0.393, 0.786, 1.570 and 3.930 The sorption of Cd(II) and Pb(II) ions on leonardite was studied over the pH range 2–6. In aqueous solutions, Cd(II) and Pb(II) may exist in different chemical species. In this way, according to the distribution of ionic species obtained from the computer program SOL 1  The effect of contact time on Cd(II) and Pb(II) removal was investigated using initial Cd concentrations of 1, 2 and 5  The specific metal uptake was obtained from a mass balance for the aqueous phase, using the following equation:  The Langmuir and Freundlich models, applicable to aqueous solutions adsorption processes, were used to determine the adsorption capacity of leonardite. The equations used were: From the Langmuir equation, the adsorption capacity for Cd(II) and Pb(II) were 0.45  Simultaneous removal of Pb(II) and Cd(II) was investigated at the conditions described in the experimental section. Since the number of initial concentration combinations was considerably large, it would be tedious to show the experimental results individually. For this reason, and according to the results of the individual metals studies, the experimental specific uptake results were fitted to the extended Langmuir equation. Other isotherm equations like Redlich–Peterson, were discarded due to the increase of adjusting parameters involved in its use. The expressions used were Two different commercial software packages were used for the parameter evaluation. Firstly, the Microsoft EXCEL Solver which uses a generalized reduced gradient method was used. Although the algorithm converged very fast, the results were strongly influenced by local minimum values. Finally, the nonlinear regressions were performed with MATLAB software. This package uses nonlinear least-squares data fitting by the Gauss–Newton method, which converged quickly and gave the best results. In order to show in the proper way the experimental results, several 3D surfaces have been drawn For the single ion situation, the maximum uptake obtained was found to be 1.21 Regarding to the parameter Even though the leonardite tested is more efficient for the removal of Pb(II) than Cd(II) (in a molar basis), the amounts of sorbate adsorbed per unit mass of sorbent are quite good for both heavy metals, with total values greater than 0.5 In order to assess the buoyancy of the equilibrium data predictions, the experimental data were plotted against the calculated data (see In this study, leonardite exhibited good potential as an alternative material for the removal of Cd(II) and Pb(II) from aqueous solutions. The removal of Pb is greater than that of Cd(II). Sorption of Cd(II) and Pb(II) is pH dependent, and the best results were obtained in the pH range 5–6. Kinetic tests were performed, showing a strong influence of the initial metal ion concentration. The adsorption data were better fitted to the Langmuir model than to the Freundlich isotherm. The maximum adsorption capacity was 50.6 Low-cost, availability and high metal uptake levels for Cd(II) and Pb(II) both individually and in competition, make leonardite a promising material for metal contaminated wastewater treatment.