This paper presents new empirical models for prediction of the mechanical properties of recycled aggregate concrete (RAC) using gene expression programming (GEP) technique. A large and reliable test database containing the results of 650 compressive strength, 421 elastic modulus, 346 splitting tensile strength, and 152 flexural strength, tests of RACs containing no pozzolanic admixtures is collated through an extensive review of the literature. The performance of existing mechanical property models of RACs is then assessed using the database, and the results of this assessment are presented using selected statistical indicators. New expressions for the predictions of 28-day compressive strength, elastic modulus, flexural strength, and splitting tensile strength of RACs are developed based on the database. The assessment results indicate that the predictions of the proposed models are in close agreement with the test results, and the new models provide improved estimates of the mechanical properties of RACs compared to the existing models.Rapid industrial and population growths have resulted in the increased rate of demolition of old structures in order to obtain new construction sites. Generation and disposal of the huge amount of construction and demolition waste in the landfills caused environmental problems by depleting the landfill areas The compressive strength, elastic modulus, flexural strength, and splitting tensile strength are the key material properties for the analysis and design of concrete structures. A comprehensive review of the existing studies on RAC has shown that a number of models have been reported in the literature to predict these mechanical properties for RAC Recent technological progress in artificial intelligence techniques has generated accurate and reliable computer-aided modeling procedures for structural engineering problems Pattern recognition of the computational intelligence methods plays a significant role in the application of them in the engineering applications. Most of the existing computational intelligence methods (e.g. ANN and support vector regression) are capable of providing complex pattern recognition through black-box models. However, the structure of these methods needs to be predefined by a base form, which requires extensive memory size In this study, empirical models are proposed using GEP technique to predict 28-day compressive strength, elastic modulus, flexural strength, and splitting tensile strength of RAC. In addition, 34 existing mechanical properties models of RAC collected from 21 published studies are reviewed and assessed through statistical analysis using a reliable and comprehensive database containing samples with a wide range of mixture proportions. The RAC database in The database shown in Three types of specimens were used in obtaining the mechanical properties in It should be noted that, as marked in  Gene expression programming (GEP) was developed by Ferreira  To increase the accuracy of the developed models, the experimental database was randomly separated into three different subsets of learning, validation, and testing. In this division, the learning data were used for the genetic development, the validation data for the final model selection, and the testing data for the determination of the accuracy of the GEP models in regard to the data that do not play any role in the structure of the models. The final models are selected using an objective function (OBJ) based on the best performance of both learning and validation data sets. The objective function, defined as Eq. In order to obtain the relationships between mechanical properties of RAC and the influential parameters with improved accuracy, the specimens in the database were closely studied and the main factors affecting the mechanical properties of RACs were determined. To evaluate the contribution of each input parameter on the mechanical properties, sensitivity analysis (SA) was performed through the determination of frequency values of the input parameters. The percentage of contribution of each input parameter is calculated using Eqs. Consequently, the compressive strength ( Based on Eq. The performance of existing compressive strength models was assessed using the database to evaluate the accuracy and relative performance of the models. Based on the available input parameters in the database, only three compressive strength models, i.e. Xiao et al. In this study, two compressive strength models were developed; one to predict the cube strength (  As can be seen in  The following expression is proposed to predict the flexural strength (  The following expression is proposed to predict the splitting tensile strength (  In order to further validate the proposed models, parametric analyses are performed for the proposed expressions based on the input parameters. The methodology is based on studying the variation of the model predictions with the change in a single input parameter, while the other variables are kept constant at the database average    A review of the existing design codes and standards This paper has presented new models developed using GEP technique to predict the compressive strength, elastic modulus, flexural strength, and splitting tensile strength of recycled aggregate concrete. A comprehensive database containing results of 650 compressive strength, 421 elastic modulus, 346 splitting tensile strength, and 152 flexural strength, tests of RACs reported in 69 studies and covering a wide range of parameters was assembled through an extensive review of the literature. The database was used to assess the performance of 34 existing mechanical property models of RAC reported in 21 studies. The following are the main observations and conclusions resulting from this analytical study: The results of the parametric and sensitivity analyses on the database show that The proposed models provide simple formulations by accurately establishing relative contributions of the most influential parameters while also being applicable to a larger number of datasets than the existing models. The comparison of the proposed models with the existing code expressions shows that the trends of the proposed models are in agreement with the overall trend of the existing code expressions when applied to NAC (i.e. The assessment results show that the proposed models provide accurate predictions of the compressive strength, elastic modulus, flexural strength, and splitting tensile strength of RAC, making them suitable for use in the pre-design of RACs. The authors thank Mr Tianyu Xie for his assistance in the preparation of the test database supplied in the appendix. 