The photocatalyzed degradation and mineralization of the linear carboxylic acid C1–C5 series (namely, formic acid, acetic acid, propanoic acid, butanoic acid, and valeric acid) were examined in UV-irradiated air-equilibrated aqueous TiO2 dispersions: (a) to assess the extent of (dark) adsorption and photoadsorption; (b) to determine their relationship with degradation; (c) to elucidate the dynamics of the degradative and mineralization processes (as loss of total organic carbon); (d) to identify intermediates by liquid chromatography (HPLC), gas chromatography (GC–FID) and gas chromatography coupled to a mass detector (GC–MS), and (e) to determine the quantum yields of degradation of this linear acid series based on formic acid (Φ = 0.12 ± 0.02) as a secondary actinometer proposed for aliphatic substrates. At low catalyst loading (2.0g/L) and except for formic acid, adsorption of the other four C2–C5 acids increased with chain length, although the overall level was rather small, contrary to high catalyst loading (20g/L) where all four C2–C5 acids adsorbed to nearly the same extent (15–19%) with adsorption of formic acid on TiO2 being two-fold greater (34%). The dynamics of degradation and mineralization decreased with increase in chain length, i.e. formic acid degraded and mineralized faster than its longer chain congeners. Several intermediates were identified in the degradation of the C3–C5 acids; in particular, 21 species were positively identified in the degradation of valeric acid by the techniques used. On the basis of partial charges and frontier electron densities of all atoms of the carboxylic acids, together with known species formed a route is proposed for valeric acid degradation. The quantum yields of degradation for the C2–C5 acid series increased with chain length from Φ = 0.010 for acetic acid to Φ = 0.067 for valeric acid.Aliphatic carboxylic acids perform a diverse range of industrial functions. Some occur naturally serving an important function in nutrition (e.g. acetic acid), whereas many others are intermediates in normal biochemical processes If the TiO Germane to the present study, Guillard Linear C1–C5 carboxylic acids were examined in this study. The corresponding branched isomers (e.g.: 2-methylpropanoic acid) will be reported elsewhere Chemicals were obtained from Aldrich and used as received: formic acid, glacial acetic acid, propanoic acid, butanoic acid (BA), valeric acid (VA), and acrylic acid. TiO Reactor-1 was a double-walled Pyrex reactor (ca. 60 Determination of photonic efficiencies and quantum yields used a Bausch & Lomb 0.25 Liquid chromatographic (HPLC) analyses were carried out using a Waters 501 isocratic pump mounted with a 20 In a typical experiment, a carboxylic acid solution was prepared at a concentration of 9.79 × 10 A 50.0 A dispersion of 25.0 The other four C1–C4 acids were treated in a similar manner collecting one sample after the 60 Fifty milliliters of a 2.0 × 10 TOC analyses were performed concurrently with HPLC measurements to determine the rates of disappearance of pollutants and loss of TOC. The Shimadzu TOC-500 analyzer range was set at 10 and the flow rate was 150 In a typical experiment (constant temperature, 20 Aliquots (1.0 The degraded acid sample was filtered and subsequently a small volume of an aqueous solution of a suspected intermediate was added to the filtrate and analyzed by the HPLC technique. In essence, the co-elution method consisted of: (1) obtaining a chromatogram of the irradiated solution of a given acid; (2) spiking an aliquot of the irradiated acid solution with a pure sample of a suspected potential intermediate; and (3) determining peak overlap between the spiked sample and the irradiated acid. Peak overlap provided positive identification. A solution (50.0 In a typical experiment, one drop of a pure acid (ca. 13 The efficiency of the derivatization procedure was validated with a simulated sample. Thus, 60.0 The relative retention times of all acids were determined against valeric acid and then compared to those obtained for the peaks of a chromatogram for an irradiated valeric acid solution analyzed under the same conditions to identify (some) unknown intermediates. The latter chromatogram was also compared to that of a blank. Sample preparation was: 400 A solution (400 The extra peaks found in the chromatogram of the irradiated sample that did not appear in the chromatogram of the blank were used for identification of intermediates with a mass spectral library. The validity of this methodology for valeric acid was ascertained from retention times and on the basis of molecular weights of the expected intermediates. Partial charges and frontier electron densities of all atoms of the linear aliphatic acid series were calculated using the MOPAC/AM1 wavefunction. The computer simulations were carried out using the CAChe Worksystem version 5.04 (Fujitsu Co. Ltd.) implemented on an Intel Pentium-IV and Windows XP system. A geometrical configuration was determined by pre-optimization calculation in Mechanics using augmented MM3, followed by geometrically optimized calculations in MOPAC using AM1 parameters. Solvation effects in water were simulated using COSMO also available in the CAChe package. Fifty milliliters of a 3.92 × 10  Adsorption increases with chain length of the acid ( Unlike the data at the lower catalyst loading ( The adsorption equilibrium constant in the dark ( Illumination of TiO When surface changes are significant, a noticeable difference can occur in the adsorption/desorption equilibria in the absence and presence of UV illumination. The adsorption/desorption equilibrium constant under illumination was determined kinetically from a plot of 1/ The temporal degradation of formic acid tended to exhibit zero-order kinetics across the concentration range 4.90–58.7 × 10 The adsorption equilibrium constants Factors that influence the rate of degradation of organic compounds on titanium dioxide include but are not limited to: catalyst load, solute concentration, oxygen concentration, extent of adsorption, pH, photon flow, temperature, presence of inorganic ions, presence of added oxidants, and not least reactor design. Most can be controlled so that observed trends can be rationalized. Herein, catalyst load, solute concentration, photon flow, medium temperature and reactor design were kept constant. No inorganic ions and no oxidants other than O The temporal degradation of the linear C1−C5 series of carboxylic acids was monitored by HPLC. The absence of a peak of the acid in the chromatograms inferred successful degradation. The chromatogram for formic acid taken after 30 This unidentified intermediate from propanoic acid may be: (a) smaller than a C3 organic acid (e.g. AA); (b) an oxidized derivative of propanoic acid {e.g. 2-HPA acid (CH Although the HPLC chromatographic patterns can be rationalized on the basis of existing data, the key issue, however, is that while the C1−C5 acids are completely degraded when exposed to UV irradiation in aqueous TiO The TOC content decreased with time indicating that the C1−C5 acids are mineralized to H The temporal course of the degradation of the C1−C5 linear carboxylic acids (initial concentration, 2.0 × 10 Except for acetic acid, which was more refractory to oxidation than propanoic acid, a decreasing trend was seen in the rate of degradation with increasing chain length. Various factors can impact on the dynamics of the process occurring on TiO The dark adsorption data ( Changes in oxidative power of the valence band (VB) of UV-irradiated TiO The temporal decrease of TOC for the five acids under consideration is shown in The overall trend in the rates of TOC loss appears at variance with that observed for the rates of acid degradation (HPLC data). Formic acid displayed the highest rates of TOC loss and degradation. Unlike the rates of acid disappearance, however, which decreased with increasing chain length, the rates of TOC loss showed no particular trend. For example, there is little difference between butanoic acid and valeric acid. The rate of degradation of acetic acid was slightly greater than those of butanoic acid and valeric acid (  TOC loss reflects a sum of exponential decays to which only the slower decay contributes most significantly Hydrogen atoms on the α-carbon of the acids are the most labile hydrogens so that the α-carbon should be the preferred site for H-atom abstraction by The results were somewhat deceiving with respect to the above expectations except for 2-hydroxybutanoic acid identified as an intermediate of valeric acid degradation together with AA, PA, BA, and acrylic acid (HPLC co-elution method). Acetic acid was also an intermediate in the degradation of propanoic acid. In no other cases were α-hydroxy acids or α-keto acids identified as intermediates by the co-elution method (but see below). However, since the rates of degradation of α-hydroxy and α-keto acids tend to be five-fold faster than those of the parent substrate Intermediates from valeric acid degradation were investigated further by GC–FID for confirmatory evidence. The intermediates in the degraded solution were extracted from aqueous media using diethyl ether, derivatized (carboxylic acids do not elute well on a GC column) and analyzed by gas chromatography. Both 2-oxovaleric acid (2-KVA), and 2-hydroxyvaleric acid (2-HVA) were included in this study to assess whether α-hydroxy and α-keto species were primary intermediates in the degradation of aliphatic linear acids. Valeric and butanoic acids were completely recovered from the aqueous sample after three extractions; recovery of 2-oxovaleric acid and 2-hydroxyvaleric acid was 87 and 62%, respectively. All four derivatized acids (VA, BA, 2-HVA and 2-KVA) were detected with appreciable signal intensities. Comparison of the chromatograms of the blank and the derivatized irradiated solution showed four peaks at shorter retention times than valeric acid, and 13 other peaks at longer retention times. With the type of column used (polysiloxane DB-5, 5% phenyl: 95% methyl), the elution order was expected to scale with the molecular weights of the species. Except for acrylic acid, retention times of the linear acids followed the order: AA < PA < BA < VA, paralleling the molecular weights of the derivatized forms (133, 146, 160, and 174 Combining the results from the HPLC and GC–FID analyses shows that the HPLC technique identified five valeric acid intermediates (AA, PA, BA, 2-HBA, and acrylic acid), whereas four valeric acid intermediates (PA, BA, 2-HBA, and 2-KBA) were identified by GC–FID. Three were simultaneously identified by the two methods (PA, BA, and 2-HBA). Clearly, an α-hydroxyacid (2-HBA) was formally identified, indicating the occurrence of hydroxylation at the α-carbon. Sample handling for GC–MS analyses was identical to that used for GC–FID, except that the extraction was carried out on the whole 400 Species identified by the GC–MS methodology are summarized in   The frontier electron density on the α-carbon atoms of the C4 and C5 linear acids (i.e. the C On the basis of the above evidence, Hydroxylation on the C Shorter chain length acids also formed in the degradation of valeric acid: butanoic acid ( The demonstration that the rate at which The alkylated compounds 2-methylbutanoic acid {( Formic acid was chosen as the standard molecule (secondary actinometer) with which to compare process efficiencies of other aliphatics because results of the TiO The quantum yield ( The rate of degradation of formic acid reached a plateau at ca. 2.0 × 10 Acetic acid, propanoic acid, butanoic acid, valeric acid, and 2-methylbutanoic acid were degraded under otherwise identical conditions to those of formic acid. The relative photonic efficiencies and the quantum yields of degradation of these acids are listed in In summary, the extent of dark adsorption of formic acid (34%) was two-old greater than for the other C2–C5 acids (15–19%) under otherwise identical experimental conditions (high TiO The intermediates 2-HVA and 2-KVA were not detected in the degradation of valeric acid. However, identification of 2-hydroxybutanoic acid and 1-propene-1,3-dicarboxylic acid indicates that hydroxylation can take place on the α-carbon of these acids. Failure to detect 2-HVA and 2-KVA is likely the result of the ease with which these species are further oxidized (by Finally, not all the compounds that formed during the photocatalytic degradation of valeric acid could be identified. The pathway leading to the degradation of a fairly simple compound such as valeric acid is rather complex yielding a broad spectrum of intermediates. The quantum yield of degradation of formic acid has been determined and is proposed as a means to determine the quantum yields of similar processes for several other aliphatics, in the same manner as phenol was proposed for aromatics This study was supported in part by a grant from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (to N.S.) and in part from the Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’Università e della Ricerca (MIUR-Rome, Italy; to N.S.). Work carried out in Tokyo was sponsored by the Japanese Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Sciences and Technology (to H.H.).