Lithium recovery from salt lake brine with a high magnesium/lithium concentration ratio from Qinghai province, China, was investigated. Li+ extraction was performed using tributyl phosphate in methyl isobutyl ketone as the extractant and FeCl3 as the coextractant. An extraction mechanism, based on cation exchange of Li+ and Mg2+ with H+ and Na+, was proposed. Boron exists as B(OH)4
                     − in salt lake brine and is extracted into organic phase as boric acid. B(OH)4
                     − in salt lake brine can strip H+ from the regenerated organic phase; this results in extraction of larger amounts of Li+ and Mg2+ because of electroneutrality. Based on cation exchange mechanism and neutralization of B(OH)4
                     − with H+, the extraction behaviors of Li+ and Mg2+ from salt lake brine are successfully predicted. An experiment using a five-stage mixer-settler with countercurrent flow was conducted. The results showed that B(OH)4
                     − largely favors lithium extraction from salt lake brine.Lithium is the lightest solid element, and it has important applications in lithium-ion batteries ( Recent research on the recovery of lithium from salt lake brines with high magnesium concentrations has focused on extraction ( In addition to lithium and magnesium, the treated salt lake brines may contain significant concentrations of potassium, sodium, and boron. Zhou et al. compared the competitive sequences for several cations using TBP/FeCl Typically boron is first removed from salt lake brine before lithium recovery. And the effect of boron on lithium extraction has not been reported. Gao et al. found that boron exists as borate anions in salt lake brine, and the form of the borate anion depends on the pH and the boron concentration ( In this study, the extraction of lithium from salt lake brine was investigated. By comparing extraction properties of salt lake brine with that of simulated brine, the effects of borate anion and other metal cations, i.e., Ca The following analytical reagents were used: LiCl (purity > All extraction experiments were conducted in 50 The regenerated organic phase was prepared by three steps: extraction, stripping and regeneration. In extraction step, 40% TBP/MIBK was equilibrated with equal volume aqueous phase containing 0.05 The effect of borate anions was investigated using simulated brine with or without borate anions, with the same concentrations of lithium and magnesium to the salt lake brine. An MSU-0,5 laboratory mixer-settler unit (MEAB Metallextraktion AB) was used to extract lithium from the salt lake brine and simulated brine using TBP/FeCl The cation concentrations in the aqueous samples were determined using optical atomic absorption spectrometry (Z-5000-AAS, Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan). The anion concentrations in the aqueous samples were determined using ion chromatography (ICS-1100, Dionexi). The cation concentration loaded in the organic phase was determined by washing the organic phase with an equal volume of distilled water to remove all cations, and then the concentrations of Li The boron concentration in the aqueous phase was determined using inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (IRIS Intrepid II XSP, Thermo Fisher, USA). The H Extraction of brine was carried out using the organic phase (40% TBP/MIBK, 0.1 The extraction mechanism for the simulated brine consisting of MgCl  Ca Weak hydrogen bonds are formed between The acid volume–pH titration curves for salt lake brine (60 The difference between the titration curve for salt lake brine and that for the simulated brine consisting of LiCl The molar ratio of HCl to B The initial pH of the simulated brine consisting of MgCl To determine whether boron is extracted as boric acid or borate ions, 40% TBP/MIBK (by volume) without FeCl In this system, boric acid is extracted by the weak hydrogen bond formed between It can be seen that TBP has much larger extractability to B(OH) According to There is another mechanism that can explain the difference between the extraction properties of salt lake brine and simulated brine: borate anions in salt lake brine can neutralize H By combining The equilibrium properties of salt lake brine can be determined based on The concentration distributions of H In the extraction process, the extractions of Li  The effects of borate anions on the lithium/magnesium separation factor,  A five-stage mixer-settler with countercurrent flow was used to further evaluate the effect of borate anions on the extraction behavior of salt lake brine. The separation of Li This work was supported by the