Objective
                  In recent years, delivery of cost-effective “essential neurosurgery” in resource-limited communities has been recognized as an indispensable part of health care and a global health priority. The aim of this study was to review outcomes from operative management of spine trauma at a resource-limited government hospital in Phnom Penh, Cambodia, and to provide an epidemiologic report to guide prevention programs.
               
                  Methods
                  A retrospective review of a prospective neurosurgical database was performed to identify risk factors for spine trauma and severe spinal cord injury (American Spinal Injury Association A or American Spinal Injury Association B) and to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of surgery for patients treated at Preah Kossamak Hospital for subaxial and thoracolumbar spine trauma from 2013 to 2016.
               
                  Results
                  Surgical treatment was provided to 277 patients with cervical or thoracolumbar spine trauma, including 36 facet dislocations and 135 thoracolumbar burst fractures at a cost of $100–$280 per surgery. Six patients (2.2%) required treatment for postoperative wound infection. Reoperation was performed in 8 patients (2.9%) for wrong-level surgery. Failure of short-segment pedicle screw fixation was discovered in 4 patients (7.0%). Neurologic improvement was reported by 64 patients (65.3%) with incomplete spinal cord injury and available long-term follow-up.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Affordable neurosurgical care can be provided in a safe and sustainable manner to patients with traumatic spine and spinal cord injuries in resource-limited communities. This supports the call for essential neurosurgery to be made available around the world to individuals from all socioeconomic strata.Spine trauma can result in devastating consequences for medical, social, emotional, and financial well-being, which are often more significant than consequences of other traumatic injuries. Following a vicious civil war and genocide that targeted the professional class in the late 1970s, killing a majority of the country's physicians, Cambodia is now rapidly developing and has recently been classified as a lower-middle-income economy by the World Bank Group. A neurosurgery department with a 30-bed capacity was established at our institution, Preah Kossamak Hospital (PKH), in 2010 and is currently staffed by 4 neurosurgeons. A retrospective review of a prospective neurosurgical database was performed to identify patients treated at PKH for cervical and thoracolumbar spine trauma from 2013 to 2016. Patients ≥18 years old who presented to PKH with acute spine injuries sustained within 2 weeks with or without neurologic deficits were included in this study. Patient demographics including age and sex, mechanism of injury, use of diagnostic imaging, treatment modality, and outcome measured by the American Spinal Cord Injury Association (ASIA) impairment scale were obtained. Cervical injuries were classified as minor fractures, burst fractures, teardrop fractures, traumatic disc herniations, and facet dislocations. Thoracolumbar injuries were classified as minor fractures, burst fractures, dislocation injuries, and translation injuries. Statistical analysis was performed using R Version 3.1.1 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria; From 2013 to 2016, 277 patients were treated for cervical and/or thoracolumbar trauma at PKH. Patients were on average 40.2 ± 14.7 years of age. The median age was 38 years. The male-to-female ratio was 3:1. There were 71 cervical injuries (25.6%) and 206 thoracolumbar injuries (74.4%). Cervical injuries included 12 minor fractures (16.9%), 5 burst fractures (7.0%), 5 disc herniations (7.0%), and 36 facet dislocations (50.7%). Thoracolumbar injuries included 44 minor fractures (21.4%), 135 burst fractures (65.5%), 96 distraction injuries (46.6%), and 96 translation injuries (46.6%) ( Motor vehicle accidents (31.3%) and falls (51.4%) were the leading causes of both cervical and thoracolumbar trauma. Spine trauma from motor vehicle accidents was most frequently sustained by motorcyclists (66.7%). Falls causing thoracolumbar trauma were predominantly work-related, including falls at construction sites (32.9%) and from palm and mango trees (34.3%). Assault (0.7%) was a rare cause of spine trauma in and around Phnom Penh ( Surgical treatment was performed for 65 patients (67.7%) with incomplete (ASIA B, ASIA C, or ASIA D) spinal cord injuries and 60 patients (70.6%) with complete (ASIA A) spinal cord injuries. Surgical cost, excluding the costs of implants and hospitalization, was $100–$280 per surgery. Cervical injuries were most frequently treated with anterior cervical discectomy and fusion using iliac crest grafts with fixation using cervical plates from an Indian manufacturer (Uma Surgicals, Mumbai, India). Posterior spinal fusion with interspinous wiring was used in 4 patients with bilateral locked facets (ASIA A) and 1 patient with bilateral perched facets (ASIA E). Lateral mass screw fixation was used in 1 patient with bilateral perched facets (ASIA A). Combined anterior and posterior fusion and fixation was used in 1 patient with bilateral jumped facets (ASIA A) ( Limited resources are available in Cambodia for postoperative follow-up. Nevertheless, we were able to contact 35 (41.2%), 14 (50.0%), 20 (55.6%), 21 (61.8%), and 57 (63.3%) patients with preoperative ASIA A, ASIA B, ASIA C, ASIA D, and ASIA E injuries by phone at least 6 months after their surgeries. Of patients with preoperative complete spinal cord injury, 11 (12.9%), 5 (5.9%), and 6 (7.1%) reported improvement to ASIA B, ASIA C, and ASIA D. Of patients presenting with ASIA B spinal cord injury, 9 (32.1%), 2 (7.1%), and 8 (28.6%) reported improvement to ASIA C, ASIA D, and ASIA E. At last follow-up, 20 patients (55.6%) with preoperative ASIA C spinal cord injury and 23 (67.6%) patients with preoperative ASIA D spinal cord injury reported full neurologic recovery ( Spine trauma in Phnom Penh and its surrounding provinces is most commonly caused by motor vehicle accidents and work-related falls, such as falls from coconut, mango, and palm trees and construction-related falls. Low-income men are disproportionately affected by spine trauma, although a significant proportion of severe cervical spinal cord injury (ASIA A or ASIA B) appears to be attributable to ground-level falls in elderly adults. A high burden of degenerative cervical spondylosis, which increases susceptibility to tetraplegia following a minor fall, has been reported in other parts of Asia and may be related to poor working posture in the manufacturing and agricultural industries. According to World Bank Group data from 2016, the gross domestic product per capita in Cambodia has risen to $1270. However, most families who recently escaped poverty were able to do so only by a small margin. In addition, limited government funding is available for health care subsidies. At PKH, we predominantly serve working-class inhabitants of Phnom Penh, who are responsible for all of their own medical expenses. For a typical admission, this includes a $5 consultation fee, $5–$15 for laboratory tests, $12–$100 for imaging studies, $10–$70 for daily medications, and a bed fee in addition to surgical costs. Advanced on-site imaging at PKH is limited to a privately owned CT scanner. Only 8.5% of patients with cervical trauma and 6.3% of patients with thoracolumbar trauma received immediate CT imaging without prior plain radiography. In addition, CT imaging was only obtained for 62.0% of patients with cervical trauma and 55.3% of patients with thoracolumbar trauma. Our experience indicates that advanced imaging is not a prerequisite for delivery of essential neurosurgery to a majority of patients with spine trauma. However, access to CT and MRI at highly resource-restricted government hospitals in the developing world may possibly be increased via privately owned on-site scanners. Our incidence of postoperative wound infection (2.2%) compares favorably with the reported incidence in the United States before the introduction of vancomycin powder (13%). Any transfer of neurosurgical skills and technology from resource-rich donors to resource-poor recipients will necessarily require a period of experimentation and adaptation to discover what essential neurosurgery looks like in terms of equipment and technology, types of neurosurgical procedures, and operative skill sets. For public hospitals serving very-low-income populations within resource-limited countries, the goal should be to perform appropriate and safe procedures using locally available equipment and technology without causing financial hardship. At PKH, our operative equipment consists of the World Federation of Neurologic Surgeons (WFNS) craniotomy and spine sets and a bipolar set, which are in fair condition at best. All procedures for spine trauma are performed without the use of an operative microscope, although loupes for all faculty and some residents have been donated by Loupes Around the World. Anterior cervical discectomy and fusion is our procedure of choice for most cervical injuries, including bilateral jumped facets. Our current plate-and-screw systems are purchased from an Indian manufacturer (Uma Surgicals). When additional posterior stabilization is required, we use interspinous wiring if the posterior elements are intact. Early failure of short-segment pedicle instrumentation owing to lack of anterior support has been reported for thoracolumbar burst fractures, with an implant failure rate of up to 40%. Our experience demonstrates that neurosurgical care can be provided in a safe and sustainable manner to patients with traumatic spine and spinal cord injuries even in significantly resource-limited communities. Surgical management of traumatic spine injuries may be regarded as a component of essential neurosurgery that should be made available around the world to individuals from all socioeconomic strata. Our experience may serve as a guide for other neurosurgeons in similar resource settings.