Objectives
                  To assess in vitro the effect of experimental mesoporous BAG, on human dental pulp cells (hDPCs) behavior in terms of cytocompatiblity and bioactivity via mineralization potential.
               
                  Methods
                  Fine (FP) and large particles (LP) of a fixed BAG composition named 0NaMBG have been elaborated by a sol-gel process. In vitro assessment was achieved on cultured primary hDPCs using indirect contact. The effect of the concentration of 800μg/mL on cell metabolic activity and cytotoxicity were examined by performing Alamar blue and crystal violet assays. Alizarin Red staining was used to detect and quantify the formation of mineralized nodules and ALP activity was colourimetrically quantified. The expression of Odontogenic markers: DMP-1 and osteopontin (OPN) expression and cell morphology was evaluated by confocal microscopy.
               
                  Results
                  According to the Alamar blue and crystal violet assay, 0NaMBG samples were non-cytotoxic. Cells treated with 0NaMBG particles expressed higher metabolic activity than control cells, especially for LP. Both FP and LP significantly increased both extra and intra cellular ALP activity. hDPCs exhibited good cell spreading and adhesion in the presence of FP and LP extracts by confocal imaging. Further, Alizarin red S assay demonstrated more mineralization nodules and significant enhancement of the extracellular calcium deposition when cells were interfaced with both FP and LP compared to the control cells. Moreover, LP extracts enhanced the production and secretion of odontogenic markers: dentin matrix protein 1 (DMP-1) and osteopontin.
               
                  Significance
                  LP have a higher surface area and pore volume, which could explain their greater bioactivity in contact with pulp cells. The clinical relevance of these findings implicate that 0NaMBG could be used as fillers in dental therapeutic materials suitable for dentin and/or pulp tissues preservation.Carious disease is still a neglected topic despite the acknowledgment of the World Health Organization (WHO) that it is still a major health problem in most industrialized countries. Report highlights that 60–90 percent of children and the vast majority of adults are affected by dental caries [ Bioactive glasses were initially used for medical application due to their ability to form a bond with bone tissue [ The use of BAG as pulp capping materials has been applied over many years [ In this study, we aimed to assess the effects of fine and large 0NaMBG particles on biocompatibility and mineralization ability of human dental pulp cells. The investigated 0NaMBG particles composition has been defined as 75SiO 0NaMBG particles with 75%SiO Dental Pulp cells (hDPCs cells) were isolated and harvested from the pulp of sound human third molar germ (14–16 years old) extracted for orthodontic reasons. Informed consent was obtained from the patients at the University of Lyon 1 – Hospices civils of Lyon (HCL), France. The culture protocol was carried out using a modification method of Couble et al. 2000 [ In this study, cells were placed in indirect contact with 0NaMBG. In the indirect contact the samples (concentration 800 Cell metabolic activity was quantified using Alamar Blue assay. Alamar blue® solution (DAL1025, Thermo Scientific France) was used in this study. The assay was carried out using a modification method of McNicholl et al. [ The kit K412-500 was used according to the manufacturer’s instructions (BioVision Incorporated, USA). The hDPCs were seeded at a density of 10 ALP activity = ([pNPP] (μmol)/ΔT (min) x (ml) x D (dilution factor) ΔT Cell cytotoxicity was also measured (after 72 % cytotoxicity: [(OD DMSO - OD sample)/OD DMSO] x100. Fluorescence staining was performed to observe the formation and the organization of stress fibers and morphological changes. Cells were seeded on a μ_dish glass bottom chamber (Ibidi GmbH, Germany) placed in a complete medium and incubated at 37 Alizarin red S staining was used to assess matrix mineralization. After Treatment, HDPCs were fixed using formaldehyde (3,7 %, 30 The evaluation of osteopontin (OPN) and Dentin Matrix Protein 1 (DMP-1) expression was performed following cell exposure to 0NaMBG particles extracts, cells fixation and permeabilization. For these endpoints, OPN staining was performed using Rabbit Anti-Osteopontin Polyclonal Antibody, ALexa Fluor® 555 Conjugated (bs-0019R-A555, CliniSciences, France), diluted 1:200 (40 Data were analyzed using statistical software SPSS™ (V21.0, IBM, IL, USA) and fond to be normally distributed. Non-parametric analysis and multiple comparison were achieved using One-way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) with a repetition test followed by Post Hoc tests. A comparison was made between the two tested particle groups (fine Cells were treated with 0NaMBG for 24, 48 and 72 Cells were treated with 0NaMBG for 7 days. Both fine and large MBGs particles significantly increased both extra and intra cellular ALP activity (p The results of cell cytotoxicity for the different conditions are shown in Dental pulp cells exhibited good cytoskeletal architecture as seen from actin cytoskeleton staining. Good cell spreading and adhesion was observed in the presence of fine and large particles extracts ( The mineralization potential of the hDPs cells can be determined from Alizarin Red S staining of evaluated cells following indirect contact with MBGs particles. After 14 days of incubation, both fine and large particles revealed significant enhancement of the extracellular calcium deposition amount ( The staining of OPN was revealed in the cytoplasm (slight red fluorescence) of cells growing in the presences of large particles extracts. Cells were negatively stained for OPN on cells growing in the presence of fine particles extracts similarly to the control cells ( Pulp tissue vitality preservation and apical periodontitis prevention are part of the minimally invasive biologically-based concept that is key to contemporary clinical endodontic therapies [ The 0NaMBG used represents experimental bioactive glasses without sodium. The composition of these particles was obtained in our previous sol-gel study investigating the influence of network modifiers and order of precursor addition. The aim was to evaluate the influence of these parameters on the porosity of sol-gel bioactive glasses [ The larger 0NaMBG particles generated initially were ball milled to reduce the primary particle size and so obtain finer particles. The aim was to achieve a particle size of less than 10 In a pilot study, we used primary human gingival fibroblasts (HGF) and cementoblast cells to assess the cytocompatibility and mineralization ability of the developed 0NaMBGs. The positive results obtained convinced us to use Human dental Pulp cells (hDPCs) that are more related to the clinical situation and more sensitive than HGF and cementoblasts cells. Moreover, the use of hDPCs to assess the mineralization ability and biocompatibility In our study, both large and fine particles were found to be non-cytotoxic. In addition, the metabolic activity of cells showed a significant enhancement in the presence of particles extracts after 72 ALP is the marker of early differentiation and extracellular matrix mineralization [ Several studies showed that BAGs have the ability to form calcium deposits in contact with pulp cells. Using Alizarin red staining [ In order to assess the odontogenic differentiation of primary cells from different origins, the markers of choice are ALP, DMP-1 and OCN. DMP-1 deemed to be one of the main non-collagenous proteins formed in the mineralized dentin matrix, it is synthesized by odontoblasts and plays an important role during early odontoblastic differentiation and at late dentin mineralization [ Other analyses could be used for further investigations, for example EDX spectra for calcium and phosphate content in the mineralized nodules could indicate a ratio of Ca:P similar to that of hydroxyapatite [ From a clinical perspective, using 0NaMBG particles as fillers in dental adhesives appear to be a relevant approach to explore in order to enhance the longevity of the adhesive-dentin interface [ This study highlighted the superior An enhancement of metabolic activity and a non-cytotoxic potential. An increase of mineralization ability. The The research work leading to this manuscript has partially received funding from the