Introduction
                  Operative treatment of acute acetabular fractures has shown better results than the non-operative approach. There is, however, limited data regarding the operative treatment of neglected acetabular fracture.
               
                  Methods
                  We present six subjects with neglected fracture of the acetabulum in Cipto Mangunkusumo National Hospital, Jakarta, Indonesia. One had only open reduction and internal fixation, three had open reduction and internal fixation first before we performed arthroplasty later, one had both open reduction and internal fixation with arthroplasty, and another had immediate arthroplasty.
               
                  Results
                  Our subjects were 4 males and 2 females with the average age of 41.1 years and the average neglect period was 18 months. In four of our subjects, the fractures had posterior wall involvement, one had an anterior column-posterior hemitransverse fracture, and the last one had transverse fracture. All fractures were classified to either Elementary or Associated type according to the Letournel classification. We observed all subjects up to eighteen months post-operatively. One subject had poor outcome, four subjects had fair outcome, and one subject had excellent outcome according to the Harris Hip Score.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Even in neglected acetabular fracture, open reduction and internal fixation where possible should be attempted to restore the anatomical relationship to facilitate immediate or late total hip arthroplasty. Surgical treatment of such fractures should be based on individual case characteristics, which includes age, associated comorbidity, neglect period, as well as the type and union state of the fracture for a better outcome. Neglected Associated acetabular fracture types are more difficult to reduce and have poorer outcome compared to Elementary types. Likewise, malunited acetabular fractures are more difficult to operate on than non-united neglected acetabular fractures, where reduction is relatively easier.Non-union of left midshaft femur Malunion of left distal femur Neglected malunited left posterior wall fracture of the acetabulum Neglected posterior dislocation of the left hip Neglected non-union of left anterior column posterior hemitransverse fracture of the acetabulum Neglected non-union of right transverse fracture of the acetabulum Neglected non-union of right sacral fracture Denis zone I Acute acetabular fracture remains a major injury to the hip joint where operative treatment has been shown to produce better results than the non-operative approaches. We are reporting 6 cases of neglected acetabular fracture to which we performed either: open reduction and internal fixation only; open reduction and internal fixation first before conducting a late arthroplasty; open reduction and internal fixation along with arthroplasty; or immediate arthroplasty without internal fixation. Over the course of 2014–2016, we treated 6 subjects with neglected fracture of the acetabulum in Cipto Mangunkusumo National Hospital, Jakarta, Indonesia. All subjects underwent pre-operative pelvic x-rays (AP and Judet views) and non-contrast pelvic CT-scans with 3-dimensional reconstruction. One of these cases was treated with open reduction and internal fixation only, three cases were treated with open reduction and internal fixation first before we performed late arthroplasty, one case where we conducted both open reduction and internal fixation with arthroplasty, and another case where we did immediate arthroplasty. All of our reductions were internally fixated with 3.5 reconstruction plates and screws. In all patients that had total hip arthroplasty, we used ceramic-on-polyethylene bearing surfaces in all subjects. The first subject was a 35-year old female with 3-year neglected malunited left posterior wall fracture of the acetabulum and non-union of the left midshaft femur, with a 4-cm discrepancy ( The second subject was a 48-year old male with 18-month neglected malunited left posterior wall and posterior column fracture of the acetabulum, with a 6-cm discrepancy ( The third subject was a 58-year old male with 9-month neglected non-united left posterior wall fracture of the acetabulum, with a 1.5-cm discrepancy ( The fourth subject was a 35-year old female with 1-year neglected non-united left anterior column-posterior hemitransverse fracture of the acetabulum with neglected posterior hip dislocation, with a 4-cm discrepancy ( The fifth subject was a 40-year old male with 9-month neglected malunited right transverse posterior wall fracture of the acetabulum with central dislocation of the hip, with a 2-cm discrepancy ( The sixth subject was a 39-year old male with 24-month neglected non-united right transverse fracture of the acetabulum and right Denis zone II sacral fracture, with a 2-cm discrepancy ( For all subjects, the posterior approach to the acetabulum was utilized. Post-operative assessment of the fracture was done through radiologic pelvic AP and Judet views, and functional outcome evaluation was measured using the Harris Hip Score (HHS), Our subjects were active young adults, 4 males and 2 females, with the average age of 41.1 years ( Complications that were found in these series were one subject complicated with infection and recurrent dislocation of the femoral component; and another subject had peroneal nerve palsy. One subject had poor outcome, four had fair outcome, and one had excellent outcome according to the HHS. Generally, a reconstructive surgery for neglected acetabular fracture is indicated when there is incongruity between the femoral head and the acetabular cup. In one of our six cases, we performed open reduction and internal fixation on an Elementary type, non-united fracture and have not yet done the total hip arthroplasty because the patient was still young and had no complaint regarding the affected hip (post operative HHS 92.8), and there was no sign of secondary osteoarthritis on the follow-up x-ray. In simple fracture patterns, it is advisable that reduction and internal fixation are attempted first before choosing arthroplasty ( Mears et al. In three of our six cases where sufficient reductions were expected during the pre-operative assessment, we decided to perform open reduction and internal fixation first. However, in all of these cases signs and symptoms of secondary osteoarthritis (OA) was apparent twelve months post-operatively. Even though we did not succeed in delaying the need of total hip arthroplasty, our previous reduction and fixation greatly eased the total hip arthroplasty process, especially during the placement of the acetabular cup. After total hip arthroplasty the functional outcomes were only fair in all cases according to the HHS, which might be due to the secondary degenerative changes that were already apparent by the time the HHS was obtained. We attempted a simultaneous open reduction and internal fixation along with a total hip arthroplasty in one of the cases in our series due to the inadequate coverage of the acetabulum after reduction. However, due to the 4 In one of our subjects who had an Associated, malunited fracture, a decision to perform immediate total hip arthroplasty was made after the intraoperative assessment suggested that an attempt to reconstruct the malunited fracture fragments might lead to further damage (due to ligaments release, possible injury to adjacent structures). The functional outcome was poor compared to the other cases where the acetabulum was fixated first. However, because this was an Associated type accompanied with a central hip dislocation, we assumed that this was due to the complex initial fracture pattern and dislocation and not due to the choice of treatment. Whenever an immediate total hip arthroplasty is selected as the treatment option, restoration of equal leg-length and the hip’s center of rotation remain as the main treatment goals. Mears et al. In a long-term study of 53 patients who had undergone total hip arthroplasty after acetabular fractures, it was reported that both implant loosening and failure in these cases is much higher than that of primary arthroplasties. Post-traumatic nerve palsies associated with acetabular fractures happened in 16.4% cases, and higher if is associated with posterior hip dislocation. The functional outcome of most of our subjects was fair according to the HHS, and this might be related to the fact that most of our subjects had posterior wall involvement, which had been associated with poor outcome independent of the quality of the reduction. As a general rule, even in neglected acetabular fracture, open reduction and internal fixation where possible should be attempted to restore the anatomical relationship to facilitate immediate or late total hip arthroplasty as situation demands, as well as to eliminate leg length discrepancy as much as possible. However, surgical treatment of such fractures should be based on individual case characteristics, which includes age, associated comorbidity, neglect period, as well as the type and union state of the fracture for a better outcome. Neglected Associated acetabular fracture types are more difficult to reduce and have poorer outcome compared to Elementary types. Likewise, malunited acetabular fractures are more difficult to operate on than non-united neglected acetabular fracture, where reduction is relatively easier. The authors have none to declare.