The influence of riverine inputs on biogeochemical cycling and organic matter recycling in sediments on the continental shelf off the Rhône River mouth (NW Mediterranean Sea) was investigated by measuring sediment oxygen uptake rates using a combination of in situ and laboratory techniques. Four stations were investigated during two cruises in June 2001 and June 2002, with depths ranging from 9 to 192m and over a distance to the Rhône River mouth ranging from 4 to 36km. Diffusive oxygen uptake (DOU) rates were determined using an in situ sediment microprofiler and total oxygen uptake (TOU) rates were measured using sediment core incubations. There was good agreement between these two techniques which indicates that the non-diffusive fraction of the oxygen flux was minimal at the investigated stations. DOU rates ranged from 3.7±0.4mmol O2
                     m−2
                     d−1 at the continental shelf break to 19.3±0.5mmol O2
                     m−2
                     d−1 in front of the Rhône River mouth. Sediment oxygen uptake rates mostly decreased with increasing depth and with distance from the Rhône mouth. The highest oxygen uptake rate was observed at 63m on the Rhône prodelta, corresponding to intense remineralization of organic matter. This oxygen uptake rate was much larger than expected for the increasing bathymetry, which indicates that biogeochemical cycles and benthic deposition are largely influenced by the Rhône River inputs. This functioning was also supported by the detailed spatial distribution of total organic carbon (TOC), total nitrogen (TN) and C/N atomic ratio in surficial sediments. Sediments of the Rhône prodelta are enriched in organic carbon (2–2.2%) relative to the continental shelf sediments (<1%) and showed C/N ratios exceeding Redfield stoichiometry for fresh marine organic matter. A positive exponential correlation was found between DOU and TOC contents (r
                     2=0.98, n=4). South-westward of the Rhône River mouth, sediments contained highly degraded organic matter of both terrestrial and marine origin, due to direct inputs from the Rhône River, sedimentation of marine organic matter and organic material redeposition after resuspension events.Continental shelves and coastal areas are among the most productive marine ecosystems ( A key step in the OC cycle is represented by the remineralization of OC at the sediment–water interface via a web of oxidative reactions where the ultimate electron acceptors are O Sediment oxygen uptake rate has been widely used to assess benthic OC mineralization during early diagenesis ( The Rhône River exerts a large influence on the Gulf of Lions which is the largest RiOMar in the north-western Mediterranean Sea. The influence of the Rhône River inputs on biogeochemical cycles in the Gulf of Lions has been extensively studied ( In the present study, oxygen uptake rates were measured in continental shelf sediments located off the Rhône River mouth. Oxygen uptake rates were obtained by two techniques: (i) in situ microelectrodes, which allow the measurements of oxygen profiles and the calculation of DOU rates, and (ii) laboratory core incubations, which provide an estimate of TOU rates. We examined the validity of DOU and TOU estimations and discussed the influence of the Rhône River inputs on the continental shelf sediments. The spatial distribution of organic matter and its characteristics (TOC, TN, C/N ratio) were also examined in order to improve our understanding of geochemical factors that likely control sedimentary mineralization processes. The Gulf of Lions is a large continental shelf located in the north-western Mediterranean Sea along the French coast. The general cyclonic circulation is governed by the north-western Mediterranean current, a seasonal stratification, and aperiodic intense vertical mixing induced by strong regional winds. With a drainage basin of 97 Sediment samples were collected during three different cruises: REMORA 1 (March 2001), PROFILER 2 (June 2001) and MINERCOT 1 (June 2002). Sediment samples were collected with a multicorer Mark VI (Bowers & Connelly) especially designed to simultaneously collect four large diameter Perspex cores (I.D. 15 TOC and TN analysis were performed by the CNRS Service Central d’Analyse Elementaire (Vernaison, France) on freeze-dried sediment samples that had been finely powdered and homogenised. Total carbon (TC) concentration was measured with a LECO SC 144 analyser at 1300 We used an in situ benthic microprofiler (Unisense The location of the sediment–water interface relative to the in situ oxygen profiles was determined from O Resistivity measurements were made with an electrode similar to that described by Sediment oxygen uptake rates (mmol O DOU rates were calculated from O To check the validity of the calculations, we used the PROFILE software developed by During MINERCOT 1, sediment cores were brought to the laboratory immediately after retrieval and incubations generally started within 4 During PROFILER 2 and MINERCOT 1 cruises, four stations were investigated and the profiling unit was deployed six times with a total acquisition of 19 oxygen profiles ( TOU was measured at Fos, Rhône 2 and Sofi stations by incubating eight sediment cores per station. Mean TOU was 18.6±4.0 Core incubation in the laboratory is a source of potential bias. Previous comparison with in situ incubation showed contrasting results ( Despite the different methodological approaches adopted in our study, the measured sediment oxygen uptake rates (DOU and TOU) appeared consistent with previous measurements in other sites of the Gulf of Lions ( It is well established that the sediment oxygen uptake rate decreases with depth from the coast to the deep-sea as a function of OC inputs, bottom water temperature and dissolved oxygen concentrations ( As underlined by The Rhône River is the main source of particulate matter in our study area, and we have considered that the carbon content in the upper sediments could be a good indicator of its impact. TOC and TN contents were analysed within surface sediments sampled at 26 stations ( Surficial TN concentrations decrease with distance from the Rhône River with 0.22% in front of the river mouth and below 0.1% in the southwest part of the study area ( In addition to the carbon data set, the C/N atomic ratio can be used, (i) as an indicator of the organic matter degradation state, and (ii) to identify the source of the organic matter. Compared to the Redfield ratio for phytoplankton (C/N=6.6 by atoms), a low value of C/N ratio indicates relatively fresh organic matter, while a higher value indicates a high state of degradation. Terrestrial organic matter supplied by rivers to the coastal ocean is generally considered as detrital carbon, which is presumably more refractory than fresh marine organic matter. The C/N atomic ratio ranged from 6.9 at Sofi station to 10 in front of the Rhône River mouth ( In surface sediment, the reactivity of organic matter is highly variable and mainly depends on the quality (marine vs. terrestrial) and quantity of this matter, and the oxygen exposure time ( The biogeochemical fate of the Rhône River inputs (dissolved nutrients, particulate organic matter and detrital particles) to the continental shelf is largely influenced by the hydrodynamics of the Gulf of Lions and by deposition, secondary transport in the benthic boundary layer and transformation in the sediments ( The distribution of sediment oxygen uptake rates shows a clear pattern in benthic carbon mineralization around the outlet of the Rhône River. This pattern seems to be largely related to the quantity and quality of organic matter, which is deposited in the sediment. Indeed, a positive exponential correlation ( Assuming a stoichiometric ratio of 138O:106C, for oxygen reduction over carbon oxidation, yields carbon mineralization rates of 66–184 In summary, the influence of the Rhône River inputs on coastal ecosystems may be mediated not only as a consequence of its nutrient load, but also through terrestrial particulate organic matter inputs to the sediment. The rates of carbon mineralization are determined by the relative contribution of terrestrial and marine carbon sources. Our study of sediment oxygen uptake rates in the close vicinity of the Rhône River mouth demonstrates the influence of the dispersion of the Rhône River inputs on carbon mineralization rates. A positive correlation between DOU and TOC content suggests that the spatial variability observed in sediment oxygen uptake rates reflects variations in the organic matter supply to the seafloor. Near the Rhône River mouth, a pattern of OC emerges with the south-west shelf being a preferential site for deposition of terrestrial originated matter. Our results highlight the importance of the Rhône prodelta in the mineralization of OC where the DOU values were very high. Our future work will be focused on the Rhône prodelta and its surrounding area in order to provide more details on the DOU distribution and to highlight the links between the fate of the continental inputs in the sediments of river-dominated ocean margins, a task addressed in the RiOMar project. We would like to thank the captains and crew members of the