Giant magnetostrictive material Terfenol-D (Tb
                        x
                     Dy1−x
                     Fe2−y
                     , 0.27⩽x⩽0.30, 0.05⩽y⩽0.1) was directionally solidified by vertical Bridgman method within a sealed quartz crucible. Macrosegregation of RE elements along the growth axis occurred in an abnormal way. RE elements concentration decreased significantly with increasing axial distance, which is different from the typical macrosegregation with a distribution coefficient, k, less than unity. This was due to the compositional inhomogeneity of the initial melt. During the melting of the prealloyed ingot in the quartz crucible, eutectic RE-rich phase melted first and flowed out into the gap between the crucible and the ingot. This RE-rich phase which flowed to the bottom did not mix well with the melt by convection because the temperature distribution in the melt is quite stable and the density of the RE-rich phase is higher than that of the REFe2 phase. Macrosegregation was reduced very much in the rod grown after the homogenization of the initial melt. Even though the magnetostrictive strain was very different from part to part in the as-grown rod due to the macrosegregation, each specimen came to have a similar magnetostriction after the heat treatment above the eutectic temperature (890°C). During the high-temperature annealing, excess RE-rich phase was observed to be melted and flowed out from the specimen leaving pores between REFe2 matrices. Therefore, composition of the crystal approached to the stoichiometic value regardless of the initial composition. That makes magnetostriction of the samples similar to one another. Melt extraction during the annealing is thought to be the result of poor wetting between the two phases.The magnetic properties and fabrication methods of (Tb Magnetostrictive properties of Terfenol-D can be improved by various heat treatments such as high-tempertature annealing Alloys with compostion Tb Magnetostrictive properties of both as-cast and annealed samples were measured. A solenoid was used to provide DC magnetic bias fields up to 100 After solidification in the quartz ampoule, slight amount of RE metals were deposited on the inner wall of the ampoule only near the top surface of the crystal. That means the evaporation of RE elements was quite well suppressed during cystal growth. Sticking of the alloy on the crucible wall as well as the reaction between the quartz crucible and the alloy was not significant, so that the crystal was easily detached from the crucible. There was a thin layer of RE-rich phase on the specimen side surface, and the thickness of this layer increased toward the bottom of the crystal. This layer is thought to come from the interdendritc flow of RE-rich melt into a space between the crucible and the ingot when the semisolid external surface of the ingot begins to contact the crucible wall during the solidification. It is called exudation From the pole figures, grain orientation of the crystal was found to be along 〈1 The reason for this abnormal solute distribution was searched in the initial solute distribution of the melt for the directional solidification Effects of heat treatment on the magnetostrictive properties have been reported in many papers and they tested various kinds of heat treatment such as magnetic annealing Annealing performed above the eutectic temperature greatly changed the structure of Terfenol-D. As shown in Leaking of liquid can also be caused by the entrapped gas during solidification Terfenol-D grown by vertical Bridgman method showed serious inverse macrosegregation, by which the concentration of RE elements decreased towards the top of the rod. Due to macrosegregation there was a difference in magnetostriction among the samples up to a maximum of 138%. It is concluded that the reason for the inverse macrosegregation is the inhomogeneous initial melt composition, and this can be eliminated by mixing the initial melt after complete melting of the prealloyed ingot. Magnetostriction of Terfenol-D increased noticeably after the heat treatment above its eutectic temperature. Magnetostriction of the samples which showed different magnetostriction before annealing became similar. By comparing the magnetostrictive properties with the microstructures, it is concluded that the enhancement is mainly due to an increase in the volume fraction of REFe The authors wish to thank the Korea Basic Science Institute (KBSI) for the ICPMS analysis. This work was supported by the Agency for Defense Development (ADD) of the Republic of Korea.