The aim of this study was to assess inter- and intraobserver agreement of the traditional systems (Ruedi-Allgower, AO [Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen], and Topliss) and the newly proposed Leonetti classification system of pilon fractures. We studied all patients at our center who underwent pilon fracture surgery over a 2-year period: 68 patients (70 legs) were included. Four observers independently classified each pilon fracture according to the Ruedi-Allgower, AO, Topliss, and Leonetti systems by evaluating radiographs and computed tomography images on 2 occasions. The inter- and intraobserver agreements were calculated using the Fleiss kappa test. Interobserver reliability was good for AO types (A, B, and C) and Ruedi-Allgower (κ = 0.71 and 0.61, respectively), whereas the interobserver reliability was moderate for AO groups (A1, A2, A3, B1, B2, B3, C1, C2, and C3), Topliss families, Topliss subfamilies, Leonetti types, and Leonetti subtypes. Intraobserver reproducibility was excellent for the Ruedi-Allgower classification, AO types, and Topliss families and good for AO groups, Topliss subfamilies, and Leonetti types and subtypes. Ruedi-Allgower and AO classification systems are the most reliable among those currently used for pilon fractures, but with lower agreement at the AO group level. The use of Topliss and Leonetti classification systems is not recommended because of less favorable results.Pilon is the French word for a pestle. A French radiologist is credited with comparing the talus to a pestle and using the term to describe the pilon fracture. High-energy tibial pilon fractures result from axial loading, with the talus driven into the distal tibia, affecting the articular surface with proximal extension ( Classification systems are useful in clinical and research practice, as they provide a common mode for evaluation of fracture severity and can even guide surgical treatment ( In 2017, Leonetti and Tigani ( The purpose of this study was to compare the 4 classification systems for pilon fractures by evaluating their inter- and intraobserver reliability with standard radiographs and CT images. The hypothesis was that all 4 systems would have a low degree of inter- and intraobserver agreement. Patients who underwent distal tibia fracture surgery at our center from 2015 to 2017 were retrospectively studied. We included only patients with good-quality radiographs (anteroposterior and standard lateral) and CT images (with 2D and 3D reconstructions). Patients with refractures, pathological fractures, and pediatric fractures were excluded. The radiographs and CT images were exported from our hospital's Picture Archiving and Communication System workstation without identifying marks and placed into unmarked folders for coding. Sixty-eight patients (70 legs) were included for analysis. Patients’ age and sex and the injury side and mechanism were recorded. We did not seek institutional review board approval for this investigation because we did not use protected health information. Four observers (1 senior orthopaedic surgeon (Xu-sheng Qiu), 2 junior orthopaedic surgeons (Xiao-yang Qi, Zhen Wang), and 1 senior resident (Xu-gang Li)) evaluated the radiological findings. The observers were blinded to patient demographics, treatment, and functional outcome. The observers analyzed and classified each fracture using 4 different systems: Ruedi-Allgower ( Ruedi-Allgower classification ( Data analysis was performed using Minitab software version 18 (Minitab Inc.). Inter- and intraobserver reliability for each classification system was evaluated using Fleiss's kappa ( A total of 68 patients (70 legs) were included, 48 men and 21 women. Mean age was 45.1 years (range 21 to 66). The fracture was on the left ankle in 32 patients (45.7%) and on the right ankle in 38 patients (54.3%). Most of the patients (72.5%) suffered high-energy trauma (traffic accidents, high height falls); 27.5% of cases suffered a low-energy accident. Interobserver reliability was good for Ruedi classification and AO types but moderate for AO groups, Topliss families, Topliss subfamilies, and Leonetti types and subtypes ( An ideal fracture classification system should be straightforward, easy to use, all-inclusive, and mutually exclusive. In addition, it should be replicable—that is, have good inter- and intraobserver reliability. These days, the most common classification systems used in tibial pilon fractures include AO ( Topliss et al ( Leonetti's system is a CT-based classification of pilon fractures. As showed by Leonetti and Tigani ( The main weakness of the present study was that the time interval between the 2 evaluations may have been too short, which may have increased intraobserver agreement. However, it did not affect the conclusions. Another limitation was that only inter- and intraobserver reliability were evaluated, with no evaluation of the responsiveness, validity, or internal consistency of the classification systems. In conclusion, Ruedi-Allgower and AO classification systems are the most reliable among currently used systems for pilon fractures, with lower agreement at the AO group level. The use of Topliss and Leonetti classification systems is not recommended because of less favorable results.