Sill mats are structural elements that provide support in underground mining ( In practice, sill mats are constructed based on two main approaches; experience, and engineering principles. From an engineering point of view, it has been considered beam theory or solid mechanics theory, numerical modelling, physical modelling (centrifuge modelling in some cases). Data of actual geometry and material properties of sill mats used in mining can be found in Vertical load ( As mentioned previously, flexural failure considerations using beam theory provides the designer with a simple tool to analyze sill mat stability. In Considering the maximum moment ( When solving the value of Eq.  As the plane AB remains perpendicular to CD (Euler-Bernoulli assumption) then: Then Then assuming Then for equilibrium of momentum: Additionally, where Solving the above equations for the corresponding boundary conditions, the deflection Consequently the maximum traction will be located at both ends and has a value derived from Eq. Failure will initiate on both ends of the beam (or sill mat). Once these two points show plastic deformation, the center of the beam will start failing as shown in Considering that an additional compressive force is applied to the beam ( In many simulations, the evaluation of flexure failure has been performed using this simple equation. However, in sill mat design the problem is closer to a plane strain than a plane stress approximation. This is due the fact that the longest dimension of the sill mat is much larger than the span. Additionally, the other hypothesis used to derive this equation will be discussed further after numerical model results are shown. More details about Euler-Bernoulli beam theory can be found in FLAC 2D version 7 was the numerical modelling code employed for modelling and estimating the factor of safety of different sill mat geometries under varying strength properties. FLAC uses a finite difference approach that allows the use of different constitutive models to represent rock mass or any other material as a continuum in order to determine its behavior under the loads being applied. Only flexure resistance of the sill mat (tensile failure) will be considered in this analysis. Therefore, shear strength will be imposed at much higher values than the expected strength of actual Sill Mat material, using Mohr-Coulomb model with high values of cohesion ( Multiple sill mat geometries are evaluated considering different aspect ratios Numerical models are performed to compare its results with the corresponding analytical equation previously shown. The comparison is performed in terms of the required tensile strength ( Therefore for a given geometry, the minimum  These results complement the conclusion obtained previously by Modelling results are shown for four different cases as the one depicted in As values of Case C shows the results for a sill mat with Case D shows the results of numerical model for   Therefore, from the numerical modelling results obtained, it is possible to assume that for boundary conditions considered in flexure failure, that is fixed at both ends of the sill mat, it is not possible to obtain failure for ratios of Additionally, when the historical sill mat data (from In this work was analyzed the range of validity of Mitchell's flexure failure equation for sill mats considering both ends fixed. The validity of Mitchell's equation was established using numerical modelling results. The following conclusions are based on the results of numerical models involving different geometries for sill mats. These results showed that flexure failure will unlikely develop for ratios of Sill mats with values of