The use of biodegradable reagents such as hemicelluloses was shown to improve copper recovery from high clay ores, but, at the same time these reagents also depressed molybdenite. Hemicelluloses are heteropolysaccharides formed by monosaccharides such as xylose, glucose, arabinose, galactose, and mannose. Since these monosaccharides are the basic compounds of the structure of hemicelluloses, the objective of this work was to study the effect of D-xylose, D-mannose and D-glucose on the flotation behavior of molybdenite and propose mechanisms to explain the mineral/reagent interactions. The effect of a non-polar collector on molybdenite flotation in the presence of the tested monosaccharides was also evaluated with the aim of looking for solutions to reduce molybdenite depression. It was found that all the monosaccharides tested depress molybdenite flotation. The depressing effects of D-mannose and D-glucose are stronger than that of D-xylose. These results can be explained by the fact that D-glucose and D-mannose molecules have more carbon atoms and hydroxyl groups in their structure than D-xylose, thus more chances to interact with the metallic sites existing on molybdenite surfaces. The depressing effect of the tested monosaccharides increases with pH which is explained by the increase of the concentration of basic sites on molybdenite surfaces and by ionization of the hydroxyl groups of monosaccharide molecules. The addition of kerosene reduces the depressing effect of the tested monosaccharides. It can be postulated that when molybdenite faces are covered by kerosene, those acidic/basic metallic sites that explain the interactions between monosaccharides and molybdenite disappear and adsorption is attenuated.The use of biodegradable reagents such as cellulose derivatives, dextrin, and starch have been proposed to improve the recovery of valuable minerals in the presence of clays and slimes [ Structurally, hemicelluloses are heteropolysaccharides formed by monosaccharides such as xylose, glucose, arabinose, galactose, and mannose. Hemicelluloses are characterized by having branches and lateral groups such as acetyl and glucuronic acid units and they can be categorized into four general classes of polysaccharide, i.e., xylans, mannans, glucans and xyloglucans. In hardwood and herbaceous plants, xylan the main hemicellulose, consists of D-xylopyranoside units connected by β-(1 → 4) linkages with glucuronic acid and acetyl groups [ Molybdenite is a molybdenum disulfide (MoS Regarding the mechanisms of adsorption of polysaccharides on molybdenite, some mechanisms were previously proposed. Wie and Fuerstenau [ Since xylose, mannose and glucose monosaccharides are the basic compounds of the structure of hemicelluloses, the objective of this work is to study their effect on the flotation behavior of molybdenite and propose mechanisms to explain the mineral/reagent interactions. In addition, the effect of a non-polar collector to improve molybdenite flotation in the presence of the tested monosaccharides was also evaluated. Molybdenite was obtained from an industrial molybdenum concentrate (−38 + 25 μm) which was purified by three stages of collectorless flotation. Then the concentrate was further washed and cleaned by three stages of washing with sodium hydrosulfide (NaSH), and three stages of washing with acetone to remove inorganic and organic reagents as described elsewhere [ All reagents were obtained from Merck KGaA. D-xylose, D-mannose and D-glucose monosaccharides of analytical grade were provided as powder of 98, 99, and 99% purity, respectively. Methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) was used as frother, sodium chloride was used as powder, and kerosene was used as a non-polar collector. Milli-Q water of 18.4 MΩ∙cm at 25 °C was utilized in all the experiments. pH was adjusted using sodium hydroxide in all the tests. The floatability of molybdenite was assessed using micro-flotation experiments which were done in a 150 mL Partridge and Smith glass cell with nitrogen gas at 80 mL/min. The flotation feed in all the tests was prepared by mixing 1 g of molybdenite with 100 mL of a 0.01 M NaCl solution after which the pH was adjusted using sodium hydroxide for 2 min. Then, MIBC was added at a concentration of 25 mg/L and conditioned for 5 min, while maintaining pH to a required value. Emulsified kerosene at a concentration of 50 mg/L was also added at this time in the experiments in which it was required. Kerosene was emulsified in a 1 L blender by stirring it for 30 s using a 0.01 M NaCl solution and adding half of the total MIBC dosage. After the addition of MIBC, monosaccharides (D-xylose/D-mannose/D-glucose) were added to the beaker as diluted solutions (1 g/L), and the suspension conditioned for 3 more minutes. Then, solution was added to make up to the 150 mL required in the micro-flotation glass cell and the pH was again adjusted and the suspension conditioned for 3 additional minutes. The suspension was transferred to the cell and the flotation process was carried out for 2 min with the froth product being removed every 10 s. The pulp level in the micro-flotation cell was kept constant by adding a background solution prepared at the same composition and pH as in the original solution. Finally, the concentrates and tailings were filtered and washed with distilled water, and acetone to remove kerosene (if needed), and dried in an oven at 105 °C for 12 h. The recovery was calculated as the ratio between the mass of molybdenite in the concentrate and the mass of molybdenite in the concentrate plus tailings. Adsorption of monosaccharides on molybdenite was measured through tests in which 1 g of molybdenite is mixed for 15 min with a 150 mL monosaccharide solution of known concentration. Then the suspension is centrifuged and filtered and the filtrated is analyzed to measure the concentration of total organic carbon (TOC). TOC values are translated to monosaccharides concentration through a calibration curve. The mass of monosaccharides adsorbed on molybdenite is calculated as the difference between the concentration in the initial and final solution multiplied by the volume of solution (150 mL). Then by knowing the mass of molybdenite, the specific adsorption can be calculated in mg of monosaccharide adsorbed per gram of molybdenite (mg/g) and the isotherm can be drawn. Temperature was controlled all the time in these experiments by using a thermostatic bath. The tests were done in duplicates with an average standard error of 4%. The interactions between molybdenite and hemicelluloses monomers were studied through electrophoretic mobility measurements by using a Zetacompact Z9000 from CAD instrument. These measurements were performed using - 20 μm molybdenite particles. The effect of pH and monosaccharides on the changes of molybdenite electrophoretic mobility distributions were also studied. Aggregation of molybdenite particles in the presence of monosaccharides was evaluated through turbidity measurements as described in  The experimental data also show that the addition of kerosene reduces the depressing effect of the tested monosaccharides. In particular, the results obtained using D-xylose show that molybdenite recovery in the presence of kerosene reaches values close to those achieved in flotation tests with kerosene in absence of D-xylose. Adsorption isotherms of D-xylose, D-mannose and D-glucose on molybdenite are plotted in  Molybdenite is a molybdenum disulfide (MoS As was indicated in the introduction, several mechanisms were previously proposed to explain the interactions between polysaccharides and mineral particles. In particular, Laskowski et al. [ Results presented in The possible mechanisms of interaction between monosaccharides and molybdenite may vary according to the differences in the chemical structure of the organic molecules tested in this work. Although glucose and mannose molecules have the same chemical formula, from a structural point of view there are certain differences, which may explain the differences in the adsorption densities observed in The experimental data presented in  D-xylose, D-mannose and D-glucose depress molybdenite flotation. The depressing effects of D-mannose and D-glucose are stronger than that of D-xylose. These results can be explained by the fact that D-glucose and D-mannose molecules have more carbon atoms and hydroxyl groups in their structure than D-xylose, thus more chances to interact with the metallic sites existing on molybdenite surfaces. The depressing effects of the tested monosaccharides increases with pH which is explained by a higher concentration of basic sites on molybdenite surfaces and by a stronger ionization of the hydroxyl groups of the monosaccharide molecules. These results correlate with adsorption values which show more adsorption of monosaccharides on molybdenite at higher pH. The mechanisms of adsorption of the three tested monosaccharides can be explained by the interactions of the hydroxyl groups existing in the organic molecules with the hydroxylated metallic basic/acidic sites on the molybdenite surfaces. The addition of kerosene reduces the depressing effect of the tested monosaccharides. It can be postulated that when molybdenite faces are covered by kerosene, those acidic/basic metallic sites that explain the interactions between monosaccharides and molybdenite disappear and adsorption is suppressed. None The authors acknowledge the financial support of