The removal of chemical oxygen demand (COD), color and suspended solid (SS) from olive oil mill wastewater (OMWW) was experimentally investigated by using electro-coagulation (EC). Aluminum and iron were used in the reactor simultaneously as materials for electrodes. The reactor voltage was 12 V, current density (CD) was changing between 10 and 40 mA cm−2, pH was taken equal to 4, 6, 7, and 9 units, and duration varied in the limits of 2–30 min. Under the 30-min retention time, 52% COD was removed by the aluminum anode and 42% was removed by the iron anode. CD efficiency versus the percent of COD removal was examined at the 10-min retention time for pH 6.2±0.2. It appeared that with the CD increase, the percent of COD removal was increasing as well. The color removal yield was examined as the result of using different retention times, current densities, and iron and aluminum as materials for anodes. CD values in the range of 10–40 mA cm−2 were tested at the 10-min retention time each one; color removal was 90–97% by this. In this study the EC process was examined with the aim of determining the highest rate of SS removal from the OMWW as well.The treatment of olive oil mill wastewater (OMWW) is one of the most important environmental problems in the Mediterranean countries. The wastewater includes organic chemicals and long-chain fatty acids, of which neither biodegrades easily. In addition, it includes phyto-toxic materials and various phenol and poly-phenol compounds, which are very difficult to treat Currently there is no such economical and easy solution. Physical and chemical methods, such as flocculation, coagulation, filtration, lagoon of evaporation and burning systems solve the problem but partially The interest in the electrochemical methods for the wastewater treatment, such as electro-coagulation (EC) and electrochemical separation, is permanently increasing When direct current passes through the Al (Fe) anodes, Al Metal hydroxides that are formed in the process of the EC possess very high ability for absorption. Coagulated particles attract and absorb different ions and micro-colloidal particles from the wastewater. The flocks formed in the water are transported to the surface by the bubbles of gases (H High effectiveness and universality of the methods make it possible to design compact purifying units, which are adaptable to manufacturing and meet all demands to the EC process automation The removal of color and chemical oxygen demand (COD) from simulated dye wastewater was experimentally investigated by using coagulation and electro-oxidation Toxic olive oil wastewater was also treated by an electrochemical method with Ti/Pt used as anode and Stainless Steel 304 used as cathode The wastewater under study was obtained from an olive-oil producing plant (Edremit area of Turkey), which uses a modern production process and has a 100–160 ton per day production capacity. No chemical additives are being used during the olive oil production. The characteristics of the raw wastewater are given in A spectrophotometer was used for the photometric COD analysis and analysis of color A laboratory-scale reactor ( EC unit is made of organic glass. A direct current imposed by a stabilized power supply (4 A, 30 V) is applied to electrodes. Two groups of alternating electrodes being cathodes and anodes are plates arranged vertically. Their materials are Fe/Al in one case and Al/Fe in another case (prior to the experiments, the electrodes were immersed in 1% HCl for 8 h). In the electrochemical processes the material of electrodes is essential for reactions. Iron and aluminum electrodes are used in the EC, because they are cheap, and their production is very simple The aim was to study temporal dependencies as to the contaminants removal. To obtain homogenous probes, the solution was primarily stirred by the magnetic bar-stirrer. After stirring, the probes were filtered by vacuum filter with the use of filter paper. All experiments were done on a 10% solution of the wastewater. With the aim of COD removal and water purification, the pH of the solution was raised to 6.2±0.2. Voltage 12 V and CD equal to 20 mA cm It has been observed that the percentage of COD-removal depends immediately on the process duration for both types of anode (however, aluminum anode performs better). In general, the graphs of COD removal versus retention time demonstrate an increasing trend. So, for the 4-min retention time, aluminum provided 28% COD removal against 20% for iron; for the 30-min retention time the corresponding values are 52% (Al) and 42% (Fe). The curves show that the retention time in the interval of 10–15 min is optimal for the COD removal. The further OMWW treatment gives low gain in COD removal and is economically ineffective. In the electrochemical purification pH is an important parameter. For this reason, the determination of optimal pH values is necessary. Therefore, we studied four different pH levels (4.6, 6, 7, and 9) to observe how COD removal changes over time. The results are presented in As seen from OMWW has a very high color concentration. This dark-colored wastewater includes poly-aromatic compounds, which are difficult to remove. The removal of color from OMWW was experimentally investigated by using EC process. The color removal yield was examined as the result of using different retention times, CD, and iron and aluminum as materials for anodes. Data in Retention time varied in the range of 2–30 min. Both aluminum and iron (taken as anodes) showed the increase in color removal with the increase of retention time. At the 2-min retention time, the minimal percentage of color removal was 78% for the iron anode and 82% for the aluminum anode. When retention time was between 10 and 30 min, color removal remained at 96% level; thus, 10 min were determined as optimal time for the OMWW treatment. As seen from the comparison of Flask 1 contains the 10% OMWW solution. Sample 2 (pH 4.2, retention time is 10 min) shows very low percentage of color removal. For the same duration and pH 9.3, the increase in color removal can be seen by the eye (sample 3). For samples 4 and 5 (pH 7), retention times are 6 and 10 min, correspondingly. For a constant pH, the increase of time results in the increase of color removal percentage. For sample 6, which demonstrates the best color removal percentage, retention time is 15 min, and pH was lowered to 6.1.  SS removal from the OMWW by EC was examined for different retention times (see Aluminium and iron anodes were tested under constant pH (6.2) and constant CD (20 mA cm In this study, EC was applied for the OMWW treatment with the following results. Under the 30-min retention time (pH 6.2, CD=20 mA cm For both iron and aluminum anodes, the value of pH 6 is an optimal one, although aluminum is the better material for COD removal than iron. With the CD raise, COD removal yield raises as well. In alkaline solutions, the best indices are characteristic of the iron anode. In neutral and weak-acid solutions the most effective purification happens in the presence of the aluminum anode. The longer is time of the OMWW treatment, the greater is level of color removal, but after 10 min both iron and aluminum anodes yield 96% color removal. With the increase of the EC time, the SS removal yield is increasing monotonically. To conclude with, a few advantages of the EC application should be mentioned. First, EC allows for the OMWW treatment without applying any chemical reagents, and the process itself is easy for management and automation. Then, the consumption of electric power is low enough. And, at last, inputs of metal (aluminum) are inconsiderable. An optimization offered to optimize the construction of the EC apparatus for the wastewater treatment allows to pass from a laboratorial model to an industrial specimen that possesses same technological characteristics.