Ankle arthritis is a debilitating condition. Primary ankle joint osteoarthritis is much rarer than hip or knee arthritis. The majority of cases are post-traumatic secondary to previous articular trauma or ligamentous instability. Treatment methods available are guided by disease severity and the patient's functional demands. Weight loss, activity modification, the wearing of an ankle brace or high topped-lace up boots and orthoses should be the first line of treatment. Joint sparing procedures such as arthroscopic debridement, supramalleolar osteotomy and distraction arthroplasty have been trialed with low levels of supporting evidence. The demand for joint preservation has led to the development of total ankle allografting procedures, but these have fallen out of favour. Despite advancements, the gold standard for end stage arthritis remains arthrodesis, although evidence for total ankle arthroplasty in certain groups of patients is increasing. The current third generation implants have improved survivorship although their results remain inferior to arthroplasty of the hip and knee. There are currently two prospective randomized control trials of ankle replacement versus arthrodesis under way as well as several national joint registries, which will hopefully better define those patients who will gain most benefit from replacement as opposed to fusion.The incidence of ankle osteoarthritis (OA) in the UK has recently been estimated to be 47.7 per 100 000. Of the 29 000 symptomatic cases referred to specialist surgeons in the UK each year, approximately ten percent undergo arthrodesis or arthroplasty. The ankle's bony anatomy confers a high degree of stability and congruence when it is loaded. It is composed of three articulations: the tibiotalar, fibulotalar, and tibiofibular joints. The talar body has a convex dome which is wider anteriorly than posteriorly. When the talus is plantarflexed, its narrowest portion occupies the ankle mortise and allows for rotation between the talus and mortise. However, when the talus is maximally dorsiflexed, the tibiofibular syndesmosis accommodates the wider portion of the talus in the ankle mortise, allowing little or no rotation to occur and stabilizing it. The ankle joint does not simply act as a hinge, nor is its primary axis fixed, but changes direction and position throughout the range of ankle motion. Accordingly, its motion is coupled, with external rotation and eversion occurring with dorsiflexion and internal rotation and inversion with plantarflexion. The talus is a frustum of a cone with its apex oriented medially. A frustum is a segment of a solid lying between two parallel lines, which cut it ( It has been estimated that ankle degeneration is one ninth as common as hip or knee osteoarthritis, despite the ankle being the most frequently injured weight-bearing joint. The reason for this is uncertain, although ankle cartilage does differ from that of the hip and knee. The articular cartilage of the hip and knee is said to be at least 3 mm thick in load bearing areas, and may exceed 6 mm. The maximal articular cartilage thickness in the ankle measures 2.7 mm on high resolution MRI. The relative rarity of primary ankle osteoarthritis, compared to the hip, may be a consequence of its ability to sustain higher peak contact stresses, resulting in a more favourable linear age related decline. Specifically, ankle articular cartilage tensile fracture stress and tensile stiffness have been shown to deteriorate less rapidly with age than in hip articular cartilage. Hip articular cartilage is also felt to exhibit an exponential decline with age. Buckwalter and Saltzman hypothesized that post-traumatic ankle osteoarthritis is the result of excessive articular surface contact stress resulting from post-traumatic joint incongruity and instability, such that the cartilage's capacity to repair is exceeded. Their contention is that post-traumatic ankle OA progresses through three stages as shown in Tibial plafond fractures, malleolar fractures, fracture dislocations of the ankle, inadequate fracture reduction and ligamentous injury have been consistently implicated in the development ankle OA. In pilon fractures the energy of the injury, articular comminution and displacement are associated with poorer outcomes. The malleolar fracture pattern attributed with the highest incidence of OA has been Weber C fractures in association with medial malleolar fracture. With greater than one third of patients developing advanced radiographic degenerative changes in a long-term, retrospective review of 102 ankle fractures, at 18 years. Osteochrondral injuries are also linked to the development of OA. However, the determining factor may be the depth and location of cartilage damage at the time of injury. In a recent 13 year follow-up study of 109 patients, lesions on the anterolateral talar dome, posteromedial tibia and medial malleolus had the worst long-term outcomes both radiographically and clinically. Chronic lateral ligamentous instability of the ankle does seem to be instrumental in the development of medial compartment degeneration. Harrington performed a radiographic review of 36 patients with chronic lateral ankle instability, at a minimum of 10 years. The patients complained of increasing ankle pain, with degenerative change over the medial talar and tibial surfaces of the ankle. These changes were observed radiographically and confirmed arthroscopically. He went onto to suggest that restoration of lateral ligament stability may prevent or slow progression. The minimum radiographic series to asses the ankle is a weight-bearing mortise view and a lateral weight-bearing radiograph of the foot and ankle. Some add an AP of the ankle and hindfoot alignment view. A mortise view is taken in 15 to 20° of internal rotation, so that the intermalleolar axis is perpendicular to the X-ray beam. Plain X-rays are the main method used to detect ankle OA for epidemiological purposes. Several radiographic grading systems currently exist. The Kellgren and Lawrence scale and its modified form are not specific to the ankle, but have been used most widely. There are five grades, with advanced OA grades 3 and 4. Recently COFAS (the Canadian Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society) introduced a classification system for end stage ankle arthritis which has been validated Radiographic classification systems also exist to describe asymmetric, commonly varus, ankle arthritis. The Takakura classification system, or its modified form by Tanaka et al. ( Shoe modification and foot orthoses are central to the nonsurgical management of ankle arthritis. The rocker sole and solid-ankle cushion-heel (SACH) are the most commonly prescribed external shoe modification ( Alternatively, many recommend the use of high-topped lace up boots, which are broadly similar to the Arizona brace™ ( Evidence supporting intra-articular steroids in treating ankle OA is limited with only short term relief being achieved. The role of hyaluronic acid (HA), commonly known as ‘viscosupplementation,’ in the ankle remains controversial. It is thought HA contributes to the viscoelastic properties of synovial fluid, as HA is believed to be in a lower concentration and of a lower molecular weight in osteoarthritic joints than in healthy ones. Exogenous HA is thought to favourably enhance endogenous chondrocyte HA and proteoglycan synthesis. Although the optimal indications for HA treatment have not yet been established it has been suggested it should only be considered in patients with an overall range of motion greater than 40°, without large osteophytes. Its reported adverse effects include injection site related pain and, in up to a quarter of patients, an inflammatory reaction which can mimic septic arthritis. Hyaluronic acid exists in either high or low molecular weight preparations, and can be used as a single injection, or as a course. In comparing these two preparations, there is some evidence to favour the use of high molecular weight HA in the ankle joint. A prospective multicenter study of 55 patients with symptomatic ankle OA were treated with a single injection of high molecular weight HA and followed-up for six to nine months. The option of a second and final injection was available if insufficient pain relief was experienced after the initial 3-months. The primary endpoint was the change in the patient's ankle OA pain visual analogue score (VAS). There was a statistically significant decrease in the mean from 68.0 at baseline to 33.8 at three months (P < 0.001). Thirty-one patients received one intra-articular injection, reporting a mean change in VAS Score of −42.5 (P < 0.001); 24 patients received two injections with a mean change in VAS Score of −23.5 (P < 0.001). The secondary endpoints were the change from baseline in: the total ankle OA score, the patients' global OA assessment VAS, the physicians' global OA Assessment VAS and the SF-36. For all of these endpoints the patients showed statistically significant improvement. In comparison the results of three published randomized control trials investigating low molecular weight, non-crosslinked HA demonstrated equivocal outcomes when compared with intra-articular saline, both as a single injection or as a course of five weekly injections.  Arthroscopic debridement of the arthritic joint has become increasingly popular as recovery times are reduced with earlier return to function than is seen with open procedures. The rôle of arthroscopy in the management of the osteoarthritic ankle has been long debated. Advocated by some to provide an interim alternative to arthrodesis, there is limited evidence to support it with high failure rates. It is important to distinguish between anterior ankle impingement and ankle OA. Impingement presents clinically with anterior ankle pain as a result of bony and/or soft tissue impingement between the tibia and talar neck. Radiologically it present with anterior osteophytes in the absence of joint space narrowing. A level II prospective cohort study (n = 62, 42M:20F, mean age 31 years) compared outcomes following arthroscopic debridement in patients with isolated anterior impingement with and without joint space narrowing. Ninety percent of patients without joint space narrowing had good or excellent results, whereas only 50% of patients with joint space narrowing on preoperative weight-bearing radiographs had good or excellent results. Furthermore pain relief at two years after surgery was significantly improved in the pure anterior impingement group, but not the group with joint space narrowing. Interestingly the patients with anterior impingement managed arthroscopically have excellent mid-term functional results, despite the fact that the anterior osteophytes often recur.  Arthrodiastasis, or distraction arthroplasty (DA) is frequently cited as a joint sparing treatment in severe ankle OA. It is thought to function by offloading the arthritic joint, inducing healing in the underlying subchondral bone. Another proposed mechanism of action is that the continuous flow of synovial fluid through the distracted joint allows chondrocyte nutrition and cartilage regeneration. This is hypothetical as there is no clear evidence that cartilage regeneration actually occurs during or following joint distraction. The indication for DA remains end stage ankle OA in younger patients with near normal ankle alignment. A circumferential Ilizarov external fixator composed of two tibial rings connected to a foot frame is used. This construct may be articulated or static and remains in situ for between eight and 14 weeks. The ankle joint typically remains distracted between 5 and 10 mm. Progressive weight-bearing is allowed. Overall the consensus from systematic reviews remains unfavourable, highlighting methodological flaws in studies with small patient cohorts and variable numbers of adjunctive procedures being randomly performed. These include open or arthroscopic joint debridement, tendo Achillis lengthening and supramalleolar osteotomy. A long-term (10 ± 2.5 years following DA) follow-up of 22 patients (14 males: 8 females, mean age 37 ± 11 years) suggested that significant clinical improvement occurred in 72% of the patient cohort, which was maintained for a minimum of seven years. With six patients considered treatment failures, five of whom were treated with ankle arthrodesis and one patient developing a complex regional pain syndrome. No cases of early frame removal were documented. The primary endpoints in this study were a combination of pain, function and patient satisfaction outcome scores. The long-term clinical benefit recorded was proposed as being equivalent to the outcome of total ankle arthroplasty in the treatment of severe ankle OA. In reviewing the available data, we consider that there is inadequate evidence to support the routine use of distraction arthroplasty.  A malaligned hindfoot is reported in up to 63% of the patients with severe ankle arthritis. Supramalleolar osteotomies (SMO) in the asymmetrical ankle are proposed to work by transferring weight-bearing to the unaffected side of the joint with intact articular cartilage. In the process talar tilt is corrected. A correlation has been observed between good radiographic correction and favourable patient outcomes. The primary indication reported for supramalleolar osteotomies is asymmetric ankle OA, with at least 50% preserved tibiotalar joint surface. To correct a varus deformity a supramalleolar osteotomy can either be a medial opening or lateral closing wedge. The medial opening wedge is the more commonly performed, with its primary advantages being ease of bone cuts and maintenance of length. Alternatively, in the case of a valgus ankle a medial closing wedge with the addition of a fibular osteotomy is more commonly performed. The advantage of a lateral closing wedge lies with its inherent stability with no graft, this allows early weight-bearing and favourably affects soft tissue tension. In reality it is the easier surgical access to the tibia which dictates the type of wedge undertaken and this may be influenced by previous incisions and other soft tissue considerations. The largest prospective study of supramalleolar deformity of the ankle complicated by ankle arthritis looked at 94 ankles at a mean follow-up of 43 months. It was concluded that supramalleolar osteotomy was an effective treatment of early and mid-stage asymmetric arthritis of the ankle. However, the risk factors for failure of supramalleolar osteotomy were osseous imbalance, for example a non-corrected fibula, ligamentous insufficiency and ankles with intra-articular varus arthritis with loss of the joint space between the medial malleolus and the talus. Observed perioperative complications from this series included two cases of neuroma associated with the saphenous nerve and injury to the tibialis anterior intraoperatively. Ten patients were converted to total ankle replacement or ankle arthrodesis within the follow-up period. Remaining studies detailing realignment osteotomies are limited to small patient cohorts with various aetiologies. This has been highlighted in a recent systematic review which suggests that the available evidence is either level III or IV and provides insufficient support for supramalleolar osteotomies in the treatment of mild to moderate ankle arthritis. On the other hand, there is good evidence to show that post fracture tibial malalignment of more than 5° predisposes to ankle arthritis. Arthrodesis remains the gold standard for the treatment of end stage ankle arthritis. It relieves pain by eliminating motion and providing stability. Historically arthrodesis was used for treating poliomyelitis and tuberculosis of the ankle, its indications changing over time to include isolated end stage arthritis from post-traumatic, post-infective, avascular necrosis and inflammatory arthropathies. Ankle arthrodesis can be performed with a multitude of implants and approaches. Mann popularized an open transfibular lateral approach, utilizing the internervous plane between the sural nerve and the lateral branch of the superficial peroneal nerve. The fibula is excised, and can be morcellized to be used as bone graft. Two 6.5 mm compression screws are passed retrograde from inferolaterally in the talus to superomedially in the tibia, achieving rigid compression. The screw positioning in the talus is exacting as there is little space. The first screw is placed just above the lateral talar process and the second screw is placed anterior to this. The ideal position for fusion is plantigrade with the hindfoot 0–5° of valgus and 5–10° of external rotation. Arthroscopic fusion is being increasingly undertaken with union rates of over 90% and a comparable time to union, compared to open techniques. The main benefits of the arthroscopic technique are minimized soft tissue trauma and reduced hospital stay. The ideal patient for an arthroscopic arthrodesis has minimal deformity. The technique varies, but we prefer a noninvasive ankle distraction through a sterile commercially available ankle strap placed around the heel and midfoot, with adequate traction applied to access the joint. The joint is inflated with normal saline and access gained using standardized anteromedial and anterolateral portals. Routine joint examination can be performed using a 4.0 mm arthroscope, followed by debridement and preparation of the articular surfaces to bleeding, viable subchondral bone using a selection of curettes, arthroscopic shavers and burrs. Pituitary rongeurs can be used to help extract cartilage remnants. Care must be exercised to maintain the normal bony contours of the talus and tibia. Two large fragment compression screws are passed from the proximal posteromedial tibia into the talar body and talar neck to achieve arthrodesis ( Postoperatively the ankle has been traditionally immobilized in a cast for three months, the first six weeks being non-weight-bearing. However in both arthroscopic and open ankle arthrodesis early weight-bearing at two weeks, has been shown not to reduce union rates. Thus we have started early weight-bearing after both techniques, providing the fixation is stable. In the longer term there is a concern that functional deterioration may occur, principally as a result of the development of arthritis in the adjacent joints. Gait studies of arthrodesed ankles have shown increased dorsiflexion stresses in the joints located between the ankle and the metatarsal heads. Two frequently cited long-term radiographic and clinical follow-up studies at more than 20 years have implicated ankle arthrodesis in the later development of OA in the subtalar and midtarsal joints. In recent years TAR has shown promising mid-term results and is no longer considered an experimental procedure. As TAR maintains ankle motion its proponents argue that it normalizes gait patterns and reduces adjacent joint arthritis, when compared to ankle arthrodesis. On the other hand its detractors quote the high rates of intra and postoperative complications and limited implant survivorship as reasons not to undertake TAR. One of the major considerations in undertaking TAR is patient selection, the indications and contraindications are still being defined. The optimal patient is older with end stage ankle OA, minimal deformity, low bodyweight and low functional demand. The exact indications vary hugely from surgeon to surgeon, and there is no absolute consensus as to the limits of ankle arthroplasty. Historically, the first TAR implants were simple hinges which failed early as a result of the small amount of rotation in the ankle. Today improved understanding of ankle joint biomechanics has meant that the majority of current replacements consist of three components: tibial, talar and a polyethylene articulation. The majority are mobile bearings, with a flat articulation between the superior aspect of the polyethylene bearing and the tibial component to allow rotation. However, two component designs remain on the market and there is no consensus as to the superiority of mobile-bearing over two component designs. Whilst patient selection is important, questions remain around prosthesis design. Recently implants, such as the Mobility ( The cumulative annual failure rate in the UK for ankle replacements has been reported as being as low as 1.9% per annum. Five-year survivorship data from other national joint registries are: New Zealand: 93%; Sweden: 81%; Finland: 83%; Norway: 89% and four-year survivorship in the Australian registry at 90%. Ten-year survivorship from Sweden is 69% and from Norway is 76%. Failure of TAR is challenging, with options including revision to a hindfoot fusion, or to a further ankle replacement. Nevertheless, in the most extreme circumstances amputation may be required. In one series of three hundred and six consecutive primary total ankle arthroplasties eight below knee amputations were recorded. On occasions, it is possible to simply fuse the ankle joint, although this relies on there being enough talar bone stock to achieve this. If the talus has been irretrievable damaged by osteolysis or infection, it may be necessary to undertake a tibiotalar calcaneal fusion, or even a Blair type fusion, in which the os calcis is fused to the distal tibia, as a result of loss of the talar bone stock. Fixation may be with screws, a transcalcaneal hindfoot nail or plate. In the presence of infection an Ilizarov frame may be needed. Maintenance of leg length with massive allografts to replace the bone loss is sometimes needed, for example an allograft femoral head can be transfixed by a transcalcaneal nail. It has been suggested that cancellous allografts should always be used in combination with autograft or bone marrow and if not available, demineralized bone matrix (DBM). In other cases it may be possible to revise the TAR. In the simplest case, this may involve replacement of a fractured polyethylene bearing, but more commonly a complex revision may be required. The use of stemmed implants, custom-made components, trabecular metal, cement augmentation and autologous structural iliac crest in instances of excessive bone loss, appear scattered through the literature. The current body of evidence on salvage procedures for failed ankle replacement is sparse, with the choice of the revision technique dependent on the cause of failure, residual bone, bone quality, and the surgical expertise. Excluding published studies with less than ten participants, arthrodesis as a salvage procedure has union rates of between 61 and 94%. Two-stage salvage protocols have been advocated for treating infected cases. The first stage comprises extensive debridement of all nonviable and infected tissues with removal of the prosthetic components. Multiple tissue samples including joint capsule and the component-bone interface. Following this a gentamicin impregnated polymethylmethacrylate cement spacer is implanted. Six weeks of antibiotic therapy is typically completed with monitoring of C-reactive protein levels before definitive fixation is contemplated. Following this a circular external fixator is used to fuse the ankle. The relative benefits of osteotomy, arthrodesis and arthroplasty in the treatment of ankle arthritis remain uncertain. Attempting to address the void in high quality evidence comparing arthrodesis and TAR there are currently two randomized controlled trials in progress. In the US, a trial sponsored by the Seattle Institute for Biomedical and Clinical Research, is aiming to provide two year follow-up data with initial results expected in 2016. In the United Kingdom, a randomized control trial total ankle replacement versus arthrodesis (TARVA) has recently commenced. The latter is a multi-centre trial aiming to recruit 328 patients, aged between 50 and 85 years with end stage ankle arthritis, and randomize them to TAR or ankle arthrodesis. Patients are to undergo clinical assessments and complete questionnaires preoperatively, and at six, 12, 26 and 52 weeks following surgery. Beyond the end of the trial, patients will be sent questionnaires at two, five and ten years following surgery so that long-term outcomes can be captured. This trial is not expected to report until 2018. At the current time the older, less demanding patient is more likely to receive a total ankle replacement and the younger more active patient recommended arthrodesis. Patients with complex ankle deformities are also more likely to be persuaded to undergo arthrodesis, as well as the patient considered unable to comply with postoperative limitations imposed by TAR. These influences have the potential to unfavourably affect complication rates as well as survivorship in the raw data from outcome studies. A primary objective in the treatment of end stage arthritis is the normalization of gait. Researchers have compared gait analyses of TAR with ankle arthrodesis, noting significant improvement in gait parameters compared to preoperative function however neither cohort appears to demonstrate overall superiority. In current healthcare climate, the cost benefit analysis of TAR and arthrodesis is also an important consideration. Analysis of the direct and indirect costs associated with either intervention, concluded that total ankle replacement was more cost effective. Thus arthrodesis remains the gold standard in the treatment of end stage ankle arthritis providing predictable results. Nevertheless there is a definite place for TAR in selected groups of patients – the next few years will hopefully allow us to better define the group of individuals who benefit most from TAR, as opposed to fusion. It is important to recognize the scenario of the patient presenting with bilateral ankle arthritis. Typically this is either a high demand middle aged male with varus ankle OA, or an older low demand patient with an inflammatory arthropathy. Conventional teaching has cautioned against bilateral arthrodesis as a result of concerns about gait postoperatively. Thus bilateral TAR's can be considered in the lower demand patient, although may not be appropriate for the middle age male. Thus creating a surgical dilemma. In reviewing the evidence for bilateral arthrodesis, a standalone series of eight patients with osteoarthritis suggests good functional results with high patient satisfaction are achievable. Total ankle replacement with an allograft, also referred to as bipolar allograft, entails replacing the arthritic ankle joint with a fresh frozen osteochrondral cadaveric graft. Giannini outlined specific inclusion and exclusion criteria, advising age less than 55 with unilateral, grade III ankle arthritis with normal alignment. He also considered osteopaenia, rheumatoid arthritis, infection, vascular or neurologic disease with lower limb malalignment relative contraindications. Allografts are typically size-matched using a radiographic or CT protocol. Either an anterior longitudinal approach between the extensor hallucis longus and tibialis anterior tendons or a lateral approach incorporating a mini open anteromedial arthrotomy have been described. Cutting jigs are used to resect the arthritic ankle as well used to prepare the donor graft for implantation. Methods of fixation include multiple headless compression or twist off screws, as well as bioabsorbable pins. Neither tissue matching nor immunosuppressive therapy postoperatively is used. Postoperative protocols vary, although early range of motion wound permitting, non-weight-bearing for 3–4 months, progressing to partial then full weight-bearing, typically at six months is the norm. A recent systematic review of the literature identified 15 allograft transplantation studies, with the majority of studies originating from three academic centres located in Italy and the United States. The evidence for replacement of the ankle with total allograft is limited and is primarily of case series with significant heterogeneity of study design, grafting procedure and fixation methods. Reported graft failure has ranged from 19 to 69% at 24 months with the largest published series to date (88 ankles, mean follow-up 5 years) reporting a 29% failure rate. Ten patients required revision allografting, seven arthrodesis, six conversion to total ankle arthroplasty and two undergoing below knee amputations. Post-traumatic arthritis is the most common form of ankle osteoarthritis. Non-operative management should be the initial treatment for all patients with attempted weight loss, appropriate analgesia, activity modification, shoe and/or orthotic prescriptions. Viscosupplementation although controversial, may yet play a rôle in second line management. Consensus regarding the optimal surgical management of ankle arthritis has not yet been reached. The difficulty in developing an evidenced based treatment model for ankle arthritis, is that the majority of the evidence is from level III or IV studies with short and intermediate term results. The number of prospective, long-term follow-up studies is significantly limited. It is important to recognize the bimodal age distribution of ankle OA. With the functional demands of the typically younger, post-traumatic OA patient strikingly different from the older patient with end stage disease. From the available evidence arthroscopic debridement is beneficial for those with anterior impingement pain without joint space narrowing. Realignment procedures in the presence of tibial malalignment are useful to treat focal arthritic change. The case for distraction arthroplasty remains unclear, with evidence lacking and support waning. Total ankle replacement with a bipolar allograft is also falling out of favour. In UK orthopaedic practice there are difficulties with the availability and accessibility of allografts, this in association with a lack of reproducibility outside of speciality centres raises genuine concerns regarding its implementation. In cases of advanced ankle arthritis the gold standard treatment is fusion, whether it is undertaken open or arthroscopically. Nevertheless, TAR is now an established and reproducible technique, with good long-term results reported. The prospective RCT's of ankle replacement versus fusion should help to clarify which patients will benefit from arthrodesis, as opposed to replacement. At the current time our preference is to only offer TAR to patients aged over 60 years, who are low demand and have a deformity of less than 10°.