Ferritins from the liver and spleen of the cold-adapted Antarctic teleosts Trematomus bernacchii and Trematomus newnesi have been isolated and characterized. Interestingly, only H- and M-chains are expressed and no L-chains. The H-chains contain the conserved ferroxidase center residues while M-chains harbor both the ferroxidase center and the micelle nucleation site ligands. Ferritins have an organ-specific subunit composition, they are: M homopolymers in spleen and H/M heteropolymers in liver. The M-chain homopolymer mineralizes iron at higher rate with respect to the H/M heteropolymer, which however is endowed with a lower activation energy for the iron incorporation process, indicative of a higher local flexibility. These findings and available literature data on ferritin expression in fish point to the role of tissue-specific expression of different chains in modulating the iron oxidation/mineralization process.Ferritin is a ubiquitous, highly conserved protein, designed to overcome the problems posed to all aerobic organisms by the chemistry of iron. The potential toxicity of Fe(II) in the presence of oxygen is due to the spontaneous conversion into Fe(III), which forms insoluble hydroxide polymers, and to the involvement in the formation of the highly damaging reactive oxygen species. The design of the ferritin molecule is such that it prevents both phenomena. It is constructed by 24 identical or similar subunits which fold as four-helix bundles and assemble into a hollow sphere endowed by 432 symmetry. Iron and small molecules can access or leave the protein cavity through small hydrophobic and hydrophilic channels that are formed, respectively, at the four and threefold symmetry axes. The ferritin molecule accomplishes the solubilization of iron in a non-toxic and bioavailable form by means of a complex, multi-step process whose features have been extensively studied The crucial role to ferritin function played by the residues forming the ferroxidase centers and the ferric core nucleation sites explains their conservation throughout evolution, even though their distribution on the constituent ferritin subunits differs. In mammalian ferritins, the highly conserved iron ligands at the ferroxidase center are located on the H (heavy) Ferritins from lower vertebrates contain a third subunit type, named M (middle) chain after its electrophoretic mobility, which harbors the residues forming both the ferroxidase center and the micelle nucleation site(s). The M-chain was described for the first time in bullfrog Information on fish ferritin is very scanty and refers entirely to DNA-derived sequences and to the pattern of organ-specific expression. H and M subunit cDNAs have been isolated from This situation prompted the recent characterization of ferritin extracted from the spleen of the Antarctic teleost To investigate further ferritins in Antarctic fish, the structural and functional properties of the protein extracted from the spleen of Specimens of the teleosts Apoferritin was obtained from ferritin by anaerobic reduction with 1% sodium dithionite in 0.5 Ferritin and apoferritin preparations were analyzed in native gel electrophoresis performed in 7.5% polyacrylamide gels and in SDS–PAGE experiments performed in 15% polyacrylamide gels according to Laemmli Thereafter, apoferritins were reduced, carbamidomethylated and separated by reversed-phase HPLC. Each protein sample (0.2 An aliquot (10.0 An aliquot (1.0 To confirm known sequences or identify amino acid replacements, selected To simplify The protein sequence data reported in this paper will appear in the UniProt Knowledgebase under the Accession No. Fluorescence and light-scattering measurements were performed on an LS50B PerkinElmer spectrofluorimeter using a 1.0-cm path length quartz cuvette. Intrinsic fluorescence emission spectra were recorded at 300-450 The kinetics of iron oxidation–mineralization were assessed after addition of a freshly prepared anaerobic solution of ferrous ammonium sulphate to an air-equilibrated solution of apoferritin at the desired temperature. The absorbance of the ferric oxide hydrate micelle at 310 Ferritins purified from the spleen and liver of the Antarctic teleosts In both liver ferritins, the SDS gels revealed two protein bands in roughly equal amounts indicative of a heteropolymeric assemblage. The apparent molecular mass of the two bands, 22.4 and 23.4 To characterize the two subunits from The amino acid sequence comparison of M, H and L ferritin chains from different organisms given in In all available M sequences the functionally relevant amino acid residues that occur on two distinct chain types in mammalian ferritins are conserved. More specifically, E24, E58, E59, H62, E104 and Q138 (numbering as in The purified ferritins under study are characterized by a high iron content in accordance with the fact that they all contain M-chains. Thus, the sedimentation velocity patterns show the presence of a heterogeneous peak of weight average sedimentation coefficient, s Iron free apoferritins, obtained by treatment of the native proteins with sodium dithionite, sediment as a single, homogeneous peak of s Due to the limited amount of available proteins, only apoferritin from The spleen M homopolymer from The iron uptake kinetics by the The rate of the oxidation/mineralization reaction was measured in the same buffer also as a function of temperature after addition of 500 iron atoms per molecule. At 4 The present characterization of ferritin extracted from the liver and spleen of Antarctic teleosts is of interest in several respects. It extends our knowledge of fish ferritins significantly since it provides the first evidence for the existence of heteropolymeric H/M ferritins and describes their functional properties. It also shows that in all the fish tissues studied to date L-chains are not expressed suggesting that this chain type appeared later in evolution. The amino acid sequences of the Despite the structural similarities, ferritins from lower vertebrates and mammals differ from a functional viewpoint. In fact, the residues conferring either ferroxidase activity or mineralization capacity occur on the same chain type, the M-chain, in ferritins from amphibia and fish, but are located on different chains, the H- and L-chains, respectively, in mammalian ferritins. Therefore in mammals formation of H/L ferritin heteropolymers is required to both oxidize and take up iron efficiently, whereas in lower vertebrates both functions are performed by the M homopolymers ( The assemblage of M or of H/M-chains in ferritin isolated from different organs of The different subunit composition of the ferritin shells in the liver and spleen of Antarctic fish calls for possible explanations. It may reflect different functional roles of ferritin in these organs and/or adaptation to low temperatures. Temperature acclimation in poikilotherms involves significant metabolic rearrangements that are due to changes in the structural and functional properties of relevant enzymes Lastly, the absence of L-chains in the Antarctic fish ferritin molecules studied to date is of interest from an evolutionary viewpoint. One may hypothesize that: (i) the common ancestor of all eukaryotic ferritins was an H-type protein characterized by ferroxidase activity, (ii) the ancestral H-chain evolved into an M-chain endowed with the additional capacity to accumulate iron, (iii) later in evolution the L-chains specialized in iron accumulation appeared and the M-chains were no longer expressed. This picture would account for the presence of M or H/M ferritin assemblages in lower vertebrates, notably fish and amphibia The authors thank Dr. L. Giangiacomo and B. Catacchio for the analytical ultracentrifugation experiments. A grant from the Italian National Program for Antarctic Research (PNRA) to E.C. and local Grants from MIUR to E.C., R.C. and V.C. are gratefully acknowledged. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 