The importance of pulse-coupled oscillators (PCOs) in biology and engineering has motivated research to understand basic properties of PCO networks. Despite the large body of work addressing PCOs, a global synchronization result for networks that are more general than all-to-all connected is still unavailable. In this paper we address global synchronization of PCO networks described by cycle graphs. It is shown for the bidirectional cycle case that as the number of oscillators in the cycle grows, the coupling strength must be increased in order to guarantee synchronization for arbitrary initial conditions. For the unidirectional cycle case, the strongest coupling cannot ensure global synchronization yet a refractory period in the phase response curve is sufficient to enable global synchronization. Analytical findings are confirmed by numerical simulations.The synchronization of networks of agents has broad application in many fields, including: biological networks ( The synchronization of PCOs was first analyzed in the early work of The previous work on PCOs relied on the direct use of the biological model, which leads to a fixed feedback strategy. In this work we propose to re-design the PCO model to combine successful synchronization strategies taken from biology with modern control techniques to improve performance, as done by the authors in In this work, In this work we follow the hybrid systems framework given in Consider a network of The network consists of A phase response curve (PRC), or phase resetting curve ( In this work we consider a constant coupling strength If The PRC An important concept used in the analysis of PCOs is absorption ( The behavior of the solutions to the hybrid system      In this section we analyze the synchronization properties of PCO networks interacting on a cycle graph. Synchronization is characterized as convergence to a compact set. Note that even though “easy” initial conditions can synchronize under weaker conditions, the following results give the weakest conditions for global synchronization. The synchronization notion studied in this paper can be defined as follows. Consider a network of PCOs. We say that the network synchronizes if, for To study synchronization, define the synchronization set as Consider the following family of functions representing the distance to the synchronization set In the following, we consider that the feedback is given by the optimal advance-delay PRC: Before stating the synchronization results, we need to introduce the concept of refractory period and a technical lemma that can be easily derived from Theorem 1 in A refractory period is an interval   The following theorems are the main results of this paper and provide necessary and sufficient conditions for global synchronization of PCOs interacting on cycle graphs.  A similar condition can be derived for the unidirectional graph  To prove      The proof of Note that  Statement (b) of Now we proceed to prove To prove sufficiency, the strategy is to show that every solution is such that eventually In this case, directly applying   In this case, the situation is more complicated. To show that the system jumps outside Then, when  The proof uses the same arguments as the proof of Now consider The ‘only if’ part follows by contradiction supposing that the network synchronizes from every initial condition and that  The beneficial effects of a refractory period on the stability of PCO networks have been mentioned before in To illustrate our analytical findings, several numerical experiments were conducted using a general hybrid systems simulator (    Global synchronization of PCOs on cycle graphs is analyzed from a hybrid systems perspective. Using a well-posed hybrid model of a network of PCOs it is possible to formulate synchronization as a set stabilization problem and solve it accordingly. It is proven that global synchronization can be achieved in a bidirectional cycle graph if the coupling strength is above the critical value, while global synchronization in a unidirectional cycle graph cannot be achieved unless a refractory period is introduced in the phase response curve of one of the oscillators. The critical value of the coupling strength was found to increase monotonically with the number of oscillators in the cycle Future work in this line includes extending the proposed approach to the analysis of PCO networks interacting on general graphs, and the analysis of PCO networks coupled through general non-optimal PRCs. The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions to improve the quality of this manuscript. To prove     To analyze existence, note that for every Since Note that It follows that the amount of ordinary time between jumps is upper bounded by the natural period of the network,  Define Regarding In the same line, when Statement (d) follows by noting that the phase ordering implies that