A low cost ferruginous manganese ore (FMO) has been studied for the removal of arsenic from groundwater. The major mineral phases present in the FMO are pyrolusite and goethite. The studied FMO can adsorb both AS(III) and As(V) without any pre-treatment, adsorption of As(III) being stronger than that of As(V). Both As(III) and As(V) are adsorbed by the FMO in the pH range of 2–8. Once adsorbed, arsenic does not get desorbed even on varying the pH in the range of 2–8. Presence of bivalent cations, namely, Ni2+, Co2+, Mg2+ enhances the adsorption capability of the FMO. The FMO has been successfully used for the removal of arsenic from six real groundwater samples containing arsenic in the range of 0.04–0.18ppm. Arsenic removals are almost 100% in all the cases. The cost of the FMO is about 50–56 US$ per metric tonne.Occurrence of arsenic in groundwater may be both anthropogenic and geogenic in nature. Anthropogenic activities include mining, release of industrial effluents, wanton disposal of chemical wastes, to name a few. Arsenic from these wastes is released due to natural weathering and eventually contaminates the groundwater aquifer. Under extreme conditions, anthropogenic activities may also lead to geogenic release of arsenic to groundwater in soluble form. A typical case in point is the state of West Bengal in India where groundwater of at least six districts have been found to be contaminated with arsenic The chemistry of arsenic in aquatic system is quite complicated as the element may exist in any one of the four stable oxidation states (+5, +3, 0, −3). However, in groundwater the arsenate (H Use of naturally occurring ores and minerals as adsorbent for removing arsenic has been attempted by some workers though not as extensively as precipitation coagulation technique. These include bituminous coal, lignite, illite, kaolinite In the present work a low cost ferruginous manganese ore (FMO) has been studied in detail for the purpose of removing arsenic from groundwater. The adsorption parameters, namely, shaking time, fineness of the particles and adsorbent dose have been optimised with respect to arsenic spiked tap water for both As(III) and As(V). Attempts have been made to ascertain adsorption mechanisms for As(III) and As(V) from appropriate adsorption isotherms. Finally, the FMO has been used for the removal of arsenic from six real life arsenic contaminated groundwater samples. The overall objective of the present study was to ascertain the capability of the FMO for removing arsenic from groundwater in a single step operation and without any pretreatment. FMO used in the present study was collected from the Mineral Processing Division of National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur. This is a low cost material abundantly available in South Bihar and Orissa. The average cost of the material is about US$50–56 per metric tonne. The material was powdered and washed with deionised water to remove dust and fines. The dried material was sieved and 250, 150 and 75 A JEOL JSM 840 A Scanning Electron Microscope with CAVEX 8000EDS was used for identifying the material constituents. Trace elemental analyses were carried out with GBC 908 AA atomic absorption spectrometer. Silica, manganese and iron were analysed by conventional wet chemical methods All the reagents used, including acids, were of Analytical grade. Stock arsenic solutions (1000 Hundred millilitre of a synthetic arsenic solution of predetermined concentration (‘mother’ solution) was placed in a stoppered 250 Adsorbent dose, adsorbent particle size and shaking time were optimised for maximum adsorption by the method of continuous variation following batch adsorption experiments mentioned above. Optimum adsorbent dose, shaking time and particle size was 0.2   Generally both Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms are used for explaining the adsorption of metal ions on naturally occurring minerals. Langmuir and Freundlich isotherm equations are given below.  Taking the logarithm of   If the adsorption data follow Langmuir pattern, a plot of Attempts were made to fit the adsorption data for As(III) and As(V) in Freundlich ( As(III)-Freundlich: As(III)-Langmuir: As(V)-Freundlich: As(V)-Langmuir: Freundlich and Langmuir constants ( Adsorption studies presented so far were carried out at a pH of 6.3 for As(III) and a pH of 6.5 for As(V). It is apparent from The results of adsorption and desorption study are also important from another viewpoint. It is evident from Arsenic filter sludge is generally disposed either by converting the entrapped arsenic in the sludge into insoluble inorganic compounds or by bio-transformation of arsenic in the sludge. Arsenic forms an insoluble mineral scorodite in the presence of iron having chemical formula, FeAsO The adsorbent FMO used in the present study was characterised to be having primarily pyrolusite and goethite mineral phases, other than silica as quartz. There are reports in the literature on the adsorption of arsenic on hydrous manganese and iron oxides The FMO used in the present study comprises goethite, which has the molecular formula FeO(OH) and it can directly adsorb arsenite and arsenate anions. However, pyrolusite, which is the major mineral phase in the ore has the chemical formula MnO The FMO studied was used for the removal of arsenic in six natural groundwater samples collected from North-24 The conclusions of the present study may be listed as follows: The ferruginous manganese ore (FMO) used in the present study comprises 76.9% MnO Primary mineral phases present in the FMO are pyrolusite ( The FMO used is an efficient adsorbent for both As(III) and As(V) in the pH range of 2–8. The adsorbed arsenic does not become desorbed from the filter sludge even at pH 2, under laboratory conditions. Presence of bivalent cations, namely, Ni Pyrolusite ( The FMO has been successfully used for the removal of arsenic in six real life arsenic contaminated water samples. There is no leaching of Mn or any other elements from FMO to water after adsorption. The authors wish to thank the Director of NML for his kind permission to publish this work. Encouragement from HOD, ANC is gratefully acknowledged. The authors express their gratitude to K.K. Gupta, Scientist, ANC Division for critically examining the manuscript. Help received from S.K. Das for EDX analysis, Ravi kumar for XRD and Engineering division for the tracings are sincerely appreciated. The authors also gratefully acknowledge the help received from the NGO, Jana Sanghati Kendra, Madhyamgram, West Bengal in collecting the real life arsenic contaminated groundwater samples.