Severe deformation processing is an emerging technique, for the production of submicron grain structures in metallic material, which involves plastic deformation to ultra-high strains. An ultra-fine grained (UFG) material was prepared from an IF steel sheet using Accumulative Roll Bonding (ARB) process. After initial preparing to achieve good sheet bonding, ten cycles of ARB at 500°C were successfully performed. Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) and Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) were used for the characterization of subgrain and grain structures of ARB processed samples. The mechanical attributes after rolling and cooling were examined. Also, the fracture surfaces were studied by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). It was concluded that metal’s tensile strengths increased by 334% while the ductility dropped from a pre-rolled value of 50.5% to 2.6%. The rolling process was stopped in cycle 10, when cracking of the edges became pronounced.Ultra fine grained (UFG) materials have grain size smaller than 1 A rather large body of research has been published on the efficiency of techniques such as equal channel angular pressing (ECAP) and high-pressure torsion (HPT) for grain refinement of a number of metallic materials Ultra-low-carbon steel was used in the tests. The chemical composition of these materials is given in The mean grain size of IF steel at the beginning was 17.6 The microstructure was investigated by optical microscopy and Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) on the longitudinal (TD plane). IF steel samples were etched by natal solution after polishing for 10 The tensile strength of IF steel was studied by strain rate approximately 8E-4S-1. Mean value of hardness evaluated by Vickers micro hardness with the load of 50 Optical macrographs of ARB processed IF steel are shown in AFM micrographs of the ARB-processed IF steel from TD planes after various cycles are shown in  Lee et al. studied on microstructure changing of samples in TD and RD planes up to higher cycles. The ultra-fine grains with clear grain boundaries begin to appear at the third cycle. The fraction of these ultra-fine grains increases with the number of ARB cycles. The specimen processed by six-cycle ARB was almost covered with the ultra-fine grains of 500 By study on ND plane in Changing in grain size was seen in various materials   One of the most important aspects of ARB process is tensile properties. Elevation in yield stress and UTS can be justified by work hardening at initial stages. Large value of plastic deformation can occur in samples by ARB process. These plastic deformations cause work hardening. At this stage grain refinement can be effective. Since the grain size in ARB samples is low, it concludes yield and tensile stress rise according to Hall–Petch relationship. These two phenomena can help improve tensile properties At higher ARB cycles, yield and tensile strengths decreased a little in specimen. These phenomena may be due to two reasons. The first cause is saturation in high level of accumulated strain in bulk material. At this stage, grains contain a large number of dislocations and it is impossible to produce new dislocation in these grains. At this stage, misorientation angle of grain can’t increase and in maximum state it is about 36° for parallel boundaries with roll plane Valiev et al. Fracture surface of IF steel are illustrated in  IF steel with an ultra fine grain structure was obtained by accumulative roll bonding. The grain size was measured using AFM and TEM. It concluded that ARB process can be useful to reach UFG structure in IF steel. The hardness of the ARB processed IF steel increased with the number of ARB cycles, so that the specimen after eight cycles achieved highest hardness of about 250% higher the initial value. The tensile properties evaluated after various ARB cycles, suggest that the sample after eight cycles achieved the highest strength which was more that three time higher the annealed state. Fractography of IF specimens showed that plastic deformation during fracture became low from initial to high ARB cycles. The authors wish to acknowledge the Metal Forming laboratory of Amirkabir University of technology and Malek Ashtar University for providing equipment for experiments.