In the context of recovering Ni from pyrrhotite tailings though a (bio)leaching process, Part 1 of this investigation explored a strategy to concentrate iron from the residual jarosite-goethite assemblage using controlled release of reducing gases from biomass to promote transformation at temperatures below 500 °C to an inverse spinel phase amenable to magnetic separation. While most of the remaining sulphur is associated with K in the form of arcanite (K2SO4), a water-soluble potassium sulfate that can easily be removed through rinsing, the present study focuses on implementing a complementary fixation strategy to minimize the significant loss of sulphur to the gas phase and to access the residual amount trapped in magnetic spinel to obtain a cleaner more valuable iron product. Through the use of potassium additives (K2CO3, KOH) during biomass-induced magnetization experiments, more than 90% of the original sulphur could be stabilized in the form of arcanite. Moreover, after a further thermal oxidation treatment of the rinsed magnetite product in the presence of KOH, the residual sulphur content could be lowered from 1.8 down to 0.08 wt%. Although the major advantage of fixing the sulphur in the form of a readily-extractable arcanite phase is to easily purify the magnetite product, subsequent exchange of the potassium sulfate solution with calcium chloride to promote the precipitation of high-purity gyspum (CaSO4·2H2O) represents a viable option to contain sulphur in a highly stable form, which can also represent a by-product suitable for use in the construction industry. On the other hand, the potassium remaining in solution in the chloride form can be precipitated as sylvite (KCl) for use as fertilizer.In the Sudbury area, up to 100 millions metric tonnes of pyrrhotite (Fe In terms of iron management, Part 1 of this study ( Upfront sulphur fixation has been documented for various applications. For example, lime-based additives such as calcium hydroxide and calcium carbonate have been used to stabilize sulphur in the form of calcium sulfite or gypsum during coal combustion in industrial boilers (e.g. Considering that water-soluble arcanite is the stable sulphur-bearing phase produced during the magnetization of jarosite-goethite assemblages, the use of potassium in the form of carbonate (K X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses were performed to identify major phases present in the starting materials and after the transformation experiments. Powder-XRD analyses were obtained with a Rigaku D/MAX 2500 rotating anode powder diffractometer using monochromatic CuKα radiation (λ: 0.154059 nm) at 40 kV and 200 mA. Collection from 5 to 70° 2θ was made with a step scan of 0.02° and a scan rate of 1° per minute. Phase identification was achieved using the JADE version 9.0 software interfaced with current ICDD diffraction databases. The concentrations of Fe, S and K in the starting material and experimental products were obtained by wavelength-dispersive spectrometry (WDS) using a JEOL JXA 8900 electron probe X-ray microanalyzer (EPMA) operated at an accelerating voltage of 20 kV. The fine-grained material was first pelletized under hydraulic pressure using a 13 mm diameter die to obtain a flat surface and quantitative analyses were collected on multiple areas using a probe current of 10 nA, with a beam defocused up to 40 μm and counting times ranging from 10 to 30 s on peak and background. The characteristic X-ray lines and standards used for the analyses were Fe Kα (Fe As wavelength-dispersive spectrometry can resolve Kα characteristic X-ray peak shape alteration related to change in sulphur valency from oxidized (6 Chemical information on some of the experimental products was obtained by energy-dispersive (EDS) X-ray microanalysis using a Hitachi S-3200N variable pressure scanning electron microscope (VP-SEM) equipped with a Bruker silicon-drifted detector. The instrument was operated at a pressure of 20 Pa and an accelerating voltage of 20 kV. Liquid chemical composition were estimated using a Horiba XGT7200 micro-XRF (μXRF) system with a Rh X-ray source operated at 50 kV. The analyses were performed under partial vacuum with a 1.2 mm beam size, an emission current ranging from 0.31 to 0.4 mA, and counting times of 1200 s. The liquid samples were contained in a PTFE cell assembly equipped with an X-ray transparent window film. The data was normalized to the K Kα1 peak. The biomass used was a softwood of spruce, pine, and fir, with low sulphur content (0.0136 wt%) which has thermal breakdown characteristics indicating a maximum release of gas at ≈340 °C ( The biomass-induced magnetization experiments were performed in a three-zone horizontal furnace under argon, using a configuration similar to the one described by As discussed in Part 1 of this study ( Compositionally, as shown on the Fe-S-K ternary diagram in The significant loss of sulphur to the gas phase during the transformation of the K-jarosite/goethite mixture, is mainly related to a potassium deficiency to account for all the sulfur in the form of arcanite (K With the exception of minor residual hydrated dipotassium carbonate, the major phases detected in the product of the reducing experiment in the presence of K Considering that K In an attempt to further decrease the amount of residual reduced sulphur, a subsequent treatment of the rinsed magnetite product from run JG3 was performed at 400 °C under air with addition of a small amount of KOH with the aim of oxidizing the sulphur and promoting arcanite formation (row JG4: The major advantage of fixing the sulphur in the form of arcanite is the ability to easily extract it in order to purify the magnetite product. However, the potential for subsequently promoting precipitation of pure calcium sulfate from the arcanite solution can provide an opportunity to recover sulphur in a highly stable form (gypsum) suitable for use in the construction industry ( Gypsum precipitation from the potassium sulfate solution through exchange with calcium chloride (CaCl As seen in XRF analysis of the filtrate from the first-stage gypsum precipitation illustrates that the calcium carried in solution decreased as the amount of added CaCl The results of this study indicate that KOH represents a very efficient fixation agent during biomass-induced magnetization of a jarosite-goethite assemblage leading to an increase in sulphur retention from 45% to more than 90%. Moreover, using a subsequent oxidation step, the residual sulphur concentration after water-based dissolution of arcanite has been drastically lowered to concentrations from 1.8 wt% to less than 0.1 wt%, resulting in an iron product of significantly higher purity. Through exchange with CaCl  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Financial support for this project was provided by