The curse of dimensionality resulted from insufficient training samples and redundancy is considered as an important problem in the supervised classification of hyperspectral data. This problem can be handled by Feature Subset Selection (FSS) methods and Support Vector Machine (SVM). The FSS methods can manage the redundancy by removing redundant spectral bands. Moreover, kernel based methods, especially SVM have a high ability to classify limited-sample data sets. This paper mainly aims to assess the capability of a FSS method and the SVM in curse of dimensional circumstances and to compare results with the Artificial Neural Network (ANN), when they are used to classify alteration zones of the Hyperion hyperspectral image acquired from the greatest Iranian porphyry copper complex. The results demonstrated that by decreasing training samples, the accuracy of SVM was just decreased 1.8% while the accuracy of ANN was highly reduced i.e. 14.01%. In addition, a hybrid FSS was applied to reduce the dimension of Hyperion. Accordingly, among the 165 useable spectral bands of Hyperion, 18 bands were only selected as the most important and informative bands. Although this dimensionality reduction could not intensively improve the performance of SVM, ANN revealed a significant improvement in the computational time and a slightly enhancement in the average accuracy. Therefore, SVM as a low-sensitive method respect to the size of training data set and feature space can be applied to classify the curse of dimensional problems. Also, the FSS methods can improve the performance of non-kernel based classifiers by eliminating redundant features.The remote sensing images are applied to identify and classify the earth surface objects. They provide the valuable information which can be enjoyed by varied fields of sciences. Geologists with the aim of lithological mapping ( The developed hyperspectral sensors compared with the earlier multispectral types use the hundreds of channels to measure spectral data. Therefore, they prepare fine details and great volume of spectral information about materials of the earth surface that enable them to distinguish subtle spectral differences and to identify similar materials of the ground surface ( Due to the having of large amount of data, hyperspectral images can be considered as a high dimensional data set. The high dimensional data are composed of a large number of features (or spectral bands in remote sensing data) while many of them are irrelevant or redundant and increase just the size and complexity of the feature space. The high dimensionality of feature space can be led to the curse of dimensionality which is known as an ill-posed problem, because the patterns of curse dimensional feature spaces are not easily recognized ( This problem as well as many others challenging problems of hyperspectral data classification have attracted the interest of data mining and machine learning fields ( The kernel-based classifiers solve a linear problem after mapping data from an original input space to a higher dimension feature space. Amongst the most widely used kernel-based methods, Support Vector Machine (SVM) has been extensively applied in the wide variety of applications to analyze the hyperspectral data ( The feature reduction methods which are implemented as an important pre-processing step in the high dimensional data analysis, select or produce an efficient subset of the features from the original data set. They should be carried out to handle the curse of dimensionality and to remove irrelevant, redundant and noisy features. The feature reduction methods can increase the speed and generalization of classification, the predictive accuracy and the ability of understanding classification rules ( At the regional scale of the mineral exploration, the classification of hydrothermal alteration zones is a vital step because of the spatial relationships of deposits and the corresponding alteration zones. Usually, a ground survey is needed to gather the valid data as a training data set of the supervised classification. This work is time consuming and costly, because prospecting areas are not easily accessible and, therefore, the sampling of adequate instances is impossible. Due to this reason as well as the probable redundancy of hyperspectral data, the classification of alteration zones using the hyperspectral data will cause the curse of dimensionality. In the curse of dimensional circumstance, the performance of classification by the conventional classifiers may be compromised, hence the appropriate methods are required to address this problem ( The study area is the most important Cu porphyry type deposit of Iran- Sarcheshmeh- and its surrounding areas, Darrehzar and Sereidun. Aforementioned methods are used to classify the main hydrothermal alteration minerals of the study area using the Hyperion hyperspectral data. The study area is located in the Iranian Uromiyeh-Dokhtar magmatic belt ( The huge Sarcheshmeh deposit with the 1200 The Sereidun district, in the east vicinity of the Sarcheshmeh, contains the various alterations including propylitic, phyllic, argillic, advanced argillic and silicic. Spatially, the phyllic alteration zone is followed by the disseminated advanced argillic zone ( The Darrehzar porphyry copper deposit which is located in 8 The Hyperion hyperspectral image with 242 spectral bands acquired on 26 July 2004 was used in this study. It has been shown in Due to the occurrence of various hydrothermal alteration zones in our study area, introduced by previous studies ( The dimension reduction techniques are categorized to two groups: feature extraction and feature selection. The feature selection algorithms try to identify the most characterizing features of the feature space which are essential to improve the performance of classification ( In this study, we will utilize a hybrid FSS to combine a filter and a wrapper method where irrelevant and redundant features are removed with the filter method, then an optimal subset of the features is selected from the reduced feature space using the wrapper method. In the filter phase, the features are weighted by a criterion, then in the wrapper phase, both Fuzzy Imperialist Competitive algorithm (FICA) and Incremental Wrapper Subset Selection with replacement (IWSSr) algorithm are applied to search and detect the most effective subset of features. This method is quite efficient for the selecting of a compact set of features from high dimensional data sets ( Support Vector Machine (SVM) ( The SVM was applied to classify alteration minerals of the study area using the data set of Due to the outperformed results of Radial Basis Function (RBF) compared to other kernel functions ( Results of the classification by using of the data sets of The results demonstrate that the increasing of curse of dimensionality from the data set 1–6 has a negligible effect on the accuracy of SVM while the accuracy of ANN has been significantly decreased. The accuracy of SVM from the data set 1–6 just decreases 1.8% (from 97.53 to 95.73) while the accuracy of ANN decreases much more, i.e. 14.01% (from 92.44 to 78.43). Also, differences between the accuracies of SVM and ANN are gradually increased by the increasing of curse of dimensionality from the data set 1–6. This trend is observed for each mineral class in all 6 training data sets. For example, the difference between the average accuracy of SVM and ANN in the data set 1 is minimum, equal to 5.09% (97.53–92.44), while for the data set 6 is maximum, equal to 17.30% (95.73–78.43). These results imply that SVM compared to ANN shows a much lower sensitivity with respect to the size of training set or the curse of dimensionality ( The largest reduction in the ANN accuracies corresponds to the Muscovite and Kaolinite which are equal to 18.96% (85.83–66.87) and 23.23% (86.85–63.62), respectively ( In terms of the complexity and computational time, SVM is trained in much lesser time than ANN. According to Although a large feature space can be considered as an advantage for high dimensional data sets, it is more probable that some features were redundant and irrelevant. These features not only have no significant contribution to reach a high classification accuracy, but also increase the computational cost and complexity of the classification process. This condition can lead to the curse of dimensionality if there are no sufficient training samples. In this circumstances and prior to the classification, using a feature reduction method can be beneficial. The feature reduction methods are utilized to transform raw data into a format that will be more easily and effectively classified. Moreover, the size and complexity of the feature space are reduced because of the elimination of irrelevant and redundant features. In present study, the FICA-based FSS algorithm was applied to reduce size of the Hyperion’s feature space. The implementation of this algorithm on the data set of Except of the mentioned 9 spectral bands introduced by FICA-based FSS, the other remained 9 bands, namely bands No. 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, 82, 83, 84, and 85 belong to the range of 400–1300 To compare with the full band mode, the classification was repeated by 18 bands selected by the FICA-based algorithm and by using exactly the same training and test samples that the obtained results are shown in The positive effect of using the smaller feature space can also be seen in the decreased computational time. According to Consequently, the effect of using FICA-based FSS in the results of ANN can be evaluated positively, because not only it has led to a small increase in the accuracy of classification, but also it has substantially decreased the computational time of classification. The curse of dimensionality, which is related to ratio of the training set size to the feature space size, can be decreased and handled by two solutions: a) the preparing of many training samples and b) the decreasing of feature space size by the elimination of redundant and irrelevant features. In this study, we tried to overcome the curse of dimensionality using two data mining methods which are able to provide the requirements of conditions (a) and (b). Therefore, instead of the preparing many training samples suggested by the first solution, SVM was applied as a robust classification method against the curse of dimensional problems. The second goal was achieved by the decreasing of feature space size and the selecting of more informative features using the FICA-based FSS method. To evaluate the performance of SVM, a well-known classification method i.e. ANN was applied and its results were compared with SVM. These methods and Hyperion hyperspectral image were used to classify four alteration minerals of the Sarchemshmeh copper porphyry deposit and its surrounding areas from Iran. Firstly, the classification was carried out by all 165 usable spectral bands of Hyperion. Results demonstrated SVM does not highly depend on the size of training set while ANN is more dependent than SVM. With the rising of curse of dimensionality, the average accuracy of SVM just decreased 1.8% while this value is 14.01% for ANN. The using of FICA-based FSS showed that Hyperion contains many redundant and irrelevant spectral bands, because so many numbers of the Hyperion bands can be removed without any considerable negative effect on the accuracy rate of classification. Based on the obtained results, both of the SVM and ANN could classify data with an accuracy very close to the accuracy of full bands case using only 18 spectral bands introduced by the FICA-based FSS. The obtained accuracies not only are very close to the full band accuracies, but even the accuracy of ANN is slightly higher. In addition, from the point of view of computational cost, SVM is not very dependent to the size of feature space while ANN is highly dependent. These results confirm that FICA-based FSS method could successfully improve the performance of ANN by the increasing of accuracy and decreasing of computational cost. Finally, it can be concluded that the performance of ANN in terms of the accuracy and computational cost is extremely affected by the curse of dimensional conditions while SVM is almost independent from the curse of dimensionality. Therefore, in those applied fields like the hyperspectral based mineral mapping that observing of the curse of dimensionality is much probable, SVM and feature reduction methods can be utilized to handle it and to increase the performance of classification.