The excellent properties such as high strength to weight ratio and biocompatibility possessed by Titanium make it a highly beneficial material. Titanium is used in aerospace, armor plating, naval ships, missiles and surgical implants. In addition, the allotropic transformation nature of this metal further gives a wider scope of applications. The basic objective of this study is to review various aspects of titanium and titanium-based alloys used as orthopedic implants. An in-depth study on β-Titanium alloys is carried out with an aim to understand the dependency of mechanical properties and phases on the alloy composition with respect to biomedical applications. A comprehensive approach has been made to understand the design and synthesis procedure of the alloys.Linear function To solve linear regression problem Depends on Threshold value To solve a Binary Classification Problem Logarithmic function Weighted data Hyperbolic function Optimisation is easier compared to Sigmoid Advantage of easy dealing with negative numbers Rectified Linear Unit Allows only Maximum values to pass during front Propagation Allows a small negative value during the back propagation Used when there are multiple classes Useful to find the class which has max probability Titanium (Ti), a transition metal with an atomic number of 22, atomic mass of 47.88 ± 0.03 AMU Hence, much of the focus, nowadays, is on advanced processing and characterization of β phase Ti alloys. In the present work, a detailed review and supporting data have been presented along with a discussion of the influence of composition, processing and microstructure on mechanical properties of β Ti alloys with respect to biomedical applications, in general, and orthopedic implants. Ti as a pure metal exists in HCP structure at ambient temperature and pressure but, undergoes an allotropic transformation to Body Centered Cubic BCC at a temperature of about 882 °C. HCP structure is considered as α-phase whereas, BCC structure is considered as β-phase. β-Ti alloys are a class of alloys specially designed to reap the advantages of the BCC crystal structure of Ti metal present at higher temperatures. The β-phase of Ti at higher temperatures is retained at lower temperatures by alloying it with stabilizing elements. Elements used in these alloys are one or more of the following in varying amounts. These are Molybdenum (Mo), Vanadium (V), Niobium (Nb), Tantalum (Ta), Zirconium (Zr), Manganese (Mn), Iron (Fe), Chromium (Cr), Cobalt (Co), Nickel (Ni), and Copper (Cu). Depending on the stabilizing nature, these elements are divided in to β-isomorphous and β- eutectoid. Isomorphous refers to complete β phase of the alloy whereas eutectoid refers to the existence of two or more phases. A detailed list of β-phase stabilizing elements and the corresponding critical weight percentage (wt%) required to stabilize β-phase are presented in β-phase Ti alloys can be further divided in to near β, metastable β and stable β alloys The first β-Ti alloy to be used in commercial quantities was metastable β-Ti alloy Ti–13V–11Cr–3Mo. Ti–13V–11Cr–3Al was used in the airframe of one of the highly decorated spy aircraft called SR-71 blackbird. The alloy was used in the fuselage frame, wing and body skins, longerons, bulkheads, ribs and landing gear. The Boeing 777 used β-Ti alloy Ti–10V–2Fe–3Al as a replacement to high strength steel in many components, including landing gear, exhaust plugs, nozzles, and sections of the nacelle. The idea of using of β-Ti alloy is to eliminate the risk of hydrogen embrittlement experienced with steel as well as provide a weight saving. β-alloys are also used in the fan disc of gas turbine engines to save weight. The two most common β-Ti alloys for fan discs are Ti–5Al–2Zr–2Sn–4Cr–4Mo and Ti–6Al–2Sn–4Zr–6Mo, and they provide weight reductions of more than 25% compared with the use of high-temperature steel or superalloy. The strength and fatigue resistance of β-Ti alloys is generally higher than the α-Ti alloys. However, the use of β-Ti alloys is very low owing to their low creep resistance at high temperature Among metallic materials, Ti and its alloys are considered as the most suitable materials for biomedical applications for their superior comprehensive properties, and they satisfy the requirements of implantation materials better than other competing materials, such as stainless steels, Cr–Co alloys and tantalum. The basic criteria for selection of a material to be used as a replacement of bone is its ability to mimic the properties of the bones like elastic modulus, hardness, toughness, fatigue strength and ductility all together. A brief study into the dynamics and the complexity of human body will make one realize that there exists no ideal material yet to replace the natural bones of a human body. The problems like low corrosion resistance of stainless steel, high density of cobalt chromium alloys resulting in excess weight led to adaptation of Ti-alloys, Ti–6AL–4V, as potential materials for implants. Sometimes the alloys fail in the long run owing to reasons like mismatch of Young’s modulus with the body parts ultimately leading to bone resorption phenomenon and also release of Al and V ions into the body causing toxicity. From the given data, it is evident that Ti6Al4V has the lowest possible value of elastic modulus as compared to other alternative alloys. Nevertheless, the elastic modulus of Ti6Al4V alloys is much higher than that of human bone which cause stress shielding effect. This certainly demands for a need to develop newer alloys to overcome the issues of present implant materials. Hence, considerable amount work is focused on development of β-Ti alloys as they offer most of the benefits of Ti. This alloy not only exhibit reduced elastic modulus but also has alloying elements which are biocompatible and bioactive and can survive long periods of time without failure as compared to α + β alloys. Attempts have been made in synthesizing Binary, Ternary, Quaternary and Quinary Ti alloys comprising β-phase stabilizing elements with an objective of attaining lower modulus and in recent past modulus value, as low as, 40 GPa has been achieved From the values presented in In case of binary Ti–Zr alloy Chapala et al. It can be noted that the results documented so far are ambiguous and thus, could not converge to a unique solution that would come up with an alloy composition ideally suited for implants. This requires a comprehensive approach to be carried out in order to design an alloy with optimum composition of various alloying elements that closely matches the properties of human bone in terms of elastic modulus, strength and hardness. Majority of the ternary, quaternary, quinary alloy systems are designed either by modifying existing compositions or designed based on concepts such as molecular orbital theory, d-electron alloy design method, and Discrete Variational (DV) Xα molecular orbital method wherein parameters like bond order (Bo) and d-orbital energy level (Md) are used for the design of the alloys. Low modulus TNTZ alloy was developed based on above concepts ANN is an alternate way to simulate ambiguous and complex problems. The transformation of nonlinear models into simplified structure has been done through ANN A neural network without an activation function is essentially just a linear regression model. Activation function does the non-linear transformation to the input making it to capable to learn and perform more complex tasks. The ANN models were developed and optimisation of hidden neurons is done by trial and error until least root mean square is achieved The problems related to metallurgy or material science are non-linear as well as non-continuous in terms of phase formation in which objectives are strongly coupled. Stochastic based algorithms, also known as metaheuristics, have been employed to solve such type of problems Alloying of Ti is a stringent process owing to the oxidation behavior of pure metal as well as its alloying elements. In general, alloying is performed in inert atmosphere or in vacuum due to the tendency of Ti undergoing oxidation in atmospheric conditions. Several casting methods like arc melting and induction melting could be used but the chemical activeness of the elements poses considerable threat Looking at the limitations that traditional processes exhibit, Mechanical Alloying (MA) is one process that has gained much of the momentum in which the alloying is performed in the powder form without melting the elements. MA is a solid-state powder processing technique that allows the production of homogeneous materials from the elemental blend powders Powder metallurgy is considered as a novel route for producing nanocrystalline alloyed powders suitable for compaction and consolidation From This section tries to correlate various aspects of the past, present and future of β-Ti alloys. Despite of the obvious capabilities and existence from past few decades, the application of β-Ti alloys is not that widespread. This possibly because of certain limitations such as high production costs of the Ti metal itself and the β-alloying elements, complexity in the synthesis of the alloys owing to the oxidation nature and the melting points in the case of solid solution treatment, mechanical working processes to increase the strength of the alloy, etc. Besides, there exists no specific need for the superior characteristics exhibited by this alloy during former days. Therefore, there was no drive in the scientific community as well in industrial community to further process these alloys. For a long period of time, steels dominated in most of the areas, including aerospace to biomedical because of its properties, ease of manufacturing and relatively much lower synthesizing costs. However, in the present-day scenario, passing the test for suitability is only one of the constraints. More focus is being paid to the ability of material or technology to get standardized and in order to achieve this, there are several other constraints that must be satisfied. Based on the study presented in this work, it can be stated that Ti, undoubtedly, outperforms the present alloys in most of the aspects such as, corrosion resistance, low elastic modulus, high strength to weight ratio, all being major concerns in implant applications. The major reasons for lower application of the alloy can be due to challenges in finding optimum composition of the alloying elements, high price of Ti and β-stabilizing elements and synthesis of β-alloys economically. As far as optimization is concerned, the alloy can be tailor made to the specific application with tailored properties through optimization techniques like MOO where in designing of the alloy can be carried out for all the properties at once and avoid trial and error experimental tests. The proposed approach may not aid in reduction of cost directly, but the usage of the costly β-stabilizing elements can certainly be optimized. Similarly, for synthesis β Ti alloy, MA could be treated as a superior alternative to solid solution processes because MA does not require high temperatures and appears justifiable on a production scale in terms of economics. Besides economics, MA is one of the most effective process to produce pre-alloyed powders which acts as raw material for the future manufacturing methods like ‘Additive Manufacturing’. Thus, it can be concluded that the simplicity of the process and applicability of the same to bulk production make it ideal for production of β-Ti alloys as shown in the β-Ti alloys possess properties which could make it a promising alternative for Ti–6Al–4V for manufacturing of implants in biomedical applications. Although a considerable amount of research is carried out related to application of β-Ti in medical industry, a major goal of reaching the elastic modulus of human bone (10–30 GPa) and mimic other properties of it simultaneously is yet to be achieved. Modern optimization and data analytic techniques may be used as a potential way to reach the said goal. Further, MA has major scope for improve the process for production of pre alloyed powders which could be used as raw material for various AM techniques through which implants are manufactured. A comprehensive approach is necessary in this field which makes the whole process economically viable. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.