Intertrochanteric fractures are commonly seen in elderly population. 90% of these occur following a trivial fall. Dynamic hip screw fixation is one of the most common modality of treatment, although intramedullary fixation devices are gaining popularity in recent times, especially in unstable fractures. Dislocation of hip following a DHS fixation of hip is a very rare complication. There are only two case reports which describes dislocation of hip following DHS fixation of an intertrochanteric fracture. Here we present a case of anterior dislocation of hip following DHS fixation of an intertrochanteric fracture. We also discuss about the possible causes of this rare complication, its management and follow up.Intertrochanteric fractures are commonly seen in elderly population. 90% of these occur following a trivial fall. In younger individuals it usually occurs following a high velocity motor vehicle accident. It is more common in females than in males. A 45-year-old female presented with sudden onset of pain in her left hip, when she rolled over in her bed. Following this she was unable to bear weight on the affected limb. Except for the history of a transient ischaemic attack 2 years ago, there was no other significant past history. Radiographs taken in A & E showed a comminuted intertrochanteric fracture of left hip ( Patient was planned for a closed reduction and internal fixation with DHS. During surgery, while reaming and tapping there was malrotation of head, which required an open reduction through the Watson-Jones approach. Because of the extensive comminution autologous bone grafting was also done. Immediate post-operative radiograph showed a valgus reduction with slight inferior placement of the lag screw ( Taking into account the delayed presentation, DHS removal, excision of heterotopic ossification and hemiarthroplasty with uncemented modular bipolar prosthesis was done ( At 1 year follow up patient was ambulating without support. Radiologically there was brooker Munjal et al reported a case of atraumatic posterior dislocation of hip 2 weeks following the DHS fixation for intertrochanteric fracture. Following unsuccessful closed reduction, an open reduction was performed. Intraoperatively the authors found complete stripping of hip capsule anteriorly, which was reattached. There were no further dislocations until patient passed away at 6 months following index surgery because of chest infection. The author attributed this unreported complication to initial soft tissue injury rather than the operative technique. Melton et al in their case report presented two cases of dislocation of hip following valgus fixation of an unstable intertrochanteric fracture. Both cases suffered an atraumatic posterior dislocation of hip at around 3-weeks following fixation and underwent an open reduction. Following open reduction both had an atraumatic redislocation and underwent girdlestone excision arthroplasty. The authors proposed that patient factors (parkinsonism in case 1 & excessive alcohol in case 2) along with malreduction (retroverted reduction) might have been the cause of posterior dislocation. Retrospectively, on our analysis we propose that following factors may have contributed to this extremely rare complication. Valgus reduction and fixation for unstable hip fractures is well described. Although it's an extremely rare complication, its avoidable by taking all possible precautions to avoid rotational malalignment & maintaining capsular attachment. Valgus reduction of trochanteric fractures has its own advantages, we need to be aware of its effect on hip stability. No benefits in any form have been received or will be received from a commercial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this article.