Objectives
                  Even after evolution of computerized tomography and improved surgical measures, treatment of intraarticular calcaneal fractures remains a controversy. Hence this study was carried out to compare functional outcomes of displaced intraarticular calcaneal fractures, treated with operative management with plating and conservative management with cast.
               
                  Material and methods
                  This study was carried out as a prospective, comparative study. Twenty nine (30 fractures) patients with acute, displaced intraarticular fractures of calcaneum aged 18–50 years, were enrolled in the study. Open fractures and fractures older than two weeks were excluded. 30 fractures were divided into two groups (operative and conservative; n=15 in each). Evaluation in form of post treatment restoration of Bohler's angle, heel varus angle and with Creighton–Nebraska (C–N) score for functional outcome was done at the end of 12 months.
               
                  Results
                  When we consider the clinical evaluation under the C–N score, the results of operatively managed calcaneal fractures are slightly better than those of the conservative group. But this did not have any statistical significance. Also, there was significant difference in pre and post treatment Bohler's angle and heel varus angle in operative group. Three cases of plating suffered from post-operative wound dehiscence.
               
                  Conclusion
                  A relatively better functional outcome was observed in displaced and comminuted fractures in plating, provided that the Bohler's angle was restored. In conservative group, functional outcome of minimally displaced fractures were better than displaced comminuted fractures. Post treatment Bohlers angle has prognostic importance in functional outcome.Calcaneal fracture, the most frequently injured tarsal bone, accounts for about 1–2% of all fractures in the human body. Approximately 75% calcaneal fractures are intra-articular, involving the subtalarjoint, mostly caused by a fall from a height with the heel directly hitting the ground. This prospective comparative study comprised of 30 intra-articular calcaneal fractures in 29 patients from June 2012 to September 2014 (minimum follow up one year). Open fractures, extra articular fractures, fractures presenting after 2 weeks after injury were excluded from the study. Fractures were classified according to Sander's classification. Conservative management was in a form of below knee plaster cast initially if there was no gross swelling or else immobilization was done with below knee slab which was later converted into a cast. Cast was removed after 6 weeks & physiotherapy exercises for ankle and sub-talar joints were started after removal of cast. Once the fracture showed appearance of signs of union, partial weight bearing was advised, which was approximately at 7–8 weeks and it was then gradually increased to full weight bearing. The Appearance and progression of signs of union was assessed both clinically and radiologically. Decreased local tenderness at fracture site, reduced pain while weight bearing were considered signs of commencement of union. Radiologically, diminution of visibility of fracture site, appearance of increased bone density (Sclerosis) at fracture margin was seen in both groups. In conservative group, appearance of irritation callus was observed. In operative group, open reduction and internal fixation was done with calcaneal plates. Lateral Seligson's approach was used for all, once oedema subsided and wrinkle sign was seen 7–10 days after injury. Fracture site was exposed. Lateral wall was disimpacted by varus force applied by a transverse stout k wire drilled in tuberosity. Reduction of articular surface was done, along with reduction of the Sustentacular fragment. Hydroxyapatite crystals were filled in 10 out of 15 the cases where there was substantial loss of cancellous bone to support the articular fragments ( The reduction was confirmed by lateral and axial views under image intensifier. The appropriately sized plate was placed on the lateral surface of calcaneum. The complete fixation was again confirmed under image intensifier. Skin was the closed with Allgower-Donati sutures in 9 and by mattress sutures in 6 patients. For all patients, the radiological evaluation was carried out initially on weekly basis from 4th week to 8th week. After the 8th week (2 months), the radiological evaluation was repeated on 6th month and 12th month. Minimum follow up of at least one year was completed in each case. Throughout the follow up, X-rays were assessed for progression of union. The Bohler's angle, Heel varus angle and Gissane's angle were measured on 2nd month, 6th month and 12th month in both groups. Criegton-Nebrasaka health foundation scoring system was used to evaluate the patients at the end of 1 year Case 3 – Open Reduction and Internal Fixation. Case 6 – Conservative Management. In our study, 20 patients were males, and 10 were females. The mean age of patients in operative group was 31 years and that of conservative group was 34 years. Majority of calcaneal fractures were caused by fall from height (77% of cases), and 23% were due to road traffic accidents. Out of 30 Fractures, only one patient had bilateral intra-articular calcaneal fractures this series. Nine patients had associated fractures with calcaneal fractures. There were 5 vertebral fractures, 2 lower extremity fractures and 2 fracture of distal radius associated. The fractures were classified according to Sander's classification based on computerised tomography. The Crucial angle of Gissane was measured in pre and post treatment, in both groups. The improvement of the angle in operative group was found to be statistically significant ( In our study we found that the difference between Pre and post treatment values, Bohler's angle in operative group was extremely significant. The mean difference between pre and post treatment values of conservative group was only 1.1 Similarly, the heel varus angulation, which ultimately leads to loss of heel height, was found to be correctable only by operative method. The mean values of both pre-operative groups were almost similar, but in operative group the varus angulation could almost completely be corrected with mean value being only 0.2 Evaluation of functional outcome was done according to C–N score at the end of 1 year. It was observed that almost 63% patients, i.e. 19 patients out of 30 had good results. 10% i.e. 3 patients had excellent results at the end of 1 year. 16.6% patients had fair outcomes and only 3 patients had poor outcome. Both groups had almost similar outcomes without taking the fracture type into consideration ( The treatment of calcaneal fractures remains controversial. In this study the outcomes of operatively managed and conservatively managed calcaneal fractures was compared in order to find out the better method for different type of fracture. Two different parameters were used to compare the outcome and finally correlation between the two parameters was evaluated. The results of present study are compared with those of previous similar studies. It can be seen from Randle et al. The tuber angle of Böhler is composed of a line drawn from the highest point of the anterior process of the calcaneus to the highest point of the posterior facet and a line drawn tangential to the superior edge of the tuberosity. The angle is normally between 20 and 40°; a decrease in this angle indicates that the weight-bearing posterior facet of the calcaneus has collapsed, thereby shifting body weight anteriorly. The varus angulation correction is very important to prevent the malunion and its related complications, and most importantly, to maintain the height of the heel. With conservative management, in the only patient there was excellent outcome with type I fracture, good outcomes with type II and III fractures. There were fair to poor outcomes type IV fracture. There was no type I fracture treated with plating. With operative management in patients with type II fractures, one patient had excellent result and other 4 had good results. With type III fracture, 1 patient had excellent result and 4 had good results. With type IV fracture 3 of them had good results but one patient had a poor result.L.A.Crosby Wound dehiscence was seen in 3 cases of operative group. All of them occurred at the area where two limbs of incision met, and were typically late on onset, occurring around 12th to 15th day post operatively ( Our study has a few limitations. The sample of our study is small, that makes it difficult to make any concrete recommendations. Also, in our study the average period of follow up is 1 year. Hence long term problem of subtalar arthritis has not been taken into consideration. Hence we conclude, that displaced and comminuted fractures managed surgically have a relatively better functional outcome as compared to those managed conservatively, provided Bohler's angle is restored. Although, the superiority of functional outcomes in operative group couldn't be proved statistically. The outcomes of both surgically and conservatively managed cases are comparable to the results in other studies. But the size of the present study group is small to come to a concrete conclusion. In case of displaced and comminuted calcaneal fractures, the aim of the treatment should be anatomical reduction and restoration of Bohler's angle surgically. Wound dehiscence with infection is a major risk in operative group. All authors have none to declare.