Enormous quantities of Al-sludge from aluminum surface treatments are yearly generated all over the world. Despite of being known as important supplier of alumina, the Al-sludge also have some other components that need to be removed. Calcination has revealed to be an inevitable treatment to achieve such objective. It was also found that conventional densification processes are not efficient for this kind of powders and, to overcome that difficulty, a dynamic compaction approach, using detonation generated shock waves have been followed. The calcinated powders compacted by this way have shown up values of density and hardness, after sintering, comparable to the ones of commercial alumina processed by the conventional methods.In the last decade research into recycling and valorization of Al-rich sludge's from aluminum surface treatment industries is one of the targets of a scientific community engaged with environmental problems In the present research, details of the chemical and phase composition of Al-sludge, for two calcination temperatures, have been studied. After explosive compaction, its sinterability has been evaluated by density and microhardness and compared with commercial alumina powders conventionally processed. The Al-rich sludge was supplied by Metalfer, Portugal. In order to compare the quality of final products resulting from this sludge, a commercial grade α-alumina (BAIKALOX SM8, Baikowski Chimie, France) sub-micrometer-sized powder, with median particle size 0.3 The as-received sludge was first heated up to 110 The explosive compaction tests were carried out using the simplest and well-known direct method, the so-called cylindrical configuration Ammonium nitrate-based water-in-oil emulsion, provided by SEC—Sociedade de Explosivos Civis, Aljustrel, Portugal, sensitized with different amounts of hollow perlite microspheres was used as explosive composition. Since the detonation velocity of this explosive composition is mainly dependent on the density Explosive compaction experiments were carried out with calcinated (1200 Sintering of explosively compacted samples was carried out for dwell times of 1 The light grey colored as-received sludge was found to be amorphous as can be detected in the XRD diffractogram ( The chemical composition of the calcinated sludge is shown in The DSC/TG results for the dried sludge ( The explosive compaction experiments were performed under the conditions described above for sludge previously calcinated at 1200 The microstructures of circular slice-shaped samples of selected experiments are shown in The first point to be emphasized is the disaggregation of the compacts prepared from 1200 For the uniaxial or isostatic pressed sludge it was impossible to assess the microhardness values due to the low green density. However, their density was found to increase with the dwell time during sintering. For the explosively compacted sludge the density, after sintering, was found to be higher than what was reported in the literature for the same material compacted with traditional techniques SEM images of fracture surfaces of the sintered sludge uniaxial and explosive compacted specimens are shown in After the calcination at 1200 One of the most surprising results concerns the abnormally high initial density of the 1650 The densification of the explosive compacted powders is thought to be a consequence of a three stage sequential process The absence of macro-cracks, whatever the sample's processing conditions, must be highlighted. This uncommon behavior is due to the modest variation of the initial volume of the powders, as in the 1650 As regards to the reported differences in the SEM images, it appears clear that for any of the performed experiments with the commercial grade alumina, the explosively generated shock wave was not enough to produce a significant consolidation. Moreover, for this particular material the process induces a small densification. Thus, it is not surprising that the compacted material show intergranular fracture surfaces. For the sludge calcinated at 1200 The explanation for the disaggregation of the 1200 Kim et al. With regard to the sludge, despite some densification, it seems evident from the SEM images of the surfaces of the uniaxial or isostatically pressed specimens that there is no significant sintering beyond the initial bonding of the sludge particles during the calcination. However, the explosive compacted powders, after sintering, reached values of density and microhardness comparables to the ones of commercial alumina. This enhanced sinterability, due to the increase of lattice distortion, is in accordance with what has been referred by several authors For the particular case of the sludge studied the α-alumina is the main phase presented after calcination at temperatures about 1200 The authors are indebt to the Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology for funding this work under contract POCI/EME/55398/2004, to SEC (Sociedade de Explosivos Civis, S.A.), Aljustrel, Portugal, for kindly providing the AN emulsion matrix and to Metalfer—Metalúrgica de Fermentelos, S.A. Águeda, Portugal.