In this paper, we deal with the oxygen displacement reactions in the Cu2O+M, and CuO+M (M=Ti, Zr, Hf) systems under self propagating regimes. Mechanically induced Self-sustaining Reactions (MSR) and conventional Self-sustaining High-temperature Synthesis (SHS) methods were employed. In the MSR processes, heats of reaction and adiabatic temperatures were experimentally determined. CuO based systems showed shorter incubation periods than the Cu2O based systems, and Zr, Ti and Hf in the order, required longer milling treatment to ignite. The use of appropriate methodologies, to evaluate the milling dynamics parameters, permitted to relate the observed features to the intrinsic reactivity of the components and to the role of interfacial conditions and deformation mixing. Similar reactivity behaviours were observed under SHS conditions.Mechanical treatments by milling of elemental powder mixtures are widely used to obtain metastable structures in far from equilibrium conditions Takacs A precise evaluation of the milling dynamics and possible correlation with the thermochemical parameters are however still lacking in spite of the great amount of data in MSR literature. An attempt in this direction is presented in this paper, by making use of appropriate experimental methodologies. Oxygen displacement MS Reactions in the Cu To gain more insight into the reactivity of these systems, the reactions were also activated by conventional Self-sustaining High-temperature Synthesis (SHS) methods Cu Handling procedures were carried out under a highly purified argon atmosphere (humidity, oxygen and nitrogen contaminants at a ppm level) in a glove box. In parallel trials, part of the powder was sampled from the vial at selected milling times and at the end of the process for X-ray investigation and thermal analysis. XRD patterns were collected by a Rigaku DMAXIIIC powder diffractometer using CuKα wavelength and a graphite monochromator in the diffracted beam. The average dimension, 〈 Thermal analysis was carried out by a Setaram LABSYS DTA apparatus. SEM-EDS analyses were also carried out by means of a Cambridge Stereoscan 200 operating at 30 kV and equipped with a back-scattered detector and a Link microprobe. The surface of the samples was coated with either 20 nm of sputtered gold or by evaporated graphite. As for the SHS experiments, the powders were isostatically cold-pressed to form cylindrical pellets 5 mm in diameter and 6 mm in height. The pellets were then combusted inside a stainless steel chamber. Powder ignition was provided by an electrically heated tungsten coil, placed 1–2 mm above the top of the sample. All experiments were performed under high purity argon (99.998%) atmosphere. Ignition temperatures were measured by placing a Pt–PtRh thermocouple under the pellet surface. The propagation rates were determined from video recordings of the reaction front. More details on the experimental setup can be found elsewhere The milling treatments were carried out under plastic collision regimes. Under these conditions, with a single grinding ball at work, the number of collision per seconds, Possible reaction schemes for the oxygen displacement in the studied systems are reported below: All these reactions are strongly exothermic and the pertaining values of reaction enthalpy, Δ These features and the formation of smoothed particles and holes, characteristic of melted phases, suggests that reaction temperature has reached at least the melting point of reactant metals As noticed above, the other parameter generally used to characterise MSR processes is the ignition time Such differences in the reactivity were also observed during DTA measurements. CuO–Hf unmilled powders were compared with different Cu Some considerations seem now possible. It is generally maintained that both CuO and Cu Conversely, in the Cu The reactivity of these systems were also tested under SHS activation and the results are now presented. Mixtures of the same initial compositions were pressed into pellets and then ignited by a thermal shock induced by an electrically heated tungsten coil. A high temperature propagation front is generated, which runs across the pellet, leaving behind the reaction products. We observed strong differences in the front propagation rates, as indicated by the values reported in Before concluding, we would like to come back to some point cited in The reported experiences on copper oxide–metal systems fall within the number of red-ox reaction performed by MSR. Some correlation emerged relating the role of the interfacial conditions and of deformation mixing to the intrinsic reactivity of components. In spite of the present results and of the variety of data in the pertinent literature, several questions remain as yet still open. Some of them are typical of the red-ox reaction, for instance the underlying mechanism of the oxygen transfer. Others relate to the physical and chemical phenomena in the MSR processes. Much work is necessary to reach a detailed comprehension of the MSR mechanisms. However, the experimental procedure outlined in this work indicate the possibility of evaluating on an absolute basis such processes and therefore to compare the transformation behaviours of different materials. Furthermore, parallel studies by conventional SHS reactions, can also offer a useful support in pursuing this kind of research on the field. This work was funded by CNR-PFMSII and MURST, Rome.