This chapter focuses on the various flotation systems used in sewage water treatment process. Flotation can be spontaneous when the specific mass of particles to be eliminated is less than that of water, or it can be induced by the artificial fixation of bubbles of air or gas onto the particles to be removed, giving them an average specific mass less than water. Flotation using blown air is effectively spontaneous flotation improved by blowing bubbles of air into the liquid mass. A flotation process using means other than microbubbles can only be used in suspensions containing light and bulky materials whose surface deposits are not disturbed by whirling movements. The widely used technique for producing microbubbles is pressurization. In this process, the bubbles are obtained by the expansion of a solution enriched with dissolved air at several bars of pressure. The pressurized liquid used is either raw water or recirculated treated water. Electroflotation is another technique, in which the objective is to produce bubbles of hydrogen and oxygen by electrolysis of the water by means of appropriate electrodes. Flotation is often combined with preliminary flocculation. By incorporating a flocculation aid, the floc can be enlarged and the particle surface area increased. This gives improved adhesion of the bubbles and an increase in the upward flow rate of the floc. The flotation units can be circular or rectangular. Rectangular units are usually employed for the treatment of water and wastewater, as they can be constructed as a monobloc together with the flocculator and filters, so that land requirements are minimal. If necessary, where heavily concentrated liquids are involved, medium size bubble diffusers are arranged, so as to produce local turbulence designed to encourage the division of the air bubbles. The size of the bubbles must be small enough to enable them to adhere to the particles to be floated. Two separate zones are generally provided in plants designed to remove light materials (e.g., grease, thick oil, large fibres and paper); one zone for mixing and emulsifying, and the other, a calmer zone, for flotation. In the emulsion zone, the suspended solids are stirred and inter-mixed with air. The path of the bubbles is increased by the spiral flow thus created. In the separation and collection zone for floating materials, the cross flow is very slow and turbulence is reduced. It is standard practice to reserve the term flotation for processes using very fine air or microbubbles between 40 and 70 µm in diameter, similar to those present in white-water running from a tap on a high pressure main. Separation by flotation of solid particles in a liquid suspension obeys the same laws as sedimentation, but in a reverse field of force.  For a flotation unit of a given cross section, the use of bubbles several millimetres in diameter will result in an air flow much greater than for microbubbles, if a satisfactory distribution of the bubbles is desired over the cross section. At the same time, this increase in air flow will set up turbulent currents, disturb satisfactory operation, and induce mechanical mixing. The bubbles have a flotation effect only to the extent to which they adhere to the particles. This generally assumes that their diameters are less than the diameters of the material or floc in the suspension. A flotation process using means other than microbubbles can only be used in suspensions containing light and bulky materials whose surface deposits are not disturbed by whirling movements. The application of flotation in the field of wastewater treatment is as follows: Separation of flocculated matter in the clarification of surface water (in lieu of settling, generally for which the water is cold, with a low mineral content and charged with organic matter); Separation of flocculated or non-flocculated oil in wastewater from refineries, airports and steelworks; Separation of metallic hydroxides or pigments in the treatment of industrial wastewater; and Thickening of activated sludge (or mixed activated sludge and primary sludge) from organic wastewater treatment plants before application of constructed wetlands functioning as sludge drying beds, for example. The techniques vary according to: The method used for bubble formation; The method of feeding the flotation unit; The shape of the structures; and The method of collecting the skimmings. The most widely used technique for producing microbubbles is pressurisation. The bubbles are obtained by the expansion of a solution enriched with dissolved air at several bars of pressure. The pressurised liquid used is either raw water or re-circulated treated water. The rate of flow of the pressurised water is generally only a fraction (10–30% of that to be treated) of the rate of flow of the plant, at When the quantity of material to be floated is high, and thickening is particularly desired, as in the case of activated sludge, the recycled flow can reach 200% of the nominal flow of the flotation unit. It is possible, with the use of polyelectrolytes, to obtain sludge concentrations between 3 and 6% for specific loadings of 5 to 13 kg of dry solids/m Electroflotation is another technique, in which the objective is to produce bubbles of hydrogen and oxygen by electrolysis of the water by means of appropriate electrodes. The anodes are highly sensitive to corrosion and the cathodes to scaling by carbonate removal. When the protection of anodes is required, protected titanium electrodes may be used, or the periodic reversal of the electrodes may be employed to effect self-cleaning. A preliminary treatment of the water or periodic descaling of the cathodes must be allowed for. Flotation is often combined with preliminary flocculation. By incorporating a flocculation aid, the floc can be enlarged and the particle surface area increased. This gives improved adhesion of the bubbles and an increase in the upward flow rate of the floc. The separation or downward flow rate of the water used in flotation units varies according to the nature of the suspensions to be treated, and also according to the method of generation and distribution of the microbubbles. For a given flotation unit, the downward velocity and concentration of the sludge floated are strongly influenced by the value of the ratio of ‘quantity of air dissolved’ over ‘quantity of material to be floated’. The greater this ratio, the greater the upward force given to the particles; the higher the downward velocity, the lower the sludge density, and the greater its concentration in dry solids. This ratio cannot exceed the upward flow of the bubbles. Although, as stated above, an extremely fine size of bubbles is particularly conducive to their distribution over the entire surface, and thus separation efficiency. However, this can sometimes limit the traverse speed, and therefore limit the output of water treated by the plant. Flotation units can be circular or rectangular. Rectangular units are usually employed for the treatment of water and wastewater, as they can be constructed With a flotation problem to solve, preliminary tests in the laboratory or a test on a semi-industrial scale are recommended. It is then advisable to proceed with the design calculation stage, which is governed by two main variables: the downward velocity and the quantity of solids to be floated per unit area and time. Alow downward velocity, while reducing the particle flow to the bottom of the tank and theoretically leading to a higher separation efficiency, also leads to an increase in the retention time of the floating sludge. This may cause deterioration and splitting-up of flocs, resulting in the reduction of the sludge concentration. It falls to the specialist to find the best compromise between sludge thickening and separation efficiency. Furthermore, the internal layout has considerable influence on the performance of the flotation unit. For distribution of air bubbles, circular shaped flotation units are superior to rectangular units. The distance between the inlet column and the outlet funnel is shorter for the same capacity, and an almost uniform distribution of the bubbles can be maintained over the entire horizontal section of the unit. The water feed always incorporates a column or chamber with a dual function: It brings into mutual contact the water (which may or may not be flocculated) to be treated and the pressurised water. The water should be depressurised immediately upstream of the unit (i.e. bubbles should not be wasted); and It disperses the kinetic energy of the raw water and the pressurised water mixture, and reduces the speed before the process water reaches the actual flotation zone. The chamber also enables any large bubbles that may have formed upstream to be removed immediately. The points and respective levels of introduction of raw and pressurised water are of major importance in the case of prior flocculation. Precautions to be taken in calming the mixture, when it is introduced into the flotation zone, vary according to the size, stability and density of the flocculated or non-flocculated substances to be floated. In the case of the flotation of slightly viscous oils, this point should be particularly watched carefully. The emulsified water is generally introduced in the top half of the unit. Sludge is collected at the open surface. The clear liquor outlet is fitted in the lower third of the unit. The deeper the unit and the greater the quantity of sludge that can be Several devices require the introduction of air upstream of the pressurisation pump. Systems incorporating an air cushion saturation tank are more costly, but their operation is very stable. Pressurised air dispersal devices in the pump discharge pipe have also been proposed. For electroflotation, a bank of electrodes covers the surface area of the tank. The surface sludge layer can in certain cases attain a thickness of many centimetres, and be extremely stable (e.g., thickening of activated sludge). In other cases, it is thinner and more fragile (e.g., flotation of flocs of metallic hydroxides or of oils). When the sludge removal is not total, the layer thickens and, with time, acquires a degree of cohesion that facilitates the adhesion of floating particles. The gradual and regular removal of sludge is an important point. The scraper mechanism must be especially strong, if it is fitted in a floatation unit designed for sludge thickening. On circular flotation units, one or more scrapers push the sludge into a radial collection channel with a length equal to half the radius. The access ramp must be constructed in such a way that contact with the scraper is always ensured. The number of scrapers is governed by the quantity of sludge to be removed, by the rapidity with which this removal must be carried out to avoid the risk of deaeration, and by the distance, the sludge can be pushed without breaking up. In rectangular flotation units, the sludge is pushed by a series of scrapers driven by endless chains to a removal channel situated at one end.