Cataclastic rocks and pseudotachylytes are exposed along the Uchinoura shear zone, a normal fault zone cutting the middle Miocene (14 Ma) Osumi granodiorite in southern Kyushu, Japan. Cataclastic rocks include non-foliated clast-supported to matrix-supported cataclasite and foliated clast-supported cataclastic granodiorite. In these rocks, fracturing and comminution played a major role, but dissolution and recrystallization of quartz, and plastic deformation of quartz and biotite were also active processes, especially in foliated granodiorite. Two types of pseudotachylyte are distinguished: a foliated-type characterized by a planar arrangement of clasts and microlites, and a spherulitic-type characterized by clasts surrounded by microlite overgrowths. Both types are of melt origin, as attested by the presence of microlites and rounded or embayed clasts, and by the scarcity of biotite clasts. Unlike spherulitic-type pseudotachylyte, which solidified without being deformed, the foliated-type pseudotachylyte underwent flow before complete solidification. This deformation is thought to reflect post-seismic strain accommodation immediately following the main slip episode.
                  Kinematic indicators, which consist of Riedel-type secondary fractures branching on primary fractures, shear bands offsetting the foliation of foliated granodiorite, or asymmetrical porphyroclast systems within pseudotachylyte veins, show that all fault rocks were generated during N–S- to NW–SE-directed extensional deformation. Pseudotachylyte is closely associated both in time and space with cataclastic rocks, thus indicating that the behaviour of the Uchinoura fault zone alternated between comminution and frictional melting. Given the slow strain rates which characterize dissolution and recrystallization processes detected in cataclasites, the juxtaposition of pseudotachylytes and foliated cataclasites provides an example of aseismic and seismic displacements within the same shear zone.In the upper part of the brittle crust, pseudotachylytes are frequently found in close association with cataclasites ( We present an example of a cataclasite–foliated cataclasite–pseudotachylyte association from a normal fault zone in the Miocene Osumi granodiorite pluton exposed in Kyushu, SW Japan. Observations of field exposures, hand-sample sections and thin sections show that pseudotachylytes are closely associated both in time and space with cataclastic rocks, thus indicating that the fault zone behaviour alternated between comminution and frictional melting. We show that, in addition to comminution, dissolution–recrystallization and plastic deformation were involved in the generation of cataclastic rocks. Dissolution–recrystallization is typical of slow, aseismic strain rates. This suggests that both seismic slip and aseismic creep occurred in the fault zone. Lastly, in some of the pseudotachylytes, we document a coaxial or non-coaxial flow of a not completely solidified material, which is interpreted as reflecting a post-seismic strain accommodation immediately following the main seismic slip episode. The 50×15 km The Osumi pluton is cut by a series of ENE-trending faults that have been mapped in the eastern part of the body ( At the three studied localities, the granodiorite, aplite veins and some of the microgranite dykes are faulted. Three types of fault-related rocks can be observed: non-foliated cataclasites, foliated cataclastic granodiorite, and pseudotachylytes. The most complete section across the Uchinoura shear zone is found at locality B (  Fault rocks consist of pseudotachylyte, non-foliated cataclasite, and foliated cataclastic granodiorite. There is a clear strike-parallel variation in the relative proportion of pseudotachylyte and cataclasite along the Uchinoura shear zone: pseudotachylyte represents 10% of the fault rocks at locality A, 60% at locality B, 90% at locality C.  At first glance,  Mutual relationships between the three types of fault rocks make clear the following points: (1) cataclasite veins or zones are concordant or almost concordant with adjacent foliated cataclastic granodiorite; (2) pseudotachylyte veins are either oblique ( From field and hand-sample observations, it may be inferred that the major episode of deformation in the Uchinoura shear zone occurred between the two stages of microgranite intrusion. The deformation episode itself includes at least three phases: (1) generation of foliated cataclastic granodiorite, cataclasite and pseudotachylyte; (2) kinking of aplite and cataclasite layers; (3) late faulting of pseudotachylyte veins and cataclasite layers. At least two stages of pseudotachylyte generation can be distinguished. Indeed, at locality B ( Non-foliated cataclastic rocks ( Under the microscope, the foliated cataclastic granodiorite is defined by alternating thin dark layers of opaque minerals and biotite, and thicker light-coloured layers of quartz and feldspar. Biotite is highly strained: it is commonly kinked, split up into several fragments, or sigmoidally bent. The shear bands offsetting the foliation consist of mosaics of recrystallized quartz grains displaying a planar preferred orientation parallel to the general trend of the band. Between the mosaics, relict fragments of quartz or feldspar are locally preserved. With increasing strain intensity, usually when approaching a pseudotachylyte vein, the angle between the foliation and the shear bands decreases from 30° to about 10°, and the density of the shear bands increases drastically. The mechanisms of deformation which led to the formation of the foliated cataclastic granodiorite are the same as those operative in non-foliated cataclasites: faulting, cataclasis, and DMT processes. However, some differences can be noted. Firstly, DMT processes were more important throughout the foliated granodiorite. Indeed, the whole foliation can be interpreted as a dissolution surface (solution cleavage), the dark layers consisting in fact of residual accumulations of insoluble biotite and iron oxides. Newly recrystallized polygonal quartz grains or subgrains (diameter<25 μm) surround larger quartz or feldspar crystals or fill the spaces along intragranular fractures, in a way similar to that described by Thin section observation shows that some of the dark veins cutting the granodiorite at the three studied localities are filled with a material that experienced melting (   The following observations, already reported by many authors ( Even if both types of pseudotachylytes went through a melt stage, they did not undergo the same post-melting strain history. The spherulitic-type pseudotachylyte did not undergo any post-melting strain. The microlite overgrowths surrounding the clasts, which are undeformed, grew statically. On the contrary, the foliated-type pseudotachylytes underwent some flow, as shown by the preferred orientation of microlites and clasts. The flow took place when the pseudotachylyte was not completely solidified, since all the observed textures are concordant with the general fabric. In most foliated-type pseudotachylytes from the Uchinoura shear zone, the preferred orientation of clasts and microlites is parallel to the vein boundaries and does not display any asymmetrical structure. This is indicative of coaxial flow. However, in some foliated-type pseudotachylytes, flow was non-coaxial, as shown by asymmetrical clast-tail systems. In the example depicted in Energy balance for mechanical cataclasis is less quantified than for pseudotachylyte, and there are no unambiguous criteria which could help in deciding whether a cataclastic rock formed during seismic or aseismic slip (e.g. The Uchinoura shear zone shows an intimate association between pseudotachylyte and cataclastic rocks. Whatever the scale of investigation (outcrop, hand sample, thin section), there is always a spatial association between pseudotachylytes and cataclastic rocks in the three studied localities. This association is also temporal, since mutual cross-cutting relationships between the two types of rocks can be observed: pseudotachylyte frequently cross-cuts foliated granodiorite or non-foliated cataclasite ( The Uchinoura shear zone pseudotachylytes also display deformational microstructures which were formed before complete solidification of the melt. Given the quite rapid rates of cooling estimated for pseudotachylytes, these microstructures were probably formed in a short time (a few seconds to a few minutes) after the main seismic episode. They can thus be interpreted as reflecting post-seismic strain accommodation. We would like to thank T. Kano (Yamaguchi University), P. Gaviglio (UFC) and J.F. Gamond (LGIT, Grenoble) for discussions in the field, M. Faure (IUF, Orléans) for critically reading the manuscript, S. André and M. Boué for technical assistance at the University of Franche-Comté and M. Imrie for checking the English. Professors J.G. Spray and T.G. Blenkinsop provided helpful reviews. Fieldwork was supported by grants from Japanese Monbusho and French Ministere des Affaires Etrangeres to Fabbri.