Unstable intra-articular distal radial fractures in women older than 55 years were treated by closed reduction and external fixation to achieve the best functional outcome. Sixteen women had radiographic and functional assessment. Despite initial good alignment secondary displacement occurred in 11 patients, probably due to the comminution of the fracture and possibly influenced by osteoporosis. Malunion of the distal radius was seen in two patients and intra-articular incongruity with an intra-articular step exceeding 1mm was observed in two other patients.
                  The functional outcome was excellent or good in 10 and fair in two patients. Four patients had a poor functional outcome. Two of these patients had a significant loss of reduction, one resulting in a malunion. The other two had an intra-articular incongruity of more than 1mm. Three of the four patients with a poor functional outcome had clinical signs of reflex sympathetic dystrophy.
               
                  Conclusion:
                  Closed reduction and external fixation of “bad case” severely comminuted unstable distal radial fractures in the elderly may result in an acceptable functional outcome in the majority of the cases, although significant secondary displacement occurred in eleven of the sixteen patients.Currently, unstable distal radial fractures are preferably treated operatively in mentally and physically healthy elderly. There is evidence that osteoporosis is present in older patients, especially women, who sustain a distal radial fracture. Nowadays, open reduction and plate osteosynthesis as well as the application of external fixation are considered to be the most appropriate fixation techniques in the treatment of these fractures in the elderly. The anatomical and functional results of the application of external fixation for unstable, intra-articular fractures in women with suspected osteoporosis has not been reported to our knowledge. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the ability of the external fixator to maintain carpal alignment after reduction of a fracture in women older than 55 years and to assess whether secondary displacement influenced functional end results. During the period 1992–1997, sixteen women with an intra-articular, unstable distal radial fracture were operated on at the Medical Spectrum Twente Enschede ( A follow-up study comprising clinical and radiographical examinations was performed after a mean period of 4 years (2–7 years). The intra-articular distal radial fractures were classified according to the Comprehensive classification of fractures. The following criteria for the physiological range of radiocarpal alignment were used; a radiocarpal angle between 10° volarly and 10° dorsally, a radial inclination of 20–30°, and an ulnar variance of −2 to +3 We defined secondary displacement as a displacement of five degrees or more of the radiocarpal angle or radial inclination, or more than 2 If at least two of the three radiological parameters were not in the physiological range for radiocarpal alignment, the end result was considered a radiocarpal malunion. Motion was measured in both wrists using a goniometer and the result was expressed as a proportion of the normal side. Wrist motion exceeding 80% was considered normal. Gripstrength of the hand was assessed by using a hand dynamometer (Baseline Hand Evaluation Set Physiological radiocarpal alignment in all directions was achieved in 13 wrists postoperatively (81%) ( A grip strength less than 80% and intermittent wrist pain on strenuous activities was reported by six patients (38%). Four of these patients could not resume their daily activities (poor result). Of these four patients, two had in intra-articular step of 2 There were five complications in five patients. Clinical signs of reflex sympathetic dystrophy, a major complication, occurred in three patients (19%). One patient developed a carpal tunnel syndrome and was operated two days after the initial procedure and one patient had a superficial pin track infection that was treated conservatively. Severely comminuted intra-articular distal radial fractures in elderly women remain a therapeutic problem. In this study, the majority of patients with this type of fractures, treated with closed reduction and external fixation appeared to have acceptable functional end results (10/16). Our results are not as good as those of Edwards, Despite initial physiological alignment by manual reduction and the application of an external fixator, secondary displacement could not be prevented in 11/16 of our patients. In most patients we noticed a loss of reduction in all planes of the distal radius. But, since real malunions were seen in only two patients, we conclude that in most fractured wrists in elderly women over 55 years of age external fixation is stable enough to maintain alignment within physiological borders. We wondered which factors are responsible for the loss of reduction with an external fixator in place. Although, we did not measure the bone mineral density, due to the retrospective character of our study, there is evidence in the literature that osteoporosis plays a certain role in these patients. Earnshaw et al. stated that osteoporosis is common in women with a Colles’ type fracture and in the early post-menopausal women this does represent pathologically low bone mineral density. Loss of trabecular bone may be another explanation why a distal radial fracture remains unstable. This problem can be resolved by the use of autologous bone grafts or bone substitutes in the initial procedure. In our study, we observed a relation between the degree of redislocation of the fracture and the functional end result. Limited loss of alignment (in one plane) did not lead to a poor or fair function, but significant loss of reduction led to a poor functional end result in two patients. The two other patients with a poor functional outcome had a persisting intra-articular incongruity. A reflex sympathetic dystrophy in three of these four patients will undoubtedly have contributed to these poor end results. The functional end result was good or excellent in 10 of the 16 patients, despite a certain degree of dislocation of the fracture. The reason for this might be the fact that a residual deformity of the wrist is well tolerated in elderly patients. Young et al. studied the outcome following non-operative treatment in low-demand patients older than 60 years. They found that the radiological outcome did not correlate with the functional outcome and concluded that functional outcome was satisfactory in most cases regardless of the radiological result. Are there other therapeutic options regarding the treatment of this very complex but challenging type of fracture? Anatomical reduction of the intra-articular surface will always remain a problem, success is partly dependant on the skills of the treating surgeon, but is always subject to the poor quality of the osteoporotic bone. Plaster immobilisation with or without early mobilisation as described by Dias et al. seems not suitable, because the functional end results of the patients with a displaced fracture were fair or poor in ,respectively, 32.6% and 70.2%. The use of homologous bone grafts or bone substitutes to compensate for loss of trabecular bone is another important item. Examples in the literature, in which homologous bone grafts or substitutes are used for this type of fractures are scarce The recent development of angle stable implants like the locking compression plate In conclusion in this study we operated on a selected group of elderly women with severely comminuted, displaced, intra-articular distal radial fractures. Four patients suffered from major postoperative complications (25%). In comparison with others this percentage is high.