With the continued broadening of scope and growth of Development of nanomaterials, ceramics and new joining technologies has also given rise to the need for EAB expertise in these new and expanding areas of materials science. Based on manuscript submissions over the last 2 years, the growth trends in these areas are progressing at an exponential rate, and so the need for an expanded group of expert reviewers has become vital. I am gratified by the increase in subscriber and contributor support from all parts of the world. Plans are underway for expansion of this publication to twelve issues a year, to accommodate the increased volume of manuscripts. The editors are currently undergoing training from Elsevier that will enable handling and reviewing to be accomplished through the electronic media. This new system will cover all stages of article processing, from author submittal to assignment and review, to revision and publication. It is with great pleasure, therefore, that the editors and I welcome the following members to the EAB. Vania Petrova, M.Sc. Ms. Petrova obtained her degree in Physics from the University of Sofia, Bulgaria. She is currently working as a Research Scientist at the Center for Microanalysis of Materials, University of Urbana, IL, USA. Her areas of expertise include the study of surfaces and interfaces, Analytical Electron Microscopy (AEM), Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and Scanning Tunneling Electron Microscopy (STEM). Nikhilesh Chawla, Ph.D. Dr. Chawla is the Director of the Mechanical Behavior of Materials Facility and an Associate Professor Chemical and Materials Engineering at Arizona State University. He has a broad range of teaching and research interests in the mechanical behavior of advanced materials, including metal matrix composites, lead-free solders, nanocrystalline materials and ceramic fibers. He also has expertise in 3D microstructure-based finite element modeling and general physical metallurgy. Simon P. Ringer, Ph.D. Dr. Ringer is a Professor and the Director of the Electron Microscopy Unit (EMU), incorporating the Australian Key Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis, The University of Sydney, NSW Australia. He is also the Executive Director and CEO of NANO—the Nanostructural Analysis Network Organization. Dr. Ringer has provided referee and review services for numerous materials technology journals for more than 10 years. In 1999, he was honored as a “Top Ten Reviewer” for his services to Acta Materialia. He also has extensive consulting experience in Sweden, Japan and Australia on a wide range of metallurgical and materials problems. Warran Lineton, Ph.D. Dr. Lineton has 16 years of industrial R&D experience. He holds a degree in physics from the University of Bath, UK. In his PhD from De Montfort University, UK, he researched the surface chemistry of fibers and fabrics. He has worked on microwave packaging, textiles, surface engineering and laser processing. He now works for Federal-Mogul in Ann Arbor, MI, USA, developing new processes using focused energy sources. Dana J. Medlin, Ph.D., P.E. Dr. Medlin is an Associate Professor of the Department of Materials and Metallurgical Engineering, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology, Rapid City, SD, USA. His areas of expertise include: Ancient/Archaeometallurgy, building materials, martensitic shear transformations, material manufacture, mechanical behavior, metal embrittlement, corrosion, welding, joining and general physical metallurgy. He has special interest in dental and medical implant materials, shape memory alloys, Ti-based alloys and wear-resistant materials. His analytical expertise includes light optical microscopy, SEM, transmission electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction. Michael E. Stevenson, Ph.D. Dr. Stevenson is the Principal Engineer and Vice-President of the Engineering Sciences Division at Metals and Materials Engineers, LLC, Suwanee, GA USA. He specializes in the performance and analysis of engineering materials in a variety of industrial applications and complex failure investigations. Dr. Stevenson is experienced with failure analysis of marine, automotive, biomedical, crane, rail, structural, and power generation components. He also has experience with consumer products evaluation, development and implementation of non-destructive testing programs, and general metallurgical and engineering consulting. Chris Bagnall, Ph.D Editor-in-Chief Materials Characterization