Photochemical degradation and relative toxicity reduction of agricultural wastewater contaminated with methyl 1-[(butylamino)carbonyl]-1H-benzimidazol-2-ylcarbamate (benomyl) by the sonophotocatalytic system was compared with that of the photocatalytic system. Under the optimal conditions, i.e., initial benomyl concentration was 3.2mg/L, the concentration of TiO2 was 2g/L and H2O2 concentration was 1.5mM, the degradation rates with a sonication/UV/TiO2 system was about 1.5 times higher than with a UV/TiO2 system and sonication/UV/TiO2/H2O2 system was about 1.3 times higher than with a UV/TiO2/H2O2 system, respectively. Furthermore, the relative toxicity with a sonophotocatalysis was about 18% lower than with a photocatalysis within a reaction time of 120min.The widespread usage of pesticides in agriculture poses a potentially serious environmental and health problem, since this may be carcinogenic and/or toxic. Methyl 1-[(butylamino)carbonyl]-1H-benzimidazol-2-ylcarbamate (benomyl) is classified as a possible carcinogen (USEPA) and endocrine disruptors (WWF, World Wildlife Fund). Benomyl is of such a low acute toxicity to mammals. However, benomyl caused adverse health effects (skin irritation, headaches, diarrhoea and sexual dysfunction) to agricultural workers Photocatalysis are commonly used for remediating wastewater contaminated with recalcitrant organic pollutants These methods are attractive because they produce almost no hazardous by-product and can be adjusted for the degree of contaminant removal desired. Sonophotocatalysis is photocatalysis with ultrasonic irradiation The photochemical treatment of pesticides is now at the commercial level. However, the application of sonophotocatalysis on the treatment of benomyl contaminated wastewater, in particular, was not enough researched. In this study, it was investigated the feasibility of sonophotocatalysis for treating wastewater contaminated with benomyl by comparing photocatalysis. Also, effluent toxicity to ecosystem was estimated and compared with toxicity of initial wastewater. As powdered photocatalyst, TiO The sonophotocatalytic and photocatalytic reactor has been described in UV intensity was measured with a radiometer (VLX-3W Radiometer 9811-50, Cole Parmer Instrument Co.) at the wastewater surface. Sonophotocatalysis operation conditions are described in Solid phase microextraction (SPME) technology (Supelco) was used for analyzing benomyl and polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) fiber was used, because it was shown to be ideal for adsorption of benomyl in our previous studies. Due to the high conversion rate of benomyl to carbendazim, it is assumed that most of the benomyl is converted to carbendazim in the samples after comminution. Therefore, benomyl should be converted to carbendazim prior to SPME extraction, otherwise undesired degradation will occur. After wastewater (50 The benomyl was analyzed using a GC (HP-6890II, Hewlett Packard) equipped with a flame ionization detector, an auto-sampler/auto-injector, an integrator and capillary column (HP-5, 5% phenyl methyl siloxane, 50 Microtox® Asssay was used for monitoring effluent toxicity. The bioassays for effluent and stock solution were investigated using a Microtox Analyzer Model 500 (Azur Environmental Inc.). The effect of the test compound on the luminescent bacterium Irradiation of TiO The photocatalytic oxidation is accelerated by scavenging conduction band electrons Reaction could be more enhanced by the decomposition of liquid water. Activated chemical species, such as radicals proceeded with the chemical reaction by the chemical effect of ultrasonic waves. The primary process of sonolysis for water was the formation of the hydrogen radical (H•) and hydroxyl radical (OH•), as shown in Eq. The following reactions can represent the chemical oxidation of the photochemical reaction kinetics. A second-order reaction was applied to fit the data: Where Where Pseudo-first-order rate constants can be obtained through a linear least square fit of the sample data from Eq. The effect of initial concentration ranging from 3.2 to 5.2 The line slope clearly decreased with an increase in the initial benomyl concentration. This indicates the high concentrated benomyl took a longer time than the low concentrated benomyl to accomplish the similar The effect of TiO A further increase in catalyst loading, however, may cause light scattering and screening effect and thus reducing the specific activity of the catalyst. At lower TiO The addition of oxidizing species, such as H Whereas the electrons are consumed during the reaction with oxygen (O The effect of adding H As shown in This result could be explained in terms of TiO If H The removal efficiency of benomyl under the optimal conditions in photocatalysis and sonophotocatalysis was shown in Compared with the photocatalytic system, the sonophotocatalytic system showed a significant reduction in the concentration of benomyl. This may be due to that the reaction rates, at which the generation of reactive species.  The degradation rates with a sonication/UV/TiO As shown in Sohmiya et al. were reported a similar result on irradiation ultrasound and UV light of 1,4-dioxane Nevertheless, it is found that the reaction rate increased according to combine ultrasound in photocatalysis. The degradation rates with a sonication/UV/TiO These results estimate due to the sum of the effect of the each photocatalysis and sonolysis or synergistic effect. Harano et al. have reported the photocatalytic degradation of the chlorinated compounds with simultaneous sonications Sonophotocatalytic degradation of pollutants may result from mechanical effects and chemical effects as described in previous and many other studies. However, it was not approved predominant effect in this study. Therefore, further studies are required for elucidating the detailed reaction between mechanical effects and chemical effects in sonophotocatalysis.  The experimental results obtained from this study were as follows: The rate constant decreased upon the increase of initial benomyl concentration. It means that the absolute amount of benomyl that can be decomposed by a TiO The removal efficiency increased with increasing TiO The synergistic effect of TiO Optimal conditions for the degradation of benomyl were determined to be: initial benomyl concentration: 3.2 Under optimal conditions, the rate of degradation in the sonophotocatalysis was much more rapid in the photocatalysis. The degradation rates with a sonication/UV/TiO Under optimal conditions, the relative toxicity with a sonophotocatalytic system was more than 10–18% lower than with a photocatalytic system according to operation time. Therefore, the sonophotocatalytic system is a tool for improvement of chemical processes such as photocatalytic reaction.