Mixtures of scheelite and graphite or carbon black, with different CaWO4:C weight ratios, have been mechanically milled for 24h. One mixture was mechanically milled for 8h to assess the role of a shorter milling time. The resulting powders have been studied by thermal analysis, isothermal annealing at different temperatures (1100–1400°C), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) to determine the effect of temperature and content of carbon on microstructure and phase purity of tungsten carbide formed by carbothermic reduction of scheelite (CaWO4
                     +4 C→CaO+WC+3 CO). The experimentally observed reduction reaction sequence showed the formation of the intermediate phases Ca3WO6, W and W2C. A thermodynamic analysis proved that tricalcium tungstate (Ca3WO6) is a stable phase that forms independently of the partial pressure of CO, and that – under inert gas flow – the reaction can take place at temperatures as low as 700°C. However, the onset of the reaction was affected by the carbon content and heating rate, and therefore kinetics effects determine the temperature at which the reaction occurs.
                  All powders subjected to 1h isothermal annealing exhibited micrometer-sized CaO particles and submicrometer-sized WC aggregates consisting of crystallites with an average size ranging between 40 and 90nm, depending on carbon content and annealing temperature.
                  A shorter milling time did cause a small increase of residual W2C in the powder after heat treatment.
                  A slight stoichiometric excess of carbon black was sufficient to ensure complete reduction of scheelite and formation of high phase purity WC, with very small amounts of W2C. After leaching with diluted HCl, the obtained powder is suitable for manufacturing ultra fine grained cemented carbides tools and wear parts.Raw materials are of utmost importance for both developing and developed countries because they are essential to maintaining and improving quality of life. Securing reliable and unhindered access to certain raw materials is a growing concern within the European Union (EU) and across the globe. Materials are considered ‘critical’ when there is a high demand from industry combined with a risk to their supply. According to a recent report published on May 2014 by the European Commission (EC), tungsten is still included in the EU list of critical raw materials (CRMs) Tungsten is a very special metal, with unique properties (very high melting point, very high density, large hardness, chemical and thermal stability, just to mention a few). By 1930, the demand of tungsten and its alloys and compounds experienced a steady growth due to increasing industrialization in the world. Before and around 1920, tungsten was only important as a steel alloying element and as a filament in incandescent lamps. However, since 1930, cemented carbides (also called hardmetals) attained a greater share in tungsten consumption. The main component of hardmetals is tungsten carbide (WC), one of the hardest materials. Cemented carbides are hard but “flexible” materials. In fact, their properties can be tuned and adjusted by changing composition and microstructure, e.g. by varying the amount and grain size of WC, the content of the binder phase (Co or Ni), and/or by adding other carbides (such as TiC and/or TaC). Consequently, cemented carbides are in reality a very wide range of materials with different properties, and are used mainly for cutting tools, abrasives, dies, or molds. The ability to adjust the properties of a tool, or of a wear part, to fit a specific application represents an important advantage over high speed steel, and explains the replacement of the latter in many industrial productions. Therefore, it's not surprising to discover that more than 60% of the world's consumption of tungsten is in the form of tungsten carbide Several factors have resulted in the EU categorising tungsten as a CRM. Actually, China accounts for 85 % of world tungsten mine production. Other producers are Austria, Bolivia, Canada, Peru, Portugal, Russia, Thailand and other countries in Africa. Chinese domestic demand has increased rapidly in the past years. This increase in Chinese demand, combined with increased controls by the Chinese Government on domestic tungsten industry and tungsten exports, has strongly contributed to a rising tungsten price Metallurgy of tungsten usually starts from wolframite, (Fe, Mn)WO the rising price of the raw material, a number of complex hydrometallurgy steps and several high-temperature processes. The technology currently employed to produce WC powders descends from the technology of tungsten metal production and, therefore, involves energy and environmental costs to synthesize high purity powders of the metal. In fact, toxic and hazardous chemicals are required in the complex processing and purification sequences involved in the production of pure APT The creation of a supply source of WC for hardmetal manufacturing industries is becoming a serious issue, which could be addressed by finding enriched ore (e.g. enriched scheelite) in the international market in such quantities as to meet the production needs of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) that produce hard metal components, tools and wear parts. In addition, processes which could allow producing WC powders by reducing the use of chemicals and the amount of industrial waste, as well as by decreasing the number of high-temperature processing steps and their temperatures, are particularly appealing from an environmental point of view. For both these reasons, there is a renewed interest in the carbothermal reduction of tungstates and, in particular, of scheelite Terry and Azubike They used rather coarse powders of CaWO Few years later, Johnson and Nguyen Welham The positive role of high-energy milling has been reported also for the carbothermal reduction of natural wolframite More recently, Singh and Pandey In this paper we report a systematic study of the carbothermal reduction of ball-milled CaWO The pure scheelite used in this study was supplied by Sigma-Aldrich. The two carbon sources were microcrystalline graphite (Carlo Erba Reagents) and carbon black obtained by thermal decomposition of natural gas (Cancarb's Thermax N990). Mixtures were prepared with CaWO Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and simultaneous Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) were performed on milled powders using samples of approximately 30 The thermodynamic analysis of the reduction–carburization reaction has been conducted using Thermo-Calc version Q. The Thermo-Calc is a very flexible code suitable for thermodynamic calculations, which is based on minimizing the Gibbs free energy. Thermo-Calc can use different thermodynamic databases; we used the SSUB3 Substances Database (version 3.2, March 2004), developed by the Scientific Group Thermodata Europe (SGTE), to calculate which phases are present at equilibrium, at different temperatures, for a given composition of the system. In our case, we have defined our system according to reaction The thermodynamics study was carried out over temperatures ranging between 800 The result of the analysis is shown schematically in Ca Above 1140 The sum of reactions  It is clear that, for the reaction CaWO The thermodynamic data allow us to hypothesize the following reactions: However, these reactions are strongly affected by the partial pressure of CO ( The standard free energy change (Δ Pure CaWO The EDS spectrum of the powder showed only Ca, W and O peaks. The XRD pattern exhibited only very sharp peaks of tetragonal scheelite     X-ray diffraction peaks of CaWO SC75-25-8 mixture was milled for 8  For each sample, the weight loss related to endothermic peaks is around 99 % of that required for the complete reduction of scheelite, and goes to completion at 1055, 1085 and 1090  Again, for all samples, two endothermic peaks in correspondence of the steep weight loss are detectable (the inset shows that a shoulder is clearly present at ≈ Whatever the reason, also in the case of mixtures prepared with carbon black the complete reduction of scheelite occurs at around 1000–1100 To investigate the role of heating rate on carbothermal reduction, powder SC75-25-24 was subjected to TGA-DSC using also a 3  In order to understand the phenomena occurring during the endothermic reduction of scheelite, we performed a series of TGA-DSC experiments in which the heating of the sample was interrupted in correspondence of specific points in DSC traces. Five portions of 25–30 It is worth noting that tungsten metal is a metastable intermediate in a system containing four (or more) moles of carbon per mole of scheelite ( Sample C was prepared by interrupting the heating between the first peak and the shoulder that represents the second endothermic (overlapping) peak. Its diffraction pattern shows more intense peaks of W with respect to sample B, and lower intensity scheelite peaks. No CaO peaks can be detected. Very low intensity W These findings indicate that The sample heated up to point D, i.e. just before the end of the second endothermic peak, shows no more scheelite, barely detectable Ca Terry and Azubike Differently from Terry and Azubike, Welham studied extensively ball milled mixtures of scheelite and graphite Our data unequivocally show that the first step taking place in the carbothermal reduction of milled scheelite is reaction Sample E was heated up to 1200  It is quite evident that, following the complete reduction of scheelite and tricalcium tungstate leading to CaO formation, the metastable W  Mixtures containing 80:20 and 85:15 weight ratios show low intensity peaks of W  FEG SEM images have been acquired by mixing the signals of secondary electrons (SEs) and backscattered electrons (BSEs). This way, the strong compositional contrast (Z-contrast) supplied by BSEs sums up to the morphological contrast of SEs. As a result, WC is the brighter phase in the electron micrographs. All powders subjected to isothermal annealing exhibit micrometer sized CaO particles and submicrometer sized WC aggregates consisting of very small grains, with sizes ranging between 10 and 200 In addition, SEM data show that the larger the initial carbon content, the smaller the size of both aggregates and grains of WC. The same trend has been observed in samples annealed at both 1100 To provide a rationale for the relationship between WC nanostructure and carbon content in the CaWO The role of excess carbon on the nucleation of WC precursors formed in the reduction phase and on the final size of WC particles should help clarify the recent results by Singh and Pandey After 100    On the basis of the above results, we decided to subject to acid leaching (with HCl 1 It is worth recalling that the powder mixture with 85:15 weight ratio, and heat treated for 1 Following acid leaching and washings, the mass of the powder was 93 % of the theoretical value, including the slight excess of carbon (see  The carbothermal reduction of scheelite starts via formation of tungsten metal and thermodynamically predicted Ca Nanostructured (< Both crystallite and particle size of WC are affected by the amount of carbon and annealing temperature. The crystallite sizes of WC obtained at 1100 Separation of the carbide from calcium oxide can be achieved by acid leaching and centrifugation, leaving a slightly sintered WC powder with particle size around 200 The WC powder thus obtained is usable for manufacturing ultra fine grained cemented carbides tools and wear parts. Therefore, the carbothermal reduction of scheelite does represent a viable process for eco-friendly, energy efficient and lower cost synthesis of tungsten carbide, which represents about 60 % of the world tungsten demand. The authors wish to thank Dr. Paolo Emilio Di Nunzio (Centro Sviluppo Materiali SpA, Roma, Italy) for his support in thermodynamics calculations, and Dr. Adriana De Stefanis and Dr. Patrizia Cavarelli (Istituto di Struttura della Materia, ISM, CNR, Roma, Italy) for surface area measurements. One of the authors (R. Polini) wishes to thank Prof. Massimo Tomellini (Università di Roma “Tor Vergata”, Roma, Italy) for the helpful discussions on aspects of this work and critical reading of the manuscript.