Childhood and adolescence are critical periods of skeletal mineralization. Peak bone mineral density achieved by the end of adolescence determines the risk for later pathological fractures and osteoporosis. Chronic disease and medication often adversely affect bone health. Epilepsy is one of the most common neurological conditions occurring in persons under the age of 21. Epilepsy may affect bone in a number of ways. Restrictions of physical activity imposed by seizures; limitations on physical activity resulting from cerebral palsy, frequently present in patients with symptomatic epilepsy; and medications used to treat seizures can all adversely affect bone health. It has long been observed that treatment with phenytoin and phenobarbital can be associated with rickets. More recently, established agents such as carbamazepine and valproate have been shown to be associated with a lowering of bone mineral density. The literature related to bone health in pediatric epilepsy is reviewed, although it should be noted that these data are limited.Bone is metabolically active to a high degree, receiving 10% of cardiac output. Throughout the life span it undergoes constant reorganization. Its dynamic nature is observed particularly in childhood and adolescence, when active mineralization of bone occurs. Interruption of this active mineralization results in weakening of bone. Reduction of bone mineralization has been shown to result in increased bone fragility and to raise the risk for future fractures Bone mineral density increases throughout childhood and adolescence, peaking by the age of 20, and, after a long plateau, decreases after the age of 40 ( Factors influencing peak bone mineral density include genetic, hormonal, and exogenous factors. Exogenous factors that adversely affect peak bone mineral density include cigarette smoking, physical handicaps, poor calcium intake, and certain medications Pediatric studies of AEDs and bone mineral density can shed light on the effects of initial monotherapy separated from those of polytherapy, smoking, alcohol, and other dietary influences, often present in adult studies. This article reviews the pediatric epilepsy literature that addresses bone mineralization. Pathophysiology and possible therapeutic interventions are not discussed, since they are addressed in detail by Fitzpatrick Seizures with onset in childhood have a profound long-term impact. In a prospective cohort study of 245 patients with epilepsy initially presenting before the age of 16 and followed up over a 30-year period, epilepsy was found to have a severe negative impact on quality of life Studies performed in the early 1970s provided the first suggestion of the adverse effects of AEDs on bone. Serum markers of osteomalacia in these early studies were correlated with phenobarbital, primidone, and phenytoin treatment Reports of more recent experience with the classic AEDs, while available for adults, are absent for children because, typically, these drugs are no longer used as first-line agents in pediatric epilepsy. However, phenobarbital and phenytoin remain the medications of first choice in the treatment of neonatal seizures. The impact of phenytoin and phenobarbital on bone has not been studied in human infants; in vitro animal evidence, however, suggests that phenytoin may affect neonatal bone Five studies have examined the influence on bone density of carbamazepine and valproate, the two AEDs most commonly prescribed for childhood epilepsy. These studies are reviewed below, and the evidence is categorized so as to better understand the individual effects of each agent. Carbamazepine is an enzyme-inducing AED that has been associated with lowered vitamin D levels, which have been shown to reduce bone mineral density in adults. The evidence concerning the effect on bone during childhood is somewhat mixed. Sheth et al. Kafali et al. Akin et al. Recently, Farhat et al. In summary, in childhood, carbamazepine, despite its enzyme-inducing properties, has not been shown to have a predictable effect on bone mineral density. Small studies found no change or a nonsignificant, approximately 5% reduction in bone density. A larger study showed that bone mineral density was reduced in patients taking AEDs regardless of vitamin D levels or the enzyme-inducing or noninducing nature of the AED. Initial studies, performed almost 10 years ago, suggested that valproate may be associated with reduction in bone mineral density in children Subsequently, studies in adults suggested that bone mass was decreased and bone turnover increased with valproate. Sato et al. Sheth et al. Akin et al. Interestingly, Kafali et al. Farhat et al. In summary, in the pediatric population with epilepsy, valproate appears to have an influence on bone mineral density. This finding appears to be similar to recent data from Pack and Morrell Fractures have been associated with valproate use in children. Pavlakis et al. Of the newer AEDs used in the treatment of pediatric epilepsy, only lamotrigine has been evaluated with respect to effect on bone mineral density. Guo et al. Limitations of this study are the presence of a lower range of body height (below the 10th percentile) in 43% of the patients. This raises the interesting issue of the role of growth in bone mineralization. The authors suggest that lower physical activity in their cohort accounted for most of the observed reductions in bone mineral density. Clearly, the effects on stature would be very gross measures compared with the expected reduction in bone mineralization, which would be a more sensitive measure. Furthermore, only total bone density was measured. Growth stature and pubertal stage were studied in girls receiving oxcarbazepine and carbamazepine In conclusion, epilepsy, comorbid disorders associated with epilepsy, and the treatment of epilepsy appear to adversely affect bone mineralization in childhood. The adverse effect of the older agents on pediatric bone mineralization appears to have been demonstrated. However, these agents are increasingly unlikely to be used as first- or second-line agents. Carbamazepine and valproate also appear to adversely affect bone mineralization. However, the effect of these agents on bone mineral density needs to be better defined. The authors of the one study that looked at bone mineralization in children taking lamotrigine concluded that the effect was accounted for almost entirely by a reduction in the level of physical activity. There are no studies of the effects of the other newer agents on bone mineralization. Accordingly, much remains to be done in defining the effects of these agents on bone mineralization. Many patients will require treatment for many years during a critical time of bone maturation and could suffer long-lasting serious consequences. An agent that is shown not to alter bone mineralization during childhood may become an agent of choice for the treatment of this special population.