The present work shows an alterative method for determining the tracking energy advantage, defined as the additional electrical energy produced by two axes tracking systems respect to fixed devices, in order to analyze the economical profitability in Spain. For this purpose, 52 main cities of this country have been analyzed. The proposed methodology starts from irradiation data, combining diffuse models and daily–hourly relations. Different types of losses have been evaluated, and the electrical behavior of the systems has been incorporated. Final annual energetic results demonstrate that two axes devices show a relevant energy advantage (higher than 20%) for most of the national territory.During the last few years, photovoltaic solar systems have become one of the most popular renewable energy sources in Spain. Nevertheless, the high cost of these installations in relation to the generated electricity constitutes one of the main drawbacks of this technology. In this sense, one and two axes solar tracking systems seems to be an attractive alternative compared to those fixed systems since they make it possible to maximize the capture of solar energy The best way to evaluate solar systems is to use information of solar irradiance, measured throughout the time. Nevertheless, this is only possible after a systematic and rigorous instantaneous measurement of the radiation at the location of study. In practice, the big quantity of data makes its use impracticable, making it necessary to reduce the information volume. For this purpose, pyranometers or satellite images are commonly used to catch the global irradiance on a horizontal surface (in the same way, it is possible to measure the direct and diffuse components over horizontal surface in a certain place). Most available information of different places in earth (for example, main Spanish cities), corresponds to monthly average daily radiation on horizontal surface On the other hand, one major advantage of flat plate solar systems (both thermal and photovoltaic) is the use of both components of the solar radiation (beam and diffuse). These components can be estimated from irradiance data and corresponding models The purpose of the current work is to quantify the additional solar gain of tracking system respect to fixed devices to demonstrate their economical viability in Spain. For this reason different issues have been considered, such us irradiation data and models providing instantaneous irradiances over horizontal, tilted and tracking surfaces, motion limits, shadows influence and efficiency of the generation system (cells, inverters, etc.). Instantaneous results have been integrated over the year, obtaining annual results. Different issues have been evaluated for one location (Jaén) over a year for instantaneous data, validating the proposed procedure for this location. In addition, some associated parameters have been estimated to adopt a simplified methodology in all the territory. Thus, the analysis has been extended to most of the cities in Spain, and a practical range of gains along this national territory has been obtained. To evaluate the robustness of the proposed method, some tasks have been carried out at a location corresponding to the city of Jaén (latitude: 37.5°N; longitude: 3.47°W, altitude: 570 Several instantaneous diffuse models have been evaluated (that will be discussed later) in order to predict the irradiances over both tilted and tracking surfaces, using instantaneous irradiance measurements over horizontal surface. To valuate the final results and establish the efficiency losses for the whole generation system, electrical generation data for a little tracking system has been used. This device incorporates a little amorphous photovoltaic cell, storing data along a year. The system takes into consideration the knowledge associated to mechanical, electrical and control tasks, such as other devices Monthly average daily radiation over horizontal surface One of the most widely known and used isotropic model in this work is the Liu and Jordan model On the other hand, anisotropic models consider a bigger diffuse component in the circumsolar zone that comes directly from the direction of the solar beams. In any case, the use of both diffuse models makes it possible to establish the upper and lower limits in which results can be reliable. They will define the most favorable scenario (with maximum annual radiation values) and the most unfavorable one (with minimum annual radiation values).  The first step (see On the other hand, the yearly tracking response  Initially, the global irradiance For this purpose, the hourly–daily relations have been considered Subsequently, Erbs et al. correlation These data correspond to values with no restrictions associated to the device. However, several restrictions sources may appear: The maximum exposure considers that the surface azimuth angle of the system An ideal solar tracking process consists on following the solar motion instantaneously along the time. Nevertheless, mechanical configurations, control devices and actuators make the system moving by steps, with no motion time periods. In this case, it is necessary to determine the energy losses for different time steps according to the daily sun path. In this sense, a time stop vector The geometric configuration of the solar field implies that some plates over one individual tracker receive shadows from others at each moment. Thus, annual integrated global losses between 2% and 6% appear It must be considered that shades only affects the reception of the beam constituent of radiation in the related surface. Nevertheless, the diffuse part is always captured from the sky, although in a less quantity. In relation to the reflected constituent, this can be considered as negligible, due to the obstacles surrounding the system in study. It is well known that power generation in a photovoltaic panel drops as the inner temperature increases. Therefore, it is necessary to consider the losses of the system and compare them with optimized fixed systems (with maximum annual energetic gain). This analysis starts from a thermal study of the system. It considers heat transfer parameters Taking as a reference a typical efficiency for 25 In a fixed system (south positioned) a high value of the incident angle (corresponding to a low value in the beam component), considerably increases the efficiency. Differences can reach up to 25% during the sunset and the sunrise In addition, for an incident angle close to 0°, the cell temperature increases considerably (up to 70° in conventional cells) while the efficiency decreases. Nevertheless, the relative differences are small (up to 10%) Thus, the minimum efficiency is reached for high temperatures and high beam component. It is only 10% lower when considering a typical conditions scenario. In a fixed system, this condition is reached around the solar midday, and a similar situation (with higher incident angle and less beam component of radiation) is repeated during most of the solar time. Thus, the difference between fixed and tracking systems will be always less than 10%. In any case, the distribution of the efficiency along the day has been obtained from the reviewed literature, following the tendencies that appear in The first source (time step motion of item a) must be incorporated to the The method is validated for a particular location in the next section. From this analysis it will be possible to obtain several parameters that can be used in a simplified methodology that can be extended for all the cities analyzed in the current work. The global procedure previously described will be detailed for one particular location: Jaén. The historical Database CENSOLAR provides a value of 5.8 Following the steps described above, the established procedures have been carried out To improve the energetic optimization, the theoretical limit occurs when the incidence angle of the radiation is always zero. Eq.  Once data along the year (with both clear and cloud sky days), have been evaluated, the average annual exposure of a tracked system regarding to the optimum fixed one without restrictions, is around 30% higher with an isotropic model. On the other hand, an anisotropic model provides up to 38%. As plate efficiency is considered with the same value as for fixed system, the lower and the upper limits for the maximum tracking advantage Δ Geometric and mechanical limitations of the tracking system could make not possible to reach certain positions, making the angle of incidence to be different from zero in these cases. Therefore, it is necessary to evaluate how these limits affect to the incoming solar energy. An analysis of different combinations of For any control system, it is always required to analyze different time intervals in which the tracker will remain blocked. It implies that the angle of incidence of direct radiation differs from zero, resulting in a lower solar isolation, which decreases as the stop intervals increase. The incoming losses depending on each new strategy must be evaluated. Thus, As a result of integrating the instantaneous data throughout a year, the global energetic capture and losses due to this concept can be obtained giving relative results that are always below 0.5%. Again, this analysis has been extended to both cities with extreme latitudes within the country: Oviedo and Las Palmas, observing very similar results. Thus, several considerations can be remarked: Losses are almost identical in the three analyzed cities, which leads to consider the analysis in Jaén as very significant. Thus, results can be extrapolated to the rest of the country. Stop interval times below 10 Incoming radiation losses higher than 1% are only possible with stop intervals of 30 The most useful stop time strategy consists on reducing the intervals as the solar time reaches the midday. Shadow analyses must reflect what exposure can be obtained considering different configurations, width–height relations ( A comparison between both scenarios (isotropic and anisotropic models) shows that reliable distances correspond to those with 8–10% losses (exposure gains related to optimum fixed systems of 28–30%). More detailed studies will be the goal for a future work. In this analysis, an average global gain is needed to estimate the influence of this kind of losses in the whole final annual result. From the tracker installation, some results have been presented in On the other hand, After evaluating multiple days with reliable results, these relative efficiency losses vary from 2% to 7.5%, with a mean value of 5%.  If the analyzed procedure is extended to a number of localities, it is possible to obtain an idea of the potential of the tracking system. In addition, there are some aspects that are not necessary to be repeated: both stop timing and motion limits can be adopted in order to assure always losses below 1%, as However, shades and generation losses can also be assumed as those indicated in Nevertheless, no instantaneous data are known, and the procedure must start with monthly average daily radiation on horizontal surface In this sense, the analysis without restrictions has been repeated for the case of Jaén, starting now from published Therefore, the indicated procedure has been carried out for all the main cities in Spain ( Annual results from integration of instantaneous daily data can be observed and compared throughout the Δ There are some conclusions that it is possible to extract from In all the cases, tendencies follow exponential laws. These trends are not related only to the latitude. Cities placed in the coastal top band of the country next the Cantabric Sea, originate worse results, not only for its latitude, but for the minor irradiation that takes place in them, principally diminished by the proximity to the sea and a major rainfall. It has not been reflected so drastically in the Pyrenean area (French border) with similar latitudes. The main conclusion is that for a moderate scenario, two axes tracking systems assure a 30% of gain over a fixed system in the major of the country. In an optimistic scenario (anisotropic model), it can be assured that this limit would reach a 35% value. All the losses related to the limitations of the system (motion limits, control, shadows, etc.) have been incorporated into the previous results without restrictions, obtaining an estimation of the electric production. Thus, in Economical approaches indicate there exist a 15–20% additional costs in tracking systems compared to fixed ones, due to higher investments, as well as other costs associated with the operation and maintenance of the plant (usually related to the electricity production). Thus, locations with an energy advantage Δ It can be observed that two axes tracking systems can be in 37 of the 52 main cities in Spain. Nevertheless, there are seven cities where these systems are not recommended in any case: A Coruña, Orense, Oviedo, Santander, Bilbao, Vitoria, San Sebastián. There are five additional cities, where some uncertainties also appear: Barcelona, Gerona, Lugo, Pamplona, Las Palmas and Pontevedra. Ten of these cities correspond to the North coastal band of the country, while two of them belong to the highest latitudes in the Mediterranean zone. Moreover, Las Palmas belongs to the Canary Islands with low latitude (28.2°). A high humidity and rainfall because of the proximity to the sea, next to the locations latitude could be the main reasons for non-advisable installations in these locations. Results illustrate that in most of the national territory two axes tracking systems seems to be profitable. Obviously, a more detailed analysis in a higher number of locations must be done if gains must be quantified. This work demonstrates that two-axes tracking systems can assure an economic viability respect to fixed ones in most of the Spanish national territory. There are some areas where high humidity, rainfall and latitude combine making not recommendable these solutions. In any case, this work is a starting point to define a further detailed economic analysis. For this purpose, it is necessary to add some technical details to the present model, such as different field configurations and systems separation (in order to optimize the shadow losses) and detailed instantaneous thermal–electrical model of the plates. It is also necessary to evaluate the investment costs in detail, by evaluating different market solutions, and incorporating the ground field price, in order to reduce the additional investment costs band (as The authors thank to the University of Jaén (Project  coefficients to annual electricity to the grid (kWh maximum annual solar irradiation (kWh function to approach function to approach function to approach vector of beam component of irradiance (W/m vector of diffusive component of irradiance (W/m global irradiance vector (W/m global irradiance vector (W/m vector of reflected component of irradiance (W/m surface height (m) monthly average daily radiation on horizontal surface (kJ hourly irradiation (time ‘ beam component of irradiance over horizontal surface (kW/m diffusive component of irradiance over horizontal surface (kW/m global irradiance over horizontal surface (kW/m extraterrestrial irradiance (kW/m solar constant (kW/m annual electricity to the grid (kWh annual electricity to the grid (kWh daily electricity to the grid (kWh daily electricity to the grid (kWh instantaneous clearness index (dimensionless) surface width (m) length of vector ratio of hourly total to daily total radiation time vector for daily analyses (from sunrise to sunset) time stop vector for daily analyses (from sunrise to sunset). Indicates when the tracker changes its position along the time electrical production of a tracked system (W/m solar altitude angle (deg) instantaneous tilt for a tracking system (deg) maximum tilt that a tracking system reaches (deg) optimum tilt for a fixed system to assure maximum solar capturing (deg) surface azimuth angle (deg) absolute value of maximum surface azimuth angle that tracking system reaches (deg) solar azimuth angle (deg) average electricity generation efficiency for a tracked system (dimensionless) average electricity generation efficiency for a fixed system (dimensionless) angle of incidence of radiation (rad) zenith angle (rad) sun hour angle (rad) sunset hour angle (rad) latitude angle (deg) declination (deg) reflectance coefficient (dimensionless) maximum tracking advantage: annual relative gain in electrical production of a tracking system without restrictions respect to a fixed one (%) tracking energy advantage: annual relative gain in electrical production of a tracking system respect to a fixed one (%)