In the present work, solvent extraction of Dy(III) from chloride solutions using 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (PC88A) and Cyanex 572 (a mixture of phosphonic and phosphinic acid extractants) diluted in kerosene has been reported. Pourbaix and speciation diagrams were plotted to understand the chemistry and formation of different species of Dy(III) in chloride solutions. The effects of different extraction parameters such as pH (1–5), extractant concentration (1–60 mM) and chloride concentration (0.05–1 M) were investigated. PC88A was found to extract Dy(III) ions better than Cyanex 572 under similar conditions. Experimental results showed that Dy(III) extraction reaction occurred via a cation exchange mechanism, which was further supported by Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) studies of organic solutions loaded with Dy(III). Separation studies of Dy(III) from a mixed solution of 16 rare earth elements (REEs) indicate that PC88A works better for light REEs/Dy separation while selectivity of middle and heavy REEs over Dy(III) are superior with Cyanex 572. Molecular modeling was employed to calculate the Gibbs energies of Dy ions in aqueous and organic phases (consisting of phosphonic acid in heptane), which supported the experimental results.Dysprosium is an important rare earth metal and its global demand has significantly increased recently. It is used in alloys for permanent NdFeB magnets and is regarded as a critical element by the European Union and the United States due to the shortage in supply and high demand [ Kuźnik [ Solvent extraction processing to produce nuclear-grade dysprosium oxide (Dy The aforementioned acidic extractants showed potential in separating REEs; however, separation of REEs is still considered a challenging task owing to their similar physical and chemical properties. Therefore, interest in the development of novel extractants towards the effective separation of REEs is still growing. Cytec has launched a novel phosphorus-based chelating extractant named Cyanex 572 to improve the separation efficiency amongst REEs compared to traditional phosphonic acid extractants. Cyanex 572 is a mixture of PC88A (25–75%), Cyanex 272 (25–75%), and diisobutylene (1–2%). It provides an advantage in reducing process costs by minimizing acid requirements during the stripping stage [ The literature is sparse on the solvent extraction of Dy(III) using Cyanex 572. Comparative study of Cyanex 272 and Cyanex 572 was reported for the separation of Nd from a mixed solution of Nd, Tb, and Dy by pertraction [ The present work is directed to investigate and compare the solvent extraction of Dy(III) from chloride solutions using PC88A and Cyanex 572. Computational modeling was performed to calculate Gibbs energies of Dy(III) in the aqueous phase and the organic phase containing phosphonic acid. Infrared spectroscopy results of Dy with PC88A and Cyanex 572 are compared and possible reaction mechanism based on experimental and FTIR results is proposed. Separation studies of Dy(III) from a mixed solution containing 16 REEs in a chloride matrix using PC88A and Cyanex 572 are reported. The organic reagents: PC88A (≥95 wt%) and Cyanex 572 (≥95 wt%) were supplied by Daihachi Chemical Industry and Cytec® Industries, respectively. Kerosene for extraction experiments or hexane for FTIR measurements (both obtained from Sigma Aldrich, reagent grade) were employed as the diluents for organic reagents. Stock solutions of Dy(III) were prepared by diluting the required amount of standard solution of Dy(III) of 1000 mg/L (Inorganic Ventures) diluted in 10 vol% hydrochloric acid. For separation studies, a synthetic solution containing 16 REEs [La(III), Ce(III), Pr(III), Nd(III), Sm(III), Eu(III), Gd(III), Tb(III), Dy(III), Y(III), Ho(III), Er(III), Tm(III), Yb(III), Lu(III), and Sc(III)] of 1000 mg/L each diluted in 10 vol% hydrochloric acid was used and purchased from Inorganic Ventures. Hydrochloric acid (37.2%) or ammonium hydroxide (NH The extraction experiments were carried out by contacting equal volumes of organic and aqueous solutions (15 mL) in a 100 mL separatory funnel at unit phase ratio for 10 min (previous experiments showed that 5 min was adequate to attain the equilibrium) using a Lab Companion SI-300 benchtop incubated shaker. All the experiments were performed at room temperature (25 ± 2 °C). After phase separation, the aqueous phase was collected for equilibrium pH (using a PHB-600R pH meter) measurement. The collected aqueous phase was further diluted in hydrochloric acid solutions (2 vol%) and REEs(III) concentration was analyzed using Agilent 7900 ICP-MS inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometer (ICP-MS). For FTIR measurements, 10 mM of both extractants (PC88A and Cyanex 572) were diluted in hexane and loaded with 3 mM Dy(III) using unit phase ratio and room temperature at initial pH of 5. The organic phase was loaded until saturation was achieved by repeating extraction experiment 2 times with fresh aqueous phase in each stage. FTIR measurements were performed using a Shimadzu FTIR instrument in the range of 600–4000 cm The extraction percentage (E%) and distribution coefficient (D) of Dy(III) at equilibrium were calculated using the following expressions: Pourbaix diagrams of dysprosium in hydrochloric acid solutions were constructed using STABCAL® software [  Different solvent extraction parameters such as pH, extractant concentration and ionic strength were varied to optimize the Dy(III) extraction from chloride media. The influence of initial pH in the range of 1 to 5 was investigated on Dy(III) extraction using PC88A and Cyanex 572 ( The corresponding equilibrium pH values of initial pH of 5 were 2.56 and 2.63 for PC88A and Cyanex 572, respectively. The equilibrium pH shift was higher for PC88A, suggesting better extraction of Dy(III) compared to Cyanex 572 under similar experimental conditions. However, for a better comparison of extraction performance between PC88A and Cyanex 572, pH The effect of extractant concentration (1–60 mM) on the extraction of Dy(III) is shown in  The characterization of 10 mM PC88A and Cyanex 572 in hexane before and after loading of Dy(III) ions was performed using infrared spectra analysis as shown in  The choice of extractant is highly dependent on the selectivity of metal ion of interest with other impurities or metal ions present in the same solution. To investigate the selectivity of Dy(III) over other REEs, separation performances of PC88A and Cyanex 572 extractants were investigated and compared in a mixed chloride based solution of 16 REEs (La, Ce, Pr, Nd, Sm, Eu, Gd, Tb, Dy, Y, Ho, Er, Tm, Yb, Lu, and Sc). In our previous publication [  Similar energy calculations were performed for Dy(III) in organic phase using a simple model representing PC88A in the DFT calculations, named DMPA (dimethyl phosphonic acid) as reported earlier [ Based on the results of this research, the following points are demonstrated: Pourbaix and speciation diagrams of Dy(III) showed that at high chloride concentrations, complexation of Dy ions follows. PC88A extracts Dy ions more effectively than Cyanex 572 extractant under similar conditions. Slope analysis results revealed that the stoichiometry of Dy extraction reaction with investigated extractants was lower than the expected value of 3, possibly due to the complexation of Dy with chloride ions. FTIR results illustrated significant shifts in characteristic absorption bands of P PC88A outperformed Cyanex 572 in separating Dy ions from light REEs while Cyanex 572 separation performance was better in separating Dy from middle and heavy REEs. Gibbs energies of Dy were calculated using molecular modeling and results from molecular modeling supported experimental and FTIR results. There are no conflicts of interest in this paper. The authors would like to thank Dr. John Bendler for performing the modeling work. Cytec Industries is acknowledged for supplying a commercial sample of Cyanex 572. This research was partially funded by ARL and SDSMT.