Natural gas hydrate in porous medium is a widespread form of hydrate in the natural world. In this study, porous media composed of sand at three particle sizes (0.85–1.18, 1.18–2.85, and 2.85–4.8 mm) were used to form natural gas hydrate by the Hydrate Synthetic Test System. The temperature and pressure during the formation process were described. The micro structural characteristics of the backbone, porosity, and the synthetic natural gas hydrate in porous media were studied by the High-precision Micro-CT Test System during decomposition. The results indicate that the hydrate is uniformly distributed and almost completely fill the pores of the porous media. The micro structural characteristics of the natural gas hydrate in porous media of three particle sizes and the backbones are also studied during the decomposition process. The relationship between the sand particle size and the maximum deformation of the backbone in the final stage of hydrate decomposition is determined.Natural gas hydrate is a snow-shaped or ice-shaped crystal. Substantial areas of pure gas hydrate are rarely found in the natural world. Geophysical exploration of hydrate layers and rock specimens indicated that massive gas hydrate deposits account for only 6% of its occurrence. The remaining gas hydrate deposits exist in porous media (e.g., marine sediments of the continental slope on shallow sea shelves or regions of permafrost) and cement of the surrounding media that generate a new pattern of energy storage: the hydrate reservoir. When the physical conditions of a hydrate reservoir changed with external interference, the hydrate could decomposes into gas and water and flows out through seepage channels. It is undisputed that natural gas hydrates are one of the largest sources of carbon on earth and a potential source of clean carbon based energy for humanity in the near future. Whilst there are no technology stoppers to exploit or produce methane from hydrates, specific technological breakthroughs will depend on the effective management of the sand and water during production, as well as the appropriate mitigation of environmental risks ( Porous media are the carriers of gas hydrate in situ. Therefore, it is extremely important to investigate the formation and decomposition of hydrate in porous media using physical simulations. It is good to understand under which natural gas hydrate occur and the actual process of hydrate decomposition, and which are necessary if we are to create an effective, reasonable, and safe exploitation technology. Utilizing the sensitivity of X-ray computed tomography (CT) to examine the variations in the microstructure allows real images of hydrate in porous media to be obtained without disturbing the experimental samples. It can offer a new method of studying hydrate in porous media. Research into hydrate in porous media is comparatively recently. In an early study, In this study, the dynamic processes of hydrate formation and decomposition in porous media were investigated with a PW30-14 Natural Gas Hydrate Synthetic System ( Coarse sands were sieved four times by a different-sized mesh, and divided into three groups according to particle sizes (0.85–1.18, 1.18–2.85, and 2.85–4.8 mm), which were placed into individual cylinders and moderately compacted. The cylinders were made by metal mesh, with an outer diameter of 50 mm and a height of 150 mm. The cylinders were placed in the upper part of a natural gas hydrate reactor filled with methane gas; the lower part was filled with Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate solution at 300 ppm. At a preset pressure and temperature the natural gas hydrate began to form. This process was lasted until there was no longer pressure fluctuation. When compression pump did not work any more, this indicated that the hydrate had formed in porous medium. The formation process lasted for about 4–5 h. An image of the formed hydrate was shown in As shown in The initial stage lasted for 100 min, and the rate of gas consumption was 1.5 L/min. The fluctuations in pressure and temperature were relatively small, and the gas consumption was minimal at this stage. The rapid formation stage lasted for 80 min and the rate of gas consumption was 3.5 L/min. The temperature and pressure showed very frequent fluctuation in this stage, as large amounts of gas and SDS solution were formed into the hydrate. The completion stage lasted for 100 min and the rate of gas consumption was approximately 0.01 L/min. When gas was no longer consumed, the hydrate were completely formed and the reaction stopped. The μCT225kv FCB High-precision Micro-CT Test System, developed at Taiyuan University of Technology, was used. The specific parameters are as follows: the system imaging magnification ratio: 1 < m < 400, system penetration capability: T < 40 mm (Fe), spatial resolution: ≦5 μm. Natural gas hydrate formed in porous medium, with a diameter of 50 mm and a height of 150 mm, were analyzed. The sample was placed in a thermal insulation vessel for CT scanning and kept in room temperature. Decomposed images of different time were selected to suit to study the structure of the hydrate. The CT device was switched on and prepared appropriately. The formed natural gas hydrate was removed quickly from the reactor. The sample was set onto the CT device, and the focus was adjusted according to the image definition shown in the To avoid too quick decomposition of the hydrate during the CT scanning process, a thermal insulation vessel was used and sealed tightly. However, a little of hydrate may still decomposed during this process. Because the densities of the gas hydrate and water are very similar, the decomposed water should be discharged as quickly as possible. Therefore, a gauze filter was attached to the bottom of the cup to discharge the water immediately for good scanning quality. Scanning data were processed with analytical software developed by Fortran, and then a three-dimensional graph was reconstructed according to scanning data. Correspondingly, the volume of hydrate, backbone, pores and the porosity of the sample can also be calculated. According to the CT attenuation coefficients of the sand grains, air, and the hydrate, three-dimensional graphs were plotted and shown in The hydrate was clearly uniformly distributed in the pores. The hydrate was not only present on the surfaces of the test sample, but also in their internal pores. This is a key property of natural gas hydrate in porous media, and is relevant to the study of the characteristics of natural gas hydrate deposit. The test was performed with micro-CT, based on the method described in the previous section. Continuous scanning was used to accommodate the rapid decomposition of the hydrate and the slowness of high-precision micro-CT scanning. Each sample was scanned six times, for 20 min each, so scanning each sample took 120 min. CT scan data were reconstructed and analyzed. Three test samples were developed with different particle sizes to obtain the various data. The decomposition process of the hydrate in a porous medium with this particle size was continuously scanned into the CT system. XZ and YZ sections of the middle CT image were analyzed to obtain the CT attenuation coefficients of characteristic regions in the sections. In the 0–120 min decomposition diagrams, shown in    According decomposition of the hydrate in porous media vertical deformations of the particles is defined as In this study, natural gas hydrate was formed in porous media, and their microstructures and their micro structural evolutions during the decomposition process were studied in a micro-CT system. The main conclusions were drawn as follows: The temperature and pressure for the formation of hydrate in porous media were 274–281 K and 5.9–6.0 MPa, respectively. Under these conditions, the atomized water and methane gas reacted, and the hydrate formed in the pores of the medium. Variations in gas consumption over time could be divided into three stages: the initial stage, rapid react stage, and completion stage. The initial stage showed smaller fluctuations in pressure and temperature, and less gas consumption. In the rapid react stage, the rate of consumption was 3.5 L/min, and the temperature and pressure showed very frequent fluctuation, caused by the rapid formation of gas hydrate. The rate of gas consumption was extremely little in the completion stage, at about 0.01 L/min. The reaction stopped when no any more gas was consumed. Hydrate formed in porous media was uniformly distributed, not only on the surface of the test sample, but also in its internal pores. As the sand particle size increased from 0.85–1.18 mm to 2.8–4.75 mm, the ratio of the pores without formed hydrate to the backbone porosity changed from 16.5% to 14.4%. This is an important feature of natural gas hydrate in porous media. During the decomposition of hydrate in porous media at three different particle sizes, as the particle size The financial supports received from the