Aiming to reveal the easy-sliming mechanism of siderite in the grinding process of carbonate-bearing iron ores, mechanical properties of siderite and hematite were computed by density functional theory (DFT). Elastic constant matrixes were developed and results show that shear deformation is the easiest deformation type compared to other types for both siderite and hematite crystal. Based on the elastic constant matrixes, bulk modulus and shear modulus of siderite and hematite were calculated and their ratios of bulk modulus to shear modulus (B/G) are 2.17 and 2.61 respectively, which suggested that siderite fractured more easily than hematite under the same stress level. Consequently, Young’s modulus, Poisson’s ratio, and compressibility were also calculated. Elastic anisotropy was investigated by computing the distribution of Young’s modulus with crystallographic direction. The color contour surfaces demonstrated that siderite crystal was strongly anisotropic in comparison with hematite, and the minimum Young’s modulus of siderite was only the half of that of hematite, which indicates the underlying mechanism that siderite slimed easily when milled with hematite. In addition, this study provides a novel understanding concerning how mechanical properties of mineral crystals affect grinding processes, paving the way for selective grinding to avoid the easy-sliming of certain minerals.The iron ores, in which hematite or magnetite as the main valuable minerals while siderite or other carbonate minerals also exist, are generally named as carbonate-bearing iron ores. During the grinding process of carbonate-bearing iron ores, siderite turns into slime easily and exhibits unselective adsorption on other minerals since siderite is much softer than hematite and quartz ( Many types of research have been published for treating carbonate iron ores ( However, as the sliming and the unselective adsorption of siderite was not eliminated completely by the current two-step flotation, the iron recovery of iron concentrate was relatively lower as about 70% ( The mechanical properties for most pure metals, especially their elastic constants, are readily available in the literature. In contrast, data regarding the mechanical properties of minerals and intermetallic compounds is much more limited. Researchers have calculated the elastic constants of iron oxides and oxyhydroxides ( DFT is a promising method of investigating materials properties such as physicochemical properties, surface modification, and so on ( Crystalline solids are anisotropic in nature, that is, some of their physical properties show different values when measured along with different directions in the same crystals. This arises from the different arrangement of particles in different directions. Since the arrangement of particles is different along with different directions, the value of the same physical property is found to be different along each direction. Most calculations of mechanical properties such as bulk modulus, shear modulus, etc are the average values of the bulk crystal other than moduli along with different directions. In the present study, the mechanical properties of siderite and hematite were computationally investigated by means of the first-principle DFT calculation, to demonstrate the elastic constants of siderite and hematite using theoretical calculations, and to explain the grinding behaviors of hematite and siderite with the aid of ductility (brittleness) and crystal anisotropy ( In order to demonstrate mechanical properties on crystal surface spatially, Matlab was used to map the spatial distribution of Young’s modulus on the crystal surface in spherical coordinates. Elastic anisotropy was investigated taking advantage of the mapped Young’s modulus surfaces, which used color contours to show the crystallographic dependence of these important mechanical properties. The characterization of mechanical properties using DFT is expected to provide new insight into the mechanical properties of mineral crystals. The innovative spherically mapping of Young’s modulus and the analysis of elastic anisotropy in the present study contribute to characterize the mechanical properties of siderite and hematite. It is also meaningful for revealing the various grindabilities of minerals and could provide theoretical reference for selective grinding, especially for clarifying the grindability of carbonate-bearing iron ores. All calculations in this study were conducted using the CASTEP module. The exchange-correlation convergence tests were performed using GGA-WC calculations of siderite and GGA-PBESOL of hematite. Due to the subsequent calculation of mechanical properties is sensitive to the calculation parameters, especially the k-point and cutoff energy, more accurate selections of k-point sets and cutoff energies of both siderite and hematite were conducted on the basis of previous experiments ( After the validation of crystal parameters in comparison with references, the relaxed crystal cell was considered as the smallest cell to display the symmetry of mineral crystal. Then the minimum formation energy of the relaxed cell was calculated and named as final energy hereafter with the unit of eV. In the case of polycrystalline, such as the crystal of siderite and hematite, it is impossible to obtain its individual elastic constants by measurement ( After these calculations, the elastic constants of single-crystal will be shown as a 6 × 6 matrix. There are 21 independent parameters, with the improvement of the symmetry of the crystal system, the numbers of the independent parameters will decrease. As were revealed by X-ray diffraction, siderite is a trigonal crystal with the space group In this paper, the Elastic properties of anisotropic crystalline materials are often demonstrated by Young’s modulus or Poisson’s ratio. Both properties, however, are dependent upon the direction of measurement within a crystal lattice. On a practical note, elastic anisotropy has been related to cracking near grain boundaries (in the form of microcracks and delamination) in polycrystalline materials ( Siderite is a trigonal crystal with the space group Hematite is a hexagonal crystal with the space group As the space groups of hematite and siderite both belong to It is found that the calculated value of C is effected by calculation package employed and calculation parameters set. Due to the different settings of calculation package, exchange-correlation potentials, calculation units, and k-points in the reference ( As shown in Secondly, the calculated elastic constants of siderite and hematite lead to the values of their bulk modulus (B) and shear modulus (G). For such estimations, two main approximations are employed, namely, the Voigt ( And in terms of the Reuss approximation as: Hematite and siderite are polycrystalline species, specifically in the form of aggregated mixtures of polycrystalline grains with random orientation. When estimating the elastic constants of polycrystalline materials, the Voigt-Reuss-Hill (VRH) approximation is widely used ( The averaged compressibility can be easily computed from the expression: Next, Young’s modulus The final calculated elastic constants of siderite and hematite are displayed in Proofread existing literature, for siderite, bulk modulus is in a good agreement with the value of 114 GPa ( Based on the results shown in Another important mechanical characteristic of materials is their brittle/ductile behavior. This behavior is closely related, particular to their plastic deformation and fracture abilities. According to reference ( The critical value of An additional indicator of brittle/ductile behavior can be calculated using Poisson’s ratio Crystalline materials are rarely able to be characterized using a single value of Young’s modulus, as its value depends on the direction within a crystal lattice in which it is measured ( Images in The mechanical properties of siderite and hematite were computed by DFT calculation to detect the easier sliming mechanism of siderite compared with hematite. On the optimized hematite and siderite crystal, a 6 × 6 elastic constant matrix was acquired. The calculated elastic constants demonstrate that both siderite and hematite are mechanically stable but anisotropic. The elastic properties of siderite are similar to hematite, but its values of The spatial distribution of Young’s modulus on the crystal surface was revealed by the contours of the computed Young’s modulus. It was suggested that siderite is strongly anisotropic in comparison with hematite, and the minimum Young’s modulus of siderite is only half of that of hematite, which leads to the easier sliming of siderite during the grinding process of carbonate-bearing iron ore. This study will provide a basic reference for seeking method such as selective grinding, to solve the slimming problem of siderite and then to eliminate the adverse impact of slimmed siderite on the reverse flotation of hematite completely. It also offers a fundamental insight into the grindabilites of various minerals from the viewpoint of micro-mechanical properties of mineral crystals. This study was supported by the