The chapter discusses the flowsheeting based on unit operations and applied to a mineralogical classification of gold ore types. Whether gold is the primary value metal or a part of a suite of metals, such as nickel, cobalt, copper, or platinum-group metals (PGMs), selection of an appropriate combination of these units would likely result in a usable flowsheet. Selection of the most appropriate unit operations for a given project entails a careful mineralogical and metallurgical investigation. Assuming that such an investigation has been carried out on a representative sample of the ore in question and the principles outlined in the chapter being applied, the selection process can be assisted by scrutinizing previous and current practical operating flowsheets.The concept of a generic flowsheet for the processing of gold ores may seem to have been superseded, given the foregoing discussion of many unit operations and process configurations. However, taking the view that simplifying the complexity can assist the process engineer or metallurgist, an overview prior to filling in the detail often reveals that certain process steps must necessarily precede others. Given the variable mine life of gold plants, from many years to just several months, there is no point in attempting a comprehensive snapshot summary of all current gold plants. Therefore, the approach in this chapter is to provide a shortlist giving examples of the many flowsheets and process issues in plants that have been referred to within this volume. In each case, reference is made to the chapters where more detailed discussion may be found. The general principle behind the structure of the volume is that of flowsheeting based on unit operations and applied to a mineralogical classification of gold ore types. Typical unit operations associated with the generic process flowsheet embodied within the structure of this book are shown in Selection of the most appropriate unit operations for a given project entails a careful mineralogical and metallurgical investigation. Assuming that such an investigation has been carried out on a representative sample of the ore in question and the principles outlined in the first part of this book are being applied, the selection process can be assisted by scrutinizing previous and current practical operating flowsheets. The information in Some key conclusions that can be drawn are as follows: Innovations in comminution unit operations are exemplified by those undertaken at Freeport, which is one of the largest gold mills in the world, despite being a copper mine. This highlights the ongoing trend towards gold recovery from more polymetallic and refractory deposits, as free-milling gold resources become depleted. Concentration of gold by both gravity and flotation has seen innovation driven partly by the development of new items of equipment, as well as their novel application within comminution and other circuits. Treatment of refractory ores has become increasingly important; pressure and bacterial oxidation as well as roasting technologies have increasing relevance to the modern gold metallurgist. Further developments that increase recoveries while decreasing reagent consumptions are set to continue, particularly in the development of complex flowsheets that target the recovery of both base and precious metals from refractory orebodies. As both the knowledge base and the number of applications increase, so the risk of applying these processes becomes smaller. The same can be said of other problematic ores, such as carbonaceous preg-robbing, tellurides and antimonial ores. Advances in cyanide leaching have clearly been made in the treatment of problematic ores such as those arising from oxidation processes and those containing complex mineralogies, including reactive sulfide or high-silver ores. While there has been much work on the development of alternative lixiviants for gold, such as thiosulfate, the ongoing initiatives in cyanide management, such as the Cyanide Code, and the inherent benefits of a reagent that, in a well-designed flowsheet, is low level and biodegradable, suggest that cyanide will continue to be applied for some time to come. Advances in the recovery of gold from leach solution have also been influenced by developments in equipment and reagents. Ongoing improvements in the refining of gold are also being made. Innovations such as the Anglo American Corporation (AAC) pump cell contactor and gold-selective RIP have found niche applications at a few operating plants. The future of cyanide in gold processing will also be influenced by the increasing application of cyanide detoxification or recovery processes into flowsheets; development of new technologies for the economic recovery and recycle of cyanide from plant tailings is continuing. Tailing-storage facility design has seen increased attention in recent years. Placement of paste or dry tailings using techniques such as centrally thickened discharge, for example, is an innovation that may address issues of dam stability as well as water and cyanide recovery, while resulting in a more natural looking landform on closure.