The objective of this study was to determine the effects of dietary α-tocopherol supplementation to pigs on the lipid stability of nitrite-reduced salami-type sausages (custom-produced for this study). Fourteen crossbred pigs were divided into two equal groups. The control group (CG) was fed a basal diet containing 34ppm α-tocopherol, and the experimental group (EG), a diet supplemented with 364ppm α-tocopherol, both for 35 days. After slaughter, salami-type sausages were produced with the addition of different nitrite levels in the curing salt (100, 50, 25 and 0ppm), ripened for four weeks, sliced, and packaged under a protective atmosphere (80 parts N2 to 20 parts CO2). The packed products were stored for eight weeks under simulation of the usual conditions in self-service shelves with permanent lighting (9°C, 200 lux). The sausages were regularly assessed for their oxidative status (thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances, fatty acid pattern) and the amount of α-tocopherol, and by sensory evaluation. In the EG sausages, α-tocopherol concentrations were twice as high and TBARS were lower than in the CG sausages. The α-tocopherol in EG prevented the loss of unsaturated fatty acids during storage. Sausages of EG containing 100ppm nitrite had the longest sensory stability. However, the biochemical parameters did not indicate that nitrite had any effect on the antioxidative potential of the sausages.Lipid oxidation is an important factor limiting both the quality of meat products as well as their consumer acceptability ( Antioxidants and modified atmosphere packaging (MAP) are used to prevent or delay lipid oxidation ( Salami-type sausages contain both antioxidative substances (enzymes, vitamins, spices, additives) and pro-oxidative ones (salt, iron, myoglobin, oxygen) with opposite effects on lipid oxidation status ( There are several studies analyzing cured ham ( Fourteen castrated male fattening pigs (Camborough 23 Post-slaughter samples of (5 Sausages were commercially produced in a food plant of a salami producing company (Stockmeyer, Sassenberg-Füchtorf, Germany). The sausage contained pork meat (88%) and dorsal pork fat (7%) of the EG or CG pigs, starter culture mixture (0.2%), spice mixture (0.4%), curing salt (2.4%), lactose (1%), maltodextrose (0.8%), and dextrose (0.2%). Four batches per group (EG, CG) were produced by the same recipe (without nitrate salt or ascorbic acid) but with different amounts of nitrite in the curing salt: 100, 50, 25 or 0 The several investigations were done in duplicate by the following methods: Post-slaughter tissue samples and the ripened and stored sausages were analyzed for α-tocopherol. The method of Lipid oxidation was measured as thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances (TBARS) by the extraction method described by The mass determinations needed to calculate TBARS were obtained by drying between 3 and 5 The fatty acid (FA) composition was measured according to the method of The residual nitrite content was determined using the nitrite/nitrate color-assay according to the manufacturer’s instructions (R-Biopharm, Darmstadt, Germany). The residual nitrite content was calculated using a calibration curve. Sensory evaluation was carried out every week (from week 3 to week 12) by a trained panel of four using the DLG line scale (German Agricultural Society, 2001) for salami-type sausages. Samples were coded with a combination of numbers and letters for blind testing. Sausages were evaluated according to a table with different possible descriptive adjectives for the criteria of appearance, color, consistency, odor, and flavor. Each criterion was judged on a scale ranging from 0 (very bad) to 5 (very good) points. Finally, the results of the single marks for each criterion were summed up for each sausage, divided by the number of criteria tested, and expressed as an overall final rating. Thus, a sausage with final rating of 5 would have been given the maximum points for all criteria, whereas one with a final rating of 0 points failed in all criteria tested. All data was analyzed using the SAS program, version 8.2 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA, 2003). First, all data were checked for a normal distribution (PROC CHART, PROC HBAR). The progress of lipid oxidation (in terms of TBARS) and the FA composition were analyzed by a three-way analysis of variance (PROC GLM). The α-tocopherol supplementation, nitrite content, storage time, and the interactions of these factors were included as fixed effects. Different Supplementation of pigs’ diets with α-tocopherol led to higher α-tocopherol levels in the tissue samples and plasma. The levels of α-tocopherol in plasma were twice as high in the EG (2.36 There was nearly twice as much α-tocopherol in the sausages produced from the animals of the EG than in those from the CG ( Levels of TBARS were significantly lower in EG sausages than in CG sausages ( For the determination of the FA composition we analyzed the total saturated fatty acids, the polyunsaturated The concentration of the The concentration of the The amount of nitrite varied significantly between the different nitrite groups on day 0: there was 12 The sensory testing ratings of the two α-tocopherol supplementation groups (CG and EG) are shown in separate diagrams ( Within the CG the 0 Of all sausages of the EG ( The quality ratings of the EG were significantly higher ( The α-tocopherol level in blood plasma is highly related to the α-tocopherol concentrations in feed ( The extent of lipid oxidation (TBARS) in both sausage-groups increased nearly over the entire study period. Similar effects in meat products have previously been described by other authors ( We found that α-tocopherol had only a minor influence on the FA composition of the sausages. Both fresh and matured, stored sausages were found to contain on average around 40% saturated fatty acids (SFA), 1.3% Although statistically significant, the differences in FA patterns (saturated and unsaturated FA) between CG and EG in weeks 0 or 12 could have been, due to only a small variation in sausage composition. The amounts of FA can be slightly variable, depending on the tissue and individual animal from which the material comes ( On the other hand, we observed here that the different amounts of nitrite added to the sausages had a positive effect on sensory evaluation. All sausages tasted uncharacteristically sour due to the relatively high amount of saccharides (2%) added, which were fermented by the starter cultures, resulting in a high accumulation of lactic acid. This undesirable, acidic taste was the reason that the final ratings of the sausages were always below the best mark 5. The sensory analysis revealed only few differences between the dietary groups (CG and EG) until week 8; between weeks 8 and 12, the influence of α-tocopherol and nitrite became particularly evident. Sensory testing revealed that both the EG and CG sausages containing 100 The results of this investigation indicate that slight variations in the concentration of nitrite in the curing salt do not result in a biochemically measurable effect. This stands in contrast to results previously reported by In summary, we showed that α-tocopherol added to the feed of pigs was found in the animals’ tissues and thus in the sausages produced from the resulting meat. A higher amount of α-tocopherol in salami-type sausages reduced the degradation of (poly)unsaturated fatty acids during storage (at 9 This study was supported by funding from the Fritz Ahrberg Foundation, Hannover, Germany. The authors are grateful to the Stockmeyer Company, Sassenberg-Füchtorf, Germany, for the production of the sausages. We thank Andrea Widdel and Uwe Glockenthoer for their technical help and assistance with the analysis and graphics. We would like to express many thanks to Judith McAlister-Hermann, Ph.D., English Editorial Office, University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Foundation (Germany), for critical review of the English manuscript. This paper is dedicated to Professor Siegfried Wenzel on the occasion of his 70th birthday.