This paper aims to study the effect of the size of pristine graphene (PRG) particles on the compressive and tensile strengths of cement-based mortars and to gain better understandings of the mechanism behind the enhancement of these properties. PRG industrially manufactured by the electrochemical process with a variety of particle sizes including 5 µm, 43 µm, 56 µm, and 73 µm was used at the optimal dosage of 0.07% by weight of cement binder. The results indicate that mechanical strengths of cement mortars at 7 and 28 days considerably depend on the size of PRG. The mixes with size 56 µm and 73 µm show significant influence on both compressive and tensile strengths of cement mortars, which increase approximately 34.3% and 30.1% at 28-day compressive strengths, and 26.9% and 38.6% at 28-day tensile strengths, respectively. On the other hand, the mix with size 43 µm of PRG addition exhibits a significant increase only in tensile strength, and there are no significant effects on either compressive strengths or tensile strengths of the mix containing 5 µm particles. The observed enhancement in the mechanical properties of cement mortars by large PRG sizes is attributed to the improvement of cement hydration level, the reduction of cement particles’ distance in cement gels because of the effect of van der Waals forces between PRG sheets, and the mechanical adhesion forces between PRG sheets and cement gels. The results from this study indicate that PRG is not only a promising additive in practical application for building materials to improve the current drawbacks of cement composites, but also a feasible option to support the reduction of cement mass used in cement composites, which could reduce the CO2 footprint and amount of CO2 emission into the atmosphere.The most commonly used materials in the construction industry are cementitious composites. Although they are strong in compressive strength, they are weak in tensile and corrosive properties To address these problems, several measures were explored by researchers such as improving cement plant production efficiency or using supplementary materials For GO studies, Li et al. In the case of PRG additives, recent studies on a combination of PRG and cement composites have shown great potential in strength improvement in PRG-cement composites Even though these studies show a strong dependence of the properties of cement composites on PRG dosages, the mechanisms of this dosage dependence have not been clearly explained. Additionally, unlike GO, rGO and PRG sheets (PRGs) have very few oxygen-functional groups that indicate a different mechanism to enhance the cement matrix, which is likely based on friction adhesion forces between PRGs and cementitious gels To address the above-mentioned research gaps, this study aims to explore the effects of different PRG sizes, which was industrially manufactured by an electrochemical process, on compressive and tensile strengths of cement mortars. The objectives of the study not only consider a range of PRG sizes including 5 µm, 43 µm, 56 µm, and 73 µm on these properties, but also evaluate their effects on physicochemical and microstructural properties of the mortars. The outcomes of this study will provide better understandings of the strengthening mechanism of compressive and tensile strengths of cement mortars, which is still lacking in the case of research of PRG-cement composites. The results of this study will contribute to future studies on using PRGs as additives in cement composites to enhance the performance of construction materials. The reduced mass of Portland cement in the binder of cement composites as a result of strength improvements due to the addition of PRGs will result in a reduction of the environmental impact of Portland cement products thanks to reduced CO The physical properties of four different PRG sizes provided by First Graphene Ltd in Perth, WA, Australia are shown in In this study, we designed the mixes with different PRG sizes at the optimal dosage (0.07% PRG), which is based on our previous study Compressive and tensile strengths were tested at 7 and 28 days to investigate the influence of different PRG sizes on cement mortars. For compression, 50 × 50 × 50 mm  Compressive strengths and their enhancement rates at 7 and 28 days of the mortars with different PRG sizes are shown in  The XRD patterns of the mortars with different sizes of PRGs at 28 days are shown in  SEM images of microstructures of the mortars with different sizes of PRGs at 28 days are shown in From the above observations and analyses, it can be concluded that physicochemical, microstructural and mechanical properties of cement-based mortars are strongly dependent on the sizes of PRGs additives. The benefits of PRG additives in the cement matrix could come from the combination of the following reasons: (1) a part of the enhancement in the cement hydration process due to the better spreading water of PRGs in a cement matrix, and the reduction of distances between cement particles in cement gels because of the effect of van der Waals forces between PRGs The ANOVA analysis by applying the Dunnett method is used to determine whether the enhancement of different sizes of PRGs on compressive and tensile strengths of cement mortars is statistically significant or not. This analysis method is based on the null hypothesis theory with a significant level of 0.05 to assess how significant differences between the mortar mixes, which is detailed in previous studies  In summary, it is evident from all the above analyses that compressive and tensile strengths of cement based mortars at 7 days and 28 days strongly depend on the sizes of PRG additives. While the small size (5 µm) does not show any significant influence on compressive and tensile strengths of the cement mortars at both testing days, the large size (43 µm) only shows a significant influence on tensile strengths at both testing days. In contrast, the ultra-large sizes (56 µm and 73 µm) show a significant influence on both compression and tension at all the testing days. This confirms the strong benefit of the ultra-large sizes on the mechanical properties of cementitious composites. As mentioned in the Introduction Section, the use of Portland cement accounts for about 7% of CO As discussed in The effects of different sizes of PRGs on physicochemical, microstructural and mechanical properties of cement-based mortars have been presented and evaluated in this study. Based on the results and discussion above, the following conclusions have been drawn: 1. The addition of PRGs additive to cement-based mortars enhances their compressive and tensile strengths at 7 days and 28 days. The enhancement accounts for the improvement of compactness of mortars, which is due to the increase in cement hydration degrees, the reduction of distances between cement particles, and the most important part from mechanical adhesion forces between PRGs and cement gels. 2. Compressive and tensile strengths of the cement mortars considerably depend on the sizes of PRGs additive. While the small size (5 µm) presents no significant effect on both mechanical tests, the large size (43 µm) only shows a significant influence on tensile strengths. The ultra-large sizes (56 µm and 73 µm) have shown the most prominent benefit to compressive and tensile strengths at both testing days. 3. The results from XRD, FTIR, and SEM analyses show that compressive and tensile strengths PRG-cement mortars have a close relationship with their physicochemical and microstructure properties. The higher mechanical strengths they are, the better microstructures they have. 4. The use of PRGs in cement composites as an additive can support to reduce the mass of cement production, and thus decrease the amount of the CO The results from the study confirm the prominent benefit of the ultra-large sizes on mechanical properties of cementitious composites. This provides the potential to apply ultra-large PRG sizes to cementitious composites as additives to not only enhance both compressive and tensile strengths but also contribute to alleviating the global warming gases. The study also contributes to providing a fast track in studying PRG and cement composites to investigate the influence of PRGs on other properties of cementitious composites, such as permeability, toughness, shrinkage, or corrosion; therefore, the application of this promising additive in practice for building materials could complete soon. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work is supported and funded by the ARC Research Hub for