Increasingly, the aim of mine residue rehabilitation is moving towards ecosystem reconstruction rather than vegetation establishment. In an unamended state, mine residues exhibit degraded soil structure as well as other chemical and biological characteristics which are inhibitory to long-term plant growth. At a bauxite residue disposal area in South-west Ireland, a series of restoration treatments were investigated for evidence of soil development. Unamended residue has high pH, sodicity, salinity, dominance of fine fraction and poor aggregate stability as well as low carbon content. Within one year, amended and vegetated sites exhibited improved physico-chemical properties and increased aggregate stability. Further improvement of these properties in subsequent years and evidence of non-labile carbon and nitrogen accumulation indicate that development of root systems and soil communities drive pedogenesis in restored industrial sites.Mine tailings and mineral processing residues are the fine-grained (<2.0 Bauxite residues are a sodic-alkaline by-product from the extraction of alumina from bauxite ore. Global production is estimated at 120 The success of bauxite residue restoration has largely been assessed by soil chemical analyses and short term vegetation growth trials ( The current study was carried out under field conditions where bauxite residues had been amended with gypsum and organic matter to support vegetation cover but varied in their physico-chemical composition and/or time since amendment and seeding. The hypothesis of this work is that the oldest revegetated residue amended with organic matter and gypsum will exhibit the highest physical quality compared to more recently amended sites or those with less gypsum. The sampling area is located at the Aughinish alumina refinery, Limerick, South-west Ireland. The climate of the experimental site is temperate maritime, with average precipitation reaching 1180 In alumina refineries, bauxite ore is processed by the Bayer process in which Al-containing minerals are dissolved in NaOH under high temperatures and pressures. Generally, for each tonne of alumina, 1–2 tonnes of insoluble solids (bauxite processing residue) are produced ( In order to evaluate the evidence for soil formation on restored residue, five treatment areas were selected representing residue of varying properties and/or restoration history (e.g. amount of gypsum added, time since seeding). The soil samples are described in greater detail below. The soil was sampled to a depth of 15 Restoration trials were initiated in 1998 to investigate methods for amending the sodic and alkaline bauxite residues to support vegetation establishment (e.g. The control site for the bauxite residue (BR1) was in an untreated area of the BRDA, and is devoid of vegetation. The second sampled area (BR2) was amended with process sand (25%), gypsum (90 The third and fourth areas sampled (BR3 and BR4) were restored nine years previously with process sand addition (25%, w/w) and compost at 100 The fifth area sampled (BR5) was amended as per BR4 but with 45 In addition, soil from an adjacent unmanaged grassland was sampled to provide a potential analogue for site comparisons. Bulk density ( Additional soil samples (0–15 The proportion of water-stable aggregates larger than 250 Soil carbon fractionation procedure followed the method of This procedure divided the soil into three size classes: (1) 200 The microaggregate stability residue treatments were determined using the method previously described by Following the implementation of Kolmogorov–Smirnov normality tests the data generated were analysed statistically using analysis of variance, descriptive measures and Pearson's bivariate correlations on SPSS, version 19.0. Differences between the restoration treatments on the residue properties were individually determined using Duncan's post hoc tests on one-way ANOVA. The relationship between residue properties and macroaggregate stability (AI) was determined using Pearson's bivariate correlations analyses. Figures were constructed using GraphPad Prism, Version 6. Residue physico-chemical properties varied significantly between the restoration treatment areas for all parameters analysed ( Cation content also significantly varied in the restoration treatments ( Nitrogen and carbon content significantly varied through the restoration sites and fraction sizes ( Total carbon was significantly higher in the restored sites with amounts in all fraction sizes increasing from BR1 to BR2. BR2 also had significantly higher >2000 AI were correlated with both carbon and cation content. Positive relationships for AI with TC were found for all fraction sizes with the lowest values for the +200 Strong positive linear relationships were found between AI and extractable Ca and Mg ( Microaggregate stability (expressed a mean particle diameter, Unamended residue exhibited physical properties typical of mine tailings and industrial residues. The dominant fraction produced at the study site was the mud residue, and as with many mine tailings and bauxite residue muds, this a fine grained medium with 20–30% clay-sized and the majority in the silt range ( Most mineral soils have particle densities of 2.6–2.75 The unamended treatment BR1 is typical of bauxite residues with high ESP resulting from sodium being the dominant exchangeable cation. As with several studies examining residue amendment, amended treatments supporting plant growth had significantly lower Na with an increase in the other cations (Ca, Mg and K) and consequently a lower ESP. Excessive quantities of exchangeable Na Deficiencies of organic matter and nitrogen in mine soils are limiting to vegetation establishment and sustained productivity. The formation and accumulation of organic matter and humus are major processes determining the direction and rate of initial pedogenesis in restored mine soils ( Macroaggregates (larger than 250 Addition of organic amendments to soils generally stimulate and increase microbial activity, leading to the production of soil-aggregate binding agents ( The extent to which erosion resistance or aggregation occurs is influenced by the type and degree of decomposition of the organic matter applied. In a 60-day incubation study of mine soils,  The increase in AI observed in the older sites is comparable to those reported by Formation and stabilisation of aggregates is driven by both physico-chemical reactions and soil microbial activity. In mine soils such as fine textured bauxite residues soil aggregation will be limited by both the prevailing physico-chemical conditions (high ESP, low organic matter) as well as the lack of biological activity. Although organic additions did improve AI the most stable aggregates were found after nine years. This can be attributed to the higher biological activity and accumulation of recalcitrant carbon in the older sites as well as lower sodium content. Restoration management should aim to reduce ESP prior to organic additions to promote aggregation. Certainly, once conditions prevail for plant growth and further vegetation establishment, accumulation of fine fraction carbon increases and promotes stability. Further research to identify plant root and soil microbial interactions in influencing soil structure in restored mine soils is suggested. We would like to thank Aughinish Alumina Ltd. for funding this research. The assistance of Richard Raleigh Landscaping in the implementation of field trials is also acknowledged. Thanks are also extended to J. Carmody and J. Owen for assistance with particle size analyser and C:N analyser. We would also like to thank the two anonymous reviewers for providing suggestions to improve this manuscript.