Hafnium is a very important valuable metal with numerous applications in electronics, refractory and nuclear industry. Its source is the secondary waste streams of zirconium purification plant. The waste raffinate stream generated from Zr extraction plant contains about 4kg of Hf per ton of zircon sand processed. The conventional solvent extraction process with Tri Butyl Phosphate (TBP) as extractant is not suitable to recover Hf value lost in this low acidic lean stream. Presence of high concentration of silica, about 2g/L poses additional challenge for application in solvent economic continuous contactors. A novel alkyl phosphine oxide based ligand having high separation factor for Zr over Hf, Mixed Alkyl Phosphine Oxide (MAPO) has been synthesised indigenously which is applicable for this lean stream. Batch equilibrium data were generated for this novel solvent to optimise the process conditions for application in continuous contactor. The developed process was successfully applied in five stage mixer settler set up in counter current mode with MAPO in mixed diluents as extractant, zirconium nitrate as the scrubbing agent and oxalic acid as the strippant. Recycle of extractant, scrub and strippant with concentration make up has been attempted to increase metal concentration in product stream and to reduce plant waste volume. The work has been successful in achieving not only complete extraction of the Hf value from the plant stream but also recovery of the metal as a concentrated solution ~10g/L with 95% purity which was efficiently converted to oxide. The Zr value is also recovered from the waste stream completely during stripping. Studies were also conducted on the characteristics of silica present in the waste stream and a technique comprising of flocculation followed by ultrafiltration was applied to make the slurry feed solid-free to achieve trouble free operation. The present studies show the potential of the developed process for application to Zr purification plant for recovery of the Hf as well as the Zr value from its raffinate waste.The primary source of Hf is the zircon (ZrSiO Various techniques effective in separation of Zr and Hf are selective crystallisation, solvent extraction, extractive distillation etc. ( In this context the aim of the present study is to develop LLX system for recovery of Hf and Zr from the raffinate stream of Zr purification plant containing 1.4 A novel extractant Mixed Alkyl Phosphine Oxide ligand (MAPO) similar to Cyanex 923 but not identical was developed and evaluated. MAPO is an improved version of Cyanex 923 in terms of its complexing activity with Zr and Hf. As seen in The present work addresses the evaluation of MAPO for establishing the complete solvent extraction circuit including extraction, scrubbing and stripping. Initially batch studies were conducted to obtain equilibrium data of extraction and stripping under various conditions for selection of MAPO among other similar ligands and to obtain the optimum conditions applicable to continuous contactor. Due to the presence of silica in feed, emulsion formation occurs during solvent extraction. Such streams containing solids are thus treated in slurry extractor which requires high O/A ratio leading to high organic requirement. It is preferred to use an efficient contactor like mixer settler with less organic requirement for continuous counter current operation. Pre-conditioning of the feed to free it from suspended solids is indispensable for making the feed suitable for solvent extraction in mixer settler contactor. Based on the preliminary batch studies for selection of LLX and pre treatment, solvent extraction cycles were developed with mixer settler as continuous contactors. Studies were carried out to increase the metal concentrations in the scrub and strip products. Recycling of the aqueous scrub and strip solutions was done for multiple cycles with concentration make up while recycling the lean organic immediately after stripping for fresh extraction. These studies were done to achieve three fold advantages. Firstly, to increase the Hf and Zr concentrations in the products, secondly, to reduce secondary waste generation and thirdly, to ensure applicability of the solvent with multiple recycles. The experimental details and results are discussed in this paper. In nitrate medium Zr forms complex with NO where, where Using Eq. Eq. Hence, from the slopes of the log–log plots of MAPO concentration and the distribution coefficient (k Alkyl Phosphine Oxides form strong complex with Zr and Hf. Hence scrubbing of Hf is not efficient with only nitric acid. Efficient scrubbing is done by zirconium nitrate solution having the same acidity of the feed during extraction. The mechanism can be represented by simple displacement of complexed Hf in organic by Zr in the scrub solution as shown in The Zr–MAPO complex being very strong, strong complexing agent is required for back extracting the metal in aqueous solution. Stripping of Zr is accomplished via complexation with oxalic acid. The stripping percent was calculated by the following relation The distributions coefficient for stripping (k where, M All the chemicals were of analytical reagent grade material. Aqueous phase used in the experiments, raffinate stream of Zr purification plant obtained after TBP extraction of Zr. It contains Zr and Hf in nitric acid medium at 2.5 Batch equilibrium studies were conducted in mechanically stirred shaker capable of handling six 50 Continuous counter current experiments were conducted in three sets of mixer settlers for extraction, scrubbing and stripping. The mixer–settlers are of box-type made of polypropylene and have 5 stages each. The volume of single stage of mixer–settler was 500 For the batch equilibrium studies equal volumes, 10 Raffinate stream of Zr purification plant contains 2000 During extraction both raffinate and the extractant (0.1 Initially batch studies are conducted with MAPO to obtain equilibrium data for various conditions with Zr plant raffinate as the feed. It was observed that if dodecane is used as diluent third phase formation occurred. Hence 20% V/V isodecanol in dodecane was used as diluent for MAPO in the distribution studies. Role of various parameters as described below were studied through batch equilibrium studies and the optimised parameters were used in experiments conducted in continuous contactor. The time required for reaching equilibrium was investigated by shaking raffinate with 0.1 The effect of various extractants on the extraction and separation of Zr and Hf was investigated. Various carriers used were 0.1 The effect of varying MAPO concentration on extraction of Zr and Hf from raffinate solution has been investigated. The log–log plot between the MAPO concentration and k The influence of nitric acid concentration on the extraction of Zr and Hf was studied by varying the feed acidity in the range of 0.5 The evaluation of recycling capacity of an extractant is essential for determining its utility for industrial use. It is always recommended to use solvent with good regeneration capacity to reduce organic consumption by recycling it in the process. For testing the reusability of MAPO, organic was loaded with metal; after extraction loaded organic was stripped using 0.2 The loading capacity of various concentrations of MAPO was studied by shaking 10 0.1 For selectively back-extracting Hf from loaded organic into aqueous phase, a scrubbing agent is required. To conduct the batch studies 0.1 The stripping ability of various stripping agent was tested. The loaded solvent was contacted with different strip solutions for 10 During the development of an industrial extraction process, it is desirable to carry out counter current multistage extraction as equilibrium data generated for evaluation of solvent by liquid–liquid extraction batch studies do not take into account dynamic conditions of interfacial stability and hydrodynamics. Thus counter current studies in continuous contactors are helpful in understanding the hydrodynamic conditions which controls the rate of solute transfer through the mass transfer resistance and interfacial area. For this purpose the best experimental conditions generated from the batch tests were used to treat 60 The extraction capability of MAPO after each contact is assessed and is shown in Enhancement of Zr and Hf concentration in scrub product and strip product respectively was attempted through recirculation of respective streams. The rise of concentration of Zr and Hf in scrub and strip product with every contact through the extraction, scrubbing and stripping stages is shown in Thus it is observed that with concentration make up and recycle of scrubbing and stripping agent the concentration of Hf as well as Zr product keeps increasing. Hf concentration of 9.47 With recycle of scrub and the strip phases, the aqueous waste generated during downstream processing of the scrub and strip product per unit volume of the feed stream processed reduces with number of recycle pass. The complete flow sheet is shown in Applicability of in-house synthesised MAPO for recovery of Hf and Zr from lean solution at low acidity was established through extensive batch studies. It was found that 3 MAPO has a good separation factor (17) for Zr over Hf with the given feed stream and with effective removal of silica it can be used efficiently for this separation in mixer settler contactor with low organic inventory and low acidic medium. MAPO forms strong complex with Zr as well as Hf and stripping is thus achieved by oxalic acid. A process was optimised and applied successfully in mixer settler set up including extraction, scrubbing and stripping, five stages each with MAPO in mixed diluents as extractant, zirconium nitrate as scrubbing agent and oxalic acid as strippant. With multiple recycles the Hf concentration in the scrub product was increased upto 9.47 The present work deserves sincere acknowledgement to Zirconium Oxide Plant, NFC Hyderabad for providing their raffinate waste, Heavy Water Board for providing TAPO and Bio-organic Division, BARC for providing support for the synthesis of MAPO. Mr. A.k Deb Singha, Mr. Rohan Chinchale and Mr. Prakash Gope are also thankfully acknowledged for providing help throughout the work.