The aim of this study is to present a modification of the failure criteria of rock masses, separately considering the effect that the Bieniawski’s rock mass rating (RMR) has due to joints, as well as the RMR linked to compressive strength of the mass rock. This modification can be applied to three of the already existing criteria: that of Bieniawski–Yudhbir–Kalamaras, that of Sheorey, and that of Hoek–Brown, comparatively analysing the effects of the three modifications that have been proposed. The new, modified criterion will be validated with new data obtained in a marble mine exploited by means of rooms and pillars. The values observed and measured in the mine are compared to those obtained through numerical modelling of the pillars, using the Análisis Lagrangiano de Medios Continuos, Lagrangian Analysis of Continuous Media (ALMEC) program. Finally, several conclusions related to the application of these rock failure criteria to the analysis of mining excavation of rooms and pillars will be proposed.As far as underground extractions are concerned, the support of a mine is undoubtedly one of the main aspects defining its viability. Ultimately, the main element supporting the rock is the pre-existing rock mass itself. Likewise, the capacity of the rock mass to contend with holes that ensure self-support in the case of mining exploitations through rooms and pillars is the key design element. In fact, the ground support capacity depends on the rock mass strength, which in turn determines both the maximum size of the holes and the size of the pillars in between these. Therefore, we need some criterion to estimate what degree of stress can produce failure of a rock mass. A failure criterion is a scalar function of the stress tensor As regards the rock mass, most failure criteria are empirical. It is thus necessary to establish a difference between those criteria that are exclusively applicable to intact rock and those that are applicable only to the rock mass itself. Most of the latter are based on the correction of the failure criterion of the intact rock depending on the Bieniawski’s rock mass rating (RMR). Taking the intact rock as the starting point, we shall now analyse the approach we have taken in order to consider the RMR as a key factor in correcting the behaviour of the rock mass. For this purpose, we shall first examine the methods of Bieniawski–Yudhbir–Kalamaras  Many of the failure criteria for intact rock have been generalised in an attempt to simulate the rock mass behaviour. These generalisations are based on the idea that a rock mass failure envelope must follow the same kind of equation as intact rock and must be corrected according to its quality. We shall now proceed to briefly describe these three criteria: those of Bieniawski–Yudhbir–Kalamaras, Sheorey and Hoek–Brown. Based on the Bieniawski criterion for intact rock Hoek and Brown This expression was later generalised in order to adapt it to rock masses, adopting the following equations: In 2002, Hoek, Carranza-Torres and Corkum Before presenting our proposed modification of the above-explained criterion, an inconsistency arising from a theoretical point of view must be analysed, as it has justified the modifications that will be introduced in this paper. This inconsistency will be exemplified for the first of the above criterion, that of Bieniawski, though the rest of the criteria behave similarly.  It can be inferred that the envelope for RMR For the previous example, whose properties were tabulated above, the Under these circumstances, there is no point in evaluating the rock strength parameters from the RMR, but it appears necessary to previously subtract the compressive strength value from this index. In this manner, the envelope of the rock mass is obtained by correcting that of the intact rock and exclusively takes into account the number, state and condition of its discontinuities. The RMR could be then broken down into two components: We shall now examine how this concept can help to eliminate the theoretical inconsistency in the two failure criteria: that of Bieniawski and that of Sheorey. In order to maintain compatibility with the rest of the criteria, we propose an adjustment of the Hoek–Brown criterion using values of RMR. Since the RMR Notice that the failure envelope for the maximum RMR and that of the intact rock coincide. It can be shown that the same inconsistency that occurs in the Sheorey criterion also arises here. Accordingly, it is hence proposed that: The Hoek–Brown failure criterion uses values of the Geological Strength Index, GSI (instead of values of RMR) to characterize the rock mass strength (see [ Nevertheless, the GSI system and the Hoek–Brown failure criterion nowadays constitute a classification system for rock masses independent of Bieniawski’s RMR. It is also true that when the GSI system was introduced, an equivalence with the RMR system was provided for back compatibility issues (see The following adjustments to the parameters originally provided by Hoek–Brown are proposed: We shall now proceed to compare the three proposed criteria. Firstly, it should be noted that the three criteria differ slightly in their envelopes for the intact rock. For example, with respect to the constants of the three criteria for a rock whose strength properties are those given in After having examined the rocks strength characteristics, we then obtained the failure envelopes of the rock masses, applying the corrections that are proposed throughout this paper to RMR values of 25, 50, 75 and 93, this last value being the maximum value (see These values lead us to the conclusion that the Bieniawski–Yudhbir–Kalamaras criterion is found to have the greatest safety factor as regards low and medium values of the RMR. However, it is not the most conservative criterion for good quality rock masses and is the one that provides the intact rock with the greatest strength, which would be equivalent to a RMR value of 93. Taking RMR A failure criteria’s importance lies in the fact that it allows us to predict the real behaviour of the rock mass when it is exposed to a certain state of stress. In this section, we shall compare the three failure criteria. We shall do so by applying these criteria to a specific mine in order to obtain the one that best fits reality and which can be applied to other mining exploitations. The steps that we have followed in this validation are the following: In a mine that has been exploited with rooms and pillars, we selected an area with pillars that were healthy, broken or ready to break. This mine was simulated by means of a three-dimensional computational model of finite differences using ALMEC (see We compared the results obtained by means of models with reality in order to determine which criterion is more trustworthy. The exploitation in which this study was carried out is a marble mine in which extraction is performed by means of rooms and pillars. Located on a slope, it is 325 The dimensions of the rooms and the pillars are highly variable. Their average height is 17 Within this mine, we selected a specific area indicated in A cross-section of the mine is presented in this figure, delimiting the studied area and indicating the location of the eleven pillars under consideration. In the three-dimensional scheme and in the cross-section, the magnitudes of the modelled rock mass are delimited in metres. Some peculiarities, enumerated below, facilitate the characterization of the behaviour of the pillars: They present a uniform RMR and a homogeneous strength to compression stress. Pillars P5 and P6 currently present some failure signs, so the neighbouring pillars have also assumed some of the overload. Likewise, even though both are damaged, the first pillar to break was P5, which presents a greater number of fractures (see It also appears that pillar P9 presents some failure signs, although in a more incipient state due to its closeness to the perimeter of the exploitation. This plays the role of a large pillar that assumes greater loads, thus benefiting the adjacent pillars. It can be said that this area is in fact being supported by eight pillars out of the eleven it contains. The former become more overloaded as the latter progressively fail, and the stresses are redistributed. First, we shall explain how the rock mass of the mine was characterized. We shall then go on to analyse the results obtained by numerical modelling with ALMEC using the geomechanical properties derived from the modified failure criteria for the same rock mass. It is clear that, in order to obtain the envelopes of the rock mass, it is necessary to determine both the properties of the intact rock and its RMR in Bieniawski’s 1989 version A synthesis of the parameters considered in the calculation of the RMR and the values obtained for this quality index are shown in However, if we bear in mind that the extraction of marble has been carried out historically through extremely powerful mining blasts in order to obtain ground material, the rock mass presents alterations of a certain degree. This is the reason why the RMR of the disturbed rock mass should be considered. This is obtained by a reduction of the respective evaluation of the joints condition (opening, roughness and continuity), as well as the spacing and the rock quality designation (RQD). The corrected values for the disturbed rock mass are shown in The numerical modelling was carried out using the ALMEC program, which was developed by the Ground Engineering Group of the University of Oviedo (see For an appropriate simulation of the exploitation ensemble, it is necessary for the geometrical model to mirror reality as faithfully as possible. The three-dimensional mesh model for this problem is illustrated in Once the stresses of the model have been initialized, the geomechanical properties of the mass rock are calibrated. The elastic properties (Young modulus and Poisson’s ratio) proposed in Serafim and Pereira As the failure of a pillar is associated to a decrease in the load that it can support, it first becomes necessary to ascertain the order of magnitude of the stress that each pillar would be able to support if it were in mint condition. In other words, it is necessary to know beforehand the distribution of stress of the modelled zone and whether the material behaves in an elastic manner. A comparison can be established from the values of the stress in the elastic state with the stress supported by each pillar in the simulation. When the latter is lower than the former, is can be stated that the pillar is undergoing a failure process. Let us first see the results of the numerical modelling with ALMEC considering an elastic state to then consider the properties of the rock mass in a second step and subsequently formulate a plastic analysis of the model. The strength properties will be assigned as shown in Section The vertical stresses that the pillars would support, assuming a perfect elastic behaviour, are represented in It is worth noticing that the values enclosed in The greatest stresses are found in pillars P4, P8 and P9, which can reach stress values that nearly double that of the pillars on the opposite side. This distribution of stress is logical if the rock cover of the model is observed (see The problem was modelled as follows: Knowing the RMR value for the rock mass (from Implement the failure criteria as non-linear constitutive models in the numerical software package ALMEC (see Compare results and check that the results match those observed in the actual physical problem. First, the models corresponding to each of the modified failure criteria were generated, giving rise to the results described below. As has already been highlighted, the experimental stresses in the pillars are determined and compared to those obtained from the elastic model in order to test the model’s approximation to reality. It can hence be established which pillars have suffered damage, or even failure, and which not. The stresses on the pillars according to the RMR modified joints failure criteria of Bieniawski, Sheorey and Hoek–Brown are listed in When the properties of the RMR-modified joints failure criterion of Bieniawski–Yudbir–Kalamaras are used, a significant stress reduction is appreciated in pillars P5, P6 and P9 (italics in When analysing the results with the properties of the Sheorey criterion for the RMR joints, it is found that a decrease in stress takes place only in the three damaged pillars. The remaining pillars remain intact. The only anomaly corresponds to pillar P9, which would have been expected to be a lot more disturbed than it actually was (incipient failure). This fact could be attributed to the location of this pillar on the edge of the work face, next to a protective rock mass which assumes most of the stress, whereas it is taken as an isolated pillar in the model. We therefore conclude that the failure of pillar P9 is quite probable once the excavation progresses and the current work face disappears. It should be noted that if the RMR joints adjusted criterion of Hoek–Brown is used, only slight changes occur in the stress. This would mean that all the pillars remain in an elastic state, i.e. in mint condition. To conclude, the best fit of the model to reality is obtained when the Sheorey criterion is modified by the RMR joints. The modification of the Bieniawski criterion was found to be underestimating, whereas the formulation proposed for the correction of the Hoek–Brown criterion slightly overestimates the strength of the rock mass. Thus, it would be more advisable to employ the original version if the Hoek–Brown criterion is chosen. From the application of the failure criteria theory to this case of marble mining by rooms and pillars, the following conclusions can be drawn in the shape of a working methodology: First, it is necessary to define the parameters governing the failure of the intact rock. To do so, triaxial type tests are recommended and the adoption of the failure criteria of Hoek–Brown or Sheorey, which are very similar and of proven reliability throughout numerous experiments. The RMR of the rock mass must be determined in both intact and disturbed conditions, clearly differentiating between the rock and joints strength to compression components. The failure envelope of the rock mass should be defined according to the modified Sheorey criterion. If the failure envelope of the rock mass is determined following Hoek–Brown, it is advisable to choose the traditional criterion, which leads to larger safety factors. Whatever the case may be, it would be of great interest to have data regarding the variation in the stress state of the rock when the opening of the rooms is carried out, as well as the deformations taking place in both the pillars and the holes by means of geotechnical instrumentation. This information would allow for a much more accurate calibration of the properties obtained by means of this kind of numerical modelling. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of Paul Barnes and Julia Contreras García for the preparation of this paper in English. The Análisis Lagrangiano del Medio Continuo (ALMEC) program has been developed by the Ground Engineering Group and is based on the Explicit Finite Difference Method. Finite difference numerical methods are iterative methods in which, starting out from an initial stress state, the way in which these stresses are transmitted to adjacent areas until the system reaches equilibrium is analyzed step-by-step. Such methods enable simulation of the behaviour of ground, rocks and structures that may suffer plastic flow when their yield point is reached. In ALMEC, data input is implemented using the widely used AutoCAD software. The graphic output has been programmed in Open Graphics Library (OpenGL), which simplifies the interpretation of results and enables a more user-friendly and rapid 3D form of visualization. Starting out from the geometrical model, discrete elements are generated by means of a mesh formed by a series of irregular hexahedrons. A mesh is thus formed to which scalar and vectorial magnitudes are applied that define the behaviour of the model. The program then initiates an iterative process on each element, recalculating in each step deformations and stresses as a function of the characteristics of the rock mass until equilibrium is reached. An adequate simulation of the processes involved in a large deformation is thus produced. For the velocities and forces applied to the nodes to be distributed adequately, as well as in order to carry out the iterative process, it is necessary to structure the mesh perfectly, in such a way that each element recognizes its adjacent elements. A material is assigned to each area of the mesh, with its corresponding geotechnical properties. Before commencing the calculation process, it is necessary to initialize the stress state of the model. To do so, the program is run during a specified number of steps assuming that the material is elastic (without a failure state), until the real state of the stresses is determined. The ALMEC program assigns a lithostatic pressure to the ground in accordance with gravity. Once the values of the displacement and velocities at all nodes have been initialized to zero, we are in a situation to commence the process of excavating the ground. We thus have ground with an initial state of stabilized stresses without displacements. On excavating, areas of the mesh disappear and with these, the stresses and displacements of each of the affected areas. This creates disequilibrium of the forces in the nodes adjacent to the area, which translates into deformations and new stresses in these areas until equilibrium is reached once more. ALMEC is provided with six basic constitutive laws regarding elastic isotropic and plastic models (Mohr–Coulomb criterion, Drucker–Prager criterion, Bieniawski criterion, Sheorey criterion and Hoek–Brown criterion). All the plasticity models use the same formulation for plastic failure. The plasticity formulation in ALMEC consists of a shear yield function and a non-associated shear flow rule. See Vermeer and Brost We shall now briefly describe the numerical implementation of the failure criteria in ALMEC. All constitutive models in ALMEC share the same incremental numerical algorithm. Given the stress state at time We define [ The description of plastic flow in ALMEC rests on the following relations: The failure criterion: The relation expressing the decomposition of strain increments into the sum of elastic and plastic parts The elastic relations between elastic strain increments and stress increments The flow rule specifying the direction of the plastic-strain increment vector as that normal to the potential surface The requirement for the new stress-vector components to satisfy the yield function Substitution of Eq. We now define Using Eqs. Based on Cundall et al. If the stress point The program provides a series of graphic outputs, the most representative of which are: displacements, stresses, stress tensor and failure state. A legend is shown on the right of each graphic representation indicating the maximum and minimum values of the magnitude being represented, as well as the range of values on a colour scale. The units used in the legends correspond to the International System. Positive stresses indicate traction and negative stresses compression. As examples, the following figures show different graphic outputs obtained using the ALMEC program, all of which correspond to the modified Sheorey model from Section  