Monitoring of concentrations of radon (222Rn) and gamma level in underground uranium mines is essential to minimise the radiation exposure of miners within the prescribed limits stipulated by regulatory agencies. This paper presents the quantitative assessment of concentrations of 222Rn and gamma radiation level at the different working places being operated at various depths of Narwapahar mine. Equilibrium Equivalent Radon (EER) concentration was found to be in the range varying from 60 to 850 Bq m−3 with a geometric mean of 289 Bq m−3 and geometric standard deviation of 1.94. The average value of EER in the mine was estimated to be about 29% of action level of 1000 Bq m−3 recommended by International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Gamma radiation was found to be in the range of 0.73–6.15 µGy/h with arithmetic mean of 2.52 µGy/h and standard deviation of 1.49 µGy/h. Its average was calculated to be 31% of the derived regulatory limit of 8 µGy/h for 8 h working period in the mine. Furthermore, comparisons of EER and gamma radiation at various working places reveal that concentrations of EER are poorly correlated with grade of uranium ore whereas gamma radiation levels depend on it. The total annual radiation exposure of miners to radon and its daughters and gamma radiation in Narwapahar mine was evaluated to be 4.06 mSv/y, which was about of 20% of the prescribed limit of 20 mSv/y recommended by International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP). Thus it may be concluded that working condition of Narwapahar mine is considered as safe due to good ventilation condition of the mine and other control measures.Several guidelines have been recommended by the international radiation agencies to reduce the radiation levels in underground uranium mines. The international radiation agencies have recommended the limits of dose intake for radiation workers ( Uranium is the source of natural radiation. Due to the large abundance of In the present study, various radiological parameters such as radon concentration, gamma radiation level and ore grade in the different working places of Narwapahar underground uranium mine were measured. The main objective of this study was to assess the radiation exposure of the miners based on the measurements of gamma radiation level and radon concentration inside the mine. Furthermore, comparison of radiation levels at various working places, which are located at different depths of the mine, was also discussed. Narwapahar uranium mine (Latitude 22 The entire Singhbhum Shear zone separates the Early Proterozoic rocks in the north from the Archean Singhbhum Granite and Iron Ore Group (IOG) in the south where the intensity of metamorphism and alteration is less in comparison to the former as shown in Horizontal cut-and-fill and Room and pillar method in Narwapahar uranium mine are being used for mining of the ore. The mine follows a split Ventilation system. The total air quantity circulated by three exhaust axial flow fans are 230 m The uranium ore grade was determined using radiometric analysis ( An ‘Equilibrium Equivalent Radon (EER)’ concentration concept has been introduced internationally to account for the non-existence of equilibrium between radon and its progeny at workplaces and to avoid the cumbersome process of measuring radon daughter concentrations. EER was calculated using the following relationship ( Radon concentration in mine air was measured at 22 locations of Narwapahar Mine by scintillation method as shown in A number of pre-evacuated scintillation cells were taken into the mine for the measurement of radon concentration in mine air and the valve of each cell is opened for sample collection at desired location of the mine. The time and location of each collected sample are noted. Before the collection of sample, the background radiations of the scintillation cells for each sample were noted. After collection of radon samples in the cell, a delay interval (the instant of sampling is reckoned as ‘zero time’) of 3 h is usually allowed before starting the counting to ensure secular equilibrium between radon and its daughter products in the cell. Then, the scintillation cell is coupled to the photomultiplier for counting the alpha activity. The alpha counts were counted for a 10 min counting period at 95% confidence interval. The alpha counts obtained in this counting period is called gross counts. The net counts can be calculated by subtracting the background radiation from gross counts. The radon concentration in air is calculated using the following relationship: In the present study, the efficiency of the system ‘ Gamma radiation levels in Narwapahar mine were measured in terms of micro-Roentgen per hour (µR/h) at 22 locations of Narwapahar Mine using an instrument Radmon (micro) Type: RM 703. This instrument works on G.M. Detector based by 6 V (1.5 × 4 V) dry cell batteries. Its operation and over ranges given by manufacture are 0–20R/h and 20–1000 R/h respectively. The exposure rate in terms of µR/h was converted to the absorbed dose in terms of micro-Gray per hour (µGy h The annual inhalation exposure of the miners was calculated based on the radon concentration, exposure time period, equilibrium factor and dose conversion factor of 5 mSv recommended by The annual external exposure of the miners was calculated based on the absorbed dose rate, exposure time period, equilibrium factor and dose conversion factor of 0.7 Sv Gy The occupational exposure time period of 2000 h y The results of ore grade and radium activity concentration obtained from the various stopes located at different depths of Narwapahar underground uranium mine are presented in  The average radon concentrations measured in the stopes under existing ventilation condition were found to be well below the lower and upper workplace reference levels of 500 Bq m The variation of Comparisons of radon concentration (EER) and gamma radiation levels at various levels being operated at different depths of the mine are presented in The statistical parameters of gamma radiation level obtained from the different stopes being operated at different depths of the mine are presented in The gamma radiation measured in the working places were found to be 31% of the derived regulatory limit of 8 µGy/h for 8 h working period in the mine by The statistical parameters of internal dose of the miners working in the stopes being operated at different depths of the mine are presented in The inhalation exposure of the miners obtained in the present study can be compared with inhalation exposure of miners working in other underground uranium mines reported by the researchers. Inhalation exposures of the miners working in different mines were reported as 1.76 mSv/y in Bagjata underground uranium mine (  The average external exposure of the miners obtained in Narwapahar mine can be compared with that obtained from other underground uranium mines reported by the researchers. It was found to be slightly higher than 1.44 mSv/y in Bagjata underground uranium mine ( The total exposure of the miners to radon and gamma radiation was calculated by summing the inhalation and external exposures of the miners. Since the data distribution of the inhalation exposure are log-normal distribution, geometric mean was considered in this study. Hence the average inhalation exposure was found to be 2.30 mSv/y. On the other hand, the data distribution of external exposure are normal distribution and hence arithmetic mean was considered. The average external exposure was found to be 1.76 mSv/y. Therefore, the total annual exposure of the miners working in Narwapahar mine was calculated to be 4.06 mSv/y. Radiation exposures of miners to It is interesting to compare the total annual exposure of miners working in Narwapahar mine with other underground uranium mines. The total annual exposure obtained in the present study was found to be lower than the exposure values varying in the range of 5.4–7.33 mSv/y reported for the same mine ( It may be mentioned here that the average annual exposure values obtained in this study portray useful information on radiation exposure under the existing ventilation condition of the Narwapahar uranium mine. Moreover, due to the dynamic nature of ventilation in the mine, the designing and planning of the ventilation system of underground uranium mines should be implemented periodically to achieve the ALARA (As Low As Reasonably Achievable) principle ( Radiation exposure is not only observed in uranium mines but also in other non-uranium underground mines such as coal, gold, copper and manganese mines ( The main objective of this study were to evaluate the radiation exposure of the miners working in the different levels being operated at different depth of Narwapahar mine. The total radiation exposure of the miners was calculated based on the radon concentration, gamma radiation level, dose conversion factors, and exposure time period and equilibrium factor. The radon concentration and gamma radiation level were measured inside mine using scintillation cell with Photomultiplier counting system and radiometric analysis respectively. The average radon concentration (EER) and gamma radiation level were found to be 289 Bq m This work was supported by Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB), Department of Science and Technology (DST),