The effect of the molecular weight (MW) of anionic polyacrylamide (APAM) on the fouling behaviours of nanofiltration membranes in brackish wastewater desalination was investigated, and its implications were elucidated using the interfacial free energy and intermolecular interactions. The foulant accumulation (mirr) was closely related to the intermolecular maximum adhesion force (Fad, max). For APAM with a larger MW of 5,000,000 Da (500APAM), the longer molecular chains were more susceptible to entanglement and thus caused a larger Fad, max between the APAM chains and membrane, leading to a larger mirr than for APAM with a MW of 500,000 Da (50APAM). In contrast, the irreversible fouling resistance (Rirr) strongly correlated with the interfacial free energy (ΔG). The ΔG for the 500APAM–membrane was higher than that for the 50APAM–membrane, which indicates a more stable thermodynamic system of the membrane surface and 500APAM molecules and thus resulted in a higher Rirr. The higher ΔG and larger Fad, max for 500APAM intensified mirr and Rirr and resulted in more severe flux declines. In addition, the strong coordination between Ca2+, when present, and carboxylates led to the intense attraction between APAM and the membrane, resulting in further flux declines of both APAMs.Anionic polyacrylamide (APAM) is a water-soluble polymer mainly used in flocculation sedimentation and clarification treatment for various industrial wastewaters, such as electroplating wastewater [ The influencing factors such as pretreatment (adsorption or oxidation) [ Previous researchers have reported that the extended Derjaguin-Landau-Verwey-Overbeek (XDLVO) theory, which is related to the Lifshitz-van der Waals (LW), Lewis acid-base (AB), and electrostatic double layer interactions in aqueous media, can provide better predictions of membrane fouling [ In this study, XDLVO is employed to explore the relation between membrane fouling and two forms of APAM with different MWs and interfacial free energies. Because of the absence of long-range electrostatic interactions in brackish wastewater, LW interactions, AB interactions, and calcium-carboxylate complexes (if Ca The specific objectives of this paper were as follows: to investigate the effect of APAM MWs on the performance of NF membranes; to analyse the interfacial free energies of adhesion for APAM–membrane and the interfacial free energies of cohesion for APAM–APAM; to elucidate the APAM–membrane/APAM intermolecular interactions; to discuss the relations between the fouling behaviours and the interfacial free energies and intermolecular interactions. The results obtained in this paper are beneficial for the fouling prediction and control of NF membranes in the desalination of APAM-containing wastewater. The lab-scale cross-flow NF apparatus (Fig. S1) used in this study consisted of three identical rectangular cross-flow cells (NF-101, Laungy, China). Each cell housed 40 cm The commercial NF membrane selected for this study was NF90 (Dow-FilmTec, Minneapolis, USA). NF90 is a fully aromatic polyamide membrane with an approximately 85–95% rejection rate for NaCl solution [ Analytical-grade sodium chloride (NaCl) and calcium chloride dihydrate (CaCl Anionic polyacrylamide (APAM) is a linear polymer with high water solubility; the chemical structure of APAM is shown in For each cycle of the experimental run, a virgin membrane sheet was initially compacted with ultrapure water for 24 h until a steady flux was reached, and the pure water flux of the virgin membrane was recorded (J After each fouling experiment, the feed tank was emptied and re-filled with ultrapure water. The pure water flux after fouling (J The flux (J) and observed salt rejection (R) during the fouling process were calculated using Eqs. The normalized flux (N To assess the fouling behaviours under the investigated solution conditions, the resistance-in-series model [ The specific resistance (α) was calculated by the following equation: The morphologies and elemental fractions of the virgin and fouled NF membranes were examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM)-energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) (SU8020, Hitachi, Japan) analysis. Zeta potentials of the virgin and fouled NF membranes were determined by a SurPASS electrokinetic analyzer (Anton Paar GmbH, Graz, Austria). The contact angles of the NF membranes were measured by a contact angle apparatus (OCA 15EC, Dataphysics Instruments, Germany). The test method was as follows: the NF membrane was placed in an air-drying oven at a temperature of 37 °C until the mass of the membrane was constant. The dried membrane was glued to a glass slide, and then the surface contact angle was determined by the hanging drop method. Using saline water, formamide, and diiodomethane as the drop-forming liquids, separately, the measurements were immediately conducted at room temperature as a 2 μL droplet touched the membrane surface. At least ten contact angles were measured at random locations. The highest and lowest equilibrium angles were discarded, and the remaining data were averaged. A total of 5 mL of 10 g/L APAM stock solution was uniformly coated on the glass slides, which were then placed in the air-drying oven at a temperature of 37 °C overnight. Then, a suspension drop method that was consistent with the membrane was used to measure the APAM contact angle. XDLVO theory [ The silicon wafers and probes were silanized in 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES) [ The impacts of the APAM molecular weight and metal ions on the flux patterns are presented in The observed salt rejection of the tested NF membranes varied with the APAM molecular weights, as shown in The effects of the APAM MW on the fouling resistance and specific resistance of the NF membranes are shown in The contact angles and surface tension levels observed for APAM with different MWs are presented in In comparison with the NaCl solution, the contact angles of the electrolyte containing CaCl The APAM–membrane and APAM–APAM interfacial free energies in the electrolytes are shown in The approaching forces between the APAM and NF membranes are shown in Correspondingly, the APAM–membrane rupture force curves are displayed in Compared with 50APAM, 500APAM has longer molecular chains and therefore is more susceptible to entanglement and the formation of a random network structure [ As shown in However, there were obvious discrepancies between the rupture curves for these combinations (particularly for APAM+Na, Both the maximum APAM–membrane and APAM–APAM intermolecular forces were closely related to accumulated foulant mass ( The maximum APAM−membrane and APAM−APAM intermolecular forces had correlation coefficients of 0.97 and 0.96 with accumulated foulant mass ( In this study, interfacial free energies and intermolecular force curves were employed to elucidate the influence of the APAM MW on NF membrane fouling behaviours in brackish wastewater desalination. In comparison with 50APAM, 500APAM, with a larger MW, induced more severe declines in the permeation flux but higher increases in observed salt rejection. Correspondingly, the accumulated amount of APAM on the membrane surface, irreversible fouling resistance, and specific resistance caused by 500APAM were greater than those caused by 50APAM. These fouling behaviours were closely correlated to the APAM–membrane/APAM interactions. The maximum intermolecular attractive forces between the APAM and the membrane had a positive correlation with the accumulated foulant mass, and the APAM–membrane interfacial free energies had a negative relation to the irreversible resistance. The 500APAM with a higher MW was associated with larger intermolecular attraction and higher APAM–membrane interfacial free energies, likely due to the significant intermolecular entanglements, which resulted in more severe fouling than in the 50APAM. For the same reason, the introduction of Ca This research was financially supported by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at