Quantitative determination of enzyme activities can be used to evaluate the dynamics of the composting process. An enzyme activity assay in solid phase was developed in which the enzyme reaction is performed by mixing the compost sample and the corresponding substrate with a water content equivalent to the water retention capacity (WRC) of the compost sample. As opposed to common activity assays that extract and quantify soluble enzymes, this solid phase method evaluates total enzyme activities under conditions closer to those found in the actual composting process. Preliminary results on enzyme activities of a compost of poultry manure and sawdust include amylase, invertase, cellulase, phosphatase, protease, and dehydrogenase activities. With the exception of proteases, all increased from day 9 to 43 of the composting process.A biosphere is a closed macrosystem in which matter recycling is essential for biomass generation The composting reaction is a biochemical decomposition of solid organic matter of the starting material under controlled conditions by the action of the same type of microorganisms that are responsible for mineralization processes in soil From the point of view of trophic chains, composting of solid organic waste involves three levels of consumer organisms: first level (which are the true decomposers) is composed by microfauna, mainly actinomycetes, bacteria and fungi, and by macrofauna which includes beetle mites, earthworms, diptera in different stages, the most active being larvae, nematodes and snails. All these organisms degrade organic matter of the starting material. Protozoa and arthropods form the second level which are fed with first level organisms, while the third level is composed of higher arthropods such as ants and beetles, which are the predators of the second level organisms. In this ecological network, biotransformations of organic matter during composting are mainly due to enzyme activities of first level microorganisms leading to mineralization processes. Most of the kinetic parameters commonly used to characterize the maturity of composts are physico-chemical properties such as C/N ratio, ashes, and cationic exchange capacity Enzymes in composts can be classified as intracellular enzymes, found inside living cells or in soil/compost due to cell lysis, and extracellular enzymes purposely released from viable cells to catalyze the degradation of extracellular polymeric substances. For instance, N biotransformations are performed by extracellular hydrolases that depolymerize proteins, aminopolysaccharides, and nucleic acids, as well as hydrolyze urea Studies addressing analysis of biochemical processes in composting commonly use activity assay methods developed for soil analysis, often restricted to the soluble enzyme fraction after extraction We report here an enzyme activity assay for the determination of extracellular enzymes (both soluble and anchored to the matrix) in solid phase using a kinetic protocol (initial velocities) instead of an end point method. Different enzyme activities are measured by adding a specific substrate to a compost sample with a water content equivalent to its water retention capacity (WRC), thus performing the enzyme reaction under conditions highly similar to those occurring during the normal composting process, without previous extraction of soluble enzymes. At different time intervals, the soluble enzyme product released from the specific substrate is extracted and determined spectrophotometrically. Enzyme activity is expressed as initial velocity of product formation. Glycosidase activities were quantified by measuring reducing ends by the 3,5-dinitrosalycilic acid reagent (DNS) prepared by mixing solution A (1.682 g of DNS (Sigma), 59 ml of 2M NaOH and 111 ml of water) and solution B (50 g sodium potasium tartrate tetrahydrate in 125 ml of water) Poultry manure and sawdust were mixed at a C/N ratio of 20, in an open static reactor (20 l) with mechanical mixing once a week, and maintaining moisture content at approximately 50%. A sample of compost is placed on a wet filter paper and weighed (W Compost samples of approximately 10 g were taken from the middle of the bioreactor after mixing. Samples were frozen at −20 A solid phase assay follows two different general protocols depending on substrate–sample preparation. In method a) the specific enzyme substrate was added as a solid to the lyophilized compost sample. After homogenization by mixing, water was added to saturation, corresponding to the WRC previously determined. In method b) a solution of the enzymes substrate in water was added to the lyophilized compost sample to reach the same water content. Aliquots of the resulting substrate–compost mixture were incubated at 25 200±2 mg (for amylase and invertase assays) or 50±1 mg (for cellulase assay) aliquots of a 1:1 (w/w) mixture of substrate (starch, saccharose or carboxymethyl cellulose, respectively) and lyophilized compost were weighed in Eppendorf tubes. 1 ml of deionized water was added to each tube, homogenized by vortexing and incubated at 25 700 μl of To a series of Eppendorf tubes containing 50±1 mg of lyophilized compost, 1 ml of ovoalbumin (1% in water) was added, and the mixtures incubated at 25 500 μl of 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TPTZCl, 1% in water) were added to a series of Eppendorf tubes containing 50±1 mg of lyophilized compost. At different time intervals reactions were quenched by adding 1 ml of methanol. After mixing and centrifugation, 500 μl of supernatant were diluted with 500 μl of water, and absorbance was measured at 485 nm (ε=6997 M All data were analyzed using The first issue to be addressed for developing an enzyme activity assay in compost is the sample preparation protocol. The product to be quantified is formed from the added substrate to the compost sample, but at the same time it may be a substrate for the microorganisms present in the compost sample, thus being depleted during the time of measurement. Under normal conditions, microorganism populations of 10 The sample preparation procedure that gave best results was freezing and lyophilization of the compost. Biological activity is stopped and samples can be stored for a few days before analysis. New biomass production when performing the enzyme activity assays is drastically slowed down, avoiding interference due to microorganism growth during the short analysis time (<2 h). The aim of the solid phase method is to measure enzyme activities under conditions close to water saturation with a moisture content similar to that in normal composting. The WRC of the lyophilized compost sample is determined, and the assay mixture of substrate and compost is adjusted to this water content, resulting in a monophasic system. The enzyme substrate is mixed as a solid with the lyophilized compost sample and water is added up to its WRC value (method a, cf. Poultry manure and sawdust at an initial C/N ratio of 20 and moisture content of 50% was composted in a 20 l aerobic reactor. Samples were taken at different days of composting to evaluate enzyme activities according to the solid phase assay reported here. The enzyme activities determined were: amylase, cellulase and invertase activities by measuring the increase of reducing power when using starch, carboxymethyl cellulose and sucrose as substrates, respectively, by the DNS method; phosphatases by measuring the release of By comparing the results at days 9 and 43 of the composting process, phosphatase and amylase activities increase 5-fold, and invertase activity increases 3.4-fold, whereas proteases are detected at day 9, but activity decreases below the detection limit at day 43. Dehydrogenases show the opposite behavior, not being detected at day 9 but showing high activity at day 43. For this composting mixture, cellulase activity was not detected. Phosphatase and dehydrogenase activities are commonly determined in soil analysis, with values of 10 The enzyme assay methodology on solid phase described here provides assay conditions closer to the actual composting process as compared with common extractive protocols to assay enzymes in solution. Not only secreted enzymes and soluble enzymes released by cell lysis are measured, but also those attached to the matrix that would not be solubilized using extractive methods. The protocol is also developed as a kinetic method instead of an end-point method, giving more accurate and reproducible initial velocities to evaluate specific activities. Work is in progress to apply this methodology for the dynamic evolution of a number of co-composting processes of cattle and agricultural waste. C.P. acknowledges funding from the Universidad de Antioquia, Colombia.