Kandelia obovata, with abundant condensed tannins (CTs), is a typical mangrove species in China, but little is known about the chemical alterations and ecological roles of CTs during leaf litter decomposition. A litterbag experiment was conducted to investigate the changes of CTs in a subtropical mangrove swamp along Zhangjiang River Estuary, China, using the colorimetric assays, reversed/normal-phase HPLC–ESI-MS and MALDI–TOF-MS techniques. Total phenolics (TP), extractable CTs (ECT) and total CTs (TCT) decreased rapidly, while bound CTs (BCT), including protein- and fibre-bound CTs in leaves, increased during decomposition, and these temporal changes were well-expressed by exponential functions. Negative correlations between nitrogen (N) and TP, as well as N and ECT were found; however, a positive correlation between N and BCT was detected, suggesting that CTs played an important role in humification during N immobilization. The HPLC–ESI-MS analyses showed that the polymerization degree of CTs had an initial increase, due to leaching, followed by a decrease in the subsequent shift towards abiotic or/and biotic degradation. MALDI–TOF-MS confirmed the degradation processes for CTs. A decrease in the degree of hydroxylation, along with an increase in glycosylation-CTs, was obtained during litter decomposition. These chemical changes enhanced the current knowledge on the potential ecological role of N transformation in CTs in mangrove swamps. Mangrove litter decomposition, mainly in leaves, is an important aspect of the function of an estuarine ecosystem. Leaf litter quality has a strong effect on decomposition rate, as does climate, soil chemistry and microbial and invertebrate activity ( A large body of literature on the molecular-level of CTs in natural products is available; however, there has been little crossover to the biogeochemistry and ecology of CTs ( In this study, All chemicals used for analyses of tannin concentrations were analytical reagent purity grade (Sinopharm, Shanghai, China). The procedures described by Except for the method used in purifying tannins as the standard for determining tannin concentration, an improved method was conducted to extract and purify CTs from leaf litter at different decomposition stages. Freeze-dried samples of leaf litter (2 g) were extracted ultrasonically with 70% (v/v) acetone/water, to which 0.25% (w/v) ascorbic acid was added to avoid oxidation of CTs (4 × 50 mL). After evaporation of acetone with a rotary evaporator, the aqueous phase was defatted with n-hexane (3 × 50 mL) and then evaporated again to eliminate n-hexane. Distilled water was then added up to 10 mL volume. These CT-rich extracts were subjected to reversed-phase HPLC–ESI-MS and normal-phase HPLC–ESI-MS analyses directly. The remaining CT-rich extracts were freeze-dried, re-solubilised with a small amount of 20% (v/v) methanol/water and purified by chromatography on a 15 × 1.0 cm i.d. Sephadex LH-20 column. CT-rich extracts were eluted with 50 mL 20% (v/v) methanol/water to remove sugars and other impurities. Tannins remaining on the Sephadex LH-20 were eluted further with 70% (v/v) acetone/water. The acetone was removed by rotary evaporation and the aqueous fraction was freeze-dried to obtain the purified CTs for MALDI–TOF-MS analysis. Generally, a 50–80% (v/v) methanol/water solution is used as the first wash step in tannins purification. Oligomeric tannins, especially monomers to 3-mers ( The modified thiolysis method described by The mean degree of polymerization (mDP) was calculated by comparing the peak areas based on the equation mDP = (total area of the extender units)/(total area of the terminal units) + 1 ( Normal-phase HPLC–ESI-MS analysis was conducted according to the method of The normal-phase HPLC–ESI-MS method can separate oligomer-CTs up to 10-mers and all polymer-CTs beyond 10-mers as a distinct single peak ( The MALDI–TOF mass spectra were recorded on a Bruker Reflex III MALDI–TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker, Bremen, Germany), with an N The harvested samples (0.1 g) were placed in a 100-mL Kjeldahl flask containing sulphuric acid and hydrogen peroxide. The Kjeldahl flasks were heated over a flame to digest the samples. The N concentration was determined by micro-Kjeldahl method ( Statistical analyses were performed using SigmaPlot 10.0 software for Windows. Exponential functions corresponding to each data of leaf litter decomposition with exponential coefficients ( TP and ECT decreased rapidly in the first 84 days of decomposition (from an initial 181.8 ± 6.1 to 24.5 ± 2.3 g kg The nonlinear regression analyses, including single exponential, double exponential, asymptotic, hyperbola, sigmoidal model and exponential rise models, were tested in this study. Although single exponential function has been proven to be the most frequently used model to describe decomposition ( The thiolysis reaction products of CT-rich extracts from leaf litter were subjected to reversed-phase HPLC–ESI-MS analysis (see The CT-rich extracts were further analysed by normal-phase HPLC–ESI-MS. All polymer-CTs showed a similar profile ending with a single peak (see The MALDI–TOF mass spectra of mangrove The changes in CTs in predominant polymers and polymer ranges are summarized in In order to investigate changes of glycosylation and hydroxylation patterns of CTs in leaf litter, the relative abundance of peak 1575 Da (PC of 5-mers) was referred to as 1, and PC-G represented the corresponding glycosylation-CTs ( The decay pattern showed rapid early losses in mass followed by a slower decrease for the remaining period of the experiment ( During decomposition, a steady decrease of TP was observed. According to field observations and experience, the yellow-, orange-, brown- and black-coloured Chemical alterations and degradation of tannins were also prominent during decomposition, particularly at the latter decay stages. DP, indicated by mDP and the proportion of polymer-CTs, is one of the most important chemical parameters of CTs, and it showed an increase at early decay stages followed by a decrease. Typically, a higher DP should correspond to a lower solubility and a greater resistance to degradation. The labile CTs of lower DP were removed in the first 28-day decay. However, the higher remaining DP would eventually be degraded by abiotic and/or biotic chemical reactions ( MALDI–TOF-MS was very sensitive to the change in molecular weight, thus only slight alterations of CTs would lead to changes in their molecular weight and, consequently, to a splitting of the respective signal in their mass spectrum ( Hydroxylation occurred at the B-ring, which in terms of CT reactivity, is considered a major variable in determining the extent of complexation with nitrogenous substances and the subsequent mineralization processes ( Glycosylation was another structural feature in CTs of The decay pattern of High levels of CT in The change of N concentrations in The structural changes of CTs, including DP, hydroxylation and glycosylation, obtained by reversed/normal-phase HPLC–ESI-MS and MALDI–TOF-MS analyses also helped explaining the N dynamics and mass loss during leaf litter decomposition. During the first 28 days, CTs were present at high levels and CTs had high DP, high hydroxylation and low glycosylation ( The inverse correlation between increases of N and decreases of TP and ECT may be indicative of humification reactions ( The present study highlighted the fate and potential ecological role of CTs during leaf litter decomposition in mangrove ecosystems. Reversed-phase HPLC–ESI-MS followed thiolysis, normal-phase HPLC–ESI-MS and MALDI–TOF-MS analyses could be used as molecular-level analytical methods to study the biogeochemistry of CTs. High levels of CTs with high DP, high hydroxylation and low glycosylation could sequester nitrogenous materials and conserved N in leaf litter during the early phase of decomposition. CTs not only played an important role in N immobilization but also were significant in humification, reduction of decomposition rate and provided a nutrient conservation strategy for This work is published in the memory of Prof. Yi-Ming Lin’s researches on mangrove tannins. We thank Prof. Guang-Hui Lin for giving us valuable suggestions and comments, along with three reviewers. Financial support for this work from the The following are the Supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at