Dissolved air flotation (DAF) is a technique used extensively for separating fine particles in water and wastewater treatment, but, unfortunately, its use is still limited for froth flotation of minerals. This appear to be due to the very low lifting power of the microbubbles (40–70μm) and low airflow rate because of the low solubility of air in water. Thus, the efficiency of DAF in treating mineral particles has shown to be poor and as a solid/liquid separation technology is limited to slurries with no more than 3% solids. This work presents results showing (measuring) the limits of DAF as a function of particle size distribution, solids content and air superficial velocity. Interestingly, the microbubbles were found to be not selective with respect to particle size, floating both fine and coarse particles, which is most likely due to the existence of several mechanisms acting on the flotation of particles by these minute bubbles.Flotation with the use of microbubbles (<100 Currently, it is believed that in the froth flotation of mineral particles, bubble size is an important factor affecting the collection efficiency and the carrying capacity of the flotation cells. The mean bubble size encountered in conventional froth flotation usually varies from 600 to 2500 Within this context, the aim of this paper was to evaluate the abilities of microbubbles to float different particle sizes, studying the effect of the pulp density on the loading and carrying capacity of microbubbles and the recovery of particles to the concentrate. This paper also analyses possible mechanisms for the flotation of coarse particles with microbubbles and their particle size selectivity. Noteworthy, although carrying capacity has been experimentally studied with large bubbles (1–3 The carrying capacity of individual bubbles has been defined by geometrical variables as the bubble superficial area disposed for particle collection and the surface area occupied by these particles. Thus, considering that particles occupy all of the superficial area of the bubble under a square packing factor, the theoretical carrying capacity can be defined using Eq. Due that the packing ratio has a large impact on the number of particles loaded onto the bubbles and consequently on the density of the bubble–particle aggregates, this ratio has to be well estimated. Based on previous studies ( The column flotation carrying capacity (  The flotation work employed high-purity micronized silica sand, as particles model five samples of different size distributions were sieved and classified as fine, medium, semi-coarse, coarse, and very coarse. The pulp was conditioned at 30 The experiments were carryout in a laboratory flotation column endowed with a transparent acrylic tube (1.8  The column was operated under two different constant gas rates (5.9 Each test consists of varying the mass flow rate of solids in the feed stream until the mass flow rate of the concentrate peaks. This maximum is the result of the bubble surface becoming completely covered or the density of the aggregate particle–bubble exceeding that of the pulp density, causing the aggregate to sink instead of float. This phenomenon may determine the maximum processing capacity of the column and may give rise to the limiting carrying capacity itself. An important part of the experimental setup is the image acquisition system, composed of a digital camera (Canon Digital Revel Xti EOS) equipped with a Canon macro lens MP-E65  Measurements of the bubble diameters were made with ImageJ software, which was supplemented with a macro-program to handle and process the images. To obtain reliable results, several steps must be followed: (1) calibration of the image magnification, (2) identification of a threshold for the image, and (3) analysis of the bubbles. To calibrate the software, a thin stainless steel wire (0.3 The software reports a list of computed objects (bubbles) and their corresponding diameters. This software makes it possible to select the bubbles for measurements that satisfy the restrictions defined by the user (threshold sphericity, minimum and maximum size, etc.). The software also shows a mask of the photograph, indicating the computed bubbles with filled circles. Once each arithmetical bubble diameter (   It was also observed that the microbubbles have a low carrying capacity for fine particles ( Conversely, the carrying capacity is higher for coarse particles because a few large particles may have a larger mass than many fine particles ( The maximal carrying capacity estimated using the statistical Eq.     The assumptions of the algorithm used to estimate the density of the theoretical bubble–particles or particle–bubbles aggregates are the follows: The bubbles are spherical, and their surface area may be calculated by the next equation. The number of particles that the surface of the bubble may accommodate may be estimated assuming a homogeneous particle size, a square packing arrangement ( To estimate the density of the bubble–particles and particle–bubbles aggregates, Eqs.   Here, it is interesting to discuss the results of carrying capacity and recovery. The limited carrying capacity with the fine particles is attributed to the complete coverage of the bubble surface area by a low overall particle mass. However, why does the maximum carrying capacity increase with the particle size and the maximum recovery decrease with the same variable? In the first instance, this phenomenon reflects the fact that the reduced carrying capacity with coarse particles is a result of too few bubbles rather than a low bubble surface area. In this case, several microbubbles may be attached to the surface of the coarse particles until a point where the limited number of microbubbles reduces its carrying capacity and the recovery of coarse bubbles. This could to explain why the maximum recovery decreases gradually as the percentage of solids on the feeds increases. Results showed that the carrying capacity of the microbubbles (<100 The authors are grateful to CONACYT (Mexico) for a scholarship and other financial support.