In the past decades, many tests have been done here and abroad in attempt to predict pick cutting forces by using mechanical properties of rock, geometrical simplifications and some basic assumptions. Khair Although a considerable amount of literature has been published on numerical modeling of rock cutting so far, there has been no consideration for the effects of the deep mining condition, since it is estimated that 73% of the total reserved coal in China exists at depths greater than 1000. The aim of this paper is to model the rock cutting test in deep mining condition using the Finite Element Method. In order to achieve this aim, explicit time integration and the element erosion algorithm in LS-DYNA3D software were utilized to model the impact between the pick and rock, the results of which were compared with the theoretical model and Okan’s results. Evans firstly put forward the cutting theory for point attack picks. Goktan As FEM is much more developed and versatile than theoretical models or DEM, we used the FEN approach in our study. LS-DYNA3D is the most well-known commercial software to analyze the dynamic response of three-dimensional solids and structures by using explicit dynamic FEM. In addition, the contact interface capability of LS-DYNA3D to handle the mechanical interactions between the pick and rock is also one of the important reasons for our choice. In this section, we establish a finite element model of the Okan’s sandstone-1 model The sandstone-1 model provided by Okan et al. In order to treat the dynamic contact between the pick and rock, an algorithm of contact with erosion developed by Belytschko and Lin During the numerical cutting tests, the bottom and the two sides in In order to verify the FEM simulation results, the tool forces of Okan’s sandstone-1 model As shown in Deep mining engineering is a current and future problem for most countries in the world. In the major coal mining countries, mining industries of Germany, Britain, Poland, Russia and Japan are relatively developed. The mean mining depths in these countries are listed in Many achievements, which focus on the rock mechanics problems caused by the deep mining engineering, were obtained by scholars through theoretical study, laboratory test and in-site test. However, there have been few studies to estimate the influence of deep mining condition on tool forces. Based on the previous studies of authors, A small single pick cutting test bed (shown as The small single pick cutting test bed is also mainly composed of a pick (shown as During the numerical cutting tests using the FEM method, if the lateral pressure is 0 The experimental data and the FEM simulation results of the small single pick cutting test bed are listed in The rock uniaxial compressive stress–strain curve is shown in When cutting depth is 1 It is clear that the constants in Finally, by combining the classical cutting theory, In addition, the tool forces of picks with different tip angles in different cutting depths are listed in It is known from the above analysis that lateral pressure has a significant impact on the tool forces in cutting process. The impact can’t be neglected not only through calculating cutting forces and normal forces of a pick, but also through designing mining equipment. In this paper, three dimensional finite element models of the cutting test bed and sandstone-1 model were established. Then the cutting process was simulated by using LS-DYNA3D software. The simulation results were verified by comparing with the theoretical model results, DEM results and experimental data. Accordingly, we loaded a lateral pressure in the Additionally, by fitting the tool forces and lateral pressures, the relationship between them can be expressed as a quartic equation. Besides, there is a linear correlation between theoretical model results and the simulated values without considering the effect of lateral pressure. Finally, based on the quartic equation and linear correlation, we modified the classical cutting theory and proposed a model to predict the mean peak cutting forces of picks which can take the influence of lateral pressure into account. Therefore, the influence of the lateral pressure on the tool forces cannot be ignored, and the results in this paper have a guiding significance for design of mining equipment. This paper has been financially supported by