This paper is concerned with a comparative analysis of modern cement grinding systems, namely, combined grinding (Comflex®), high-pressure roll mill (HPRM) grinding, and horizontal roller mill (Horomill®) grinding. Cement production trials were run with these grinding systems in the same cement plant by using the same clinker/gypsum feed to produce cements of almost identical chemical compositions and similar Blaine fineness values of about 3600cm2/g. The grinding systems were compared in terms of specific energy consumption and mortar properties of the produced cements. The specific energy consumption and the cement setting times increased in the order of combined grinding, HPRM grinding, and horizontal roller mill grinding. No significant difference was detectable among the water demands of the cements from the three grinding systems. The HPRM cement was superior in strength development, particularly at early ages.Cement production is an energy intensive industry requiring approximately 830–1100 Besides energy consumption, the grinding system has an important influence on the particle size distribution and particle shape of the product cement, as well as on the reactivity of the clinker phases and the temperature-dependent extent of dehydration of gypsum interground with clinker. All these factors, in turn, affect mortar properties of the product cement such as water demand, initial and final setting times and strength development Despite their high specific energy demand, two-compartment ball mills in closed circuit with air separators have been traditionally used for cement finish grinding because of their reliability and the favorable properties of the product cement. Ball mills, in fact, are the most energy inefficient grinding mills. They suffer from considerable energy loss in the form of heat due to friction in a tumbling mass of balls which transfers input energy to an unconfined bed of particles. In an unconfined bed of particles the entrapment of particles in the impact zone between the balls is highly probabilistic and far from the conditions required for optimum conversion of the input energy to useful comminution energy. Energy efficiency of a ball mill depends on a number of factors such as ball filling ratio, the mill length/diameter ratio, size composition of the ball charge, circulation ratio, throughput, and the fineness of the feed and product. High-pressure comminution with vertical roller mills, high-pressure roll mills (HPRM) or the horizontal roller mill (Horomill®) has found considerable popularity over the last two decades for improving capacity and reducing specific energy consumption in clinker grinding circuits A review of the literature showed that some energy-based comparisons of the current cement grinding systems have been made. For example, Schnatz and Knobloch There are comparatively fewer industrial results reported on the energy consumption of the horizontal roller mill systems. The operating results of the horizontal mill (Horomill®) in the Trino cement works for the production of various types of cements having different Blaine fineness and mill feed compositions indicated energy savings of 35 to 40% when compared with the specific energy consumption of an optimized ball mill in the same plant An overview of the literature indicates that the three clinker grinding systems mentioned above have been investigated separately or two together on the basis of energy consumption by using different feed materials and producing different type of cements, mostly without the accompanying mortar properties of the produced cements. Direct comparisons of the results, however, should suffer from some limitations since no two plants are the same as to machine design and operating parameters. Extending the range of available data on the comparison of these systems, particularly with tests conducted in the same plant, would be beneficial for the industry with a goal of better understanding the capabilities of the grinding systems. This paper presents an investigation carried out to compare the three clinker grinding systems, namely, the combined grinding (Comflex®) circuit, HPRM-only circuit, and the horizontal roller mill (Horomill®) circuit, available in the same industrial plant. The grinding systems were operated using the same clinker/gypsum feed to produce CEM I 42.5 R Portland cements with almost identical chemical compositions and similar Blaine specific surface areas so that the sole influence of the grinding mode on the specific energy consumption and cement mortar properties could be delineated. The same lots of Portland cement clinker and natural gypsum (CaSO A mix containing 95% clinker and 5% gypsum was ground in three different types of grinding systems in the same plant to make CEM I 42.5 R cements having almost identical chemical compositions and similar Blaine values of about 3600 The three industrial grinding systems tested in this study were 1) the combined grinding system (Comflex®) using a HPRM circuit upstream of the ball mill circuit to produce a combined final cement product, 2) HPRM-only system in which the cement was produced only with the HPRM circuit of the combined grinding system, and 3) the horizontal roller mill (Horomill®) system.  Particle size distributions of the cements from the three grinding systems are presented in A comparison of the specific energy consumptions of the investigated grinding systems is given in From  The water demand has two components, namely, the physical water demand and the chemical water demand. The physical component of the water demand is for moistening of the particles and filling of the void volume between the particles. This physical component constitutes the majority of the total water demand and is determined primarily by particle size distribution. The chemical component is of much smaller quantity which is required for the chemical reactions between the cement constituents and the added water, essentially for initial hydration of the tricalcium aluminate (C The water demand test results shown in The variation in the initial and final setting times of the investigated cements was considerably different. The combined-grinding cement had the shortest initial and final setting times, followed by the HPRM-only and horizontal-roller-mill cements, in the increasing order. The horizontal-roller-mill cement demonstrated the longest total active setting time (111 minutes), defined as the final setting time minus the initial setting time. The total setting time was the same (69 minutes) for the combined grinding and the HPRM-only systems even though the cement from the former system displayed a more rapid initial setting than that of the latter system. The initial and final setting times seem to follow a trend with the measured temperatures of the cements from the grinding systems of this study ( Compressive strength development for all ages, from 1 Based on the data obtained from the industrial production and testing for mortar properties of CEM I 42.5 R Portland cements produced from the same clinker/gypsum feed ground to almost identical Blaine fineness with three different grinding systems, the following conclusions could be deduced: Due to the high efficiency of the air classifiers closing the grinding mills, the three grinding systems produced cements with quite similar particle size distributions having more or less the same RRSB slope parameter. The RRSB position parameter of the cement from the combined grinding system (HPRM/ball mill, each having its own air classifier) was, however, slightly coarser because of the coarser size distribution of the cement product from the air classifier closing the ball mill. The combined grinding system had the lowest specific energy consumption (30.6 The type of the grinding system did not have a clearly noticeable effect on water demand, whereas it was noticeably influential on setting times and strength development. The cement generated in the combined grinding system had the shortest setting times, and the HPRM-only cement had the highest strength development. The variations in the setting times seemed to be related with the temperature differences in the product cements probably causing different extents of gypsum dehydration, but this must be substantiated with further investigations. The authors gratefully acknowledge the plant management at the Denizli Cement Plant (Turkey) for their permission to conduct and publish this work. The plant staff is also thankfully acknowledged for their help and close interest during the work.