The controversial effect of autologous serum (AS) on human mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) was studied in rat MSC culture. Rat bone marrow cells were plated in a medium containing either FBS (fetal bovine serum) or AS were cultured to passage 3, during which the population doubling number (PDN) of both cultures were measured and compared statistically. The number of viable cells, the cell colonogic activity, and cell growth rate were also compared. In addition, mineralization in the osteogenic cultures from each system was measured. Our data indicated that AS enriched medium provided a microenvironment in which growth rate as well as bone differentiation of the isolated MSCs were significantly higher than in FBS enriched medium.Recent advances in tissue engineering have increased the need for large numbers of appropriate multipotent or pluripotent stem cells. MSCs are an appropriate source because of their multilineage differentiation potential and their extensive self-renewal properties ( The expansion medium for MSCs must include serum, usually bovine calf, fetal bovine, adult horse, and human, for maximum cell proliferation. AS has also been used on human MSCs and has the advantage that it excludes the problems associated with FBS, including possible viral or bacterial infections and immunogenic reactions, which should not be present when cultured cells are to be transplanted ( Therefore, we tested the effects of AS on rat MSCs, which we have previously used to study bone tissue engineering and bone regeneration ( Five female and 15 male Wistar rats, 8–10 Peripheral blood was allowed to coagulate at 4 Marrow cells were washed, centrifuged at 350 On day 5 of primary culture from both groups, the medium was removed and the cell monolayers were rinsed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and stained with Crystal Violet for 5 The number of population doublings (PDN) as well as the time required by cells for each population doubling (PDT) were calculated from hemocytometer counts for each passage according to the following formulae: Cells expanded in the presence of either AS or FBS were further characterized by comparing their colonigenic ability, the number of viable cells and their growth curves. Cells from passage 3 of either culture were plated at 1 The numbers of viable cells in confluent third passage AS and FBS-supplemented cultures were determined by using [3-(A,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-1,5-diphenyl tetrazulium bromide] (MTT, Sigma, USA) mitochondrial reaction. Cultures were washed with PBS, transferred into 24-well plates containing a 5:1 ratio of medium and MTT solution (5 Fifty-thousand passage 3 cells from each group were plated in 12-well culture plate and grown to confluence. Cells were counted daily with a hemocytometer and growth curves were plotted for each culture from the calculated average number of cells. Each experiment was performed on 20 rats. All values are stated as means Differentiation of AS- and FBS-supplemented cultures towards osteogenic, chondrogenic and adipogenic cell lineages was estimated by establishing induction cultures. For osteodifferentiation, DMEM medium supplemented with 50 For adipogenesis, DMEM medium containing 100 Cartilage differentiation was induced by a micro-mass culture system. passage 3 cells (2.5 The differentiation ability of the cells was also studied by RT-PCR analysis of specific gene expression. Total RNA was collected from differentiated cells using RNX-Plus™ solution (CinnaGen Inc., Tehran, Iran). Before reverse transcription, the RNA samples were digested with DNase I (Fermentas) to remove contaminating genomic DNA. A standard reverse-transcription reaction was performed with 5 Alizarin Red staining of the osteogenic culture derived from cells grown in the presence of AS and FBS was quantified and compared on day 21 of culture using an osteogenesis quantification kit (Chemicon, USA). OD Marrows in primary cultures of both groups formed colonies of fibroblastic cells. The AS-supplemented primary cultures became fully confluent on day 10, whereas the FBS-supplemented primary ones only reached confluence 5 Another interesting observation was the difference in susceptibility to trypsinization of the two cultures; while the AS-developed passage 3 cells lifted rapidly after ∼90 There was no significant difference in cell morphology or growth indices between cells from male and female rats. On day 7 the mean number of CFU-F for AS-supplemented cultures, was 7.54 The cell population in AS cultures doubled 12.40 Both the number (80.4 The confluent passage 3 cultures supplemented with AS had more viable cells than those supplemented with FBS serum, 1.95 The growth curves showed a higher growth rate for AS cells than FBS cells. In addition, there was no lag time in AS cultures, which became confluent earlier than their FBS counterparts (7 Some areas in the osteogenic cultures of both groups stained positively with Alizarin Red, indicating mineralization had occurred during the induction period ( Cytoplasmic lipid droplets accumulated inside cells of both groups during the adipogenesis. These droplets stained with Oil $Red: ( Sections prepared from chondrogenic pellets prepared from both cultures stained metachromatically ( Calcium deposition by the osteogenic culture of AS cells reached 1.82 The effectiveness of AS versus FBS on MSC culture is controversial. We investigated rat bone marrow adherent cell cultures – for which no previous work could be found – to determine whether AS was a better supplement medium than FBS either in terms of the cell in vitro expansion or the mineralization of their osteogenic cultures. Adding AS to culture medium increased the growth rate of rat bone marrow cells during the culture periods. Both indices of growth, PDN as well as PDT, indicated rapid growth of the cells in AS compared with those in FBS. More importantly, the number of viable cells in AS passage 3 was much higher than in FBS passage 3 cultures. Passage 3 cultures from the AS group had no lag time, starting to proliferate immediately on plating and reaching confluence at 7 Mineralization is a complex biological process occurring normally in very few tissues. The identification of high levels of alkaline phosphatase at mineralization sites in bone and calcifying cartilage led to speculation that the enzyme could be involved in the mineralizing process by hydrolyzing organic phosphates to release free inorganic phosphate (Pi) at sites of mineralization ( Considerable effort is being made to compare the effects on hMSC culture of supplementing medium with autologous or bovine serum ( The colony forming efficiency of FBS-grown cells proved significantly higher than that of human serum (HS)-grown cells ( PDN and PDT were calculated for three successive subcultures; the primary culture was excluded from the calculation because only the subcultures originated from just a small portion of the cells used at culture initiation, the majority of which were discarded when the medium was replaced. To consider the cells that adhered and survived at primary culture, the number and size of the colonies were counted and compared after Crystal Violet staining. A morphological difference of cells was that those from AS cultures were more fibroblastic than in FBS, with clear-cut boundaries. These findings contradict reports of no difference in morphology between the human MSCs cultivated in AS and FBS ( While AS-grown cells were released after brief exposure to trypsin, the FBS cells resisted trypsinization, being lifted in a relatively longer time. This different behavior of the cells could be related to the morphological differences: the FBS-grown cells may have lifted more slowly because they are more flattened, and therefore could be more tightly attached to the surfaces of the culture dishes. This difference may also explain the absence of a lag time in AS-grown cells. The need for less trypsinization might mean that they will be less damaged by the enzyme. In conclusion, a culture system established with AS as a medium supplement provides an appropriate microenvironment in which bone marrow cells proliferate rapidly and possess a greater mineralization capacity in osteogenic culture of late passage cells than those cultured in FBS-supplemented medium.