Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) because of low-cost fabrication and high performance have shown superb potential for the next-generation photovoltaic application. For the potential applications of photovoltaic technologies, semitransparent PSCs are also highly attractive and of commercial interest to develop building- and tandem-integrated solar cells. Here, we present fully-ambient-processed stable and mesoscopic semitransparent PSCs by non-continuous islands-structure-CH3NH3PbI3-xClx-NiO nanoparticles (MAPbI3-xClx-NiO NPs) composite and interface engineering by inserting Al2O3/NiO between TiO2 and MAPbI3-xClx-NiO composite layers in a device configuration of FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/Al2O3/NiO/islands-structure-MAPbI3-xClx-NiO /spiro-OMeTAD/Au. Except for the islands-structure-MAPbI3-xClx-NiO capping layer, a uniform and thicker and transparent TiO2/Al2O3/NiO/MAPbI3-xClx composite layer is formed, which can effectively reduce photocurrent density loss and interface recombination. Interestingly, the optimized semitransparent PSCs showed hysteresis-free performance. The average visible transmittance (AVT) of MAPbI3-xClx-NiO NPs composite film was ranged from 18% to 56% and the corresponding device PCE changed from 17.51% to 12.47%. The PSCs without encapsulation showed an excellent air stability over 270 days with retaining ~98% of its original V
                     
                        oc
                     , ~96% of J
                     
                        sc
                     , ~97% of FF and ~93% of PCE under ambient condition (25–30 ℃ and 45–50% humidity). Finally, we achieved semitransparent device of PCE = 10.06%, corresponding to AVT = 27%.The goal of green energy development to substitute non-renewable fossil fuels, photovoltaics (PVs) based on various hybrid organic-inorganic materials have been become one of the most promising renewable energy conversion technology To increase In brief, hydroiodic acid (57 wt% in water, purchased from YAKURI) was added into methylamine (40 wt% in water, purchased from Sigma-Aldrich) with the molar ratio of 1:1.2 in an ice bath for 2 h under continuously stirring. The mixed solution was evaporated by rotary evaporation system (SB-1200) to remove the solvents and crystallize MAI, followed dissolved in ethyl alcohol and precipitated with diethyl ether with several times. Finally, the white solid was dried at 60 ℃ in a vacuum oven overnight. Details of MAI synthesis is available elsewhere The optimized condition of TiO All the fabrication processes of the PSCs based on MAPbI Structural morphology of the device configuration was examined by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Hitachi S4700, and SUPRA 40VP). Crystallinity of materials was examined by multi-purpose high performance X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku) with Cu-Kα radiation, λ = 1.540598 Å in the range of 10–60° and 10–90°. The absorption properties of the composite was analyzed with an ultraviolet-visible (UV–vis) spectroscopy. HAADF images were examined by high-resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy (HR-TEM, Jeol). Incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) was measured by using a lock-in amplifier coupled with a monochromator and a 500 W Xenon lamp (Crowntech, Qtest Station 2000). Photoluminescence (PL) was measured by PL measurement system with exitation light source at 325 nm and applied laser power at 50 mW. Electronic impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was measured at 250 mV applied bias under 1 sun light intensity in the range of 1 Hz to 300 kHz. Current-voltage (  To optimize device transparency and performance, we examined the role of the capping layer of MAPbI To evaluate the photovoltaic performance of PSCs, we fabricated devices with configuration of FTO/c-TiO To further increase device transparency, we controlled the thickness of hole conductor spiro-OMeTAD and top electrode Au layers. It was observed that the value of AVT varies from 19.8% to 35.6% for spiro-OMeTAD thickness between 320 nm and 199 nm (the thickness of islands-structure-MAPbI To achieve semitransparent devices, various thicknesses of top electrode Au were also investigated, as shown in The poor-stability of PSCs has been become a burden for commercialization because of hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites degradation during exposure to air moisture, UV-light and high temperature. Recently, however, perovskite composites and interface engineering have become a major method to improve stability In summary, we have achieved fully-ambient-air-solution-processed semitransparent PSCs by employing islands-structure-MAPbI This work was supported by National Leading Research Laboratory program ( Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 