The interaction forces between a hydrophobic silicon plate and a silica particle in an aqueous solution were investigated with an atomic force microscope (AFM). The surfaces were hydrophobized chemically by a silane coupling agent, and the hydrophobicity (contact angle θ) of the surfaces was varied. The interactions were long-ranged at θ
                     >90° with a discontinuous step appearing in the approaching and separating force curves respectively. The range and magnitude of the interaction were decreased with decreasing θ. On the other hand, the interactions at θ
                     =80° was unstable and no long-range attraction was observed. When the gas phase on the surfaces was removed by flushing organic solvents between the surfaces, the interactions became short-ranged at θ
                     >90°, and the interaction was described DLVO theory at large distances at θ
                     =80°. A large number of nano-size domain structures were found on the surfaces by tapping-mode AFM. These results imply that the bridging of nanobubbles is the main origin of the long-range force between chemically hydrophobized surfaces and that the size of the bubble has critical effect on the range and magnitude of the attractive force. The short-range interactions without bubbles were found to consist of an electrostatic repulsive force at larger distances and an attractive force, which was sufficiently longer-ranged than the van der Waals force, at smaller distance.The interaction forces acting between solids, or solids and air/water interfaces in aqueous solutions are critical for flotation. Among the interaction forces, the attractive force between the hydrophobic surfaces, which is called hydrophobic attraction, is important since it is presumed to play a key role not only in particle coagulations but also in particle–bubble interactions, which is central to the flotation process. The hydrophobic attraction has long fascinated many researchers due to its very strong and extraordinary long-ranged nature. Since the first direct indications that the attractive force between mica surfaces in a cationic surfactant has greater range than the van der Waals force ( Reflecting various observation results, several mechanisms have been proposed for the attractive forces, such as the electrostatic fluctuation between surfaces ( Recently, the authors have shown that in the case of surfaces coated by a chemically bonded hydrophobizing agent (as in system (2) above), the bridging of gas between the surfaces has a critical role on the interaction force ( In the present study, we measured the interaction forces between surfaces of differing hydrophobicities using an atomic force microscope (AFM). We also conducted the AFM observation of the surfaces to clarify the origin and the mechanism of the interactions. Silica particles of 4–20 Propyltrichlorosilane (PTS, Shin-Etsu Chemicals, Japan) was used as a hydrophobizing reagent without further purification. Potassium nitrate (KNO The forces acting between a silica sphere and a Si plate in a 1 In force measurements, the force curves were measured not only when the surfaces approached each other (the approaching force curve), but also when they were retracted from each other (the separating force curve). To determine the separation distance between surfaces, the method of The Si plate and the silica particle on the probe were hydrophobized through the reaction of PTS. The plate and the colloidal probe were immersed into a Teflon vessel filled with a 2.0 The observations of the hydrophobic surfaces were carried out using the tapping-mode AFM in a 1 Typical interaction forces between the surfaces at At In contrast, at These results imply that a gas bridging between the surfaces affects the interactions. The existence of the steps in approaching and separating force curves at To confirm the origin of the bridging, the gas phase on the surfaces was removed using the following method before the force measurement. First, the AFM liquid cell was filled with toluene. Then the surfaces were rinsed several times by flowing acetone and ethanol into the cell successively. The ethanol in the effluent was detected according to the method of The approaching and separating force curves for surfaces without gas phase are illustrated in These findings are consistent with our previous results for highly hydrophobic surfaces whose contact angle is more than 110° ( On the other hand, the stable bridge cannot be formed at AFM images (5 When hydrophobized wafer surfaces were observed in air, the surface was very smooth and such domain structures were not on the surface. Thus, the domain structures were not originally present on the surface. Furthermore, when the gas phase on the surfaces was removed through the aforementioned method prior to the imaging, no domains were found in the obtained images. These observations are consistent with our previous results ( The average diameter of the bubble as a function of the contact angle The relationship between the interaction force and the nanobubbles is considered as follows. From the size of the bubbles, the volume of the gas bridge formed between the surfaces would be larger at What occurs between the hydrophobic surfaces when there is no bridging between them? To investigate the interaction force between the hydrophobic surfaces at The approaching force curves at This repulsion is attributable to an electrostatic double-layer force, since the modification of a silica surface with silane has little effect on the electrical property of the surface ( However, the distance at which the jump-in of the particle occurs is far larger than that predicted by the DLVO theory, implying the presence of an additional attractive force that is longer-ranged than the van der Waals force between the surfaces even without the bridging. We suggest that this attraction can be the “genuine” hydrophobic attraction, in other words, the force generated by the hydrophobic nature of the surface. Though the origin of the “genuine” hydrophobic attraction is yet unclear based on results to date, it is worth noting that recent theoretical calculation indicates that the attractive force of this range can be explained by the density fluctuation of water between hydrophobic surfaces ( The present study shows a strong possibility that the bridging of the nanobubbles on hydrophobic surfaces is the main origin of the long-range attractive force, in the case of the surfaces coated chemically by a hydrophobizing agent. It is also suggested that the size of the bubble has a critical effect on the range and magnitude of the attractive force. On the other hand, when the bubbles are removed from the surfaces, the interaction force becomes short-ranged, although there is still an attractive force that is sufficiently longer-ranged than the van der Waals force. This additional force will be “genuine” hydrophobic attraction. However, more detailed experiments and analysis are necessary to clarify the origin of this force.