The main aim of the paper is to present possible strategies of copper production, which the processing plant can implement, resulting from the technological and economic (market) factors. Such a way of the optimization of copper production process, is considered within the scope of ore extraction, ore concentration and metallurgical processing. The issue is presented on the example of KGHM “Polish Copper” S.A. which operates three mines, three concentrators and two smelters. Each concentrator treats one orebody, producing different bulk concentrates at different recoveries and grades. The effect is to determine the strategy of copper production and such strategy would determine the quality and quantity of concentrates, processed in each of three concentrators in the entire flow-sheet. The routing of the three concentrate streams to the two smelters is optimized using a set of models built with GAMS software. These models consider ore, concentrator process and smelting, and use metal production: (1) or profit maximization (2) as target function. Formulation of a relationship between copper concentrate grade and mass recovery is the major part of introduced model. Limitations determining the maximum copper grades in concentrates as well as relationships between copper grade β
                     Cu and silver grade β
                     Ag for each concentrate, were also introduced.
                  Theoretical target concentrate grades were estimated for both high and low stock market copper and silver prices. Further sensitivity analysis of model for metal stock market prices and production costs was performed. It was conducted that generally for lower stock market prices, higher concentrate grade should be produced, whilst for the higher metal prices, lower concentrate grade was the optimal strategy.number of mines in the total copper production system, number of concentrators, number of smelters, mass of ore extracted in the mine number copper grade in the concentrate processed in specific concentrator (%) mass recovery of the concentrate processed in specific concentrator (%) copper grade in the concentrate processed in concentrator mass recovery of the concentrate processed in concentrator content of copper in tails from concentrator number mining cost per mass unit (PLN/tonne of ore) processing cost per mass unit for specific concentrator (PLN/tonne of concentrate) metallurgical cost per mass unit for specific smelter (PLN/tonne of copper) price of copper in London Metal Exchange (USD/kg) silver grade in the concentrate (%) copper grade in the concentrate (%) content of copper in ore (%) mass recovery of the concentrate (%) content of copper in tails (paymetal loss) (%) metallurgical recovery of copper for a specific smelter (%) metallurgical recovery of silver for a specific smelter (%) mass of the ore processed in specific concentrator (tonnes) mass of the concentrate transported from concentrator price of copper at world metal stock markets (USD/tonne of copper) prices of silver at world metal stock markets (USD/kg of silver) KGHM Polish Copper S.A. has integrated systems of copper production, starting from extracting the ore, through the concentration process, to the metallurgical treatment and pure metal production. Such an arrangement enables both the optimization and effective control of the whole technological process in the mine–concentrator–smelter system and the proper planning of the metal volume production with respect to real operating conditions. The company is comprised of integral parts including three mines, three concentrators and two smelters. The mines are ZG Lubin, ZG Polkowice and ZG Rudna and are denoted in the paper as mine 1, mine 2 and mine 3, respectively ( The ore processed in each concentrator is a mixture of three lithologic types: sandstones, carbonates and shales including, besides copper, also silver as a valuable component. Each mine extracts a different type of ore, regarding the content of copper and silver, content of lithologic types and cupriferous sulphides. The content of silver is quite variable and depends on the type of mineralization. The average content of silver for main minerals is as follows: chalcocite 180–1700 Each concentrator uses sulphide flotation as the separation process. Since the ores from respective mines differ from each other, the flow-sheets in concentrators are designed in such a way that they take into account the variable ores characteristics. A general flow-sheet includes preparatory operations (like crushing, screening, grinding and classification), main operations (flotation circuits) and complementary operations (thickening, filtration and drying). According to the flow-sheet presented in Inspection of As the concentrate from concentrator 1 has the lower copper grade comparing to respective products from concentrators 2 and 3, it is then transported mainly to smelter 1, where the flash smelting process is the metal production operating technology. In smelter 2 the suspensional process of copper production is applied, in turn. This technology is more advanced and more effective than the flash smelting process, but the copper grade in the input concentrate should be respectively higher. Mass flows presented in The investigation presented in this article is based on actual operations results. It is recognized that concentrators cause the largest and most variable paymetal loss in the whole metal production system ( Proper planning of production strategy for copper is connected with the maximization of either the technological effects (the maximum copper recovery – It is possible to conduct the analysis of such an approach to technological optimization by using the function of paymetal loss ( A generalized economic optimization model with the maximization of profit as a target function is presented below: Restrictive conditions concerning the quality of the concentrate, described by inequality In order to determine the maximum of the target function for models described by formulas The mass balance product equation as a relationship of three independent variables: The real course of the concentration process is illustrated by a curve lying on the surface which takes into account the mineralogical composition of the ore as well as the selectivity of mineral grains ( There are two essential points, A and B, on the hyperbole ( In formula The coefficients in formula The investigations of the selectivity of copper and silver carried out in the Non-Ferrous Metals Institute in Gliwice (Poland) ( The qualitative limitations for enriched concentrates, from the point of view of both the ores floatability and the concentration technology used in the company (especially the type of the course of metallurgical process in individual smelters) were also introduced. Depending on the smelter and the concentrates processed the concentrate quality cannot be lower than   The target function from the point of view of economic optimization of copper production strategy is defined as the maximization of the company profit. To attain the maximum profit it is necessary for each concentrator to produce a defined amount of the concentrate with a specific copper grade For the situation under consideration in this article, the company profit can be denoted with formula In formula Five additional formulas determine the fixed proportion ranges for concentrate mixtures being distributed between individual smelters ( Calculations were proceeded by means of GAMS software. The program works on the basis of non-linear programming principles, with CONOPT algorithm as a tool ( The main aim of solving the presented model is an effective determination of For the values of input parameters presented in The results of modeling for variant 1 are presented in Analyzing The third variant results ( The modeling results concerning the income and production costs for the third variant are not quite convergent to the real operating data of the plant. However, the profit value according to the model was determined with very high precision, when compared to the real one. The discrepancy between the model and reality, as regards income and costs, results from the fact that the period of time analyzed (end of 2008, beginning of 2009) was the time of high variations (mainly depreciation) of metal stock market prices. Additionally, the value of the Polish currency in relation to American dollar sharply dropped, and what is more, copper production costs also showed some fluctuations. During such a turbulent period it is very difficult to produce an accurate set of initial parameters for the model. But apart from that, profit values for all three variants were calculated with high accuracy which proves that the model was projected with suitable precision. The analysis can be also performed for the situation where as a decisive variable the following items are accepted. These are either the world stock market price of silver, or the cost of processing (particularly at the metallurgic stage), or, finally, the type of the processing ore. Such analyses are subject to constant research and this matter will be the point of subsequent investigations. For the issues presented in the article the sensitivity analysis may appear especially valuable. We can track changes in the model target function depending on the change of main independent variables as well as model parameters. The sensitivity analysis made here presents modeling results for changes in values of the following parameters: copper stock market price, silver stock market price, metallurgical costs. We investigated how the above parameters influence the company profit ( In the second part of the sensitivity analysis the influence of copper price, silver price and the change of metallurgical costs on technological results, defined as the copper grade for optimal concentrate, was analyzed. The results are presented in Concentrator 2 presents a more interesting situation ( It results from the fact that for higher market metal prices it is more economical to recover a larger amount of useful component from the ore, even though the weight recovery of the concentrate increases which, in turn, causes the increase of processing costs. For higher metallurgical costs the optimal concentrate should have a higher copper grade, respectively. Similar relationships can be observed for concentrator 3 and the results are presented in It is very complex to analyze simultaneously the influence of changes for all parameters in the model. We can, however, compute the optimal values for economic and technological variables using the earlier mentioned GAMS software. The model designed for the issue is convergent to the reality and the obtained modeling results are close to those obtained for the real operating conditions of the plant ( lower copper stock market prices – higher copper grade in the concentrate, higher copper stock market prices – lower copper grade in the concentrate (paymetal loss is also lower), low processing costs – metal recovery can be higher, high processing costs – copper grade in concentrate can be higher. All combinations of possible situations, simultaneously taking into consideration simultaneously processing costs and stock market metal prices, as well as respective strategies are presented in The implementation of the presented model into industrial operation is a rather complex issue. Two basic problems should be solved, the first matter concerns the adjustment of the technological circuit for production of the concentrates with copper grade according to the regime determined by the model. Second issue is connected with the suitable concentrates distribution system between the smelters, according to the formula