 Choose a design that allows independent selection of head diameter and prosthesis length Avoid overlengthening by using one or more of the following: Direct measurements on the resected radial head Length gauges to avoid distraction at the ulnohumeral joint Reference points (coronoid, lesser sigmoid notch) Trial prosthesis Intraoperative fluoroscopy Select the minor diameter of the articular surface of the resected radius Unfortunately, a number of patients treated for a radial head fracture according to the principles described in previous chapters will not do well and may require further surgery. Management of these patients will be different depending on the nature of the complication developed, the presence of associated injuries or conditions, and the patient's anticipated demands and activity level. In this chapter, we will review a few aspects of the management of those patients presenting with failure after surgical treatment of a radial head fracture as it relates to the radial head; we will not include management of associated problems such as the Essex-Lopresti injury ( The rate of reoperation after attempted internal fixation has not been analyzed in detail ( There is more information published regarding the rate and risk factors for implant revision or removal after radial head arthroplasty. Duckworth et al. reported on 105 elbows followed for a minimum of 1 year after implantation of cemented monopolar prostheses. In a separate study, Ha et al. reviewed the clinical and radiographic features of 258 radial head prosthesis with a mean follow-up of one year. Van Riet et al. reported on the Mayo Clinic experience on 44 elbows that underwent removal of failed metallic radial head prostheses. The usual mechanisms of failure after attempted internal fixation of a radial head fracture are malunion, nonunion, and restricted forearm rotation secondary to excessive fibrosis or prominent hardware. Radial head malunion after internal fixation of a radial head fracture can occur as a consequence of either nonanatomic reduction or secondary displacement. It can affect a segment of the radial head, the head-neck junction, or both. Head-neck malunion occurs in fractures with substantial comminution at that particular location, leading to healing with an abnormal tilt. Radial head malunions can sometimes be well tolerated. However, they can also lead to pain or limited motion. In addition, they can contribute to instability: a distally displaced fragment, or excessive tilt of the whole radial head, can facilitate escape of the radial head underneath the capitellum as the elbow is moved into extension. Radial head malunions should be carefully evaluated with plain radiographs and oftentimes computed tomography with tridimensional reconstruction to confirm that the fracture is malunited as opposed to nonunited and to try to understand whether the residual displacement truly contributes to the patient's symptoms. Some patients with limited forearm rotation in the setting of a malunion after internal fixation will improve their motion with release of the contractured tissue around the annular ligament and radial head, as well as hardware removal, without necessarily needing to correct the associated residual bone deformity. One or more fractured fragments may fail to unite after internal fixation of a radial head fracture. Nonunion at the neck level may be well tolerated and permit a reasonable arc of forearm rotation without major symptoms. Nonunion of fragments of the head oftentimes are associated with hardware failure that becomes prominent; typically, patients complain of pain, mechanical symptoms such as catching and locking, and various degrees of forearm rotation loss. Loss of forearm rotation after internal fixation of a radial head fracture needs to be analyzed carefully. Associated injuries to the wrist or forearm that may have happened at the time of fracture can contribute to limited pronation and supination. Fracture malunion or nonunion may also contribute to limited forearm rotation. In many circumstances, it is mostly due to fibrosis and/or prominent hardware. In patients with loss of forearm rotation initially attributed to a radial head fracture, secondary contractures of the interosseous membrane and the distal radioulnar joint may develop. The time frame and frequency for these secondary contractures to occur is largely unknown. Some surgeons believe that the space between the proximal radius and the annular ligament is very sensitive to space-occupying hardware. A study completed at our institution demonstrated worse forearm rotation when fractures involving the radial neck were fixed with plates when compared to oblique screws ( The usual mechanisms of failure after use of a prosthesis for treatment of a radial head fracture include overlengthening and missizing, loosening, infection, prosthesis disassociation, wear, stress shielding, and progressive cartilage erosion or osteopenia on the capitellar side of the joint. The relative frequency of various failure mechanisms in patients subjected to revision radial head replacement was analyzed at our institution. For quite some time, little attention was paid to accurate restoration of the overall length of the radius, sizing, and a number of design features that are now known to have major effects on the mechanics of the elbow joint and on the clinical and radiographic outcomes of radial head replacement. The design and surgical technique details required to achieve the best possible outcome with radial head replacement are discussed in An overlengthened radius can lead to stiffness, progressive cartilage and bone loss in the capitellum, and persistent instability secondary to stretch of the lateral collateral ligament complex. Too large or too small of a radial head diameter can lead to poor tracking with instability or capitellar damage. Controversy persists regarding the ideal mode of fixation of radial head implants. Some implants are polished and designed to avoid ingrowth when implanted in a cementless fashion. These implants function as mobile spacers, and several authors have reported absence of symptoms despite clear evidence of lack of fixation. When loosening complicates cemented implants or implants designed for ingrowth fixation, problems are more likely to occur, including pain, mechanical symptoms, progressive bone loss, and in selected cases, recurrent instability. Infection is a relatively uncommon complication of radial head replacement, but it does happen. Most of the infections seen in our practice have presented with overt signs, either drainage or substantial swelling with redness. Anecdotally, we have noted a higher incidence of infection in immune-compromised patients, active smokers, and after several reoperations. The most common microorganisms we have encountered are Most implants used currently are modular. Head disassociation off the stem has been noted mostly in bipolar implants, as well as those with a locking mechanism based on screw fixation ( Bipolar implants typically have polyethylene articulating at the bipolar junction. The bipolar implant best analyzed in the literature is the Judet prosthesis. Some studies have documented that as polyethylene wear occurs at the bipolar junction of this particular design, the head may tilt excessively (which contributes to instability) and, in some patients, may dynamically disengage or may completely disassociate. Difficulties with radial head prosthesis insertion at the time of surgery have prompted the design of implants where the head may slide on the stem once the stem is completely seated. Many of the earlier designs with these features use a screw mechanism to lock the head on the stem. Several cases of screw failure with backing out and partial or complete disassociation have been reported. Implant disassociation may be diagnosed as an unexpected radiographic finding, but oftentimes it leads to pain, mechanical symptoms, and instability. In addition, substantial metallosis with staining of the articular cartilage and soft tissues may be found at the time of reoperation. Most monopolar implants are not associated with symptomatic wear of the implant surface because they articulate with the articular cartilage of the capitellum and the lesser sigmoid notch. As mentioned previously, polyethylene wear is a concern mostly at the head-stem junction of bipolar implants. Even if it does not lead to partial or complete disengagement, particulate debris from polyethylene wear could lead to osteolysis and synovitis, although the rate and severity of this failure mechanism is largely unknown. Progressive radiographic resorption of the radius underneath radial head implants has been reported mostly after cementless fixation of certain ingrowth designs. Chanlalit et al. published the most detailed study to date on stress shielding after radial head replacement. Various degrees of progressive capitellar osteopenia can be seen in most patients after a well-performed radial head replacement. The mechanisms for this to occur are unknown but are most likely due to a change in the loading conditions of the capitellum. Progressive collapse of the capitellum leading to symptoms is much less common but can occur. However, severe capitellar changes (cartilage loss, bone erosion) are most commonly associated with poorly performed radial head replacements, loose implants, or traumatic damage to the cartilage of the capitellum at the time of the index injury that led to the radial head fracture. The evaluation of the patient with failed internal fixation or replacement after a radial head fracture needs to assess the whole elbow to identify the presence of associated pathology, especially as it relates to the coronoid, ligament complexes, forearm, and wrist. This is covered in detail in Physical examination findings typically present in patients with complications after radial head fixation or replacement almost always include lateral-sided elbow pain and various restrictions of forearm rotation. As previously mentioned, pain in the proximal third of the forearm has been described as typical of loose radial head implants. Plain radiographs may be sufficient to make the diagnosis in many patients with nonunion, malunion, or a failed implant. When osteotomy or revision internal fixation is considered for nonunion or malunion, a computed tomography scan with three-dimensional reconstruction is extremely helpful. The radiographic evaluation of symptomatic radial head implants should be directed to assessment of size, radial length, alignment and tracking, implant fixation, and stress shielding. For sizing and length, comparison with radiographs of the opposite normal elbow may be used. Because the metallic radial head replaces both bone and cartilage, and cartilage is radiolucent, the prosthesis always looks a little big on radiographs even if perfectly sized. If the implant is well aligned, the central axis of the radial neck should intersect the center of the capitellum in all views and any position of flexion/extension. As in other arthroplasties, loosening is associated with radiolucent lines around the stem and occasionally marked cavitation. Assessment of radial length may be more difficult. Revision internal fixation and osteotomy, hardware removal, and contracture release may be considered respectively for nonunion, malunion, and limited forearm rotation after internal fixation of a radial head fracture. Other salvage procedures include surgical creation of a pseudoarthrosis distal to the radial head, partial osteoarticular allografts, simple resection, resection with interposition of the anconeus muscle, or radial head replacement. Failed implants may be revised or removed. When removed, interposition of allograft or the anconeus muscle may be considered as well. Sometimes, the capitellar side of the joint is affected enough to consider use of a capitellar implant (radiocapitellar arthroplasty). As in other areas of revision surgery, for many patients it is wise to obtain consent for more than one procedure: the surgeon may be planning to perform revision internal fixation but may find at the time of surgery that the bone stock is compromised, requiring intraoperative conversion to a radial head replacement. This procedure is indicated for patients with a healed radial head fracture in a good position where lack of forearm rotation is attributed to prominent hardware and/or excessive scarring around the annular ligaments. As with other hardware removal procedures, most of the time it is best to remove the contracted soft tissue and obtain as much motion as possible prior to removing the hardware, unless a plate or screw is clearly impinging. Otherwise, forced forearm rotation once the hardware has been removed could lead to refracture through any of the stress risers left after hardware removal. The goal is to obtain as much rotation in the operating room as possible. Maintaining intraoperative gains in the postoperative period may be difficult. The patient must be trained to use the opposite hand and rotate the forearm by grabbing the distal radius and ulna, not the wrist, because the wrist ligaments allow some motion that is not effectively transmitted into forearm rotation. It is also useful to make custom plastic braces that allow the patient to mechanically force the forearm into pronation and supination. Resection of the native radial head after failed internal fixation, and simple removal of a failed radial head prosthesis, will both lead to absence of the radial head. Various studies, mostly from Europe, have reported good long-term outcomes after simple resection of a fractured radial head provided all other stabilizing structures of the elbow are competent. Caution is required when this option is selected because we have seen patients develop both symptomatic elbow instability and symptomatic longitudinal forearm instability after late radial head or prosthesis resection. Preoperatively, every effort should be made to examine the elbow, understand the nature of the index injury, scrutinize all imaging studies, and review the details of previous surgical procedures to identify subtle or hidden stability. In addition, the elbow and forearm should be examined under anesthesia, and occasionally fluoroscopy, after resection of the radial head or removal of the prosthesis; the patient should have consented to alternative procedures should the elbow or forearm prove to be unstable at the time of surgery. Patients with severe restriction of forearm rotation and an otherwise stable and functional elbow may be considered for this procedure, in which approximately 1 cm of radius is removed, if possible proximal to the bicipital tuberosity. This procedure was first described by Morrey. Osteotomy of malunited fragments with revision internal fixation may be considered selectively for patients with a symptomatic malunion in the presence of healthy articular cartilage, especially in younger patients. Osteotomy of head fragments is more attractive than osteotomy at the neck level because dividing the neck of the radius completely may make it more difficult to obtain stable fixation, and there is some risk of nonunion or avascular necrosis. In both circumstances, a bone graft may be needed. If plate fixation is required, there is some risk of excessive scarring underneath the annular ligament leading to restricted forearm rotation, and a second procedure may be required to remove hardware and restore motion. Selected nonunions may be considered for revision internal fixation. As mentioned in the section on osteotomy, revision internal fixation is more attractive when at least a portion of the radial head is still in continuity with the neck of the radius; otherwise, most authors would favor radial head replacement or other alternatives. A number of factors are required for this option to be successful, including reasonable remaining bone stock, obtaining secure fixation, and liberal use of bone grafting. Patients with nonunion or malunion of a segment of the radial head may be considered for replacement of the missing radius with a partial osteoarticular allograft. There is very limited published information on this technique, but the outcome has been surprisingly good. Turner et al. reported on eight elbows treated in this manner; the partial radial head allograft healed in all elbows, but there were three unsatisfactory results secondary to progressive resorption of an associated coronoid reconstruction. Simple resection of the radial head or removal of a failed radial head replacement may lead to symptoms even in the absence of elbow or forearm instability. The radial head width contributes to tensioning of the lateral collateral ligament (LCL) complex, and in some individuals, excessive laxity may result from an absent radial head even if the LCL complex healed properly. In addition, the proximal radius stump may be driven onto the lateral cortex of the proximal ulna, which might lead to symptomatic impingement. Finally, progressive valgus angulation of the elbow, combined with mild degrees of proximal migration of the radius, may lead to painful impingement of the radial stump with the capitellum. Radial head replacement can avoid these problems. However, insertion of a radial head implant may be concerning in the setting of poor capitellar cartilage or bone, as well as in patients with compromised proximal radius bone stock. In these circumstances, the anconeus muscle can be transferred intraarticularly under the LCL complex to fill the space of the missing radial head. The surgical details and outcome of this procedure are described in detail in Some surgeons prefer to interpose allograft tissue in this same location, similar to a suspension-arthroplasty of the first metacarpophalangeal joint. An Achilles tendon allograft may be folded in several layers and anchored to the lesser sigmoid notch of the ulna with suture anchors and to the adjacent soft tissues with suture. This alternative avoids harvesting the anconeus muscle but does not provide viable tissue. The outcome of this procedure is largely unknown. In those circumstances when the load sharing function and shape of the radial head are deemed necessary for stability of the elbow or the forearm, failed open reduction internal fixation and failed arthroplasty could both be revised to a radial head replacement. Radial head replacement for failed internal fixation may be straightforward, especially if a plate was not used for fixation; the radial head can typically be resected at the neck level, and implants used for primary radial head arthroplasty do provide adequate fixation in most cases. On the contrary, revising a failed radial head implant may be more complicated; not uncommonly, the failed implant leads to bone loss, and implants with longer revision stems may be necessary in order to achieve implant fixation. The outcome of radial head replacement for the salvage of failed internal fixation is difficult to tease out from the literature because most studies on radial head replacement mix patients undergoing arthroplasty for acute injuries or after resection or fixation. Similarly, to our knowledge there is very limited information on the outcome of revision radial head replacement. Delclaux et al. reported on 26 patients who underwent reoperation for failure of a radial head prosthesis. The limiting factors for radial head replacement in all these circumstances may include compromised bone stock at the proximal radius, damage to the cartilage and/or bone of the capitellum, and difficulties with implant tracking. For those circumstances when use of a longer revision radial stem is required, for years the only option available was to use the Judet bipolar radial head implant. The Judet system has a few features that may make it less attractive: cement fixation is required, and the bipolar features may facilitate elbow subluxation or implant disassociation. Additional revision radial head implants are being released to the market to allow cementless fixation with a monoblock construct ( When a radial head prosthesis is deemed to be necessary for the management of failed internal fixation or failed arthroplasty, but the amount of capitellar damage is concerning, consideration can be given to a unicompartmental replacement. This option is discussed in detail in The first attempt to surgically treat a radial head fracture is not always successful. Attempted internal fixation can be complicated by malunion, nonunion, and restricted forearm rotation. Radial head replacements may be complicated by loosening, stiffness, infection, prosthesis disassociation, wear, stress shielding, and capitellar erosion, or severe osteopenia. Evaluation of the symptomatic elbow after attempted surgical management of a radial head fracture should not only focus on the radial head but also assess possible elbow- and forearm-associated injuries. Plain radiographs are oftentimes enough to establish the diagnosis. Surgical options depend on the initial treatment modality and the failure mechanism. Revision internal fixation and osteotomy, hardware removal, and contracture release may be considered, respectively, for nonunion, malunion, and limited forearm rotation after internal fixation of a radial head fracture, although oftentimes the most reliable solution is to resect or replace the radial head. Failed implants may be revised or removed. Other salvage procedures include surgical creation of a pseudoarthrosis distal to the radial head, osteoarticular allografts, and resection with interposition of the anconeus muscle.