The application of a ball-cratering method to test three-body abrasive wear of bulk materials in the presence of large abrasive particles has been investigated. Three high-Cr white cast irons (WCIs) with different material properties were used as wear samples. Abrasive slurries contained two types of abrasive particles, silica sand and crushed quartz. Silica sand and crushed quartz particles have similar chemical composition and hardness but differ in sharpness. Wear rates of WCI samples were determined and the worn surfaces were examined by optical microscopy, SEM and Talysurf profilometry.
                  It was found that the ball-cratering test can differentiate between the wear resistances of materials with similar properties. The wear resistance of WCIs in the presence of silica sand increased with increasing the hardness of the wear sample and decreasing the size of carbides in the microstructure. Smaller silica sand particles caused less wear damage than larger silica sand particles, even though the smaller particles were slightly sharper than the larger ones. When silica sand and quartz particles of the same size were used, the angular quartz particles caused much higher wear than the rounded silica sand particles. Surface morphologies of the wear craters on the WCI samples were examined in an SEM and then compared with the morphologies of the worn surfaces from slurry pumps. It was found that the silica sand particles generated surface morphologies similar to those found in the worn slurry pumps. In these surfaces the matrix was preferentially worn out and hard carbides were protruding. Wear surface morphologies produced by the angular quartz particles were different. They consisted of numerous superimposed indents and the microstructure phases were not distinguishable. This indicates that the type of abrasive particles used in ball-cratering testing significantly affects the test outcomes in terms of wear rates and wear surface morphology.The ball-cratering abrasive test involves the rotation of a hard ball against a wear plate in the presence of abrasive slurry to generate wear craters with an imposed geometry. It is predominantly used as a micro-scale abrasion test where the abrasive particles are smaller than 10 In micro-abrasion tests fine angular particles such as SiC Up to date very few ball-cratering studies conducted in the presence of particles larger than 10 When the wear scar morphology of high-Cr white cast iron (WCI) from some of our preliminary tests with large abrasive particles was examined, it was found that it resembled the morphology of worn surfaces from slurry pumps used in mineral processing High-Cr WCIs, selected as wear samples, are the main materials used in slurry pump manufacture, since they are quite resistant to damage caused by impacting small particles. Centrifugal slurry pumps are typical pumps used in mineral processing industries to transport mixtures of liquid and abrasive particles. The slurry pump components (lining, impellers) suffer from wear generated by contact with moving abrasive particles The main ball-cratering abrasion tests were conducted with silica sand particles with size ranging from 150 to 300 The experimental abrasion tests were carried out using a ball-cratering tribometer, shown in Three high-Cr WCIs with different chemical compositions and microstructures were used as wear samples. The samples were sectioned from production slurry pumps, from regions with equiaxed grains (random direction of carbide growth). The material characteristics of wear samples are given in In ball-cratering abrasion tests a steel ball was rotated against a wear plate with a velocity of 0.2 Silica sand and crushed quartz abrasive particles were sieved into various size ranges, shown in Ball-cratering tests using three types of high-Cr WCIs were conducted in the presence of silica sand particles with sizes ranging from 150 to 300 The presence of large abrasive particles interferes with the perfect reproduction of the ball shape in the wear crater generated. Therefore, optical microscopy cannot be used to measure the wear crater diameter to calculate the wear volume. Instead, Talysurf surface profiles were taken across the middle of the wear craters to examine their shape. Representative Talysurf profiles for the three WCI samples tested are shown in The wear crater morphology of all three wear samples was examined by SEM. Some asymmetry in wear was found and the SEM micrographs shown in The abrasive wear of the 27Cr sample was further investigated using three silica sand slurries with a decreasing size of particles. The mass loss, averaged from three repeats, is shown in To isolate the effect of particle shape on three-body abrasive wear ball-cratering tests were conducted on the 27Cr hypoeutectic sample in the presence of 250–300 The effect of the different shape of silica sand and crushed quartz on wear can be clearly seen in SEM micrographs showing single indents made by both particle types on the 27Cr surface ( In order to assess the correlation between the wear scar morphologies from ball-cratering tests and those found in the field, worn slurry pump components were examined. When examining worn slurry pumps two scales of wear features have to be distinguished: a macro-scale where features such as gouging can be measured even in centimetres The worn slurry pump parts were then examined by SEM to assess how the wear progresses on the micro-scale and the representative SEM micrographs are shown in The main objective of the present work was to find out if a ball-cratering test can be used as a laboratory test for ranking wear resistant materials used in slurry pumps. The suitability of the ball-cratering test for such a task was assessed by comparing: (i) the wear rates and (ii) the wear scar morphologies obtained in the laboratory tests with those found in the field. The ball-cratering test is simple, inexpensive and produces repeatable results. It can be used as an initial quick test selecting materials for subsequent more sophisticated tests that better simulate working conditions of slurry pumps, such as the Coriolis test The results shown in The reviews of the published results obtained on other laboratory rigs have confirmed that the abrasive or erosive wear resistance of various high-Cr WCIs depends on the testing conditions. In gas jet erosion tests it was found that hypoeutectic WCI outperformed hypereutectic WCI under conditions that caused the removal of carbides The wear scar morphologies of all three samples, 30Cr, 27Cr and 25Cr, were examined using optical microscopy (very low magnification to image the entire wear scar) and SEM (higher magnification to image surface morphology on a micro-scale). Typical optical microscopy images of the entire wear scars are shown in The effect of particle size on abrasive wear was investigated by conducting ball-cratering tests with three narrow sizes of silica sand: 125–180, 180–250 and 250–300 Investigating the effect of particle size on abrasive wear is generally not the objective of ball-cratering tests as the majority of tests are conducted using the recommended particles smaller than 10 In our ball-cratering tests with large particles particle fracture in the contact zone has been found, as reported previously Laboratory tests conducted with real slurry pumps and the field data collected have shown that the particle size effect depends on the slurry pump design The comparison between the wear scar morphology from ball-cratering tests and that found in the worn slurry pump components can only be done on a micro-scale. The reason is the small size of the wear crater generated by ball-cratering and the geometry of the test that cannot simulate the turbulent flow of the slurry over a wear surface. The small turbulent eddies are responsible for the characteristic wear patterns found in slurry pumps From the results presented, the following conclusions can be drawn: The ball-cratering test can discriminate between the wear resistances of materials with similar properties. The wear resistance of WCIs in the presence of silica sand increased with increasing the hardness of the wear sample and decreasing the size of carbides in the microstructure. Smaller silica sand particles caused less wear damage than larger silica sand particles, even though the smaller particles were slightly sharper than the larger ones. When silica sand and quartz particles of the same size were used, the angular quartz particles caused much higher wear than the rounded silica sand particles. Silica sand particles generated surface morphologies similar to those found in the worn slurry pumps. In these surfaces, the matrix was preferentially worn out and hard carbides were protruding. Wear surface morphologies produced by angular quartz particles consisted of numerous superimposed indents and the microstructure phases were not distinguishable. This indicates that the type of abrasive particles used in ball-cratering testing significantly affects the tests outcome in terms of wear rates and wear surface morphology. In order to properly simulate the wear behaviour of high-Cr WCIs the conditions of the ball-cratering tests (normal load, particle type and size) have to be carefully selected. The wear behaviour of high-Cr WCIs can be reversed when the testing conditions are changed. The authors wish to thank the Australian Research Council SPIRT and Alcoa World Alumina for sponsoring the project and D. Ferdinand and R. Lewis for conducting some of the experimental tests.