The skull base is uniquely placed to absorb anteriorly directed forces imparted either via the midfacial skeleton or cranial vault. A variety of skull base fracture classifications exist. Less well understood, however, is fracture extension beyond the anterior cranial fossa (ACF) into the middle and posterior cranial fossae. The cases of 81 patients from two UK major trauma centres were studied to examine the distribution of fractures across the skull base and any relationship between the vector of force and extent of skull base injury. It was found that predominantly lateral force to the craniofacial skeleton produced a fracture that propagated beyond the ACF into the middle cranial fossa in 77.4% of cases, significantly more (P
                     <0.001) than for predominantly anterior force (12.0%). Fractures were significantly more likely to propagate into the posterior fossa with a lateral vector of impact compared to an anterior vector (P
                     =0.049). This difference in energy transfer across the skull base may, in part, be explained by the local anatomy. The more delicate central ACF acts as a ‘crumple zone’ in order to absorb force. Conversely, no collapsible interface exists in the lateral aspect of the ACF, thus the lateral ACF behaves like a ‘buttress’, resulting in increased energy transfer.The skull base represents an intricate osseous interface between the cranial vault and the face anteriorly, and the neck posteriorly. The face is the only sub-cranial structure related to the anterior cranial fossa (ACF), separating the neck from the base of the skull. It has long been postulated that the bones of the midfacial skeleton will act as a ‘crumple zone’, thereby reducing the transmission of force to the intercranial contents. These protective features in the skeletal anatomy of the midfacial skeleton have also been shown to exist in the anatomy of the ACF. The vector of transmitted force determines the fracture severity and pattern. With anteriorly directed forces to the frontal bone, the central (sinonasal) compartment of the anterior fossa provides a collapsible interface. The anterior orbital rim and mid-portion of the orbital roofs fracture preferentially and again provide a collapsible interface. Bones fracture in a preferential manner leading to reproducible fracture patterns. This phenomenon exists in various areas of the skeleton, hence the occurrence of a multitude of eponymously named fractures, e.g. Smith and Colles fractures of the radius; typical examples for the facial skeleton are of course the Le Fort original midfacial fractures. It can be argued that these reproducible fracture patterns occur only with moderate impact energy. A feature of high-energy impact is that there is apparent disregard of conventional fracture patterns with gross comminution of the bones involved. The aims of this study were (1) to demonstrate the patterns of propagation of fractures across the anterior skull base that extend into the middle and posterior cranial fossae, and (2) to test the hypothesis that laterally based forces exploit the relative biomechanical weakness of the construct and produce more extensive skull base injuries. A study of patients who had sustained frontobasal fractures due to non-penetrating trauma was conducted. These patients were seen at two major trauma centres (MTC) in the UK. A prospectively maintained database of surgery was used to retrospectively identify patients treated at MTC1 from 17 June 2006 to 17 July 2013. Similarly, all patients under the care of the oral and maxillofacial trauma team at MTC2 from 1 January 2012 to 28 February 2014 were identified prospectively using comprehensive electronic patient handover notes. Ethical approval for this study was granted by the National Research Ethics Committee; Research and Development approval was granted at both study sites. All patients who had sustained a fracture of the ACF from either an anteriorly or laterally directed impact to the frontal bone or midfacial skeleton, with available computed tomography (CT) images and accessible clinical data, were included. The following patients were excluded: those with non-traumatic ACF disruption, those with penetrating skull base fractures, and patients sustaining fractures confined to the anterior table of the frontal sinus. In addition, patients with inadequate clinical information/CT imaging were excluded. The following data were collected for each patient in the study: patient demographics, mechanism of injury, and direction of force. The direction of force was recorded as either anterior or lateral as follows: a line at 45° to the right angle formed by the midline and the sphenoid wing was used to bisect the ACF. The force was deemed ‘anterior’ if the predominant force impacted the frontal bone anterior to this line and ‘lateral’ if behind the line (see The CT scans were analysed using OsiriX v.4.1.2 software (Pixmeo, Geneva, Switzerland) allowing for the manipulation of images into the desired view. The fractures identified on the CT scans were manually transferred onto an image of the superior aspect of the skull base using a Wacom Bamboo Pen Tablet and stored as an individual layer in Adobe Photoshop v. 14.0; this was done by two of the investigators (BTE and JRS). The prevalence of fracture propagation into the middle cranial fossa (MCF) and PCF was noted for each subject. All data were analysed using IBM SPSS Statistics v. 21 (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA) and Confidence Interval Analysis v. 2.2.0 (CIA; University of Southampton, UK). The In total, 81 patients met the inclusion criteria for the study; 36 patients were treated at MTC1 and 45 patients were treated at MTC2. There was no statistically significant difference between the patients in these two cohorts in any of the patient demographics or outcome measures. Mechanisms of injury are described in Of the patients who suffered a lateral impact, 77.4% had fractures that propagated from the ACF into the MCF compared to 12.0% of the patients who sustained an anteriorly directed force. This difference was statistically significant (difference in proportions 65.4%, 95% confidence interval 44.5–78.3%, Propagation of the fracture into the PCF occurred in 19.4% of patients who sustained a lateral force in comparison to 4.0% of patients who sustained an anterior impact. This again was statistically significant (difference in proportions 15.4%, 95% confidence interval 15.0–32.5%, Fractures of the ACF resulting from blunt trauma to the frontal bone are often associated with high-energy injury mechanisms and comprise around 5% of all fractures involving the craniofacial skeleton. In up to 62% of cases, frontobasal fractures are associated with high midfacial fractures. It is helpful in skull base tumour surgery to divide the ACF into ‘central’ and ‘lateral’ compartments, with the demarcation between the two compartments being formed by (1) the middle third of the supraorbital rims and the frontal sinuses, (2) the medial walls of the orbit, which are also lateral walls of both the ethmoid and sphenoid sinuses, and (3) the optic canals. The central compartment of the ACF consists of what may be termed the ‘inter-orbital complex’. Taken as a whole, this is a lattice-like structure made up of nasal cavity and the frontal, ethmoid, and sphenoid sinuses, ending at the prechiasmatic sulcus in the roof of the sphenoid sinus. The lateral component consists of the lateral supraorbital rims, variably pneumatized by the frontal sinuses and incorporating the thickened angular process of the frontal bone, the orbital roofs, and ending at the sphenoid wing, the junction with the MCF. The orbital roofs vary in thickness, being thickest anteriorly at the supraorbital rims and posteriorly at the sphenoid wing; the middle third of the roof of the orbit is thinnest and least robust. Concerning the effect of the direction of force on skull base fractures, it was observed that laterally directed forces were associated with fractures that extended through the skull base in a diagonal fashion, through the ACF and into the MCF and PCF, ultimately becoming contralateral. Anteriorly directed forces were associated with linear fractures of the skull base, with separation of the MCF and PCF running parallel to the petrous temporal bone. Previous cadaveric experiments also demonstrating these features used overwhelming force to fracture the skull base (>2000 Skeletal buttresses, and surrounding areas of weakness, have been proposed based on cadaveric work, as well as on fractures observed in human subjects. These buttresses have been termed ‘pillars of strength’. The concept of the central and lateral anatomical compartments of the ACF may have a bearing on the sequelae of impacting forces to the ACF. Predominantly anterior impacts, being directed to the more compressible central skull base, appear to be far less likely to propagate beyond the ACF, while in contrast, laterally directed trauma that predominantly involve the more robust lateral compartment, appear to lead to a high incidence of fracture propagation. The findings of this study have further highlighted the protective features of the ACF and central ACF structures. With anteriorly directed impacts to the frontal bone, force can be absorbed by the lattice-like structures, resulting in a reduced incidence of fracture propagation beyond the ACF. Conversely the anatomy of the lateral compartments (comprised of the orbital roofs bilaterally) is largely different, leading to a different distribution of fractures. In comparison to the lattice-like structure of the central compartment, there is a distinct lack of collapsible interface in the lateral compartments. The present results demonstrate that this lack of collapsible interface in the lateral aspect of the ACF prevents the impacting force from being absorbed, resulting in greater energy transmission throughout the skull base – particularly into the MCF and PCF. In these events, it also appears that the impacting force is transmitted down the ‘pillar of strength’ in the lateral aspect of the ACF, namely the lesser wing of the sphenoid. Therefore in these circumstances, the relative strength of the sphenoid wing may in fact be detrimental to the middle and posterior cranial fossae. The reduction of fracture propagation may also provide a protective role in craniofacial trauma given that the morbidity and mortality of fractures confined to the ACF is significantly lower in comparison to fractures that propagate to involve the MCF and PCF. This may be the result of a number of factors including: (1) the greater level of force required to involve the MCF/PCF and hence the more severe the blunt cerebral injury sustained; and (2) the anatomical structures in the MCF/PCF that may be damaged directly or indirectly, such as the internal carotid artery and brain stem, in particular the medulla oblongata responsible for respiratory and cardiac control. Fractures associated with the clivus, for example, are associated with mortality rates of between 12.4% and 80%, with a high incidence of intracranial haemorrhage occurring in 80.5% of cases. To conclude, the results of this study further highlight the protective role of the anatomy of the ACF in craniofacial trauma. The lattice-like structure of the central compartment of the ACF allows it to act as a ‘crumple zone’, thereby reducing energy transmission across the skull base. Conversely, due to the lack of a collapsible interface, the lateral regions of the ACF act as a functional ‘buttress’, causing fracture propagation. To this end, during predominantly laterally directed craniofacial trauma, the relative strength of these bones may in fact be detrimental to the patient's severity of injury and prognosis. No funding was sourced for this research. Although JRS received personal financial support from The Wolfson Foundation for his university expenses during the period of this study, this did not have any impact on the study and was entirely separate. Nonetheless, we feel it important to be transparent with this issue. All authors declare that no competing interests exist that could inappropriately have influenced this work. Ethical approval for this study was granted by the National Research Ethics Committee under REC 13/WM/0194; Research and Development approval was granted at both study sites. Not required. We would like to thank Mr D. Bulters, Consultant Neurosurgeon at University Hospital Southampton, for access to the database of surgery used to identify eligible patients. We would also like to thank and credit OsiriX for use of their software.