The treatment of displaced or unstable pelvic fractures involves surgical stabilization. Traditional methods of fixation for the anterior pelvic ring include plate fixation, screw fixation, or external fixation. Recently, a technique for using spinal pedicle screws to create an anterior subcutaneous internal fixator, also termed an “INFIX,” has been reported with some success. Although no technique has proved clinically superior, the subcutaneous technique offers significant advantages over traditional pelvic external fixation. These advantages include obviating the risk of pin tract irritation or infection, decreasing postoperative pain, and increasing the biomechanical stability of the fixation construct. Here, we review the anatomical considerations, imaging, and surgical technique for placing an anterior subcutaneous internal fixator. In addition, the surgical outcomes and complications of this specialized technique are discussed. Surgical management of pelvic ring injuries is complex, and this technique is a valuable tool in the armamentarium of pelvic surgeons.Pelvic ring injuries constitute only 0.3%-6% of all fractures but are present in 20% of polytrauma patients. Specific features of anterior pelvic and hip anatomy are pertinent for safe placement of the ASIF device. These include the anterior soft tissues of the hip and pelvis as well as the bony corridor for placement of the fixation. The superficial interval for placing the device is between the tensor fascia lata and the sartorius muscle groups. This corresponds to the classic Smith-Petersen surgical interval. It is important to note the proximity of the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve (LFCN) in this area as it must be identified and protected. The location of the femoral nerve on the anterior superior edge of the iliopsoas muscle and the external iliac artery and vein lying below the inguinal ligament are also critical. Fixation is achieved by tunneling a rod subcutaneously. Compression of these structures by the tunneled rod can lead to neurologic deficit or vascular compromise. Displaced pelvic fractures are often the result of high-energy trauma and are often associated with other significant injuries. Plain radiography and computed tomography (CT) are required to fully evaluate displaced pelvic fractures. Plain radiographs should include an anterior-posterior image as well as inlet and outlet views. A complete review of surgical indications for pelvic ring injuries is beyond the scope of this article. We provide an illustrative case example of a 52-year-old otherwise healthy woman who sustained a pelvic fracture after a fall down from a flight of stairs ( The patient is placed supine on a radiolucent operative table. The patient’s arms are placed out to the side at 90° to the body or tucked across the chest depending on the need for posterior pelvis fixation ( The superficial landmark for the placement of the ASIF is the bilateral anterior superior iliac spine. The AIIS is not palpable but generally lies 3-4 The dissection required is straightforward. The skin is incised longitudinally, and care is taken when dissecting down to the level of the deep investing fascia not to injure the LFCN. Once the nerve is identified, it can be protected. It often runs across the surgical field ( The interval between the sartorius and the tensor fascia lata is then opened. Blunt dissection is performed down to the level of the AIIS. The direct head of the rectus muscle is identified ( The sharp awl for pedicle screw insertion is placed in the middle of the AIIS—directly at the center of the teardrop seen on the obturator-outlet radiograph ( Next, a pedicle finder is used to create a tunnel toward the PSIS. Both iliac oblique radiographs and lateral pelvic radiographs are taken to confirm the appropriate trajectory ( Once a pedicle screw is placed on one side, another similar screw is placed in the contralateral hemipelvis using the same technique. The connecting rod is now contoured to fit the patient. A 6-mm titanium rod is then contoured to create an arc that spans from one AIIS to the other ( The rod is then pushed through and tunneled under the sartorius muscle and through the deep fascia into the subcutaneous fat. It is then pushed through the fat across the pelvis to the contralateral side. Once at the level of the contralateral side, it is pushed through the fascia on the medial border of the sartorius. By crossing the deep fascia medial to the sartorius, the LFCN is protected. Once in place, the rod is maneuvered into the tulips of the pedicle screw and the setscrews are placed with a torque screwdriver. In general, reduction should be obtained before placement of the ASIF, typically through indirect means. Once the connecting bar is in place, the reduction can be fine-tuned by either distraction or compression of the pelvic ring before locking the setscrews of the pedicle screws. The wounds are closed in layers. The deep investing fascia is closed with absorbable suture. Skin is closed as per routine, though we typically use an absorbable subcuticular stitch and surgical glue for closure. Once the wounds are dressed, the drapes are taken down with care to leave the back table sterile. A pulse examination is performed to ensure normal perfusion of the lower extremities. The hips are then flexed to 90° and pulses rechecked to ensure the absence of dynamic compression of the femoral arteries. Once the pulse examination is compete, the back table can be broken down and the patient awakened. Care must be taken during the dissection to protect against any injury to the LFCN. The LFCN may be injured during the dissection or during rod placement. Injury can lead to painful numbness in the thigh, termed meralgia paresthetica. Careful and accurate imaging must be obtained for safe placement of the ASIF device in the pelvis. An intimate understanding of pelvic anatomy and pelvic radiography is necessary for accurate placement. The most important view is the obturator-outlet view with a clear teardrop. It is important to adjust the angle of the beam to create a clear path for the screw to ensure safe placement. Having the screws sunk down too deep or having the rod undercontoured can lead to compression of the femoral nerve or vessels. Care should be taken to curve the connecting rod enough to avoid compression. We typically try to have the rod palpable but not deform the skin contour of the anterior pelvis. At the conclusion of the case, flex both hips to ensure that the pulses remain palpable, and complete a neurologic examination once the patient is awake to ensure that there has been no iatrogenic femoral nerve injury. The postoperative rehabilitation after ASIF placement varies depending on the specific configuration of the pelvic fracture. Typically, weight bearing is restricted on the side of the posterior pelvic ring injury until union occurs. As with any patient with a pelvis fracture, prophylaxis against thromboembolic disease is important. Routine hardware removal is recommended at 4-6 months postoperatively once the fracture is healed. One of the advantages of the ASIF is that it is often much well tolerated than an external fixator and can be left in place until the fracture is solidly healed. Removal is straightforward. A careful approach is required to avoid injury to the LFCN. The pedicle screws are dissected out and the setscrews are removed. The rod typically slides out easily. The pedicle screws are removed, and the wound is irrigated and closed in layers. Although ASIF has been shown to be a relatively safe and reliable procedure, complications have been reported. In the initial descriptions of this technique, excellent results have been reported equivalent to that of external fixation. This is a promising technique for anterior pelvic stabilization with excellent early clinical results. This technique obviates the inherent problems of prolonged external fixation of the pelvis.