This paper describes a model which makes it possible to predict the transport velocity of a crushed rock material bed along an ordinary screen with a circular stroke. Transport velocity can be predicted with respect to the inclination, stroke and frequency of the screen. The model is based on physical laws. A particle leaves the screen surface when the negative vertical acceleration of the screen surface exceeds that of the particle. The particle can also slide along the screen surface. Monte Carlo simulation is used to estimate the influence of the other particles. Thus, random values are used to simulate the collisions between particles. The predicted transport velocity is equal to the average transport velocity from a few runs with the model. To verify the model, experiments were made: the transport velocity of a bed of crushed rock particles along a wire cloth was measured for different inclinations, strokes and frequencies. The predictions made with the model agreed well with the experimental results.
                  A model which makes it possible to predict the size distribution of both the remaining and the passed material on a screen with several interacting screen planes has already been presented by the author. In addition, it is necessary to know the transport velocity of the material to be able to estimate the bed thickness and the capacity of the screening process.acceleration small time step friction force frequency gravity coefficient distance mass normal force radius of the circle followed by the screen surface uniform random value between 0 and 1 time velocity angle of friction angle determined with a random value inclination of the screen surface friction coefficient angle from the vertical axis angle from the vertical axis when random factor rotation speed average relative to ground when a particle returns to the screen surface particle when particles start to slide when a particle leaves the screen surface horizontal direction direction along the screen surface vertical direction direction normal to the screen surface A physical model which makes it possible to predict the outcome of the screening process has been developed by     The physical model presented here is based on the assumptions that single particles can slide (but not roll) along the screen cloth when friction is exceeded and that when the acceleration is great enough they leave the screen surface. These are assumptions made by several other authors, see the It is likely that there are other good ways to determine the transport velocity. For very thick layers of material, the diameters of the particles are insignificant compared with the thickness of the bed. Accordingly, it may be possible to determine the transport velocity by comparing the movement of the bed with a continuous flow. The edge effects between the bed and the screen cloth should be taken into account as well as the damping effects. The movement of a particle is probably influenced by both damping within the bed and damping between the bed and the screen surface. When the bed is thick, it is quite likely that the transport velocity varies with the distance from the screen cloth. When the material layer is very thin, the diameter of the particle is significant in relation to the thickness of the bed and a flow model is less suitable. For a thin bed, a mechanical model could probably be used without needing Monte Carlo simulation. Since the distance from the screen cloth is small for all of the particles, they presumably have approximately the same velocity. It is probably also possible to use discrete tools such as discrete element method (DEM) or FEM; CSIRO Mathematical and Information Sciences have developed a DEM model for simulation of granular flows. Thus, the interaction of each particle with other particles could be studied with a deterministic contact model. Newton's laws are then used to give a set of ordinary differential equations that marches forward in time, typically with 25 time steps per collision between individual particles. Simulations with DEM for mills and tumblers are described by To make it possible to estimate the transport velocity of the material along the screen, the movement of the screen surface was determined. A model was developed for a screen with a circular motion of radius The accelerations Since the screen surface is moving, the particles are likely to slide most of the time that they are in contact with the screen surface. The sliding is assumed to occur for one particle in the bed. The friction coefficient When the bed is in contact with the screen surface and moving in the When a particle has no initial sliding velocity ( The particles start to slide at time If the particle is moving in the negative  When the acceleration of a screen surface becomes great enough, the particles leave it. Equilibrium for a particle in the The acceleration of the screen surface in the negative The resultant velocity of the particle relative to ground Acceleration of the particle relative to ground in the When the particle leaves and returns to the screen surface Movement of a particle relative to the screen surface when The impact when the particle hits the screen surface is modelled as an inclined central impact. The initial velocity components when the particle starts sliding are treated separately. The same assumptions are made by In the The physical model presented here was put into a computer program. In this program, the positions in the The mechanical model described above is valid, provided we look at a single particle that interacts with a flat nonelastic surface. Nor is the particle influenced by the surrounding material (except for the assumption that it does not bounce). Several authors have tried to use a similar model to predict the movements of the particles on a screen. However, this model alone is not suitable to predict the transport velocity of a bed of particles along an ordinary screen. According to this model, the bed should even move backwards for certain combinations of inclination, stroke and frequency, see In reality, we have a bed of irregularly shaped particles that might roll and that bounce on each other numerous times. The surface is a cloth consisting of steel wires. Both the screen and the cloth also have natural frequencies that vary with the mass flow of material. These are all factors that are very difficult to control, however, they do influence the rate of transportation of the material. Therefore, Monte Carlo simulation is used to represent the influence on the particle from these somewhat random factors. The particle is assumed to collide with other particles, both when it leaves the screen, during the jump and when it returns to the screen surface. The value of the coefficients was determined with the help of the experiments ( When a particle leaves the screen, it is always assumed to collide with other particles or the meshes, which will change the velocity of the particle along the screen. Thus, the initial velocity for the jump When the particle is in the air, it can also collide with other particles. This is assumed to happen when When the particle lands on the screen surface it is assumed to collide with other particles and the meshes. Thus, When the Monte Carlo simulation is used, the predicted transport velocity of the particles along the screen varies. However, since the particles frequently jump along the screen, the average Experiments were conducted on a small Svedala screen to obtain the transport velocity of a bed of material along a screen. The length of the screen was 1.225 m and the width of the wire cloth was 290 mm. The aperture size was 5 mm. The rock material was a damp mixture of diabase and gneiss; it consisted of particles with a diameter between 8 and 11 mm. The bulk density of this material was The transport velocity of the material bed along the screen was measured with the help of a tracer (a piece of leather with an area of about The standard deviations of the measured transport velocities were calculated during the first set of experiments, when the inclination was 14.2° and the stroke 4 mm. These deviations were found to be small (they varied between 0.0079 and 0.0184). Consequently, fewer repetitions were made during the other experiments. All the average transport velocities from the experiments are provided in In addition, during a set of experiments described in The outcomes from the model were compared with the data from the experiments. The results are shown in Since the gravel formed a heap at the beginning of the screen during low frequencies, the velocity at 800 rpm is lower than it looks in the figures. Some small local deviations can occur, as in The influences of bed thickness and particle size on the transport velocity are assumed to be insignificant. With the assumptions that are made in the calculations of the mechanical model, the mass of the particles has no influence on the theoretical movement of a given particle. In addition, since the particles form a bed on the screen surface, the smaller particles and the larger particles cannot move independently of each other. In the experiments, when the transport velocity of the material was studied for different bed thicknesses, the change in it was negligible. Yet, if the bed were considerably thicker, the transport velocity might decrease slightly, since the damping on the movement of the particles would increase. A physical model previously presented by the author makes it possible to predict the outcome of the screening process according to the number of screen planes, size distribution and density of the rock material, feed rate, screen length, width and aperture size. To apply this model, it is necessary to know the transport velocity of the material along the screen. Therefore, a model has been worked out which makes it possible to predict the transport velocity of a bed of crushed rock material along a screen with a circular stroke. The model presented here can be used to determine the transport velocity according to the stroke, frequency and inclination of the screen. The model is based on common mechanical analysis. It takes into account both that particles leave the screen surface and those that slide along the surface. Since these calculations do not include the interaction between the particles, or the interaction between the particles and the screen cloth, Monte Carlo simulation has been used. Thus, the collisions of the particles are simulated with random numbers. The transport velocity of the particles can then vary significantly between different points in time. However, since the particles frequently jump along the screen, the average transport velocity does not vary much. To obtain an accurate prediction of the transport velocity, the average value from a few runs with the model is used. The results from the model have been compared with data from experiments. During these experiments the transport velocity of the material along the screen was measured with the help of a tracer that was put on top of the material bed. A wire cloth was used in these experiments. The velocity was measured for different frequencies, strokes and inclinations. The agreement between the model and the experiments is satisfactory. Professor Göran Gerbert is gratefully acknowledged for his support and valuable commitment to this research. I also want to thank the company Svedala Industri AB which has contributed all of the equipment and material that were used in the experiments. In addition, Richard Bern, M.Sc., and Torsten Åhman have helped me with useful advice as well as the practical experimental work. Svedala Industri AB, the National Swedish Sand, Gravel and Crushed Stone Association (GMF), the Swedish Road Administration (Vägverket) and the Development Fund of the Swedish Construction Industry (SBUF) are gratefully acknowledged for their financial support and information. See