The development of a solvent extraction process for the recovery of high-grade lanthanum oxide from a light rare earth (RE) (La, Pr, Nd) chloride solution is described. In a preliminary stage, process parameters and experimental conditions were explored in bench-scale experiments. The effect of variables such as nature and concentration of the extractants (di-2-ethylhexylphosphoric acid [DEHPA] and 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester [HEH(EHP)]), contact time, acidity and rare earth concentration in the extraction stage as well as the effect of the hydrochloric acid concentration in the stripping stage were investigated. The continuous counter-current experiments were carried out in a mini-battery unit of mixer-settlers. The final set-up was comprised of 22 stages: 8 for extraction, 8 for scrubbing and 6 for stripping. A high-grade oxide (>99.9% La2O3) was obtained with a yield superior to 99.9%.Rare earth (RE) elements have been increasingly used in the field of chemical engineering, metallurgy, nuclear energy, optical, magnetic, luminescence and laser materials, high-temperature superconductors and secondary batteries, catalysis, red phosphors, among others The extraction behavior of rare earths has been studied since the 1950s. There are several reports on the separation of rare earth elements in different media and extractants, such as: phosphoric, phosphonic and phosphinic acids, with 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (HEH(EHP)) also known as 2-ethylhexyl 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid (EHEHPA) and DEHPA being the most used DEHPA is one of the first and most extensively investigated extractants in the separation of rare earth elements. In recent years, studies have also been carried out with HEH(EHP) in view of some advantages of this extractant compared to DEHPA, like higher separation factors and easier stripping The extractants, HEH(EHP) (96.5 wt.%), commercialized under the trade name Ionquest 801® and DEHPA (97 wt.%), were supplied by Albright and Wilson Americas. The extractants were diluted in Exxsol® (purified kerosene), supplied by “Exxon Quı́mica”. All other reagents were of analytical grade and their solutions were prepared with distilled water. The rare earth chloride solution was supplied by “INB— The effect of the main process parameters, such as aqueous phase acidity, RE concentration, nature and concentration of the extractant on the rare earths extraction and the effect of the hydrochloric acid concentration on the rare earths stripping from the loaded organic phase were investigated. The experiments were carried out in mechanically agitated beakers containing equal volumes (20 cm The continuous experiments were carried out using HEH(EHP) as the extractant, in an acrylic mini-battery unit of mixer–settlers, supplied by Sonal-Polux, with mixers of 13 cm The Kevex system has a radioactive source of americium (Am DEHPA and HEH(EHP) are liquid cation-exchangers, the extracted metal being exchanged by the hydrogen ion in the hydroxyl group. These reagents are prone to form dimers through hydrogen bonding. In dilute solutions, the dimerization increases with the decrease of solvent (diluent) polarity The mechanism involved in the extraction of rare earths by DEHPA and HEH(EHP) was first described by Peppard and collaborators Mechanisms of rare earth extraction by DEHPA involving the formation of organic species like REX The batch experiments were carried out with the extractants DEHPA and HEH(EHP). The following variables were investigated: extractant concentration, acidity and concentration of rare earths in the feed solution, contact time in the metal extraction and stripping and hydrochloric acid concentration in the metal stripping. The results are presented in  The pH of the aqueous phase was investigated from 0 to 2.4. As shown by The total rare earth concentration was investigated from 30 to 89 g L The separation factors Nd/Pr remained practically constant and equal to 1.3, for the system HEH(EHP)–HCl, and 1.1 for the system DEHPA–HCl. As for Pr/La, the highest separation factors were obtained with HEH(EHP)–HCl. The separation factor was not significantly affected by the other variables investigated in the present study, remaining at 10.2 and 1.33 for La/Pr and Pr/Nd, respectively, with HEH(EHP) and 5.4 and 1.10 with DEHPA. The high separation factor between La and Pr is due to the absence of cerium and the higher basic character of lanthanum. Under all conditions, the extractions obtained with DEHPA were significantly superior to those obtained with HEH(EHP). These results will be discussed on the basis of the soft and hard acid/base theory As the extraction of the rare earths is higher with DEHPA compared to HEH(EHP), metal stripping, the reverse reaction, is expected to be relatively easier from the loaded HEH(EHP) as compared to DEHPA. This behavior is confirmed by the results shown in Based upon the superior separation factor Pr/La (equal to 10.2 with HEH(EHP) and 5.4 with DEHPA), the lesser extraction of the La and the easier stripping as compared to DEHPA, HEH(EHP) was selected for the experiments in a continuous mixer–settler battery. The batch experiments indicated that praseodymium and neodymium are more easily extracted than lanthanum. Then, the objective of the continuous experiments was to transfer praseodymium and neodymium to the organic phase, lanthanum being kept in the raffinate. In the continuous experiments, the variables studied were: number of stages in the extraction, scrubbing and striping steps; organic/aqueous ratio in all steps, HCl concentration in the scrubbing and striping; NH The extraction occurred in the stages 1 to 8. The aqueous solution containing the rare earth elements was fed at the eighth stage and the organic solution was fed in the first. The scrubbing solution (0.25 mol L The high efficiency of the proposed separation process is depicted in The utilization of solvent extraction to obtain high-grade, high-yield lanthanum oxide from a light rare earths mixture has been demonstrated. The process consisted in extracting Pr and Nd into 1.5 mol L The authors would like to acknowledge “INB—Indústrias Nucleares do Brasil” for supplying the sample and the support of