Aim
                  To describe here a technique of miniarthrotomy assisted percutaneous screw insertion for displaced Herscovici type B and C medial malleolar fractures.
               
                  Method
                  Incision was made centred over the superomedial angle of the ankle mortise, about half a cm medial to tibialis anterior. Arthrotomy was done and reduction obtained. Percuntaneously, two 4 mm cancellous cannulated screws were inserted through medial malleolus.
               
                  Results and conclusion
                  This approach allows direct visualization of reduction, removal of entrapped soft tissue and preservation of saphenous vein and nerve.Medial malleolus can fracture in isolation or in association with lateral malleolus or tibial plafond. Displaced fractures need reduction and fixation to restore ankle mortise. Open reduction and internal fixation is considered as the standard treatment of these fractures. Medial malleolar fractures have been classified by Herscovici et al based on the location of fracture into four types. Traditionally, medial malleolus fractures are approached through an anteromedial approach, a direct longitudinal incision centred over malleolus or a J shaped incision. The standard anteromedial malleolar approach is through a 10 cm long incision centred anterior to tip of medial malleolus, starting 5 cm proximally and curving to end 5 cm distal and anterior to medial malleolus tip. To circumvent the above mentioned problems and difficulties, we devised a technique of miniarthrotomy assisted percutaneous screw fixation for displaced Herscovici type B and C medial malleolus fractures. This method has been successfully used in three of our patient. We present one of the cases for illustration of the surgical technique. Based on our experience we recommend this technique in all cases of displaced medial malleolus fractures with fragment large enough to allow screw placement. An 18 yr old female had a twisting injury to her ankle while working in farmyard resulting in supination external rotation injury and bimalleolar fracture with grade 2 compounding of fibula ( Surgery was performed in supine position on a radiolucent table with a small bump under ipsilateral hip. A tourniquet was applied in mid thigh and inflated to provide a bloodless surgical field. A 3 cm incision, slightly curved was made centred over the superomedial angle of the ankle mortise, about half a cm medial to tibialis anterior ( Anteromedial approach, conventionally used for ORIF of medial malleolus fracture is associated with risk to saphenous vein and nerve at the proximal half of incision and posterior tibial tendon at the distal extent. Damage to saphenous nerve results in painful neuroma or numbness in its distribution. Injuring saphenous vein may result in venous insufficiency in foot. It is also an important site for cutdown in shock and venous grafts and therefore should be protected. Secondly, in this approach direct visualization of intraarticular fracture line is not possible and retraction or undermining of skin flap is needed for performing anterior arthrotomy which can cause marginal necrosis; given the precarious blood supply of skin in this area. Furthermore, making an incision directly over the fracture can lead to potentially catastrophic wound problems. Injury to saphenous nerve has been reported following ankle arthroscopy, fasciotomy' and release for tarsal tunnel syndrome. The incision for miniarthrotomy approach described here is situated just medial to tibialis anterior and away from saphenous nerve and vein, thus avoiding them. Tibialis posterior, sometimes found entrapped at fracture site, can be retracted away by subperiosteal placement of a homan retractor. The miniarthrotomy, done directly over the shoulder of malleolus, allows visualization of fracture site as well as superomedial articular surface of talus and tibia. Hence, with this approach, direct inspection of fracture site and removal of entrapped periosteum is possible. Reduction is done under vision. Joint is easily explored and lavaged. Articular surface of tibia and talus can be inspected for marginal impaction and osteochondral injuries. It also allows inspecting superomedial corner of the joint to ensure that screw is not intraarticular. The incision is very small; soft tissue stripping is minimal, therefore this approach is ideal for fractures with soft tissue damage as early fixation has been proven to be advantageous in these cases over delayed surgery, both in terms of wound healing and hospital cost. Treatment of vertical fractures, in which a horizontal screw perpendicular to fracture line is passed, can also be fixed by this method, but no such case has been treated by the authors. Marginal impaction commonly seen with this fracture can be managed with proximal extension of the incision, but this can put saphenous nerve and vein at risk. Miniarthrotomy assisted percutaneous screw fixation for medial malleolus fracture allows direct reduction of fracture and preserves great saphenous vein and nerve. It has a small scar, minimal soft tissue stripping and therefore, allows rapid recovery and is recommended for displaced Herscovici type B and C medial malleolar fractures. Written informed consent was obtained from patient for publication of this report and accompanying images. All authors have none to declare.