Online monitoring load parameters inside the ball mill is the key to improving the production quality and quantity of the mineral grinding process. In this paper, the experimental analysis of wet mill load parameter (MLPs) based on multiple channel mechanical signals is presented. A series of experiments is conducted to investigate the mechanical frequency spectrum characteristics in terms of different grinding conditions, such as only-ball, -mineral, or –water load change. Based on power spectra density (PowSD), multiple channel mechanical signals are interpreted for different MLPs, i.e., mineral-to-ball volume ratio (MBVR), pulp density (PD), and charge volume ratio (CVR), in detail. Experimental results show that the PowSDs of these mechanical signals are positively correlated with CVR and negatively correlated with MBVR and PD.
                  Further, the generation mechanism of these mechanical signals is qualitatively analyzed, and a new measurement method for the contribution rate of multiple channel mechanical signals, i.e., combination estimation index, is proposed. The results show the different contribution rates of these signals to various MLPs under varied grinding conditions. Appropriate mechanical channels for different MLPs must be selected to construct an effective MLP forecasting model.Operational optimization control for energy consumption reduction and economic efficiency improvement is an urgent problem for the mineral grinding process ( Zeng et al. were the first to use vibration signals to monitor and analyze MLPs ( The mechanical signals produced by ball mills have non-stationary and multi-component characteristics, and their features are difficult to extract in the time domain ( The mechanical vibration/acoustic frequency spectrum generated by the rotary operation of the ball mill is often used to construct the MLPF model. Single/multi-scale spectra based on high frequency resolution possess high dimensionality and strong collinearity. Projection to latent structure (PLS) and its kernel version (kernel PLS) can extract low-dimensional latent variables (LVs) to construct multivariate regression models for high-dimensional data ( This research aims to analyze the difference in multiple channel mechanical signals and to measure their correlation with MLPs and their contribution rate to the MLPF models. First, we focus on the differences in the power spectra density (PowSD) of multiple channel mechanical signals under different grinding conditions and the correlation analysis between MLPs and PowSD. Then, the multiple channel mechanical signal generation mechanism is qualitatively analyzed. A new metric approach for the mechanical signal contribution rate under different grinding conditions is proposed. Finally, several useful conclusions are provided. This paper is divided into the following sections. The ball mill is a heavy rotating device that relies on the impact and grinding between the ball load and mineral load to crush raw ore. As shown in Therefore, the multiple channel mechanical signals measured at different positions of the ball mill system contain different MLP information, which are redundant and complementary to each other. Therefore, these multiple channel mechanical signals should be quantitatively evaluated. This experiment is carried out on a laboratory-scale ball mill with a rotational speed of 42 r/min, a diameter of 602 mm, and a length of 715 mm. The diameter of the steel ball used in the experiment is 30 mm, and that of the iron ore is less than 2 mm. The sampling frequency of all eight channel mechanical signals is 51200 Hz. The sensor’s installation positions and types are as follows: (1) two accelerometers fixed on the mill shell surface for measurement of shell vibration signals; (2) two acoustic sensors located 2 mm apart from the mill shell surface for measurement of shell acoustic signals; (3) three accelerometers fixed to the left-side mill shaft seat for measurement of vertical vibration signals and the right-side mill shaft seat for measurement of vertical and horizontal vibration signals; (4) one acoustic sensor located 10 mm under the mill grinding zone for measurement of acoustic signals. These channels are labeled as CH1–CH8 as shown in In this experiment, multiple channel mechanical signals are synchronously acquired using NI’s DAQ9184 equipment, where CH1–CH4 are transmitted via Wi-Fi, and CH4–CH8 are transmitted by a shielded wire. The main computer adopts Labview to build a data acquisition and storage platform, which communicates with DAQ9184 through a USB line. In this study, mill load The MLPs, such as MBVR, PD, CVR, and ball-charge-to-volume ratio (BCVR) are calculated as follows: This experimental design includes 3 categories, 17 groups, and 1058 tests. Each category comprises numerous groups, and each group involves numerous tests. The relationship is “3 categories ->17 groups->1058 tests.” The corresponding MLP values are calculated using Eqs. This category involves 199 tests performed using five groups (B1–B5). A total of 527 tests are performed under this condition using five groups (M1–M5). This grinding condition includes 432 tests performed using seven groups (W1–W7). The curves of MLPs and mill loads are shown in The wet grinding experiments are performed using the following steps. First, the mill is charged with grinding balls, iron ore, and water. Second, after gently mixing the balls with iron ore and water, the mill is started and kept running for 60 s. Finally, the mill is stopped and added with one type of load to conduct another test in accordance with the experimental design in We consider group B1 as example to show the experimental process. The mineral and water loads are kept at 62.43 and 41.622 kg, respectively. The ball load increases from 101.05 kg to 498.07 kg with a step increase of 10.18 kg. A total of 40 experimental tests in special batch milling mode are conducted for this group. Based on the existing research results ( Given the non-stationary nature of the mechanical signals measured during the start and stop phases of the ball mill, the data of the former eight rotation periods and the last five ones are removed. The length of each processing period with FFT is the data of one revolution of the mill shell. The window function uses a Hamming window with a parameter of 1024 and data overlap length of 512. The variation curves of PowSD under different grinding conditions and its correlation with MLPs are given below. The relationship between the ball load and the PowSD value is obtained when only the ball load is changed, as shown in  The relationship between the mineral load and PowSD value when only the mineral load changes is determined as shown in When considering only the group M4, the following are observed ( The relationship between the water load and PowSD is determined when only the water load is changed as shown in Except for CH4, the following are obtained for the different channels ( Based on the above analysis, seven groups, i.e., B1, B2, B3, B5, M4, W4, and W7, are selected. Based on the mean values of the correlation coefficients, (1) the most relevant channels to the PowSD value are the ball load (positive correlation), MBVR (negative correlation), and the BMW load (positive correlation); (2) the least relevant ones are water load (negative correlation), PD (negative correlation), and CVR (positive correlation); (3) among all the channels, the most relevant channels for PD and CVR are CH3 and CH6, respectively. Therefore, different measurement channels should be reasonably connected for various MLPs. Given the uneven distribution of the samples in the above results, correlation analysis is performed under each group, namely, groups B2, M4, and W4, for each type of load change case. Similar to the results above, based on the mean value of the correlation coefficients, the following are obtained ( Thus, compared with the results in In this study, the number of multiple channel mechanical signals is recorded as We assume that the mechanical signals of The frequency spectrum data representing the The above modeling samples are divided into two parts: modeling and validation data. With the The process of constructing the MLPF model  Based on the above validation error, the contribution rate of predicted performance of the Based on the above structural parameter, the contribution rate Further, we denote Given all Notably, the smaller the value of Here, the following definition of Here, the smaller the From the above formulas, In this paper, the data for each grinding condition (category) are equally divided into five parts, of which the 1st, 3rd, and 5th parts are used as training data, the 2nd one is used as validation data, and the 4th one is used as testing data. Here, the MLPF model is constructed using a PLS algorithm that is suitable for high-dimensional spectral data.   Given that the contribution rates contain information and prediction performance indices, the following are observed ( Considering only the contribution rates of the prediction performance index, the following are obtained ( Therefore, in the case of only-ball-load change condition. (1) CH5 and CH7 are selected twice for MBVR; (2) CH1, CH6, and CH7 are selected twice for CVR. Therefore, the shaft seat vibration, i.e., CH7, is more effective in the only-ball-load grinding condition compared with the other channels.  Given the contribution rates of the contained information and prediction performance indices, the following results are drawn ( Considering only contribution rates of the prediction performance index, the following are noted ( Therefore, in the case of only-mineral-load change condition, (1) CH6 and CH1(CH2) are selected twice for MBVR; (2) CH6 and CH8 are selected twice for PD; (3) CH1(CH2) is selected twice for CVR. Given that no common channel is selected for three different MLPs, various channels should be selected to build distinct MLPF models.  Given the contribution rates of both the contained information and prediction performance indices, the following are deduced ( Considering only the contribution rates of the prediction performance index, Therefore, in the case of only-water-load change condition: (1) CH7 is selected twice for PD; (2), CH1(CH2) and CH7 are selected twice for CVR. Therefore, the vibration signal of CH7 is more effective in this condition compared with the other channels. This result is the same as that of only-ball-load-change condition. Estimation results under three grinding conditions  Considering the contribution rates of the contained information and prediction performance indices, the following are obtained ( Considering only the contribution rates of the prediction performance index, several results are obtained ( All the three load change cases show that (1) CH6 and CH1(CH2) are selected twice for MBVR; (2) CH1 are selected twice for PD; (3) CH6 and CH7 are selected twice for CVR. Therefore, different channel mechanical signals need to be selected for different MLPs. A further study should investigate how to optimize the selection of these complementary channel mechanical signals, which can be used to improve the predicted performance of MLPF model, and how to estimate these multiple channel mechanical signals in the actual industrial process with continuous milling mode. The measurement of eight channel mechanical signals is performed on a laboratory-scale ball mill. The signals are collected by vibration and acoustical sensors located on the mill shell, near mill shell surface, shaft seat, and near grinding zone. The sampled multiple channel mechanical signals are processed using FFT, and the relationships between the PowSD values and MLPs are analyzed. The channel mechanical signal contribution rate metric approach is proposed, and a new combination estimation index is defined. The following conclusions are drawn from the investigation. From the perspective view of the correlation between MLPs and PowSD, MBVR and PD are negatively correlated with PowSD, and CVR is positively correlated with PowSD. ① In the only-ball-load-change case, the correlation between PD/CVR and the shell mechanical signal is stronger than that among others; this correlation becomes weaker with the increase in MBVR. ② In the only-mineral-load change cases, MBVR/PD are highly correlated with eight channel mechanical signals, and this correlation is slightly stronger between MBVR and shell vibration compared with the others. ③ In the only-water-load-change case, the PD has a strong correlation with the shell mechanical signal, and the correlation between CVR and mechanical signals is not as significant as that with PD. From the perspective view of the combination estimation index of multiple channel mechanical signals, MBVR versus shell vibration and shaft seat vertical vibration, PD versus shell vibration, and CVR versus shaft seat vertical/horizontal vibration, have stronger relationship than that of other mechanical signals. Among these pairings, the strong relationships are as follows: ① in the case of only-ball-load change, MBVR versus shaft seat vertical/horizontal vibration signals and CVR versus shell vibration and shaft seat vertical/horizontal vibration signals; ② in the case of only-mineral-load change, MBVR versus shell vibration and shaft seat vertical vibration signal and CVR versus shell vibration signal; ③ in the case of only-water-load change, PD versus shaft seat horizontal vibration signal and CVR versus shell vibration and shaft seat horizontal vibration signal. Therefore, we need to select different channel mechanical signals for different MLPs and to develop an optimized combination. This action can effectively improve the generalization performance and applicability of the MLPF model in the actual industrial process. Further research should be conducted based on the industrial-scale ball mill.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work is partially supported by the  