The basic idea in this study is to look into the possibilities of reducing the heavy metal concentrations of fly ash by means of electrostatic precipitation. The utilisation of fly ash as fertiliser is hampered by its high concentrations of heavy metals, which are highly variable. Fly ash fractionation experiments were done using electrostatic precipitators at four power plants. Based on the results, the concentrations of heavy metal are at their lowest in the first collector chamber and highest in the last chamber. The concentration of cadmium in fly ash used as fertiliser can be reduced by as much as 70% by applying electrostatic precipitation fractionation. The removal of other heavy metals is not as efficient as that of cadmium. The results show that electrostatic precipitation is an adequate method in the fractionating of fly ash to be used as a fertiliser or soil amendment.Heating-energy plants and power plants in Finland generate approx. 400,000 In 2001, the utilisation rate of coal ash (84%) was considerably higher than that of peat and mixed fuel ash (43%). Wood fly ash utilisation rates have been considerably lower, being about 6% in 1997. The extraction of heavy metals from fly ash could enable its more efficient utilisation. Currently, it appears that manipulating the power plant fuel quality is the only method available for this purpose. This means that we must know the combustible fuel’s exact consistency, and which materials increase the ash-contained Cd concentrations, and then screen out the cadmium containing materials. Small amounts of fly ash are used as a fertiliser both in agriculture and in forestry. Generally, various ash types are more suitable as a soil improvement material than fertilisers in agriculture because the amounts of soluble plant nutrients in ash are fairly low. Peat ash is used mainly as a phosphate fertiliser and wood ash in liming of mineral soils and as a basic and support fertiliser in the growing of cereal crops. The liming and fertiliser effects of ash in the soil depend on the concentrations of calcium and nutrients in ash, on the solubility of nutrients in the ash and the soil, and on soil properties, e.g. acidity and nutrient concentrations ( Many substances contained in ash are in extremely poorly soluble forms. As the heavy metals (e.g. cadmium, lead, nickel) in ash are in very poorly soluble forms, it can be assumed that ash fertilisation will not result in significant heavy-metal impacts, e.g. in water systems, within a short period of time following fertilisation. In the long run, harmful heavy metals may, however, be released from ash in soluble forms and be thereby translocated into the vegetation ( Electrostatic precipitation ( The functioning of the electrostatic precipitator is significantly dependent on the properties of the fly ash to be collected. The amount and size distribution of the particles to be removed have a significant impact on the functioning of the electrostatic precipitator. Although the collection efficiency of electrostatic precipitator is more or less constant irrespective of the particle mass, the effective migration velocity is lower in the case of small particles. Due to the different charging properties of the particles, the collection efficiency of the particles varies as a function of particle size. The most difficult particle size from the point of view of separation is 0.2–0.5 The concentrations of heavy metal in ash can be reduced by fractionation of the finest ash particles from flue gases by means of multi-chamber electrostatic precipitators. The fractionating properties of the precipitator can be influenced by actions such as restricting and pulsating the current. Our research results have shown that heavy metals are concentrated in fine ash particles ( Depending on the boiler in question, ashes from bark fuelled and wood chip fuelled power plants (grate boilers) are divided into weight percentage categories as follows: bottom ash 70–90%, cyclone fly ash 10–30%, electrostatic precipitator fly ash 2–8% and dust emissions 0.1–3.0% ( The electrostatic precipitator can more effectively fractionate fly ash than the traditional methods when a mechanical classifier (cyclone) is connected before the ash reaches the precipitator. Properly designed and adjusted electrostatic precipitation is in principle, capable of separating that fraction of the flue gases, which contains the greatest amount of heavy metals but only a fraction of the overall amount of ash. The heavy metal concentrations in the main part of the ash can thus be reduced to below the maximum permitted concentrations. The fractionating trials with fly ash were performed at four power plants (A, B, C and D). The electrostatic precipitators were operated at the power plants at different voltage levels and samples were taken from the ESP’s various fields. All the samples taken from the electrostatic precipitators were taken from the ash feeders located under the electrostatic precipitators before the ash was fed into the silo. The samples were analysed for the presence of Pb, Cu, Zn, Ni, As and Cd using the graphite method and particle size determination was done using a Malvern device. Power plant A uses peat, forest chip and oil and the by-products of the mechanical wood processing industry as its fuels. The boiler capacity available to the power plant is 150 Power plant B uses two boilers, one a Pyroflow circulating fluidized-bed boiler (capacity 55 Power plant C is equipped with two power plant boilers. Boiler 1 is a fluidized-bed boiler with a fuel capacity of 267 The electrical power generated by power plant D’s fluidized-bed boiler plant is 77 During trials with power plant A’s electrostatic precipitator (trials 1–7) the fuel used was composed 49% peat and 51% wood fuels. The ash funnels of fields’ 1–3 of the electrostatic precipitator were sampled and analysed ( On the basis of the results, the Cd concentration was at its lowest in field 1 of the electrostatic precipitator and at its highest in field 3. This is due to the bigger fly ash particles accumulating in field 1 and field 3 containing ash with the smallest particles. The Cd concentration in field 1 varies within the range of 2.2–3.6 During trial runs, the electrostatic precipitator fields’ CBO ratio (cycle block in operation) was controlled within the range 0–12. The value 0 means that all the half-cycles of the field in question are currently active, and for example, the value 2 means that only a third of the half-cycles are active. Thereby the CBO value declares how many sequential half-cycles are closed, that is, how often the separator’s supply current is pulsated. In the present research, the CBO value was controlled by the Micro-Kraft controller whose main task is to keep the voltage near to the breakdown voltage. The most important thing is to be able to influence and change the properties of field 1 in the electrostatic precipitator. The first field enables the production of fly ash with heavy metal concentration levels that make it suitable as a fertiliser, for example.  The more field half-cycles there are deactivated, the lower the heavy metal content of the fly ash being generated. Cd concentration variations are also caused by fuel quality variations, in addition to the control itself, among other factors.   On the basis of this figure, the smaller-sized particles tend to be concentrated in the last field and the bigger-sized particles in the first field of the electrostatic precipitator. These small particles have the highest concentrations of heavy metals ( The cadmium concentrations were at their highest at power plant D ( According to the results the Pb, Cu and Ni concentrations are not problematic from the viewpoint of fractionation. With respect to these metals, fly ash can be used as a fertiliser without fractionation being necessary. Zn, As and Cd concentrations may exceed the permitted limit values and thereby cause problems for the fertiliser use of fly ash. With respect to these metals, the use of the fly ash as a fertiliser depends on the composition of the fuel and on the effectiveness of fractionation.  At power plant B, C and D, the electrostatic precipitator was controlled by adjusting the current value. Nevertheless, the electrostatic precipitator’s productive capacity depends on its voltage level. The proportion between the voltage and the current is not symmetric. When the current level was reduced by 50%, the voltage level merely decreased by 10–20%. In addition, there were considerably fewer breakdowns when the current’s setpoint value was reduced. These were the reasons why the average voltage value did not change to a sufficient degree between the various tests, so as to affect the electrostatic precipitator’s separation efficiency. This means that the various current adjustments made to the electrostatic precipitator did not have a significant effect on heavy metal concentrations during the trial runs. The chemical and physical properties of combustion-generated ash, as well as the resulting ash volumes, depend on the combustible fuels’ composition and quality. The combustion technology and the parameters applied, such as the temperature, combustion rate and air supply volumes, plus the boiler condition and the ash recovery systems also contribute to the resulting ash quality. In view of the fly ash properties, the ash separation equipment is of particular importance since its flue gas borne finest fraction is the crucial one, with regards to the ash composition. The fine particles of fly ash are frequently enriched by heavy metals. The extensive variation of its heavy metal concentration level makes fly ash problematic to use in practice. Fly ash may contain heavy metal concentrations that exceed the statutory limits for its use as a fertiliser. The most problematic heavy metal in wood-based fly ash is cadmium. In Finland, its currently valid statutory limit value is 3 In several cases, heavy metal emissions may be reduced by process technological methods. These include the minimisation of gas emission volumes, waste gas collection, the use of air recirculation, efficient use of raw materials and energy, and the use of raw materials and fuels with minimal heavy metal concentrations. In addition, the quality of fly ash may be manipulated through fractionation. Fractionation is geared towards separating the fractions with high fine particle densities and high heavy metal concentrations from the portion that is suitable for practical applications. The fractionation trials demonstrated that the heavy metal concentrations are at their lowest in field 1 of the electrostatic precipitator and at their highest in field 3. The heavy metals are enriched in the small particles of the ash. The fly ash particles having the biggest particle size accumulate in the first field while the last field has more of the ash-containing small particles. Due to this, the dust accumulated in field 1 contains less heavy metal. The concentrations of heavy metals in the ash are affected by properties such as the ESP voltage, fuel quality, and flue gas flow rate. Ni, Pb and Cu are the heavy metals, whose concentrations do not exceed the limit values imposed on wood and peat ash intended to be used as fertiliser. Fractionation is not necessary with respect to these metals considering the present permit conditions. However, fractionation clearly lowered the fly ash concentrations of these metals. Zn, Cd and As are the metals, whose concentrations may exceed the limit values. Cd and Zn can cause problems when burning wood whereas the problem in peat burning is As. However, the concentrations of these metals significantly depend on the fuel being used. Especially in the case of wood, Cd and Zn concentrations vary a great deal. In regard to Zn, fractionation always resulted in concentrations below the permit limit values. Cd was the most problematic metal of all and it was not always possible to bring its concentrations below maximum permitted concentrations even after making adjustments to the electrostatic precipitator’s settings. The cadmium concentrations of ash due to be used as a fertiliser can be reduced by as much as 70% by fractionating the ash using an electrostatic precipitator. The concentrations of the other heavy metals do not diminish quite as much. Arsenic concentrations were always brought to levels below the maximum permitted limits, but making adjustments to the electrostatic precipitator may be necessary if the arsenic concentration of the peat is high. If various by-products formed in industry or wastes are used as fuels, there is no single overall assessment available regarding the concentrations of heavy metals. Based on the test results obtained, it may be stated that electrostatic precipitators’ increasing CBO ratio values will decrease the separation efficiency in the case of fine particles. The heavy metal concentration level increases in accordance with the rising voltage. This is due to the fact that higher voltages can more effectively separate fine particles that also contain heavy metals. This means that electrostatic precipitators’ separation efficiency may be influenced by adjusting their maximum voltage setpoint values and CBO ratio values. These adjustments may decrease the efficiency of field 1, thus enabling the minimisation of heavy metal concentrations accumulating in the resulting ash. Correspondingly, heavy metal emissions with fine particle concentrations may be reduced by making the electrostatic precipitator’s final field more effective. No overall values can be given for the parameters of electrostatic precipitators used in fractionation. The heavy metal concentrations of the fuels used can vary a great deal and the fractionation required cannot be determined unless the fuel in question has been analysed.