Mineralization of flocculated bitumen emulsions allows producing bitumen powders, also referred to as Bitumen@SiO2 hybrid particles, that can resist storage in hard conditions, with a load up to 8 kPa at 50 °C during 20 h, without alteration of their morphology or release of their bitumen core. Thanks to the flocculation, final Bitumen@SiO2 powders are not highly pulverulent and allow transportation and handling of bitumen at ambient temperature without the need of water as it is the case for bitumen emulsions. This “water free” storage particularity exhibits the double advantage of reducing the cost of transport and of avoiding inhibition of bitumen adhesion at mineral aggregates through the presence of water, therefore rendering the bitumen its high quality of binder. The silica shell is responsible for the high storage stability and, when mixed with aggregates for end use of asphalt, as for example in pavement applications, serves as mineral charge to the bitumen, modifying the bitumen flow properties. Indeed, when heated at 100 °C and crushed, the capsules break releasing thus the bitumen. This suspension made of bitumen and silica shell fragments exhibits an interesting shear-thinning behavior that can be attributed to the presence of the remnant fragments. Indeed, when shell fragments have been transferred into a silicon oil, initially exhibiting a Newtonian behavior, the mixture of fragments and oil also exhibited a shear thinning rheogram demonstrating the effect of the silica shell fragments. The benefit of such a behavior modification is the possibility to reduce or avoid the usual addition of fillers. Passive adhesion has been tested by generating asphalt concretes with Bitumen@SiO2 powders and showed high stability. Mechanical tests of cylindrically shaped concretes demonstrate the outstanding mechanical resistance and the high potentiality of the proposed bitumen powders.Bitumen is a component issuing from the distillation of a natural product, crude oil, and exhibiting a very high viscosity (in the range of 10 In the present study, the aim was therefore to show the possibility of: i) synthesizing powdered bitumen made of bitumen@SiO The cationic surfactant tetradecyltrimethylammonium bromide (TTAB) (Molecular weight, Mw = 336.39 g.mol Among the three studied bitumen-in-water emulsions, two of them have been graciously provided by Laure Boucard and Vincent Gaudefroy from IFSTTAR [ Emulsions were observed using an inverted optical microscope, Zeiss Axiovert X100, and the images were recorded using a Hitachi video camera and Scion image program. The emulsions size distributions were obtained using a Malvern Mastersizer Hydro MS2000 granulometer. The measurements were performed at room temperature in distilled water. The collected scattering intensity as a function of the angle was transformed into a size distribution using the Mie theory. The size distribution was characterized in terms of Sauter diameter D (corresponding to the surface-average diameter) and polydispersity P: The native emulsions contained well dispersed droplets ( As bitumen emulsions did not bear too acidic conditions, we chose to proceed mineralization by a two-step process and to pre-hydrolyze the TEOS. So, in a plastic beaker, 5 g of water at pH = 2.2 and 0.74 g of TEOS were mixed under magnetic stirring at 850 rpm for 2 h in order to pre-hydrolyze the TEOS. In a second 50 mL beaker, 2 g of water at pH 2.2 and 9 g of E1f were mixed and then the pre-hydrolyzed solution was added under manual stirring. The tubes were then placed on the rotating device at 20 rpm for 3 days. Each tube contained 20.5% by weight of bitumen. For the second mineralization step, in a beaker, 23 g of deionized water and 21 g of hydrochloric acid at 37% by weight were mixed in order to obtain a solution at a pH of 0.2 (optimum pH for the manufacture of dense/Euclidian silica). The already mineralized suspension (suspension after 1 In a beaker, the distilled water and TTAB (see Mineralized emulsions have been dried using the spray dryer 4M8-TRIX from ProCept. For E1@SiO Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) observations were performed on the produced powders by means of a SEM HITACHI TM-1000 apparatus, to visualize the capsules surface. All the samples were gold coated prior to observation. In order to observe the thickness of the shells, cryo-SEM was used. The powder was re-dispersed in distilled water and then a few drops of the suspension were placed in a crucible. This was then immersed in the liquid nitrogen in order to freeze it. The specimen was cut in the SEM preparation chamber to break the sample that has then been observed directly (no replica). If by chance, the cut led to a capsule rupture, the observation of the shell thickness was possible. The equipment necessary for the preparation and transfer of samples (ALTO 2500 from GATAN) is directly adapted to SEM (FEG 6700 F from JEOL). The sample was slightly sublimed inside the SEM preparation chamber, in order to remove a thin layer of water to better observe the silica shell. It was then covered with a gold-palladium conductive deposit under a stream of argon with a current of 10 mA. Then it was inserted into the observation chamber of the microscope on a plate cooled to -150 °C. For the observation after capsules rupture, a Hitachi S4500 SEM operating at 10 kV was used. When required secondary electrons were used with non-coated samples in order to distinguish bitumen that is carbon-rich from the silica shell fragments. A thermal gravimetric measure was used to determine the amount of inorganics in the powders. The experiments were performed by weighting a sample of powder before and after a thermal treatment at 600 °C in an oven. The treatment duration corresponded to the delay until no mass evolution could be detected and the sample had completely lost its black color. Bitumen being an organic compound, its mass loss can be observed between 200 and 600 °C while the inorganic remains until 1000 °C. So, by registration of the mass loss, the proportion of inorganics could be determined. To confirm the silica content, elemental chemical analyses were performed through standard flame spectrophotometry by the Crealins company with a ICAP 6000 from ThermoFischer. In order to compare the viscosity between the pure bitumen grade 160/220 and the bitumen powder manufactured from this bitumen, rheology measurements were carried out on a rheometer of TA instruments In order to be stored and conveyed, the bitumen powder must be placed in a one-ton bag with an area of approximately 1.21 m For this, the bitumen powder (about 3 mL) was placed in a 20 mL syringe (sealed with silicone) and the piston (without seal) was positioned on the powder. The joint was previously removed. A weight of 208 g was then deposited over the piston and the whole was put in an oven regulated at 50 °C. As previously, the aim of the experiment was to test the resistance of the powder to an applied pressure of 8 kPa (the pressure applied by one big bag) at 50 °C for 20 h. After the experiment, the powder was removed from the syringe and examined to determine if it resisted compression. Indeed, there was almost no loss on the syringe and the recovered powder was initially compact but the grains could easily be separated showing that the capsules were intact. To test the coating properties of the bitumen powder, experiments were carried out on a small scale (asphalt mix of 1 kg) using as an aggregate a mixture of different La Noubleau granular slices ( The aggregates were heated to 125 °C and the bitumen powder was added without heating (60.2 g, representing 5.7 wt% of bitumen powder in the asphalt concrete). Using the Kitchen Aid, a first kneading was performed. However, the mixture, brown in color, seemed dry, with no shine or sticky effect showing that bitumen has not been released. So, it was heated again at 145 °C and then re-kneaded. The asphalt concrete changed color from brown to black, but no gloss or sticky effect was noticed. A final heating at 160 °C overnight was carried out followed by kneading. The asphalt concrete seemed correct (shine and sticky effect). For E2f@SiO Four types of mixes (of small quantities, 40 g) were obtained from different types of aggregates. To do so, 37.4 g of aggregates (limestone, flint, quartzite or diorite 6/10) and 2.65 g of powder (representing 5.55% by weight of bitumen) were weighted in a metal bowl and then placed in an oven at 160 °C for 1 h. Manual stirring with a spatula was then applied. The coating of the aggregates being difficult, the bowl was returned to the oven at 160 °C for 20 min and further stirring was applied until the aggregates were coated. The bitumen powder was able to coat the 4 types of aggregates. Asphalt concrete is intended to be placed on a road and therefore it has to withstand the compression due to road traffic. Once the asphalt manufactured, it has therefore to be transformed into a cylindrical test piece in order to test its resistance to compression. To address the produced material performances, the hot mixture (1 kg) was placed in a mold and was then compacted using a Controlab press in order to obtain a test piece. A pre-compaction was first performed, then a force of 60 kN was applied for 300 s. The assembly (mold and compacted asphalt concrete) was then allowed to cool in order to recover the test piece. The different test pieces were then characterized by measuring their dimensions and masses. They were then compressed axially and crushed at a predetermined speed until rupture to determine the maximum crushing force they can bear. This test aimed at determining the compressive strength of the mixes. Note that these tests exhibit the same characteristics of the so-called Duriez tests but as they were only conducted in air rather than in air and in water, we prefer avoiding the term Duriez test in the following. Asphalt is subjected to climate variations, it is therefore useful to check the bitumen adhesion on aggregates. Passive adhesion tests were carried out following the NF EN 15626 standard in order to determine whether bitumen is removed or not from the aggregates in presence of water and under heating. Asphalt was put in demineralized water heated at 60 °C for several hours (24 h in the present case). Then the sample was visually examined to detect the possible stripping of bitumen. Emulsion E1 has been mineralized with TEOS precursor using the two-step procedure described in the materials and methods section. After drying a fine powder has been obtained ( From pure geometric considerations, the silica volume fraction can be written as followed: The mineralized emulsions have been dried using a spray dryer as described in the materials and methods section. The final products E2f@SiO We can observe the mineralization of agglomerates of bitumen droplets with a surrounding silica shell exhibiting a thickness around 150–200 nm. The amount of inorganic content present within the powders has been assessed using thermo-gravimetry (determination of the remaining weight fraction at 600 °C in an oven as described in the experimental part). It is equal to 17–18 wt% and 16 wt% for the E2f@SiO After this treatment the powders were compacted but not destabilized and they kept their flowable character ( The mechanical resistance at 50 °C is required for storage; however, for use, bitumen should be released at higher temperature and under shear to regain his adhesive behavior. It is then worthy investigating the flow properties of the final product after bitumen release, corresponding to the material in contact with aggregates. To get insight into the flow behavior, we performed rheology investigations on the initial bitumen and on this novel bitumen containing the inorganic broken shells (see Materials and methods section for the experimental conditions applied to break the shells and The viscosity versus the shear rate is reported in After release, the bitumen has to act as a binder therefore, we tested the E2f@SiO As two antagonistic effects were sought after, that is to say a high mechanical and thermal resistance for storage together with a possible release for application, we had to optimize the binding process to really reach the desired adhesive and shining aggregates coated with bitumen. A first process (process 1) made the use of a first heating temperature of the aggregates (145 °C) into which the E2f@SiO To go further and test the resistance of the asphalt concretes, we have produced bulky cylindrical shaped compacted asphalt concretes ( The first information is that E2f@SiO The first important result is that the compacted monolithic asphalts generated from the E2f@SiO In a first step bitumen emulsions have been advantageously flocculated through a depletion process. Secondly, making use of sol-gel chemistry at almost neutral pH while employing a silicate solution as inorganic precursor, the flocculated emulsions have been mineralized at the outer surfaces of flocs, and a final spray drying technique is employed to both complete the silica polycondensation and promote an efficient drying of the final bitument@SiO Beyond the final Bitumen@SiO This work has been performed through the funding of the