When the data information of target domain is very limited, it is difficult to establish the accurate model to analyze the target problem. For the safety control modeling problem, this paper develops a new Bayesian network (BN) transfer learning strategy for the thickening process of gold hydrometallurgy. First of all, the safety control modeling problem in this process is analyzed deeply. When the data information of abnormality is insufficient, the safety control modeling problem is transformed into the BN transfer learning problem. Furthermore, the new BN transfer learning strategy is proposed, which includes the structure and parameters transfer learning methods. For the structure transfer learning, by integrating the common structural information of multiple sources and the useful information of target, the final structure of target is determined. For the parameters transfer learning, by distinguishing the similarity of multiple sources, the parameters of target are obtained by the fusion algorithm. Finally, the proposed method is verified by the Asia network and it is applied to establish the safety control model for the thickening process of gold hydrometallurgy. The simulation results demonstrate that the proposed method is effective and owns the better performances than the traditional modeling method.As an important technique of refining gold in the industrial process As an intelligent machine learning method, Bayesian network (BN) provides us a new way to solve the problem, which can fuse the expert knowledge and data information to establish the model effectively. For the safety control problem in the thickening process of gold hydrometallurgy, the paper Under this situation, the transfer learning and domain adaptation inspire us from a new angle to solve the problem. By collecting the useful information of related sources whose abnormality data have been collected and/or the model has been established, the problem of target can be solved by utilizing the related information effectively. Transfer learning has been applied in the various fields and obtains the extensive attention, such as, prediction The transfer learning survey based on the computational intelligence methods has been provided by the paper As far as we know, no research results focus on the safety control modeling problem for the thickening process of gold hydrometallurgy when the data information of target is too scarce to establish an accurate model. Therefore, inspired by the expert knowledge and transfer learning, this paper proposes a new safety control modeling method for the thickening process of gold hydrometallurgy based on the BN transfer learning strategy. In this process, the safety control problem is analyzed based on the existing research results. When the data information of target is very limited, the safety control modeling problem is transformed into the BN transfer learning problem. Furthermore, a new BN transfer learning strategy is proposed. By extracting the common structural information (CSI) of multiple sources and integrating the useful information of target, the final structure of target can be obtained. The parameters of target can be learned by fusing the parameters of multiple sources owning the different similarities and target. Finally, some simulation results are shown to verify the effectiveness of proposed method. The proposed transfer learning strategy is applied to establish the safety control model for the thickening process of gold hydrometallurgy when the dosages of flocculants are in the different conditions. The simulation results imply that the proposed approach is effective and owns the better performances than the traditional modeling method which uses the limited data information of target. The contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows. On the one hand, this paper proposes the new safety control modeling method based on the transfer learning for the thickening process of gold hydrometallurgy. On the other hand, this paper proposes the new BN transfer learning strategy. By integrating the CSI of multiple sources and the useful information of target, the final structure of target is determined. By distinguishing the similarity of multiple sources, the parameters of target are obtained by the fusion algorithm. The proposed method owns the generality, and it can be applied to solve the similar problem in the other research backgrounds. The remaining sections of this article are organized as follows. Based on the existing research results on the safety control for the thickening process, the problem to solve in this paper is analyzed deeply in Section The simplified schematic diagram of thickening process can be depicted by  In the BN transfer learning setting, a domain In this section, the new BN structure transfer learning strategy is proposed to obtain the structure of target. It needs to be considered that how to apply the useful information of multiple sources and the limited information of target to learn the structure of target. The specific process can be depicted by  Based on the related research results on the BN structure learning from the related tasks It assumes that Based on the research results in the papers Finally, based on the above analysis, Eq.   Although the available information in the target is limited, it reflects the valuable information of target in a way. Therefore, in the process of searching for the target structure, the CSI and the information in the target are all utilized. The posterior probability of target structure given the target data and CSI can be expressed as the following form: When the available useful information of multiple sources and target are in the different situations, the different strategies need to be applied to learn the structure of target. When searching for the CSI of multiple sources, three cases need to be considered.  As the description of  For this case, when searching for the CSI, Eq.  For this case, when searching for the CSI, Eq. The cases two and three are the special situations of case one. When searching for the structure of target, two cases need to be considered.  For this case, the prior structural information of  For this case, when searching for the structure of target, Eq. The case five is the special situation of case four. In this section, the new BN parameters transfer learningmethod is proposed to improve the performance of target parameters learning, which is shown in     The target and the multiple sources may only own the local same structures. The parameters of source nodes which own the different parent node sets (PNS) compared with target structure are less likely to have the similar probability distribution to the target. Therefore, the structures of multiple sources are compared with the searched structure of target. If the PNS of one node are the same between the source and target, the parameters of this node in this source will be used to transfer learning. Otherwise, it is not considered as the information for transfer learning. For each node in the target, all the sources need to be evaluated respectively by the same way.   The weights of alternative sources for the fusion algorithm are calculated by the following equality:   Similar to the structure transfer learning method, when the available useful information of multiple sources and target are in the different situations, the different strategies need to be applied to learn the parameters of target. Three cases need to be considered.  As the description of  For this case, firstly, the structures of multiple sources need to be learned by the sufficient data information from multiple sources. Other steps are the same with the case one.  For this case, when the PNS of one node in the source are the same with the target, the parameters of this node are used to transfer learning directly. This operation replaces the step 2 in Section The cases two and three are the special situations of case one. To express the description of symbols in this paper in a clear way, the symbols in this paper are summarized in  Firstly, to demonstrate the feasibility of proposed method, this section presents the experiments on the well-known Asia network  To verify the proposed BN transfer learning strategy, three related sources models are constructed. The structures of three related sources models are shown in   To show the influence of data size from the target on the performance of proposed method, the simulation results of different data sizes from the target are shown in  For the BN parameters learning, the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence is used to evaluate the performance of parameters learning and measure how closely the learned parameters with the true parameters. The smaller the value of KL divergence is, the better the learned parameter is. The parameters of target are learned by the proposed BN parameters transfer learning method in Section  For the proposed BN parameters transfer learning method in Section  The numerical experimental results on the Asia network show that our proposed BN transfer learning method is effective to learn the model of target and owns the better performances than the method which only uses the target data. The proposed BN transfer learning strategy is applied to establish the safety control model for the thickening process of gold hydrometallurgy on the semi-physical simulation platform. Hydrometallurgy semi-physical simulation platform has been designed and constructed by our team during the past few years. Based on mechanism analysis and actual data, the simulation platform can simulate the hydrometallurgical process including the thickening, cyanide leaching, washing and cementation sub-processes. The new optimal control, monitoring and fault diagnosis methods can be verified by this simulation platform. The hardware structure diagram of system can refer to the related research results Based on the analysis in Section   In the Example one, the collected target data information is only from the condition that the dosage of flocculants is too low. The learned model structure of target is the same with   Based on the simulation results in the Examples one and two, it can conclude that the proposed BN transfer learning strategy is effective to establish the safety control model for the thickening process of gold hydrometallurgy. It owns the better performance than the traditional modeling method which only uses the limited data information of target. This paper develops a new safety control modeling method based on the BN transfer learning strategy for the thickening process of gold hydrometallurgy. First of all, by analyzing the existing research results on the safety control for the thickening process of gold hydrometallurgy, the problem to solve is transformed into the BN transfer learning problem. Furthermore, a new BN transfer learning strategy is proposed, which includes the structure transfer learning and the parameters transfer learning. Finally, the experimental results demonstrate that the proposed BN transfer learning strategy is effective and owns the better performances. The influences of data size of target and DSST on the transfer learning are analyzed and compared. Finally, the proposed BN transfer learning strategy is applied to establish the safety control model for the thickening process of gold hydrometallurgy. The simulation results demonstrate that the proposed method is effective to establish the model when the dosages of flocculants are in the different situations and it owns the better performances than the traditional modeling method which only uses the limited data information of target.  This work was supported by the