China possesses the largest resource of rare earth elements (REE) in the world. The reserves of rare earth ores (REOs) in China consist of 40% of total global reserves. China has dominated world rare earth production since the 1980s. Currently, the rare earth supply in China mainly comes from the Bayan Obo REE–niobium–iron deposit situated in Inner Mongolia, the ion adsorption rare earth deposits in Jiangxi, Guangdong, Fujian, and Guangxi, the Mianning bastnaesite deposit in Sichuan and the Weishan bastnaesite deposit in Shandong, and the placer monazite and xenotime deposits in Guangdong and Hainan. In this chapter, China’s rare earth resources, production, mines, and ore mineralogy are introduced and beneficiation techniques including flowsheets, flotation, and leaching reagents, and development are discussed.China has the largest resource of rare earth elements (REE) in the world. According to the United States Geological Survey Mineral Commodity Summaries in 2014 and 2015, rare earth reserves in the world are around 130 to 140 million tons (Mt) (rare earth ores (REO)), and reserves in China are 55 Chinese rare earth resources are mainly divided into four types of deposits consisting of 95% of the total rare earth resources of China. They are the Bayan Obo REE−iron (Fe)−niobium (Nb) ore deposit in Inner Mongolia, the Mianning REO deposit in Sichuan Province, the Weishan REO deposit in Shandong Province, and the weathered crust elution deposited REO (ion adsorption-type rare ore) mainly found in Jiangxi Province but also distributed in Guangdong, Fujian, and Guanxi provinces. In addition, Southeast China beach placer deposits contain monazite and xenotime, which occur along the coastal area of west Guangdong and Hainan. The average grade of placer deposits in China is 0.5–1.0 China’s rare earth has a light north, heavy south pattern ( China’s rare earth production mainly takes place in Inner Mongolia, Sichuan, Guangdong, Jiangxi, and Fujian. Inner Mongolia accounted for 50–60% of China’s total rare earth concentrate output during the past decade. Sichuan Province was the second leading rare earth concentrate producer, accounting for 24–30% of production. The remaining output was from the provinces of Fujian, Guangdong, and Jiangxi, which are important for their production of heavy rare earths ( Rare earth production in China remained relatively low during 1990–1992 but started increasing in 1994. In 1995, as the leading producer, China produced 48,000 China has a complete industrial system covering mining, ore dressing, smelting, and separating, as well as equipment manufacturing, material processing, and end product use, and it can produce over 400 varieties of rare earth products for more than 1000 specifications. Exported rare earth products from China include rare earth oxides, rare earth salts, and rare earth metals and alloys ( Light rare earth mines are mainly located in the Baotou area in Inner Mongolia and other northern areas such as the Weishan Shandong Province, as well as in the Mianning Sichuan Province, whereas the ion absorption-type middle and heavy rare earth mines are mainly in the southern areas in the Jiangxi, Guandong, Fujian, and Guanxi provinces. Situated in Inner Mongolia on the northern edge of the North China Kraton, 135 The chemical and mineralogical compositions of the Bayan Obo ore are complex; they contain 71 elements and 170 minerals. More than 90% of rare earths in the ore exist in independent minerals and about 4–7% of rare earths are dispersed in iron minerals and fluorite. A total of 15 different rare earth minerals are found, the principal ones of which are bastnaesite ((Ce,La,Nd)(CO Most of the minerals in Bayan Obo ore, particularly in the banded ore, are very fine to extremely fine grained. Most iron, rare earth, and Nb minerals are closely associated with fine grain sizes. The grain sizes of rare earth minerals are in the range of 0.01–0.074 The Bayan Obo mining area is shown in The Mianning rare earth deposit was found between 1985 and 1986. It is an alkaline pegmatite carbonate-type rare earth deposit. The industrial reserve was 1 Bastnaesite is the main rare earth mineral; other rare earth minerals such as chevkinite and parisite are also found in the ore. Other associated minerals are barite, fluorite, iron, and manganese and small amounts of galena. The ore is divided into granule and powder types. The granule ore has a coarse grain size, usually >1 The deposit was found in 1958 and the exploration was finished in 1975. The industrial reserve was about 2.55 It is a quartz–barite–carbonate-type REO deposit. The main rare earth minerals are bastnaesite and parisite, and the main associated minerals are barite, calcite, quartz, and fluorite. The grain sizes of rare earth minerals are coarse, in the range of 0.04–0.5 China’s weathered crust elution-deposited REO (ion adsorption REO) is the most unique rare earth deposit in the world. It was found in 1969 in Jiangxi Province and has two types: light rare earth and The deposit was considered to be formed by many years of weathering of granite and effusive rocks. It has the characteristics of shallow ore body coverage, soft ore, and a very fine grain size. The 80–90% of rare earths in the state of positive hydrated ions are adsorbed on the surface of clay minerals such as kaolinite, halloysite, and illite. The ore is relatively low-grade, generally only 0.05–0.5 Compared with domestic and abroad single bastnaesite ores, Bayan Obo ores are much more difficult to upgrade because of the similar physical and chemical properties of minerals and the close association of rare earth minerals with iron and gangue minerals. A lot of experimental studies by many research institutes in China on the rational exploitation of the Bayan Obo rare earth deposit have been carried out since the late 1950s, and more than 20 beneficiation techniques have been reported. Significant progress on rare earth mineral processing was made in the early 1990s, and mixed and separate rare earth concentrates with a high grade and high recoveries were obtained from the iron ores. These flowsheets were developed: calcination-magnetic separation–flotation, flotation–low magnetic separation, low magnetic–flotation–high magnetic separation, and low magnetic–high magnetic–flotation separation processes. Among them, the flowsheet of low-intensity magnetic separation (LIMS)–high-intensity magnetic separation (HIMS)–flotation ( After being crushed, the ore was ground to 90–95%, passing 0.074 At the rare earth flotation circuit, the feed grade of REO was 9.78–12%. Flotation was performed at low alkaline conditions (pH 9) and the flotation reagents contained naphthyl hydroxamic acid as the collector of rare earth minerals, sodium silicate as the depressant of silicates, and J Different flotation reagents were tested. Earlier, only a rare earth concentrate with a low grade of REO 15–20 In 1986, a more selective collector, H205, as the representative of aromatic hydroxamic acid, was successfully developed using naphthalene as a raw material through sulfonated-hydrolysis-alkali fusion hydroxylation to prepare intermediate naphthol and then acylation reaction and a condensation system with hydroxylamine (–NH–OH) to make a naphthyl isobutyl group hydroxamic acid. The rare earth grade and recovery could be improved significantly using a new generation of rare earth mineral collector H205 in the presence of NaSiO The coexistence of massive and powdered black sludge, Fe–Mn-weathered amorphous aggregates slime, greatly influences the floatability of rare earth minerals. Three types of flowsheets, gravity concentration, magnetic–gravity concentration, and gravity concentration–flotation, were used industrially ( In the gravity concentration flowsheet, the ore was ground to 62%, passing 200 mesh and hydro classified into four size fractions, then processed by shaking tables separately. Three different grade bastnaesite concentrates were obtained with the grades of REO 30, 50, and 60 In magnetic–gravity separation, after being ground the ore was concentrated by LIMS and HIMS. A magnetic concentrate with a grade of REO 5.64 In the gravity concentration-flotation flowsheet ( The Weishan rare earth flotation plant was built in 1982. The ore was ground to 65−75%, passing 200 mesh and rare earth minerals were floated with one rougher, three scavengers, and three cleaners. In the 1980s, oleic acid and kerosene were used as the collectors of rare earth minerals under acidic condition (pH 5) using sulfuric acid. After 1991, as the ore grade dropped to 3–4 Because rare earths in the ore mainly occur in the state of hydrated ions adsorbing on the surface of clay minerals, they cannot be effectively concentrated by conventionally physical methods but must be extracted by ion exchange. The adsorbed rare earth ions are not dissolved in water or ethyl alcohol but are dissolved in electrolyte solutions of NaCl, (NH In the 1970s, NaCl was used as the leaching solvent to dissolve rare earths by ion exchange. However, a high solvent concentration and long leaching time were required. Also, solvent consumption and processing costs were high. Meanwhile, the grade of rare earth concentrate reached only REO 70 The process was usually run in a cement bath at a volume of about 10–20 However, the bath leaching technology led to environmental problems because of mining-related deforestation and the discharge of tailings and was ultimately replaced in the early 1990s by the heap leaching procedure ( The in situ leaching process, also called solution mining, was studied in the 1980s to resolve ecological environmental problems of exploitation caused by bath/heap leaching technology In in situ leaching technology, leaching holes at a depth of 1.5–3 It was reported that two key technical problems must be solved during in situ leaching. One is how to avoid the leaching reagent solution spreading around the wells, causing environmental pollution; the other is how to recover the leachate so as to optimize the leaching rate. The technology was used in Wenfeng, Jiangxi Province. More than 200 China possesses the largest resource of REE with reserves of 55 In the past 15 Situated in Inner Mongolia on the northern edge of North China, the Bayan Obo REE–Nb–Fe deposit is a giant polymetallic ore deposit of hydrothermal origin. It is the world’s largest known rare earth deposit, with a reserve of 35 The Sichuan Mianning REE deposit found between 1985 and 1986 is an alkaline pegmatite carbonate-type rare earth deposit. The industrial reserve is 1 The Shandong Weishan REE deposit, a quartz–barite–carbonate-type deposit, was found in 1958; exploration was finished in 1975. The reserve of rare earth is about 2.6 Chinese ion adsorption REO occupies over 1 In the Banyan Obo mine the flowsheet of LIMS–HIMS-flotation was considered the most successful one to be used in industrial plants and was developed in the 1990s; the HIMS cleaner tailings containing most rare earth minerals were processed by flotation to obtain rare earth concentrates. By one rougher plus one scavenger and two cleaners of flotation, two rare earth concentrates, the first at a grade of REO 55 In the Mianning rare earth mine, the gravity concentration–flotation flowsheet ( In the Weishan rare earth mine, the flowsheet of flotation was used to recover rare earth minerals with one rougher, three scavengers, and three cleaners at the weak alkaline condition of pH 8−8.5. A rare earth concentrate with a grade of REO The rare earth elements in China’s ion adsorption ores cannot be effectively concentrated by conventionally physical methods and usually are extracted by ion exchange method. Since the 1980s (NH