Deep drilling is becoming the direct and the most efficient means in exploiting deep mineral resources, facilitating to understanding the earthquake mechanism and performing other scientific researches on the Earth's crust. In order to understand the limit of drilling depth in the Earth's crust, we first conducted tests on granite samples with respect to the borehole deformation and stability under high temperature and high pressure using the triaxial servo-controlled rock testing system. Then the critical temperature-pressure coupling conditions that result in borehole instability are derived. Finally, based on the testing results obtained and the requirements for the threshold values of borehole deformations during deep drilling, the limit of drilling depth in the Earth's crust is formulated with ground temperature.In the efforts to utilize hot dry rock geothermal energy in exploiting deep oil and gas resources, deep drilling (depth The details of the testing system are described by During the tests, the hydrostatic pressure (equal axial and confining pressures) was applied to the specimen, and no pressure is imposed on the borehole. Each specimen was heated to the target temperatures gradually. At each step, the levels of temperature and pressure were kept constant for a certain period, during which the deformation of borehole was measured. The tests for each specimen lasted for more than 400 h.  Eq. The above-described testing results also reveal that the borehole in the granite fails when the temperature and the hydrostatic pressure are above 500 °C and 125 MPa, respectively. At this stage, the borehole gradually collapses.  The borehole deformation in the granite experiences different stages due to the increasing temperature and pressure. When the temperature and the hydrostatic pressure are below 400 °C and 100 MPa, respectively, viscoelastic deformation is dominant in the borehole. In this stage, the borehole diameter tends to decrease. The borehole remains stable and the granite specimen does not fail. Viscoelasto-plastic deformation appears when the temperature increases from 400 °C to 500 °C and the hydrostatic pressure from 125 MPa to 150 MPa. In this stage, the borehole diameter increases due to the creep of granite. Small pieces fall off the borehole wall and the borehole starts to collapse. In the final stage, both the borehole radial deformation and the axial deformation of rock specimens experience accelerated creep, resulting in failure of the specimens. The critical temperature and pressure at which the borehole fails are listed in The test results show that the strain of borehole before collapsing is as large as 20% under high temperature and high pressure. Based on the maximum principal strain theory and Eq. Given an average rock unit weight of 25 kN/m Eqs. The limits of drilling depth given by Eqs. Based on the critical ground temperature and pressure coupling condition with respect to borehole instability, the parameters for borehole deformation thresholds during deep drilling are obtained and the limit of drilling depth in the earth crust is formulated with ground temperature. The testing results in this context show that borehole deformation under high temperature and high pressure experiences steady and accelerated creep stages, which increases exponentially with the temperature and hydrostatic pressure. The temperature has almost the same impact on the borehole deformation as the hydrostatic pressure does. The borehole is instable when the temperature increases to 500 °C and the hydrostatic pressure increases to 125 MPa. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial supports by the