The particle surface properties are essential for understanding froth flotation, particularly for the evaluation of various chemical or reagent effects.
                  Dynamic Vapor Sorption (DVS) is used in the pharmaceutical industry for the evaluation of surface properties and has to the knowledge of the authors not been used for applications in mineral processing. This paper describes an evaluation of industrial ore samples using DVS.
                  Four samples (feed, CuPb concentrate, Cu concentrate and Pb concentrate) from each of the Cu – Pb flotation processes in the Boliden and Garpenberg concentrators, Sweden, were analyzed by DVS in order to investigate if this technique could be used to estimate differences in their hydrophilicity. The DVS measures the water uptake as a function of the relative humidity (%RH) at constant temperature.
                  For both series of four samples, it was found that the DVS-data are in precise agreement with the flotation theory on hydrophobicity (indicated by differences in water uptake). The feed material, without any collectors, adsorbed more water compared to the CuPb bulk concentrate, which in turn adsorbed more water than the Cu concentrate. The lead concentrate on the other hand, which had been depressed by dichromate and should be more hydrophilic, showed a higher adsorbance of water than that of the CuPb concentrate.
                  The repeated measurements of three sub samples from one of the ore samples gave a mean value and an estimated standard deviation of 0.13 ± 0.01%. This shows that the method gives highly reproducible results and that the differences between the samples had high significance. This also shows that the DVS method can serve as a useful complement to traditionally used contact angle or capillary absorption-based measurement methods, especially when screening for new flotation reagents on industrial ore samples.In froth flotation crushed and ground mineral particles in aqueous suspension are mixed with one or more collectors. These are typically amphiphilic molecules with polar and non-polar end groups. Under the right conditions, the polar ends of the collector molecules can selectively bind to the surface of certain minerals, thus leaving them with a surface more or less covered with non-polar molecular tails. This renders these mineral particles more hydrophobic than mineral particles where no collector has attached. These differences in hydrophobicity between the different minerals forms the basis of the flotation process. The choice of collector reagent, together with the chemical conditions in the pulp, affects the degree of hydrophobicity on selected minerals ( In a flotation process, a number of flotation steps are utilized and in the case where several valuable minerals have been floated and are to be separated from each other, a so-called depressant may be used. A depressant can act in two ways, first to selectively inhibit the adsorption of collector to ascertain mineral, or secondly to restore the hydrophilicity of particles which have floated in a previous step. Consequently, the depressed minerals will either go to the middling product for further processing or end up as a final concentrate. Both the action of the collector and depressant is strongly pH dependent. In this way, different minerals may be separated by manipulating their surface properties ( Dichromate is one of those depressant reagents, which can be used for the separation of copper and lead. The depressant is still used in the Garpenberg and Boliden concentrators, both owned by Boliden Mineral. The process employs bulk flotation of copper and lead with PAX (potassium amyl xanthate) and in a second stage galena is depressed by using sodium dichromate ( The problem with using dichromate is that it is both carcinogenic and an environmental hazard. Since ECHA (echa.europa.eu) has put dichromate on the authorization list, the ongoing research for finding a suitable alternative reagent has been intensified ( In order to identify new suitable depressants for the inhomogeneous mineral samples collected in the concentrators, one way is to compare the hydrophobicity between two identical ore samples treated with different reagents. In practice, there are several ways to compare the hydrophobicity of related materials. Such methods typically entail measuring the contact angle either on a flat surface of a mineral or as capillary methods e.g. the capillary rise method on a compacted powder or the capillary pressure method, ( Other factors that affect the contact angle measurements could be the surface roughness, particle size or shape and the heterogeneity of the ore sample. The selection of liquids has also been shown to be sensitive to the equipment design ( In this work Dynamic Vapor Sorption, DVS (sometimes also referred to as Gravimetric Vapor Sorption, GVS) was used for characterization of wettability properties of minerals. The DVS method is an analytical method where the adsorption of water (or solvent) onto the particles, in the form of a powder, is measured as a function of the relative humidity (or the solvent partial pressure) at a constant temperature. In the pharmaceutical industry this technique has been used for a long time to measure the moisture sensitivity of active pharmaceutical ingredients, but has to the knowledge of the authors not been used for applications in mineral processing ( The purpose of this work was to investigate the effect of the depressant collector system on the surface properties of mineral samples. Four samples from different locations of the Cu/ Pb- flotation circuits of two concentrators were evaluated with the DVS method and compared with each other. The samples were also analyzed with XRPD and the particle size analyzed by laser diffraction for obtaining a better understanding of the results from the DVS measurement. Four pulp samples were collected from each of the flotation processes in Garpenberg and in Boliden. The samples were (a) ore feed to the 1st flotation step, (b) the CuPb concentrate, before Cu- Pb separation, (c) the Cu-concentrate, which floated in the Cu-Pb separation step and (d) the Pb concentrate, which was depressed with dichromate in the Cu-Pb separation step. The samples were filtered and dried in an oven at 80 °C. A DVS-instrument is basically a very sensitive balance, with a sample cup and an empty reference cup, which are both flushed with an extremely well controlled moist gas stream. The %RH of the gas stream is obtained by careful mixing of two gas streams, one with 0 %RH and one with 100 %RH. The mass flow control meters of the two gases are extremely accurate giving very exact %RH-values. The %RH obtained is also checked with a dew-point sensor. The instrument used in this paper is a Surface Measurement Systems DVS Advantage instrument, in which the balance can operate at a constant temperature between 5 and 60 °C. The temperature is controlled by keeping the whole assembly in a closed cabinet with very sensitive temperature sensors and heaters/coolers. It uses a sample amount between 1 and 150 mg (5–70 mg in this work) with a sensitivity of 0.1 µg and, if water is used, with a percent relative humidity between 0 and 98 %RH and an accuracy of ±0.5 %RH. The instrument was used to measure the water uptake as a function of the relative humidity at 25.0 °C. A % Partial Pressure Method was used. The sample weight was monitored while the sample was exposed to different relative humidities (%RH). The sample was first dried with dry nitrogen gas for 1 hour before the 1st cycle. The sample was then allowed to adsorb water in the 1st sorption/desorption cycle, where the %RH was increased stepwise up to 95 %RH (10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90 and 95 %RH) and then down to 0 %RH again. The sample was once again dried for 1 hour at 0 %RH, before another identical cycle, the 2nd sorption/desorption cycle, was run. In both sorption/desorption cycles, at each step, the sample was kept at the set relative humidity until dm/dt <0.002%, over a period of 5 min (a lower value of dm/dt will increase accuracy and lower the sample hysteresis, at the expense of increased measuring time). The particle size distribution data for the collected ore sample were obtained with a Malvern Mastersizer 2000, equipped with a Hydro 2000S presentation unit. A sample RI of 2.000 was used as well as a dispersant Miglyol, with an RI of 1.449 and an absorption value of 0.05. Measurements were performed by adding each sample directly to the presentation unit, which was stirred at 2500 rpm. Three measurements were performed on each sampling and each ore sample was sampled four times, two with and two without prior ultrasonication. Each ore sample was thus measured 12 times. From the analyses mean values of different particle size parameters were calculated with and without ultrasonication. XRPD-analyses were performed at 22 °C on a PANalytical X’Pert PRO instrument, equipped with a Cu, long fine focus X-ray tube and a PIXcel detector. Automatic divergence and anti-scatter slits were used together with 0.02 rad Soller slits and a Ni-filter. Samples prepared at 22 °C were ground in an agate mortar and were then smeared out on cut Silicon Zero Background Holders (ZBH). In order to increase the randomness of the samples they were spun during the analysis. All samples were analyzed between 2 and 80° in 2θ. The full detector capacity of 256 channels was used and all samples were scanned continuously with a 2θ step size of 0.007° and a measuring time of 39.27 s per step. The XRPD-data for the ore samples are given in The data were matched against the JCPDS-database (PANalytical ICDD PDF-2 database). The minerals in In When the water uptake levels of the different ore samples are compared, it is obvious that there are significant differences between them. In fact, one ore sample (the Garpenberg Cu concentrate in One way of comparing the data is by simply listing the amounts of water taken up at 95 %RH, as is presented in The results are in precise agreement with flotation theory considering that Potassium Amyl Xanthate (PAX) modifies the surface properties to be more hydrophobic and consequently the floated product should be more hydrophobic compared to the non-treated feed material. For each cleaning step in a flotation plant the expected results is to have an incrementally higher grade at the expense of recovery. Therefore, it is logical that Cu- concentrate is more hydrophobic than the CuPb- concentrate. Also, a concentrate containing a mixture of galena and chalcopyrite is expected to have different hydrophobicity than any of the pure constituent. The addition of potassium dichromate to the Cu-Pb separation step renders the Pb-fraction more hydrophilic, thus depressing it successfully. In order to obtain information about the significance of these data the Garpenberg feed ore was analyzed several times; first five consecutive analyses were performed on the same sample placed in the DVS-balance and then two new samples were analyzed, one twice and the other one three times. Since each analysis consists of two cycles, this altogether constitute 20 analyses to compare. The moisture uptakes at 95 %RH for all of these analyses are compiled in It is noted that the moisture uptakes are generally higher for the ore from Boliden than for the one from Garpenberg. This can be explained by the smaller particle size of the ore from Boliden (see Even though the discussion above is straightforward and the results logical for industrial minerals, it is important for anyone performing DVS-analyses to have some knowledge about the moisture uptake processes, which may occur. These include: Surface adsorption and pore filling, Dissolution/Deliquescence, Hydrate formation, Crystallization of glass. Surface adsorption correlates strongly with the specific area of similar samples and normally corresponds to a small water uptake, unless for very fine particulate samples. For a non-micronized sample it is usually much less than 1%. If a material is porous, water may also be taken up into pores. One reason for the generally larger moisture uptake in the Boliden ore samples compared to those from Garpenberg is that they are ground finer, as was shown by laser diffraction (see As expected, ultrasonication gives slightly more fines and correspondingly a slightly larger surface area. The samples were measured with and without ultrasonication, to reduce loose (mainly electrostatic) agglomeration. Such agglomeration will decrease the particle size but has no effect on surface area. However, if ultrasonication breaks up more strongly bonded agglomerates, the specific surface area will also increase. Mild ultrasonication should not be able to break up strong agglomerates of such hard materials as ore particles, so the higher surface areas obtained after ultrasonication is likely to be an artifact because the specific surface area is calculated from the particle size distribution. Hence, the standard deviations given for the specific surface areas are likely to be underestimated. If a sample is highly soluble in water it will at some point during the DVS-analysis start to take up large amounts of water and start to dissolve. This is usually referred to as deliquescence. If a sample, which is not soluble in water, shows large uptakes of water from a certain %RH and upward, one should suspect that it either becomes hydrated, or that it contains an impurity, which is deliquescent or forms one or more hydrates. Sulphide ore samples will rarely contain salts, being more than slightly soluble in water. This is clearly shown by the XRPD-analyses of the samples in this investigation. Samples which have been processed through flotation cells will contain even less water-soluble salts, since they have been processed in water, which will already have dissolved most of these salts. Ore samples may however contain minerals, which may give off and take up water, such as zeolites or clay-type minerals. This may also be a reason for the generally larger moisture uptake in the Boliden ore samples compared to those from Garpenberg. The Boliden feed ore contains much more chamosite (a clay mineral) than the Garpenberg feed ore. The standard procedure for performing DVS-analyses is to run two consecutive sorption – desorption cycles. The reason for this is that some samples may exhibit phase transitions (e.g. hydrate formation) during the analysis and if this occurs during the first cycle, the second cycle will usually looks different. This can be a neat way of identifying metastable crystal modifications, but is observed most frequently when a sample is water soluble and partly amorphous. When such a sample is analyzed it will take up water, but at some point during the first cycle, it may suddenly give off some of its water. This is the point at which the amorphous material softens and crystallizes. In the second cycle this phenomenon will usually not be seen (unless in cases where a hydrate is formed, which during desorption becomes amorphous when dehydrated). When the sorption and desorption curves for a cycle are compared, there is always various degrees of hysteresis effects, meaning that water which has been taken up in the sorption cycle is given off at lower %RH than it was taken up. This is due to the dynamic nature of the DVS-analyses. If one allows the analysis to take a much longer time to be completed (lower dm/dt), the hysteresis effects would become much less apparent. The results of the study clearly show the usefulness of using the DVS technique for detecting the differences in wettability between samples collected from an industrial flotation circuit. The main benefits of the method are that it is suitable for inhomogeneous powders, which are common in industry, while still allowing reliable measurements with low sample amounts. This is especially useful for screening of new flotation reagents, evaluating their performance and impact on surface properties of minerals. The samples in this investigation were also analyzed by XRPD for constituent minerals. Furthermore, the particle size distribution of the systems was analyzed by laser diffraction to evaluate possible differences arising from the particle sizes of the ore samples. It was found that the samples from the Boliden concentrator had higher wettability compared to the samples from Garpenberg. The Boliden samples were shown to have a higher specific surface (Malvern) and to contain a clay mineral, which also affects the DVS results in the same direction as a higher wettability does. Knowing that different minerals and particle sizes have influence on the results of wettability tests, one should exercise caution with drawing conclusions, when comparing samples from different mines. The high accuracy and reproducibility of the DVS analysis, however, makes the technique a good complement to commonly used methods based on direct or indirect contact angle measurement, such as the Washburn capillary rise test or the sessile drop test method. The main drawback of using the instrument in comparison with the Washburn or similar techniques is the operating time, approximately one or two samples a day can be processed. The result is also only an indirect measure of the contact angle, and therefore a comparative study is recommended. In this work, the particle size distribution was measured by laser diffraction, but for further investigations one should also conduct evaluations using other techniques such as the BET surface area method and compare and correlate these with the DVS measurement results. The DVS instrument is a relatively costly investment, which possibly should not be made unless the instrument is used on a daily basis. Due to its benefits, however, it is an interesting tool for in-depth evaluation of flotation processes and mechanisms, either for research and academic purposes, or for more detailed understanding of industrial process performance and troubleshooting. Since the results are repeatable with small amounts of industrial materials, the method is particularly well-suited for screening of new flotation reagents, including both depressants and collectors. The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. Nils- Johan Bolin, Mr. Jan- Eric Sundkvist, Mr. Paul Kruger and Dr. David Degerfeldt for their help during preparation of this manuscript. The authors also wish to acknowledge Boliden Mineral and RISE for permission to publish this paper, as well as