The strip mining method is preferred to the extraction of coal resources under surface buildings, water bodies and railways in China. Strip pillars with appropriate widths play a significant role in controlling stress distribution and surface subsidence. The strip mining activity at Tangkou coal mine in Eastern China is taken as the engineering background in the paper. In order to evaluate the general strip pillar design of mining area no. 430, an innovative analytical model is developed to determine the yield width and the elastic core width of the strip pillar under the stress superimposition effect in this paper. In the proposed model, the strip pillar is divided into the yield zone and the elastic core zone on the basis of the existing reasonable structural division of the strip pillar. Based on the Drucker-Prager criterion which considers the influence of the intermediate principal stress, the formulae of the partitioned width of the strip pillar are inferred. The yield width of the strip pillar with one-sided goaf is derived based on the limit equilibrium theory and the Drucker-Prager criterion. The yield width of the strip pillar with two-sided goafs is obtained based on the stress superimposition method. The elastic core width of the strip pillar is obtained by the semi-inverse method with the consideration of mine pressure and the application of the Drucker-Prager criterion. As a case study, the proposed model is used to determine the yield width and the elastic core width of the strip pillar at Tangkou coal mine in China. Comparing the obtained results with the in-situ measurement data, it can be concluded that the proposed analytical model is effective in calculating the yield width and the elastic core width of the strip pillar. In order to evaluate the effects of the parameters in the proposed model on the yield width of the strip pillar with one-sided goaf and the elastic core width of the strip pillar with two-sided goafs, a detailed sensitivity analysis is conducted based on the actual data at from Tangkou coal mine.There are substantial coal resources left un-mined under surface buildings, water bodies and railways in China. The extraction of these coal resources is termed ‘three-body’ coal mining and has become a major problem in the mining industry. Several methods of estimating the stability of the strip pillar have been introduced previously. Generally, the methods used to evaluate the stability of the strip pillar are divided into four types, including the empirical method, The partial mining method discussed in this paper refers to a type of mining in China, which is termed the strip mining method. For this type of mining method, the main purpose is to control the surface movement and deformation of the surface to protect buildings and infrastructures above the coal mine. On the premise of ensuring the coal pillar stability, controlling surface deformation and improving the production efficiency should be considered in the strip pillar design. In this paper, an innovative analytical model focusing on the different zones in the strip pillar and judging the instability process of the strip pillar is proposed and its application in Tangkou Coal Mine in eastern China is discussed. Tangkou coal mine is located in the central part of China and is near Jining city, Shandong province. The strip pillar adjacent to the 4301 panel attached to mining area no. 430 is selected to perform the case study in this paper. The purpose of the strip pillar design is to use modern scientific and engineering practices to develop a safe underground mine in which the ground surface movement and deformation of the ground surface will be controlled to protect the surface buildings. This pillar design method is based on pre-mining estimations of surface subsidence. In strip mining, the overlying strata basically move integrally. According the previous studies, the plastic soften phenomena will be occurred when coal material will be yielded and deformed. Based on its width, the strip pillar can be normally categorized as the yielding strip pillar (YSP), the critical strip pillar (CSP) and the stable strip pillar (SSP) as schematically shown in At present, the problems in the size designing of the strip pillar are mainly in two aspects: (a) The Mohr-Coulomb yield criterion was adopted in the calculation of the yield zone width which ignored the influence of the intermediate principle stress and made the result conservative. At present, the Regarding the values of If σ To simplify the selection of the parameters in the In practical engineering, the intermediate principal stress coefficient Equation By substituting Equation To simplify the calculation and avoid significant errors, the following assumptions are made. (a) The strip pillar is homogeneous, isotropic and continuous. The distribution of the vertical stress in the strip pillar with one-sided goaf is given in Normally, the length of the strip pillar is larger than its width in strip mining. A cross section along the vertical bedding plane of the strip pillar is used to create a model ( By combining the boundary conditions, In field practice, if the solid coal at one side of the strip pillar has been mined out, the mining pressure will be released, thus Hence the D-P criterion can be described by Equation Substituting Equation When the solid coal at both sides of the strip pillar is extracted, the distribution of the vertical stress in the strip pillar is totally different. After the solid coal at both sides of the strip pillar is mined out, if the strip pillar remains stable, the vertical stress in the strip pillar has a saddle shaped distribution. In general, the strip pillar in strip mining consists of the yield zone and the elastic core zone. Therefore, the superimposed stress value in the strip pillar becomes higher if the strip pillar has a smaller size. To ensure the stability of the strip pillar, the ratio of the elastic core zone width ( To further study the loading condition of the strip pillar, it is necessary to obtain the yield width of the strip pillar by the stress superimposition method. Furthermore, it provides the basis of the rational width of the strip pillar in strip mining. Due to the symmetry distribution of the elastic core zone in the strip pillar, half of the strip pillar is studied. The procedure of calculating the yield width of the strip pillar with two-sided goafs by the stress superimposition method is detailed as follows ( It should be noted that the load-bearing capacity of the strip pillar can be changed due to stress superimposition when the solid coal at both sides of the strip pillar is extracted in strip mining. In field practice, the mining widths at both sides of the strip pillar are not necessarily consistent to each other. Therefore, the elastic core width in the middle part of the strip pillar is calculated according to different mining widths at the two sides of the strip pillar. The distribution of the superimposed stress is described in According to the stress re-distribution theory, the vertical loading applying to the strip pillar is re-distributed when the goaf forms. Most of the loading is transferred to the effective load-bearing zone in the strip pillar, which is the elastic core zone. Meanwhile, the elastic core zone is in a triaxial compression loading condition. As shown in When the coal mass is in an elastic state, the front abutment stress induced by strip mining obeys the parabola attenuation law according to similarity experiment results. The horizontal stress distribution in the elastic core zone is considered as uniform due to the relatively small ratio between coal seam thickness and mining depth. Based on the actual loading condition in the elastic core zone of the pillar (i.e. an approximately parabola type), the vertical stress distribution in the right part of the elastic core zone is given in According to the distribution characteristics of the abutment stress, the values of the constants in Equation Based on the classical elastic theory, the relation between the stress and the stress function is given in Equation Equation Equation In order to satisfy the requirement of Equation Substituting Equation The general expressions of the stress components are given in Equation The values of the parameters Overall, the expressions of the stress components are given in Equation When Similarly, the critical width of the elastic core zone, In general, the elastic core width of the strip pillar in strip mining can be obtained by substitute Equations The sensitivity of the calculated yield zone width and elastic core zone width to the parameters in the proposed mechanical model is analyzed based on the mechanical parameters at Tangkou Coal Mine ( The yield width of the strip pillar with one-sided goaf is obtained based on the limit equilibrium method and the If the other parameters are kept constant, the yield width of the strip pillar with one-sided goaf decreases almost linearly as the lateral support stress increases ( The elastic core width of the strip pillar with two-sided goafs is obtained based on the If the other parameters are fixed, the change of the elastic core width of the strip pillar against the coefficient of the lateral pressure follows an approximately linear tendency ( In this section, the proposed model is validated based on the in-situ measurement at Tangkou coal mine. As a result of the strip pillar adjacent to the 4301 working face attached to mining area no. 430 is selected to perform the case study in this paper. The geotechnical condition at Tangkou coal mine is taken as an example to calculate the yield width and elastic core width of the strip pillar by the proposed approach considering the effect of stress superimposition. In addition, based on the Tangkou coal mine data, the proposed model is compared with the available equations given in the literature. Commonly, in-situ measurements are used for the validation of an analytical model. Borehole pressure gauges and multipoint extensometers are respectively used to measure the vertical stress and the lateral deformation of the strip pillar respectively at from Tangkou coal mine. The installation depths of the six borehole pressure gauges are 1, 3, 6, 7, 8, and 10 m, respectively, and the installation depths of multipoint extensometers are (1.2, 3.5 m), (4.5,7.5 m), and (9.5, 12 m), respectively. The yield width and the elastic core width of the strip pillar with two-sided goafs under the effect of stress superimposition are derived based on the analytical model of this paper. It should be noted that the obtained results by the proposed approach can be used for the reasonable design of the strip pillar dimensions at from Tangkou coal mine, which improves the safety and efficiency of the mining operation. The calculation procedure is given as follows. (a) The yield width of the strip pillar with one-sided goaf ( If the strip pillar needs to maintain its long-term stability, the ratio between the elastic core width of the strip pillar and the strip pillar width should not be below a certain limit (i.e. In this section, the result of the proposed approach is compared with those of comparable analytical models given in the literature based on the Tangkou coal mine data. Yield zone model Determining the extent of the yield zone is not only the basis of determining the width of the effective load-bearing zone (i.e. the elastic core zone) but also gives an important parameter in other relevant theoretical calculation since the yield zone in the strip pillar loses its load-bearing capacity. Many theoretical models have been proposed to evaluate the extent of the yield zone in previous studies. The results are summarized in  The third category model is essentially the general form of the Wilsion yield zone width equation. The basis of this model is to assume the stress state in the yield zone is constant with increasing mining depth. This assumption is reasonable for the design of strip pillars in thin coal seams but could be unsuitable for the determination of the yield width of a relatively high coal pillar. To simplify the solution process, A. H. Wilison considered the stresses in the Elastic core zone model To establish the mechanical model of the elastic core zone in strip mining, an appropriate failure criterion is selected in this paper. The effect of the intermediate principal stress is considered based on the fact that the elastic core zone is in a triaxial stress state. The intermediate principal stress has an impact on stability of the structure. In essence, the intermediate principal stress improves the deformability and the strength of the rock mass. Compared with the external performance of the lateral pressure, the confining pressure has an internal performance. Hence the D-P strength criterion is selected to describe the failure condition of the elastic core zone and optimize the design theory of the core zone. An innovative analytical model is developed in this study to calculate the yield width and elastic core width of the strip pillar. To determine the yield width of the strip pillar with two-sided goafs under the stress superimposition effect, the yield of the strip pillar with one-sided goaf is first calculated based on the limit equilibrium theory and the The results of the sensitivity analysis indicate that the strip pillar height has direct influence on the yield width of the strip pillar with one-sided goaf. On the contrary, the lateral support stress has a negative impact on the yield width of the strip pillar with one-sided goaf. The friction coefficient and cohesion between the strip pillar and the roof or the floor changes against the yield width of the strip pillar with one-sided goaf in an inverse logarithmic tyoe, while the intermediate principal stress coefficient of the strip pillar with one-sided goaf changes with its yield width in a secondary parabola type. The strip pillar height, the coefficient of lateral pressure and the peak stress in the elastic zone have direct influence on the elastic width of the strip pillar with two-sided goafs. Moreover, the relation between the stress in the elastic core zone and the elastic width of the strip pillar with two-sided goafs is inverse logarithmic. To validate the proposed model, the obtained results are analyzed and compared with the available in-situ measurement data at Tangkou coal mine. The results show that the proposed model has good agreement with the in-situ measurement data. The proposed methodology in this paper provides a consistent and simple way to calculate the yield width and elastic width of the strip pillar, which contributes to the optimized design of the strip pillar dimensions. Therefore, this approach can be a significant tool to improve the safety and performance of the strip mining method. Additionally, the monitoring provides important theoretical reference for strip mining in similar geological conditions. This research has been supported by the Future Scientists Program of “Double First Rate” of