In this research, carbothermic reduction of molybdenite in the presence of sodium carbonate as sulfur scavenger by mechanical activation and heat treatment was studied. Mechanical activation of the mixed powders of molybdenite, graphite and sodium carbonate with 1:4:2 mol ratios were carried out by ball milling process under argon atmosphere for 10,20,40,50 and 70 h. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of samples revealed that no reaction occurred in the mill even after 70 h of milling. In order to study the mechanism of carbothermic reduction of molybdenite in the presence of sodium carbonate, simultaneous thermal analysis (STA) under heating rate of 10, 15 and 20 °C/min was carried out on the activated samples. XRD patterns and thermodynamic analysis of reaction products indicated that carbothermic reduction of molybdenite in the presence of sodium carbonate was advanced through the formation of intermediate phases Na2MoO4, MoO2 in which the final products were Mo2C, Na2S. For separation of these two products, leaching by HCl and hot water was used. The XRD patterns of leached products were shown that molybdenum carbide with high purity was produced. The kinetics of reduction reaction was investigated and it was found that mechanical activation lowered the reaction temperature and activation energy.Power law Power law Power law Avrami-Erofeev Avrami-Erofeev Avrami-Erofeev One-dimensional diffusion Diffusion control (janders) Diffusion control (crank) Mample (first order) Second order Contracting cylinder Contracting sphere The main source for production of molybdenum and its carbide is molybdenite (MoS The reducing agent carbon is used to reduce MoS According to this reaction, carbothermic reduction of zinc sulfide in the presence of sodium carbonate is done and sodium carbonate is a good sulfur scavenger by the formation of Na According to my information, no research work was found in the literature on the carbothermic reduction of molybdenite in the presence of sodium carbonate. So, in this research, the effect of sodium carbonate and mechanical activation on the reduction of molybdenite with carbon was investigated. Molybdenite and sodium carbonate powders with the 99% purity from Merck Company and graphite (99% purity) from Uni Chem Company were used. To prevention molybdenite from oxidation during milling or thermal analysis and heating, Argon gas with 99.9% purity was used in all examinations. For mechanical activation of samples, a planetary ball mill with the stainless steel vial was used. The ball to powder ratio in all samples was chosen 15:1 and was constant in all times of milling. For prevention oxidation of molybdenite during milling process, the argon gas was used in the vial. The milling times were 10, 20, 40, 50 and 70 h. Thermal analysis system with a TGA-DTA system was used to study the reduction reaction of samples from room temperature to 1200 °C with three heating rates of 10, 15 and 20 °C min Coats-Redfern method was used to calculation the kinetic parameters and study the reaction mechanism. Thermodynamic data were calculated and used by the HSC software. The starting material and products were analyzed by employing Philips X-pert X-ray diffractometer with PW 2273 tube and Cu Kα radiation with scan rate 0.04  In this study, the Williamson-Hall method was used to determine the grain size and strain in the activated molybdenite powders [ Where θ is the Bragg angle and β is the widening of the Bragg XRD peak. In the other word, β is the line broadening at half the maximum intensity (FWHM), k is a constant that has the value of k = 0.9, d is the grain size of particles and λ is the wavelength of the instrument [ The effect of mechanical activation on molybdenite grain size was analyzed by Williamson-Hall method according to As shown in As shown in The DTA and TGA results for the carbothermic reduction of molybdenite in the presence of sodium carbonate for un-milled and activated samples after different times were indicated in According to these figures, by mechanical activation, a shift in the peaks to the lower temperatures was occurred. As evidenced in According to XRD pattern for mixtures with the molar ratio of MoS The X-Ray results indicated the presence of Na At the end of reduction reaction of carbothermic reduction of molybdenite in the presence of sodium carbonate, the final products are molybdenum carbide (Mo  It can be seen in Coats-Redfern equation can be described as [ f(α) and g(α) for some reaction models are listed in By plotting the left side of Eq. The set of Arrhenius parameters of carbothermic reduction of molybdenite in the presence of sodium carbonate for unmilled and 70 h milled samples is shown in The theoretical values of the pre-exponential factors for the solid state reactions were accepted in the range of 10  The results for the mechanical activation of different molar ratios of Na In In order to study the kinetic model of reaction with the molar ratio of 1:4:4, the Coats-Redfern method (Eq. The conclusions of this paper can be summarized as: By mechanical activation of the mixed powder of MoS Mechanical activation for 70 h decreased the grain size of molybdenite from 327 to 52 nm. Carbothermic reduction of molybdenite in the presence of sodium carbonate was done by formation of intermediate phases of Na The model-fitting base on kinetic calculations showed that the kinetic model for non-activated mixture with stoichiometric ratio (1:4:2) was the chemical control and mechanical activation of the mixture for 70 h did not change the kinetic model of the reaction. Increasing the content of sodium carbonate decreased the effect of the mechanical activation on molybdenite grain size. By increasing the sodium carbonate content of the mixture, the activation energy and the temperature of reaction were increased and the reaction model was changed to diffusion control with E = 320 kJ/mol and A = 3.4 × 10 Final reduction products Mo We appreciate very much the editor and the reviewers. All changes in minor revision highlighted in revised manuscript. We hope that you find our responses satisfactory and that the manuscript is now acceptable for publication. The authors declared that they have no conflicts of interest to this work.