In this paper, we consider the problem of testing for variance changes in the linear autoregressive processes including AR(p) processes meanwhile autoregressive parameters shifts occur. In performing a test, we employ the conventional residual CUSUM of squares test (RCUSQ) statistic. The RCUSQ test is based on the bootstrap method introduced to eliminate the influence caused by the autoregressive parameters shifts. It is shown that under regularity conditions, the test statistic behaves asymptotically the function of a standard Brownian bridge. Simulation results as to AR(1) processes and an example of real data analysis are provided for illustration.The problem of testing for change-point in statistical models has been an important issue among both theoreticians and practitioners. Research into this problem originally began with iid sample; for a review of work, see Owing to the works of Perron In this article, special attention is paid to the ergodic stationary processes including linear autoregressive (LAR) time series since they accommodate important linear time series models, such as AR( The organization of this paper is as follows. In Section We consider the following models: We test the null hypothesis  We state the assumptions which are needed to prove asymptotic validity of our approach.  The independent identical distribution (iid) innovations  {  All of the roots of 1  The last Assumption can ensure Our approach also relies on the following results.     The results indicate that In this section, we will get asymptotic distribution under autoregressive parameters shifts.      In practice, we can replace the unknown parameters  When there are no autoregressive parameter shifts, we can presume the residuals Step 1: Compute the OLS residuals from the regression of Step 2: Compute the maximum likelihood estimator of the parameters Step 3: Compute the estimator of innovations Step 4: Compute the centered residuals Step 5: For a fixed Step 6: Analogous to Ξ  Step 7: Steps 5 and 6 should be repeated a large number  As a result, we can assure the residuals Let Denote      In the section, we present the results of a simulation study intended to assess the performance of the bootstrap test procedures in Section In order to evaluate the performance of the RUCSQ test, we consider following model:  When study the empirical sizes and powers of RCUSQ test Ξ  We now discuss the main conclusions that can be drawn from our simulation. (1) The results summarized in In this section, we analyze a series of daily stock price on financial assets, containing a real estate series with SLDC (Shanghai Lujiazui Finance & Trade Zone Development Co., Ltd.). The stock price in this group is observed from March 1, 2000 until January 22, 2002 with samples of 445 observations. Data used in this analysis can be found in Firstly, we get the return rate For tests the null of no variance changes is rejected in favor of H In this paper, the RCUSQ test for variance changes in autoregressive processes including AR( The authors wish to thank the editor and the anonymous reviews for their helpful comments and suggestions which helped to improve the presentation. However, any remaining errors belong to the authors. The authors receive the financial support from NSFC (Grant No.: 70873094), NSSFC (Grant No.: 08&ZD046) and XUST (Grant No.: 2010039). Throughout the section we use the notation introduced in Sections Before the proof of    As we select one of       Observe that when  We obtain     These results yield     This proof is the same as the proof of     This proof is immediately obtained by Horvath and Kokoszka     For the     For the     The proof immediately follows from     Observe that      The proof of By Combining with relations  To show the