A pulsed electromagnetic sensor (PEMS) utilising the difference in electrical and magnetic properties of metals was designed for automatic sorting of scrap stainless steel (SS). Experimental results for the identification and separation of stainless steel are presented. The design of a prototype being developed at Delft University of Technology and the results obtained in the laboratory are also discussed.The separation of stainless steel (SS) from non-ferrous metal mixture is important not only due to the intrinsic value of scrap SS, but also because it is a contaminant in non-ferrous metal production. For most recycling plants, SS is currently removed from scrap metal by manual sorting. Despite the fact that this is labour intensive, manual sorting is still applied and has to be carried out in low cost countries. It has limitations in capacity per person but the products obtained have acceptable quality and labour is easy to get. Above these all manual sorting may have negative consequences on the human health. Recently, new methods have been investigated for sorting of scrap metal on a belt or in free fall that use sensors based on several operational principles ( Separation systems that use cameras are widely applied in sorting applications. Some examples are from the food industry and metal sorting. Based on differences in the colour, such systems can differentiate between copper and brass ( Another application is the removal of SS from a mixture of non-ferrous metals based on colour sorting. This process needs several steps to obtain a sufficient grade and recovery, and it is therefore costly ( Metal detectors are extensively used for the removal of metal particles from a mixed stream, e.g., for food, agricultural products, glass cullet and other applications ( New sensor design using the eddy current principle was studied at Delft University of Technology for the characterisation and differentiation between scrap metals. New methods for metal characterisation in a material flow with pulsed eddy currents were studied and practical solutions were proposed for industrial applications. The main application of the designed system is the identification and separation of non-ferrous scrap originating from end-of-life cars, household appliances, electronic devices or municipal waste. The present investigation focuses on identification and sorting of scrap SS. Although a number of electromagnetic automated sorting systems for scrap metals have entered the market with some success, no information is currently available regarding the system efficiency. In most of the applications, such systems are applied to recover SS from non-metals in combination with a colour camera ( A pulsed electromagnetic field is usually applied in non-destructive testing (NDT) for crack detection or the metallurgical property evaluation of metals ( For the generation of eddy currents in metals, an alternating magnetic flux is needed. Usually, a coil is used to create this changing magnetic flux. The flux is a function of the coil parameters and the primary excitation current. The oscillating nature of the flux induces (eddy) currents in the metal piece above the coil ( The voltage measured with the receiver coil is given by Faraday's law: Eq. For materials having different electrical and magnetic properties, The above statement was considered for harmonic signals, where a sinusoidal voltage is applied at the transmitter coil. When a pulsed system is considered, the difference compared to single frequency systems consists in the fact that the induced eddy currents are created by abrupt changes in the field due to suddenly interrupted excitation current at the transmitter coil. The change in the magnetic field is measured by changes in the voltage at the receiver coil. Although it is considered that for these systems signal analysis is difficult compared to the alternating field method, the pulsed systems showed improvements in metal differentiation when material size varies ( The coil resistance ( When a pulsed method is applied, the spectrum over the frequencies is distributed over a large range and depends on pulse width. Compared to the method where alternating currents are used, the pulsed method allows much higher depths of penetration of the eddy currents. Depth of penetrations of ten times higher than those obtained from the alternating fields are normally achieved ( The depth of penetration of the eddy currents is defined as the distance at which the currents are 37% from their intensity at the metal surface. Previous literature described the variation for this parameter with the frequency and material composition for several metals ( For the pulsed system, the signal measured at the receiver coil consists of a voltage, which changes when a metal is positioned above the receiver coil. The changes in the signal are caused due to electrical and magnetic properties of the test metal. Particle size and the distance between the receiver coil and the test metal have less influence on the signal compared to the alternating field method ( The developed PEMS prototype consists of a pulse generator, a transmitter coil and an array of receiver coils ( To analyse the signal variation from the receiver coil, 200 non-ferrous scrap particles were used. The material composition was chosen from SS, copper, cast aluminium, wrought aluminium, magnesium and brass having the size range of 20–60 mm ( The first set of experiments was conducted in static mode, which means that a particle was manually placed above the receiver coil. For the second set of experiments, the particles were slid over the receiver coil, which was mounted under an inclined slide plate. The transmitter coil has 40 windings and is of a rectangular shape (30×15 mm). The receiver coil has a diameter of 10 mm and 1500 windings. The pulse generator transmits pulses via the transmitter coil. The applied pulse rate is between 100 and 500 Hz and the pulse width is 100 μs. The pulse generator has a variable pulse length and repetition rate. The distance between the receiver and the transmitter coils was selected at approximately 70 mm. At this distance a maximum sensitivity for the differentiation of SS was obtained. The interaction between the metal particle and the magnetic field is measured with the receiver coil. In order to determine the metal composition, the changes in the signal are analysed and compared to the signal in absence of a particle. A sensor with a pulsed electromagnetic field was designed on laboratory scale for selective distinction of SS. The pulse wave measured at the receiver coil presented in The pulse shape changes when a particle passes over the receiver coil. Experiments with different metals showed that this variation depends on the following parameters: The depth ( In Zone II changes according to Eq. Austenitic grades of SS have values of As described in literature, zone I represents the transient part of the pulse signal. Experiments conducted with different metals demonstrate that zone I is more affected by variations in Similar to the experiments conducted with SS, brass and aluminium ( As discussed above, the changes in the pulse wave are not only dependent on  A shredder is applied for liberation of the different metals and size reduction. After shredding the particles have an irregular shape. As a result, When a particle is lifted, the pulse signal gradually moves closer to the original pulse wave being recorded in absence of a particle. The experimental results showed that even for Experiments conducted with SS and aluminium showed that for thicker particles the influence on  In practical applications, particles are moved on a conveyer belt with a speed up to 3 m/s. Experiments were conducted to investigate the influence of particle speed on sensor response. For these experiments, SS and aluminium particles of a cylindrical shape of 50 mm diameter and thicknesses of 5 and 10 mm were used. During the experiments,  During its movement across the receiver coil, a SS particle has a different influence on sensor response compared to aluminium. The maximum of The pulse wave of zone II also varies as a function of the particle position. Experiments carried out with brass showed that Particles having The experimental results discussed previously were considered for particles with defined size and geometry. In order to study the variation of the pulse signal for scrap particles, samples with different composition and irregular geometry were considered. The samples were selected from high, medium and low conductive. The maximum of The results were obtained for 100 scrap particles with variations in particle size ranging from 20 to 60 mm ( Although both zones of the signal show distinct differences for SS compared to the other metals, it was also observed that for scrap samples During particle movement, aluminium has a different trend for Based on the interpretation of the results obtained for dynamic measurements, an experimental set-up for the identification and separation of scrap SS was constructed using the PEMS sensor ( The particles being detected by the PEMS are ejected from the stream using an actuator, which is activated by the processing unit. In practice, conveyer blowbar systems could be use. For the present tests, new design of an actuator was applied. Its main objective was multi-fraction actuation. The ejection mechanism consists of pneumatic hammers installed under the conveyer belt. These are controlled by electronics being part of the PEMS system. The design and working principle for the actuators was described by A mixture of non-ferrous scrap particles containing austenitic and ferritic SS in a proportion of 10 to 3 was tested. In practice, it is relevant to separate austenitic SS from the non-ferrous metals mixture, because most ferritic grades can be removed by low intensity magnetic separation. The experiments were conducted with 200 particles and the belt velocity was approximately 0.5 m/s. The computed grade and recovery for SS are presented in The sensor was designed to detect particles with a minimum area cover of about twice the receiver coil diameter. Even though the test particles are placed at an The proposed PEMS prototype uses four receiver coils for particle identification at a belt width of 30 cm ( The PEMS is an on-line sensor system that inspects the stream particle by particle. Based on the information being processed with an electronic unit, the system automatically ejects SS from mixed scrap. The proposed system can be also used for quality monitoring of the input feed as well as for data collection and process control. At the same time, management of the entire system including shipments of the product can be better controlled and optimised. The PEMS system automatically identifies and separates scrap stainless steel from other non-ferrous metals based on electrical and magnetic properties. The experimental results show that 95% of the stainless steel can be recovered with a grade of almost 100%. A practical application of the system comprises the removal of scrap stainless steel from other non-ferrous metals in the non-magnetic metal fraction from industrial shredders. Due to the fact that the magnetic field interacts only with the metal particle, the PEMS is insensitive to dust or other impurities covering the particle surface. The system can operate post shredding and no feed preparation or pre-processing steps are required. Furthermore, the PEMS system is not restricted to any safety regulations, it is easy to use and mechanically robust. distance from the receiver coil to the particle [mm] receiver coil diameter [mm] field frequency [Hz] constant equilibrium magnetic field intensity [A/m] receiver coil windings number coil resistance [Ω] voltage variation zone I pulse [V] voltage variation zone II pulse [V] voltage at the receiver coil [V] lift-off [mm] coil reactance [Ω] time sampling [μs] receiver coil impedance [Ω] depth of penetration of Eddy Currents [mm] equilibrium flux [Wb] primary flux [Wb] secondary flux [Wb] air magnetic permeability [4π10 material magnetic permeability [H/m] electrical conductivity [S]