The use of low intensity pulsed ultrasound accelerates cortical and cancellous bone fracture healing. Seventeen patients with eighteen high-energy fractures of the long bones were treated with low intensity pulsed ultrasound supplementation to surgical skeletal stabilization and tissue flaps. Sixteen fractures were healed within 13–52 weeks after starting ultrasound supplementation despite severe soft-tissue injuries and varying degrees of tissue loss. This method may be useful in the combined treatment of high-energy limb injuries.Low intensity pulsed ultrasound has been reported to accelerate the cortical and cancellous bone repair process in fractures and non-unions We present our experience with 17 patients (14 males and 3 females) with 18 severe compound high-energy limb injuries and varying degrees of bone comminution and soft-tissue loss, who underwent complex treatment with the use of low intensity pulsed ultrasound between 1997 and 2001 ( In two patients, low intensity ultrasound treatment was started within a month after the high-energy injury (one was a 63-year old patient after Gustilo 3B open tibial fracture and the other was a 22-year old patient after open Gustilo 3C open fracture of the forearm bones) due to suspicion of hampered bone healing. In all the remaining patients, the ultrasound was started at more advanced stages of treatment due to very slow bone formation in spite of prolonged fixation time (median: 6 months; range, 4–38 months), when no radiographic evidence of fracture callus appearance was noted. The distance between the rings of the Ilizarov device allows room for the Treatment Head Module transducer to be applied over the fracture (non-union) site. All ultrasound treatment was performed according to the protocol of a 20-min period each day applied by the patients at home. The ultrasound treatment was continued until the appearance of clinical and radiographic signs of solid bone union (median time for ultrasound care: 26 weeks; range, 13–52 weeks). Sixteen of the eighteen treated fractures united with solid bone union within 13–52 weeks after starting the ultrasound supplementation. One fracture, located at the lateral humeral condyle, developed stable pseudoarthrosis, and one patient was lost to follow-up. No local or systemic side effects of the ultrasound supplementation ensued. Thus, in this relatively small clinical group, bone healing was achieved in most patients who completed their treatment (16/18 fractures––88.9%). It is important to note that most of these patients suffered from severe high-energy injuries with severe disruption of both soft and hard tissues. Previous prolonged treatment in these patients did not achieve bone healing. Based upon this experience, we suggest that pulsed low intensity ultrasound with 30–50 mW/cm The authors thank Mrs. M. Perlmutter for her help in the preparation of this paper.