This paper reviews the different borehole breakout failure micromechanisms observed during a multiyear laboratory research effort at the University of Wisconsin. Vertical borehole drilling experiments were conducted in a variety of granites, limestones, and sandstones under a wide range of pre-existing stress fields. Test samples that developed breakouts during drilling were analyzed under optical and scanning electron microscopes to establish the micromechanics of failure. All rocks tested, except for the quartz-rich sandstones, develop dog-eared breakouts along the minimum horizontal far-field stress springline, even though the grain-scale mechanisms leading to the final appearance may differ considerably. The common denominator is the incipient failure in the form of dilatant microcracking in the zones of the highest compressive stress concentration around the borehole. Dependent on rock type, these microcracks could be tensile or shear openings, extending inter- or intra-granularly. A type of failure not hitherto recognized was discovered in quartz-rich sandstones, which develop tabular slot-shaped breakouts that maintain a constant very narrow width over an extensive length, resulting in a fracture-like appearance. Such breakouts are the result of a largely non-dilatant micromechanism consisting of localized grain debonding and repacking leading to the formation of an apparent reduced-porosity compaction band along the minimum horizontal far-field stress springline. Breakouts are produced by the removal, with the help of the circulating drilling fluid, of loose grains and grain fragments that were debonded in the process of compaction band forming.In this paper the term ‘borehole breakout’ is limited to vertical-borehole cross-section elongation along a preferred direction resulting from stress-induced rock failure. Early reports of stress-induced breakouts came from Leeman Extensive research has been conducted in an effort to also determine whether breakouts can be used to gain information on in situ stress magnitudes. Haimson and Herrick Numerous attempts have been made to explain the mechanism that brings about the phenomenon of borehole breakouts, notably using pressure-dependent elasticity Drilling experiments were conducted on rectangular prismatic rock samples varying in size between 127×127×178 The electric drill rig was affixed to the top of the loading frame crosshead ( The loading frame, which was designed and fabricated in-house, is unique in that it accommodates the drilling rig and enables vertical drilling into a rectangular prismatic specimen that is subjected simultaneously to three unequal mutually perpendicular loads ( Testing procedure began with the careful preparation of the rock specimen to meet the dimensions and orthogonality requirements. The specimen was inserted into the biaxial cell, which was then moved into position inside the loading frame. Three independent servo-control units, activated by a testing software package run on a personal computer, were used to raise the pressure in each of the three directions of loading. The final pressures applied were predetermined, leading to a state of true triaxial stress acting on the specimen. This was a direct simulation of field conditions, where rock is naturally subjected to crustal stress conditions before drilling is conducted. Soon after the external loading was completed, drilling of a central vertical hole was commenced. Typically tap water was used as drilling fluid for the purpose of cooling the bit and removing debris. Upon the completion of drilling, the loads were left unchanged for a short period of time (up to 30 The state of stress in the vicinity of a vertical borehole drilled into the earth's crust depends on the rock mechanical properties. In the simplest case, which is the one most often used to simulate brittle rock behavior, linear elasticity and isotropy are assumed. In addition, it is assumed that the vertical stress is a principal stress component, that conditions of plane strain apply, that the borehole fluid does not communicate with the pore fluid in the rock, and that the pore pressure in the rock is constant. In this case the state of stress can be expressed by the well-known Kirsch equations for a hole in an infinite plate (modified by Fairhurst It is obvious from Eq. Two independent research projects were conducted on the borehole breakout phenomenon in granite, one in Westerly granite, from the State of Rhode Island, USA By conducting drilling experiments for different preset magnitudes of far-field principal stresses and inspecting post-test cross-sections under the petrographic microscope, the several stages of breakout development were detected. Borehole instability leading to breakouts in granite begins before any noticeable failure on the borehole surface. Under far-field stresses not quite sufficient to initiate visible breakouts, transgranular microcracks subparallel to Around a borehole, each failed column leaves in place hanging cantilevers at both ends. These appear to limit the length of the next spalled flake. As the breakout deepens, the spalled flakes become shorter and shorter, causing the breakout span to continuously narrow. This process ends when the next rock flake in succession is sufficiently supported and stabilized by the remnant cantilevers of the previously failed flake. The final shape resembles that of the letter V ( A remarkable analogy exists between the laboratory breakouts and those developed in the field, specifically the Lac du Bonnet granite of the URL, where both the sub-horizontal principal stress magnitudes and the principal stress differentials are unusually high. One estimate of the in situ state of stress at the 420 Level is The Indiana (also known as Salem) limestone used in the reported experiments is of Mississippian age, and comes from the State of Indiana, where it is massive, medium grain, medium porosity, flat lying, and fossil-rich, underlying the Harrodsburg limestone. Its basic mechanical properties are: density: 2300 An extensive series of breakout tests in Indiana limestone was carried out At somewhat higher differential stresses ( At post-critical stress conditions ( Cordova Cream (also known as Austin Chalk) is a lightly bedded, highly permeable oolitic limestone. It forms the upper layer of the Whitestone Member in the Walnut Formation, part of the lower Cretaceous Fredericksburg Group in Texas. Celle and Cheatham Unlike the stronger, stiffer Indiana limestone, Cordova Cream boreholes develop shear rather than extensile fractures, as the principal horizontal far-field stresses approach a critical level at which visible breakouts occur. The first indication of impending visible failure is provided by shear cracks that appear to initiate at the borehole wall at some short distance from the At far-field stresses above a critical level rock chunks between conjugate cracks spall off on opposite sides of the borehole aligned with the Cordova Cream was also used to examine the orientation of breakouts on a vertical borehole wall when the two horizontal principal far-field stresses are equal. In tests conducted under Our most recent work has been concerned with breakouts in sandstones. We have conducted extensive drilling experiments in several sandstones collected from different regions of the USA. The interest in this type of rock stems to a large extent from its importance as a major host of petroleum reservoirs. Some of the tested sandstones, like the Berea, Kyune, and Tablerock There is another group of sandstones identified by our tests, which includes the St. Peter, Aztec, Mansfield, and high-porosity (22–26%) Berea Micromechanically, incipient borehole failure in quartz-rich sandstones, is almost exclusively through grain debonding at the points of highest stress concentration (along the The lower-porosity St. Peter (11–12%) requires higher far-field stresses to produce slot-shaped breakouts of similar length, but the narrow band ahead of the breakout tip is now remarkably different, consisting mainly of cracked and crushed grains Independent corroboration of the unexpected breakout shape in quartz-rich sandstones has been documented by several laboratories. Bessinger et al. The micromechanism of failure leading to slot-shaped breakouts is not straightforward and presently only partially understood. The most puzzling feature of these breakouts is their geometry, characterized by extensive length and constant width of only a few grain diameters. Our present understanding of the probable grain-scale mechanism leading to this unexpected breakout shape derives from a coincidence of contemporaneous findings. Concurrent with our initial borehole breakout studies in sandstone, a new geologic structure, named ‘compaction band’, was discovered in the Navajo Sandstone of the Kaibab monocline, Utah Consequently, optical and SEM studies were conducted on cross-sections of slot-shaped breakout tips in all four quartz-rich sandstones tested. In each of the sandstones, a narrow band of grains along the The discovery of slot-shaped breakouts is important because they result from a mechanism of rock failure not hitherto recognized. Slot-shaped breakouts have been compared to anti-mode I cracks, which are created and extended by high compressive stresses acting at their tip Supporting evidence that breakouts in quartz-rich sandstones are preceded by the formation of compaction bands is provided by Vajdova and Wong Experimental studies at the University of Wisconsin, in which vertical boreholes were drilled in rock subjected to true triaxial far-field stresses above certain thresholds, revealed several distinct failure micromechanisms leading to instability in the form of breakouts. In crystalline granite it is the development of intra- and trans-granular dilatant (extensile) microcracks behind the borehole wall, along the The most surprising borehole failure mechanism was found in medium- to high-porosity quartz-rich sandstones held together by grain contact sutures. Here, borehole instability leads to the formation of long and narrow fracture-like breakouts, which can extend for great distances and are, counterintuitively, perpendicular to the far-field major compressive stress. The high compressive stress concentration along the Of practical interest is the fact that the two phenomena related to borehole instability in quartz-rich sandstones, the formation of apparent compaction bands and the subsequent generation of slot-shaped breakouts, could each have a significant effect on field wellbores: reduced porosity in induced compaction bands could slow the free flow of fluids around wells, while the elongated breakouts could be a source of unwanted sand production. The work reported here has been supported over the years by the National Science Foundation (grants EAR-8511941 and EAR-9004688), by the US Geological Survey (award no. 14-08-001-G1517), by the Atomic Energy of Canada Limited, and by the Geosciences and Biosciences Division, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, US Department of Energy Grant DE-FG02-98ER14850. The efforts of former graduate students C. Herrick, I. Song, M. Lee, J. Kovacich, A. Klaetsch, H. Lee, and R. Sheets, who did much of the experimental work presented here, are gratefully acknowledged. Many thanks to two anonymous reviewers whose suggestions helped improve the manuscript substantially.