High gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) is effective in concentrating or removing weakly magnetic particles from slurry and has been applied in many scientific and industrial fields. The basic principles behind HGMS are of great importance to appreciate the effectiveness of HGMS and have received considerable research attention. Modeling of particle capture by matrices provides very intuitive understanding of the HGMS process and models are being used in many experimental and industrial cases to estimate the performance. This review focuses on the modeling of capture of micrometer-sized particles by ferromagnetic matrices in HGMS. Particle capture models of a variety of matrices under different circumstances in three configurations of HGMS are reviewed and presented. Typical particle trajectories around matrices and particle capture efficiency are demonstrated and discussed.High gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) is an effective method in disposing of weakly magnetic materials. Magnetic matrices and applied magnetic field are key components of HGMS system. Matrices with high permeability dehomogenize the uniform magnetic field, inducing high magnetic gradient. Paramagnetic particles will be subjected to large magnetic forces and attracted by matrices, being trapped there. When applied magnetic field is removed, the captured magnetic particles can be easily dislodged by rinsing. In gradient magnetic field, the force acting on a magnetic particle can be given by Eq. As the widespread application of HGMS in various scientific and industrial fields, the basic principles behind HGMS also attract much attention from scientific researchers. The theoretical principles of HGMS mainly include capture of magnetic particles by matrices and buildup of magnetic particles on matrices. Capture of magnetic particles determines particle capture efficiency while buildup of magnetic particle on matrices determines accumulation contour and saturated mass of particle deposit. Particle capture and buildup models of different HGMS configurations under various circumstances have been developed by researchers. Generally, particle capture models are constructed with Newton second law considering dominating forces acting on particles. For buildup of particles on matrices, boundary of buildup contour can be determined by particle locus where net force of particle is just 0. The particle capture and buildup models can be used for studying the effect of influencing parameters on HGMS in specific studies as well as development of novel magnetic matrices. In some studies of HGMS, adopting these models to study some influencing factors has unique advantages. For instance, the effect of some factors on HGMS is slight and cannot be reflected in experimental results, or can hardly be directly observed in experiments, these factors can be conveniently investigated with these theoretical models, providing that the models are accurately constructed. The particle capture and buildup models can give very intuitive understanding of the HGMS process and have been applied in many relevant studies [ Thereafter, this paper critically reviews the literature on capture model construction of fine weakly particles in HGMS. The development and applicable conditions of different theoretical models are specially concerned. The aim of this review is to focus on separation mechanism and improve the understanding of HGMS. The size of materials that can be disposed of by HGMS ranges from several nanometers to hundreds of microns. Forces acting on individual particle include magnetic force, gravitational force, fluid drag force, van der waals force, electrostatic force, magnetic dipole attraction force [ The magnetic force acting on a particle is proportional to magnetic field strength and gradient of particle location, as shown of Eq. The gravitational force acting on a paramagnetic particle is given by Eq. Fluid drag force is the main competing force in HGMS, especially for fine magnetic particles. In Stokes flow regime, the fluid drag force acting on a particle is given by Eq. For the case that initial fluid For modeling of particle buildup on matrices, particles are assumed static on matrix, magnetic force is the same. Fluid drag force is calculated using shear stress at the bottom of boundary layer. The shear stress is derived from Blasius solutions to boundary layer equations [ Magnetic matrices used in HGMS includes steel balls, rods, wools, mesh, toothed plates. Many studies focusing on particle capture by these matrices have been demonstrated. For modeling of capture of paramagnetic particles within the size range of several microns to dozens of microns in HGMS, magnetic force and fluid drag force are dominating forces. The motion of particle can be determined by Newton's second law: The inertial terms (terms on the right side of the equals) can be neglected as they are always less than 1% of magnetic and fluid drag forces. Thus particle capture can be modeled by balancing magnetic and fluid drag forces acting on paramagnetic particles. Circular cross-section matrices (circular matrix hereafter) with high magnetic susceptibility are the most commonly employed matrices in HGMS. Theoretical analyses concerning particle capture by cylinder matrices consequently attract great attention from researchers. As shown in Bean firstly studied performance of a magnetic filter and gave an expression describing the performance [ For transversal configuration, magnetic force is the same as that in longitudinal configuration, but with different fluid drag force. The flow field around the matrix in longitudinal and transversal configurations has been given by Eqs. Particle motion trajectories can be depicted by solving particle motion equations. Based on the work of Watson, Luborsky extended the original particle trajectory model to include build-up of multiple layers of particles on matrix [ Badescu et al. modeled particle capture of a transversal high gradient magnetic filter cell in which the flow was bounded by two parallel plates [ Almost all the above studies were based on single wire. Natenapit and Sanglek used an effective medium treatment (EMT) approach to model particle capture in random cylindrical matrices [ Uchiyama and Birss [ With Eqs. The above particle capture model is constructed in terms of ideal frictionless potential flow. Based on the basic equations, many researchers studied particle capture in axial HGMS for more realistic conditions. Birss et al. and Gerber pointed out that a more complete theoretical description of particle capture process for laminar flow in axial HGMS could be obtained by incorporating features of laminar flow into the carrier fluid [ Rezlescu et al. modeled particle capture of axial HGMS filter with a bounded flow field, considering both laminar and potential flow of carrier fluid [ Abbasov et al. studied capture of particles carried by laminar flow of non-Newtonian fluid in axial HGMS with power law flow model [ Similar to that in longitudinal and transversal configurations [ HGMS system employing ball matrix (the radius is On the basis of Birss, Watson investigated the particle capture of a ball matrix surrounded by equisized nonmagnetic balls and the particle capture of a collection of randomly packed equisized ferromagnetic spheres. The particle capture efficiency increased with increasing applied magnetic field before matrix reached magnetization saturation. After the matrix was saturated, particle capture efficiency was independent on applied field [ Charkson and Kelland developed a numerical calculation method which used elliptic coordinates to approximate a ribbon-like nature of fibers and verified the calculation with experiments [ For axial configuration, the particle motion equations were as follows ( With particle motion equations, particle motion trajectories around elliptic matrix can be calculated and performance of elliptic matrix can be estimated. Based on theoretical studies of elliptic matrices in HGMS, Zheng et al. conducted experiments to study the performance of circular, elliptic, square and diamond shaped matrices in axial HGMS [ Particle capture cross section analyses with the extended particle capture models agreed well with experimental results [ Magnetization state of matrices had significant influence on performance of matrices. Extended particle capture models of circular and elliptic matrices had been established, considering both the case that matrices were unsaturated and saturated by applied magnetic field. Problem remained that how to determine that matrices had reach magnetization saturation or not (under which applied induction As the widespread applications of HGMS in various scientific and industrial fields, theoretical principles behind HGMS also attracted substantial attention from researchers. Capture of magnetic particles by matrices in HGMS is generally a complex subject. Modeling of capture of micrometer-sized particles in HGMS can be realized by balancing dominating forces (magnetic force and fluid drag force) acting on particles. Modeling of particle capture in HGMS are critically reviewed in this paper. The particle capture models of saturated cylinders and ball matrices for a variety of conditions in three configurations of HGMS are demonstrated, along with typical particle motion trajectories around matrices. It is believed that magnetization state of matrices is an important parameter which is not given adequate attention before. Extended particle capture models of circular and elliptic matrices (both unsaturated and saturated) in three configurations of HGMS are also presented, as well as demarcation judgment of applied induction for determining magnetization state of matrices in HGMS. With extended particle capture models and demarcation judgment method, optimal aspect ratio of matrices in HGMS can be investigated. Future modeling work can focus on extended particle capture models for more realistic fluid conditions and particle capture models for more specific and complex configurations.  permeability of vacuum, 4π×10 permeability of matrix, H/m permeability of fluid, H/m magnetic susceptibility of the magnetic particle – volume of the magnetic particle, m magnetic field, A/m magnetic field gradient, A/m the applied magnetic field strength, A/m the Magnetic field induction, T radius of the magnetic particle, μm polar angle coordinate – polar coordinate, m the saturation magnetic of the matrix, T radius of circular (ball) matrix, m viscosity of the fluid, Pa·s velocity of particle, m/s velocity of fluid, m/s initial velocity of fluid, m/s average fluid velocity, m/s mass of particle, kg length of matrix, m length of filter, m packing fraction – number of particles – half the long axis of elliptic matrix, m half the short axis of elliptic matrix, m half the focal length of elliptic matrix, m ratio of matrix long axis to short axis – ratio of axis along magnetization to that perpendicular to magnetization – elliptic angle coordinate – elliptic coordinate – This research work was financially supported by the