The removal of Microcystis aeruginosa and associated microcystins was investigated by a dissolved gas flotation (preceded by coagulation/flocculation)—nanofiltration (NF) sequence. The experiments were conducted with a freshwater spiked with M. aeruginosa cell aggregates to simulate a naturally occurring bloom. Two types of gases were used in the flotation pre-treatment, air (DAF) and a mixture of CO2/air. Very good results in terms of NF fluxes, overall removal efficiencies and final water quality were achieved with both sequences. However, the CO2/air mixture presented no benefit to the overall sequence, both in terms of toxin release to water during flotation and lower natural organic matter removal by NF, which was due to an overall negative effect of the acid pH. NF was able to completely remove cyanobacteria (100% removal efficiency of chlorophyll a) and microcystins (always under the quantification limit), regardless of the pre-treatment used and the water recovery rate (up to 84%). Therefore, DAF–NF sequence is a safe barrier against M. aeruginosa and microcystins in drinking water. In addition, it ensures an excellent control of particles, disinfection by-products formation, and other micropollutants that may be present in raw water.Cyanobacteria (blue-green algae) have been identified worldwide, posing a significant risk to water supplies when they occur in reservoirs, lakes and rivers used as water sources, due to their ability to produce toxins—as well as taste and odour compounds—as secondary metabolites under particular conditions of growth. These cyanotoxins include hepatotoxic cyclic peptides, neurotoxic alkaloids (e.g. anatoxin-a) and dermatotoxins, amongst which the hepatotoxic microcystins (and, in particular, the microcystin-LR variant) are the most commonly occurring cyanotoxins in water sources ( To definitely improve the overall drinking water treatment effectiveness and economics, cyanobacterial cells should be removed without causing cell damaging (e.g. by coagulation/flocculation, flotation), although such procedure will not avoid the need for further treatments addressing the removal of dissolved toxins, taste and odour compounds (e.g. oxidation, activated carbon, membrane technology particularly nanofiltration (NF)). Actually, when seeking complete algae removal, the most promising solution for the treatment of algal-rich waters may lie in a combination of conventional and membrane processes ( Therefore, dissolved air flotation (DAF) and NF were first studied separately, and for each technology the key operating conditions were optimised for removing, respectively, cyanobacterial cells ( The objective of the present study is to investigate the overall performance of the dissolved gas flotation—NF integrated sequence, as a safe barrier against cyanobacteria and cyanotoxins in drinking water. The importance of studying these two technologies together (in sequence) lies in the two mechanisms of cyanotoxin release that impair the drinking water quality: the natural active toxin release that occurs in water reservoirs through cell lysis, and the induced toxin release that may occur during the water treatment process, as a result of mechanical and/or chemical stress factors, that influence the cyanobacterial cell stability ( The proposed sequence (DAF–NF) intends to minimise the induced cyanotoxins release, while safely removing the dissolved toxins existing in raw freshwaters. DAF is used to profit from the natural flotation ability of cyanobacteria for their removal without cell lysis. A CO  These PCC 7820 aggregates produced four microcystin variants, MC-LR, MC-LY, MC-LW and MC-LF. As detailed in a previous paper ( The Funcho dam reservoir was chosen for it is one of the most important drinking water sources in western Algarve, southern Portugal (ca. 2 The treatment experiments were performed with RW from Alcantarilha WTP, spiked with As depicted in The investigated NFT50 membrane is a thin-film composite NF/RO membrane of polypiperazine amide on a polysulphone microporous support and a polyester support, from Alfa Laval, with an hydraulic permeability of 5.9 From previously published data on zeta potential measurements ( Samples were analysed for pH (at 25 After extraction, samples were also analysed for extra and intracellular microcystin by liquid chromatography with photodiode array UV detector (HPLC/PDA), according to the standard operating procedures presented in A Dionex Summit HPLC/PDA system was used, which includes a high-pressure gradient pump (Dionex Summit), an autosampler (ASI-100), a column oven (STH-585) and a photo diode-array detector (PDA-100). A C18 column was used (Merck Purospher STAR RP-18 endcapped, 3 The dissolved gas flotation experiments were performed in a laboratory-made flotation cell adapted from In C/F/DAF and C/F/DCO These operating conditions were optimised in earlier experiments ( For DAF and DCO In order to further understand some of the results obtained, two additional sets of experiments were conducted using TW. For the first set, DAF experiments were performed with The NF experiments were performed in a plate-and-frame unit, Lab-unit M20, from the Danish Separation Systems (membrane area of 0.0360 The membranes were first compacted and were then stabilised with deionised water until a steady permeate flux was achieved at the pressure and crossflow velocity planned for the experiments, 10 The NF experiments were performed after C/F/DAF or C/F/DCO These trials consisted on concentration runs, in order to simulate the industrial NF operation at different water recovery rates (defined as the permeate volume over the initial feed volume). In the beginning of the concentration runs in batch mode with recycle, the solutions were given a time to equilibrate, after which a flux measurement and samples from the feed and the permeate were taken to serve as baseline for flux and rejection at 0% water recovery rate. Permeate was then not recycled to the feed reservoir until a stipulated permeate volume was obtained, corresponding to a given water recovery rate. At each recovery rate, the permeate was recycled to the feed reservoir during the stabilisation period, after which the flux was measured, and feed and permeate samples were again collected. All samples from the feed and permeate solutions, taken at the different recovery rates, were analysed for extra and intra-cellular microcystin variants, NOM (DOC and UV Between each NF run, membranes were washed until the pure water flux reached the initial value measured after compaction (±2%), and the bulk conductivity was similar to that of DI. The temperature was maintained at 25 Results from C/F/flotation experiments using RW spiked with Extracellular microcystin results ( Results in Results displayed in As expected, due to a pH effect, flux is slightly higher using DCO While similar removal efficiencies of particles—turbidity, chl_a (always 100% removal—and intra-MC) always below the quantification limit—are achieved by NF after C/F/DAF (81–95%) and C/F/DCO The apparently poor NF removal efficiency of turbidity achieved for all water recovery rates (ca. 70%) is most likely just an artifact of signal-to-noise since the incoming turbidity is very low (0.64 NTU, A most important observation from these results is the low variation of flux and rejection with the water recovery rate. In fact, high fluxes and removal efficiencies are obtained for high water recovery rates ( Moreover, NF is able to completely remove both the cyanobacteria (100% removal efficiency of chl_a, Such results were already obtained with model solutions (  Comparing the overall removal efficiencies of the two treatment sequences, they are quite similar except for DOC ( For turbidity, the treated water is far below the national standard of 1 NTU for both sequences. Although there are no national standards for UV The extra- and intra-MC of the treated water is under the limit of quantification ( The same protection against microcystins could not be provided by conventional treatment ( This work investigated the ability of the C/F/flotation+NF sequence for removing cyanobacteria and the associated microcystin variants from natural waters (moderately hard freshwater with hydrophilic, low molecular weight NOM) containing a toxic Good results in terms of NF fluxes, overall removal efficiencies and final water quality were achieved with both C/F/DAF+NF and C/F/DCO As far as the final water quality is concerned, C/F/DAF+NF guaranteed a full removal of the cyanobacterial biomass (100% removal of chl_a) and the associated microcystins. Microcystin concentrations in the treated water were always under the quantification limit, i.e. far below the WHO guideline value of 1 The authors would like to thank the PRODEP Programme (no. 2/5.3/PRODEP/2001) for providing a Ph.D. scholarship to Margarida Ribau Teixeira, Águas do Algarve, SA (Portugal) and the European project “TOXIC—Barriers against cyanotoxins in drinking water” EVK1-CT-2002-00107 (01/09/2002–31/08/2005) for funding this project, and Teresa Cecílio for her help on microcystins and DOC analysis.