Uncertainty information is essential for the proper use of life cycle assessment and environmental assessments in decision making. To investigate the uncertainties of biodiesel and determine the level of confidence in the assertion that biodiesel is more environmentally friendly than diesel, an explicit analytical approach based on the Taylor series expansion for lognormal distribution was applied in the present study. A biodiesel case study demonstrates the probability that biodiesel has a lower global warming and non-renewable energy score than diesel, that is 92.3% and 93.1%, respectively. The results indicate the level of confidence in the assertion that biodiesel is more environmentally friendly than diesel based on the global warming and non-renewable energy scores.Nowadays, biodiesel as a diesel fuel made from biomass (e.g., vegetable oils, crops, animal fats) becomes popular as countries strive to reduce environmental impacts and carbon emissions generated from petroleum diesel burning. Uncertainty information is essential for the proper use of LCA and environmental assessments in decision making. Parameter uncertainty propagation has mainly been studied using Monte Carlo techniques ( The functional unit is one person-km driven by a regular bus. All emissions, energy consumption, cost and materials are based on this functional unit. Two scenarios were considered in this study, namely, biodiesel and diesel. Both scenarios involve energy production, transport, storage, distribution, infrastructure, biodiesel/diesel refining and production, regular bus production, consumption by a regular bus, and regular bus disposal processes. Additional processes included in the biodiesel scenario are feedstock collection and production. Two sources have been used: A bio-petro-diesel final report ( The eco-invent 2.0 database, using the processes for the regular buses and the diesel and biodiesel processes for all the supply chains and emissions not covered in the bio-petro-diesel final report ( To enable a comparison between different types of vehicles and fuels, emissions are calculated per brake horsepower hour of engine use (bhp-h). This procedure can be related to the km driven by a given vehicle. Comparing the bio-petro-diesel final report ( The life cycle impact assessment results are calculated at midpoint and damage level using the IMPACT2002+ method ( Uncertainty on each input parameter of the life cycle inventory (LCI) is characterized by a lognormal distribution, as defined by their data pedigree within the reference ( An explicit analytical approach based on a Taylor series expansion for a lognormal distribution is used in this study. The overall coefficient of variation on the final result is determined for a single scenario as a function of two widely available types of information: the model sensitivity ( For comparing two scenarios, assuming that A and B are both log-normally distributed, the geometric standard deviation of the A/B distribution can be shown by the following equation: Midpoint LCIA results are compared in the two scenarios in For the LCI, we compare the  In addition, the analytical Taylor series expansion directly provides the explicit contributions of each process to the overall uncertainty ( For the non-renewable energy impacts, the Taylor series yields a The analytical Taylor series expansion directly provides the explicit contributions of each process to the overall uncertainty non-renewable energy scores ( The current study presented the uncertainty propagations of biodiesel in detail and determined the level of confidence in the assertion that biodiesel is more environmentally friendly than diesel in the global warming and non-renewable energy categories. This approach is a very relevant and efficient way to get an accurate overall LCA uncertainty of biodiesel. Such an approach demonstrates that the LCA uncertainties of biodiesel in both categories are mainly generated from regular bus operation stage. The probability distributions obtained using the Taylor series expansion method lead to virtually equal results to the classical Monte Carlo distributions, while being significantly simpler. This work was conducted at the University of Michigan while the corresponding author, Jinglan Hong, was a postdoc. The author thanks Dr. Olivier Jolliet and Dr. Ralph K. Rosenbaum for their help.