This study focused on the flotation behaviour of very coarse quartz particles in the presence of fine silica and alumina, both of which were used as pulp viscosity modifiers. A decrease in the contact angle of the coarse quartz particles, caused by the attachment of fine particles was believed to be the principal mechanism accounting for the noted depression. Only small surface coverage of attached fine particles may dramatically decrease the quartz particle recovery because the flotation behaviour of the coarse particles was very sensitive to particle hydrophobicity, e.g. less than 5% surface coverage is able to decrease the contact of particles from 83° to 81° and causes a decrease in recovery from 60% to 20%. The effect of removing the fine particles from the pulp, by the process known as desliming, on the flotation behaviour of coarse quartz particles was also investigated. The results showed that desliming is beneficial for the recovery of coarse quartz particles. Furthermore, the recovery of coarse quartz particles attached with fine particles can be restored by conducting flotation in high viscosity medium where glycerol was used as the viscosity modifier.Detachment of particles from bubbles is one of the key issues responsible for the low recovery of coarse particles. For coarse particles attached to bubbles, the particle–bubble aggregates must withstand the various forces which are operational in the flotation cell to be successfully transported to the pulp/froth interface. A property-based flotation model, developed at the Ian Wark Research Institute (The Wark flotation model) ( It has also been suggested that slurry rheology is an important factor for flotation due to its marked effect on cell hydrodynamics, including gas dispersion throughout the cell ( An increase in slurry viscosity may be achieved by increasing the percent solids, particularly using fine particles as the viscosity modifier. An example of the effect of particle concentration on the rheology of titanium dioxide suspensions was reported by One of the drawbacks of using fine particles to modify the viscosity is the possible interaction between coarse and fine particles, which may cause a decrease in the flotation recovery of the coarse particles by reducing the hydrophobicity of the coarse particles. Thus, fine particles may modify the flotation behaviour of coarse particles through both viscosity modification and fine particle attachment to coarse particles. This paper investigates the effect of fine particles on the flotation of coarse particles through rheological modification and/or fine particle attachment mechanisms. Samples of quartz (GEO Discoveries, Australia) were ground and screened to two coarse size fractions of interest, namely 150–300 Trimethylchlorosilane (TMCS) solutions in cyclohexane were used for particle methylation ( Fine alumina (Hydral 710, Alcoa of Australia Limited) and silica (Sigma–Aldrich Inc., USA) were used to adjust the pulp viscosity. The choice of these particles is based on the fact that at pH Zeta potential of silica and alumina was determined from the particle dynamic mobility using the Nano-ZS Zetasizer instrument (Malvern Instruments Ltd., Worcestershire, UK) in electrophoretic light scattering mode for dilute particle suspensions. Dilute silica and alumina suspensions were prepared at 0.5 The particle size distribution of alumina and silica was determined by laser diffraction using a Mastersizer 2000 (Malvern Instruments Ltd., UK). The basic particle size sensor comprises an optical measurement unit which supplies information to a computer to process data and perform the analysis. Ultrasonication for 5 Scanning electron microscopy (a PHILIPS XL-20 electron microscope) was used to determine the adsorption of fine silica and alumina particles on the surface of coarse quartz particles. The samples were mounted onto the sample holder using double-sided sticky tape and were coated with a thin carbon layer using a vacuum evaporator. The rheological behaviour of the silica and alumina suspensions was investigated using a Haake RotoVisco RV1 rheometer (Thermo Electron GmbH, Germany) fitted with the concentric cylinder (Couette) sensor. Each slurry sample (∼100 Flotation tests on coarse quartz particles were carried out according to the flowsheet shown in The viscosity of the suspending medium was increased by: (i) using glycerol (95% purity)/water mixtures instead of water and (ii) by the addition of the colloidal alumina or silica particles at different volume concentrations. Flotation tests in water and the glycerol/water mixtures were conducted at pH 7. In the case where fine particles were used to increase the viscosity of the suspending medium, 10 To determine the recovery of coarse quartz particles in the flotation tests in the presence of alumina and silica, the concentrates and tailings were wet screened at 38 Assuming that froth flotation is a first-order kinetic process, the flotation recovery, A nonlinear least square regression was used to calculate The flotation recovery of coarse quartz particles generally decreased in the presence of the colloidal silica and alumina particles, presumably due to the adsorption of fine particles onto the surface of the coarse quartz. To investigate whether the adsorption of fines was reversible, a series of desliming tests was carried out. The desliming procedure is schematically presented in Advancing mean contact angles of the quartz particles in water were measured using DCAT 11/DCAT 11EC, DataPhysics Instruments (Germany). This instrument allows measurements of the contact angle and surface energy of cylindrical samples in accordance with the Washburn technique (  It is apparent that at pH 9, alumina is slightly positively charged (+2  The flow curves for alumina and silica suspensions as a function of solids percent (v/v) are presented in Silica suspensions show Newtonian behaviour, i.e., the viscosity of the suspension is independent of the shear rate. At pH 9 in 10 The apparent viscosities (at a shear rate of 500 The recovery of coarse quartz particles (600–850 Evidently, both types of fine particles negatively affected the recovery of coarse quartz particles. In the case of alumina, which is positively charged under the test conditions (pH 9, 10 The effect of the fine silica and alumina on the flotation behaviour of the coarse quartz particles was also investigated as a function of coarse quartz particle size range and mean contact angle. The results of flotation tests for quartz particles in the 150–300 It is worth mentioning that the reason for using two different hydrophobicity ranges for the two size fractions is that for coarser particles, greater hydrophobicity is required to recover the particles. The contact angle ranges shown in the study is the range where a reasonable recovery was obtained for the coarse particles in water only. Thus we can investigate the effect of fine particles on the recovery further. For coarse particles with a reasonably high mean contact angle (75° and 90° for quartz particles in the 150–300 In previous work ( The recovery of coarse quartz particles after 8 Furthermore, the flotation response of very coarse quartz particles (600–850 In the presence of fine alumina, the flotation recovery of coarse quartz with a mean contact angle of 90° was as high as in water only or as in the presence of silica (∼92% in both cases). In contrast, the recovery of coarse quartz particles with mean contact angle of 83° decreased from 60% in water to 10% in the presence of fine alumina (4%). Particles with a mean contact angle of 81° became essentially unrecoverable in the presence of fine alumina particles. It is also shown in Since the presence of fine particles had a negative effect on quartz recovery, the effect of their removal in desliming was also investigated. The desliming procedure was outlined in the experimental section above. The effect of desliming on the coarse quartz particles recovery on the size range of 600–850 In the presence of alumina (2% v/v) ( In the case of silica (3% v/v) suspension ( In the previous sections, it was shown that the recovery of coarse quartz decreases in the presence of fine particles, particularly in the case of alumina. It was also proposed that the loss of recovery of coarse particles was due to the decrease in particle hydrophobicity which resulted from the adsorption of fine hydrophilic particles onto the quartz surface. Additionally in previous work ( In this investigation, the coarse quartz particles were conditioned in the presence the fine alumina (2% v/v) or silica (3% v/v) following the flotation procedure described in the previous section. A single stage of desliming was carried out using a flotation cell. In the “control” test, 10 The recovery of quartz particles as a function of flotation time in the “control” test (water) and in the test conducted in the 50% glycerol/water mixture are presented in The flotation results indicate that fine particles in the pulp have a negative effect on the flotation behaviour of the coarse quartz. The fine particles were used to increase the pulp viscosity and, possibly, the flotation recovery of coarse quartz particles. However, the flotation recovery of quartz decreased. The supposition that the coarse particle recovery may increase in the presence of fine particles is based on previous work that increased viscosity (through addition of glycerol) increased coarse particle recovery ( It was demonstrated in previous ( To elucidate the possible mechanism of the decrease in recovery of quartz particles in the presence of fine alumina and silica, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used. Coarse quartz particles, collected from the tailings were gently washed with water and studied by SEM. The SEM images of the quartz particles are presented in Evidently, both types of particles, i.e. alumina ( It was reported earlier that both silica and TMCS treated quartz are highly negatively charged (the zeta potential is −40 As shown earlier, the removal of fine particles from the pulp is, to some extent, beneficial for the flotation of coarse particles. A single stage of desliming increased the recovery of coarse quartz particles in the presence of fine alumina, although in the presence of fine silica, it was rather unsuccessful. In contrast, adding a second stage of desliming for the alumina containing pulp was ineffective, but appreciably improved the recovery of quartz in the pulp containing fine silica. The positive effect of desliming may be attributed to detachment of fine particles from the surface of the coarse particles, thus restoring the value of the contact angle. However, it seems that the success of the desliming process depends on the type of the interaction between the fine and coarse particles, as well as on the concentration of fine particles in the pulp and, possibly, turbulence and fluid velocity in the flotation cell ( In previous work ( Adsorption of fines onto the surface of the coarse particles decreases the coarse particle contact angle. In the cases, where the coarse particles become unrecoverable as a result of the adsorbed fine particles, their contact angle decreases to a value lower than the critical contact angle determined in water. Conducting the flotation tests at higher viscosity is beneficial to the recovery of the coarse particles in two ways: (i) the high viscosity medium decreases turbulent energy dissipation in the flotation cell, resulting in an increase in the stability of bubble–particle aggregates and (ii) the contact angle of coarse particles does not need to be as high for the particles to be recovered. In practice, desliming is sometimes used to remove fine particles from the pulp and to reduce the amount of fine hydrophilic particles attached to the coarse particles. This is recognition of the controlling behaviour of the fine particles on coarse particle recovery, and the sensitivity of coarse particles to changes in contact angle. Moreover, desliming may also be accompanied by deliberate changes in pulp viscosity by the introduction of high viscosity media. This combination of approaches has been used to successfully increase the recovery of coarse composite particles from an ore ( The depression of coarse particle recovery was due the attachment of fine hydrophilic particles, which resulted in a decrease in particle mean contact angle. Increasing the pulp viscosity using fine particles failed to benefit the coarse particle recovery due to the dominant effect of fine particle attachment, which was attributed to the fact that the flotation recovery of coarse particle is very sensitive to particle hydrophobicity. Desliming was successful in restoring recovery to a degree probably due to detachment of fine hydrophilic particles and an increase in the contact angle of coarse particles. Further increases in the recovery of coarse particles were apparent with the high viscosity medium using glycerol as a viscosity modifier. Financial support from AMIRA International, the Australian Research Council and University of South Australia, is gratefully acknowledged.