We describe the methodical and possibilities of 3D surgical printing in preoperative planning for a total hip arthroplasty in acetabular deformity after acetabular fractures, showing a case of a 43-year-old with posttraumatic arthritis after both column fracture of the left acetabulum that was treated non operatively, supporting the do it yourself mode.Displaced acetabular fractures constitute a surgical challenge for the orthopaedic surgeon. An anatomical congruence between the femoral head and the acetabulum is essential for good long-term results in these fractures. Residual displacements greater than 2 mm lead to early coxarthrosis and poor functional outcomes [ Lately, the advances in three-dimensional reconstruction of radiological studies have provided tools for virtual surgical planning, obtaining reconstructions that are easier to interpret, even by less experienced surgeons. From the diagnostic images of the case, the study can be rendered software, and can even be exported as a three-dimensional mesh to obtain a real model in a 3D printer. This 3D preoperative impression allows a more effective diagnosis and helps in the simulation of the surgical procedure. Thanks to the improvement of the domestic computers, more intuitive development of the software and decrease of its cost, access to several formative platforms and to domestic 3D printers, all this process can be realized by the final user, in such a way that has facilitated the “Do It Yourself” (DIY) style, even in our daily practice as orthopaedic surgeons [ The goal of this paper is to describe a methodology for applying 3D technology thru a DIY processing, analyzing advantages and potential drawbacks in total hip arthroplasties after acetabular fractures treated non-operatively. We describe our method thru a clinical case that underwent surgical treatment at our institution. We present the case of a 43-year-old male who attended our outpatient clinic reporting severe progressive constant pain in the left side of the groin, compromised functionality and shortening of 3 cm. 5 months before, after a fall from a height of ten meters, he suffered several fractures (pelvis, spinal, elbow, metatarsal) that were managed non operatively at that time and a left diaphyseal femoral fracture that was treated with an intramedullary nail. The patient’s walking ability was very limited and he required a wheelchair to get around. Tapentadol 200 mg every 12 h was not able to relieve the pain. On examination, the affected leg showed apparent shortening of 3 cm upon inspection with functional impairment and limited hip range of motion with a marked tendency of external rotation while flexing the hip ( X-ray and CT scan evidenced severe deformity of the left acetabulum with proximal migration of the femoral head and clear images of coxarthrosis, a consequence of the acetabular fracture ( In order to create our preoperative surgical planning, we used the DICOM archives of the standard multislice CT performed to the patient (Philips Brilliance 64, 0.625 mm slice thickness). The CT study was loaded into the radiological post-processing software OsiriX Due to the complexity of the model, supports were generated in order to maintain the model to the printing bed during the printing process. The bone model itself presents many cavities, in addition to an acetabular joint surface disrupted by the defect lines, caused by the old fracture lines, so different supports were needed in this area in order to reproduce reliably the STL model. It was also especially important to place the STL model properly in the bed of printing in order to reproduce all the shapes during printing, that is the reason vertical the areas that required more detail since the resolution is greater in the vertical direction than in the plane. After obtaining the printed hemipelvis ( The patient was admitted on the same day of the procedure and placed under intrathecal anesthesia in the lateral decubitus position, using a standard hip posterolateral approach. The gluteus medius was easily identified and elevated to enable access. As the short rotators could not be individually identified, they were separated by blunt dissection using Cobb dissectors. After identifying the femoral neck, we performed in situ femoral osteotomy, avoiding dislocation and taking care not to damage the anterior column. We continued distal dissection from the upper rim of the acetabulum towards the obturator foramen, clearing away fibrosis and osteophyte residue from the lower rim of the native acetabulum. The fracture healing was checked. Once the fibrotic tissue was removed by curettes the acetabular bone loss, type of deficiency and remaining bone stock was analyzed and it was considered as a severe segmental and cavitary defect according to the AAOS classification [ Regarding the femoral component, an uncemented fully hydroxyapatite-coated stem of 12 mm was used (Corail We administered three doses of cefazolin (2 g every 8 h) and routine anticoagulation with low molecular weight heparin (3500 IU bemiparin subcutaneously) 6 h after surgical closure, maintaining the once-daily dose for 35 days. No prophylaxis against heterotopic bone formation was given. The patient was discharged from hospital 5 days after his admission, beginning rehabilitation therapy and toe-touch weight bearing with crutches after suction drainages removal, two days after the surgery, beginning with partial weight bearing one month after surgery, and increased as tolerated after six weeks. After two months the patient was allowed to walk without the aid of crutches. Radiological images were taken to check the position of the implants. A Merle d’Aubigne and Postel system modified by Charnley was used for the clinical evaluation [ The patient developed no clinical complications following the procedure. In the postoperative radiographic analysis of anteroposterior view of the pelvis and anteroposterior and axial views of the hip, the centre of rotation of the hip and length discrepancy was recovered ( After six months of monitoring, the patient’s functional capacity was excellent, with no pain, recovered flexion of 100° and abduction to 30°, no leg length discrepancy and walk without a cane but with a slight limp, which gives him a score of 12 points on the modified Merle d’Aubigne-Postel scale. Shoe lift was no longer used after the surgery. Acetabular fractures are usually complex high-energy processes affecting young people. They frequently need open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF). It is recommended to consider surgical treatment if there is articular displacement of 2 mm or greater, weight-bearing area location, femoral head subluxation, roof arches greater than 25° anteriorly, 45° medially, 70° posteriorly, 50% of posterior wall affection or less than a 50% but subluxation under a fluoroscopic examination with a 90° of hip flexion and posteriorly pressure [ Before Matta described better surgical results when the anatomical reduction was achieved (<2 mm of intraarticular displacement) many other authors had observed that in those acetabular fractures where weight-bearing dome was affected or a lack of joint congruency was found, poor conservative results were obtained. If none of these criteria are present, or patients are medically not prepared, most studies find satisfactory results for conservative treatment between 75–80% [ ORIF continue being the gold standard treatment. In a review in 2014 ORIF obtained an anatomical reduction in 70–75% in young people and 45.3% in old ones. Conversion into THA was found in an average of 8.5% when all ages were included and 23.1% when geriatric patients were studied [ Percutaneous techniques search sufficient stability with a less aggressive surgical approach, minor blood loss, and risk of complications. It is also used as a complementary technique when an acute or delayed THA is considered. Delayed THA after percutaneous techniques are not more required than after ORIF in old people (25–26%) and blood loss is reduced ten times [ The best timing for treating acute acetabular fractures has been largely discussed and isn’t still clear. Many factors are involved: fracture pattern, approach, patient immune-inflammatory status or associated injuries [ Delayed THA can be recommended in posttraumatic osteoarthritis, avascular necrosis or ORIF failed. Due to the extensive scarring, retained fixation material, residual deformity, acetabular nonunion, osteonecrosis of the femoral head or heterotopic ossification, secondary THA is more difficult than primary THA and there are a higher risk complication and blood loss [ Regarding complications of acetabular fractures, arthritis is developed in an 18% when the anatomic reduction is achieved, in a 58% when a 1–3 mm intra-articular incongruence and 100% when >3 mm incongruence is present [ Under those situations, THA after an acetabular fracture has more infection rates (7%), heterotopic ossification (46%) and dislocation 11% [ Heterotopic ossification appears in 10–40% of surgical managed cases [ Dislocation rates go from 4 to 14%. Bone defects and anatomy modification after acetabular fracture make acetabular component orientation difficult. Posterior approach, scarring tissue, bone impingement and muscular deficit because of patient’s age or long-term non-bearing periods could explain the higher dislocation rates than in primary THA [ Altered anatomy, non-union, bone loss (lack of reduction, acetabular or femoral necrosis, osteolysis because of pervious hardware), osteopenic bone quality, force the surgeon to take a revision-like attitude when planning delayed posttraumatic THA after an acetabular fracture. Bone defects are usually classified by the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons (AAOS) or Paprosky classifications. The AAOS takes into consideration if the defects affected the acetabular rim (segmentary), intrinsic acetabular bone stock (cavitary) or combination of both. On the other hand, Paprosky classification gives an idea of location and measure of the defect [ The case that we present was defined pre-operatively as a type IIIB, according to the Paprosky classification, and intra-operatively as a severe combined segmental and cavitary defect (type III), according to the AAOS classification. To reconstruct the defect we can select bone graft (structural or morselized), meshes, cup-cage, acetabular ring and cages, jumbo or oblong acetabulum, trabecular metal augments or customized implants. How to choose between them? Surgeons experience, economical resources, and acetabular defect type would determine our final planning [ When there is no rim defect and loss of acetabulum surface is smaller than 30% (Paprosky I, II and AAOS II), a non-cemented acetabular component is indicated achieving a survivorship comparable to those acetabular implants set in non-posttraumatic hips. Non-cemented implants have predictable excellent results in comparison to cemented ones which survival varies between series [ Oblong cups avoid the use of structural graft when a big superior defect is present. The implant design helps in restoring hip rotation centre and a larger surface keeps contact with bone. On the other hand, less versatility than augments is given and no replacement of bone stock would make challenging a new revision [ Jumbo acetabular components are hemispherical non-cemented implants thought to achieve a three-point support on pubis, ischium and iliac bones by reaming sizes over 70 mm when peripheral rim is intact (the main point of contact for a better survival). The cons for electing this implant are the big lost of bone during reaming, difficult revision if loosening, elevation of hip rotation centre, and psoas impingement because of anterior wall disruption [ Bone grafting has traditionally been the gold standard technique for bone defects supplementation. The acetabular bed is biologically favourable to graft integration because of high vascularisation and contained surface. For hip artrhoplasty revision, freeze-frozen allogenic femoral heads are usually employed. They can be reamed with same acetabular size reamer so an anatomical structural allograft would be obtained, or they can be used for obtaining with a rongeur small cancellous bone pieces (1–10 mm). The smaller the pieces obtained the better bone integration will be achieved but the worse structural resistance. 20-year survival rates of 87% have been reported for cemented impaction bone grafting and 9-year survival of 94% for hidroxiapatite-coated acetabulum on impacted bone graft [ Cotyloid defects with no rim integrity (Paprosky III) and 30–50% of bone lost, (segmentary, cavitary or both, though AAOS I or III); hemispherical cotyloid implants, cages, rings, trabecular metal augments, oblong or bilobed cups can be used.Structural allograft for big bone defects has been used for minor and major column defects. When used for minor defects, screws for graft fixation and acetabular implant to achieve mechanical stability. 10-year survivorship has been reported to be 78%. If major column defects are solved by bulky allografts, cages or rings should be used for loading protection. 50% of survival rates are registered for bulky structural allografts without protection device and 87.5% when used [ Before trabecular metal era, it was needed for a correct acetabular fixation at least 50% of bone contact. Nowadays, new series have demonstrated survival rates of 94% with a 5 and 10 year follow up, with tantalum implants and structural allograft, even if less than 50% of contact was achieved [ If there is more than 50% of the acetabular bone defect, bulky grafts and augments can be protected by cages. Antiprotusio cages are implants that bridge the defect and transmit loading into iliac bone and ischium. Cages like Burch-Schneider doesn’t have a biological integration and mechanical failure is the most important cause of failure with a reported 6 and 7- year survivorship of 49.9 and 64% [ Custom made implants try to solve the irregularity of bone defects that are different for each patient. When talking about big defects or pelvic discontinuity, the capacity of planning and adapting our implant to our patients becomes crucial for a better hip anatomy restoration and reduction of operating time. The time between the image studies, implant manufacturing and surgery moment, could be enough to develop a new bone defect when operating. This option doesn’t guarantee better survival implant or anatomical restoration for rotation hip centre [ Thanks to the three-dimensional rendering options of the digital radiology archives obtained by helical axial tomography, both the diagnostic phase and the preoperative design phase have gone one step further in the management of acetabular defects [ Preoperative planning using 3D printed models have been used for treating multiple acute fractures and deformities. However we are not aware of previous publication describing a DIY method in order to address an acetabular sequel [ Regarding the printer used, we selected the model Ultimaker 2+ Extended as it has a large printing volume (223 × 223 x 305 mm), and offers a hot bed to facilitate the adhesion of the printed material. It allows printing in many different materials, offering excellent results in all of them. Its interchangeable extrusion tip system makes it easy to obtain different print speeds, as well as different finishes depending on the quality or speed of printing selected in the preferences of the software [ As disadvantages of 3D printing we could cite resolution limitations of 0.1 mm as maximum and trouble to include cartilage and soft tissue, which are excluded in the process of rendering of the native radiological image. So until we don´t surgically remove all that tissues from the acetabulum the concordance with the printed model can be not as exact as expected. We also have to consider that the need to use reamers in order to size the native bone to a spherical shape can undersize the expected cup in the model. In our case we used a definitive cup of 58, when in the plastic model we planned a trial of 56. This different is based on the bone removed by the last reamer. As the cartilage needed to be removed in the area where the augments were planned to be, the correlation of the augment trials was exact compare with the size and location of the definitive augments [ Fractures of the acetabulum are complex. Its treatment has to be adapted depending on patient physiological reserves. THA has been used as a primary and delayed solution for fracture or sequel treatment. When talking about delayed treatment THA revision concepts guide surgery decisions. Planning surgery becomes crucial when complex tridimensional defects and structures are present. We believe that 3D printing technology may lead to effectively achieve a predefined surgical objective. Sánchez-Pérez C, Rodríguez-Lozano G, Rojo-Manaute