A cyanidation study was conducted on a mild refractory gold ore sample from the Central zone of Clarence Stream Property, owned by Freewest Resources Canada, to develop a leaching strategy to extract gold. Gold, at a grade of 8.00g/t, is present as native gold, electrum and aurostibite. The ore also contains 2.8% pyrrhotite, together with several antimony minerals (0.8% berthierite and gudmundite, 0.18% native antimony and stibnite). It also exhibits weak preg-robbing properties with 0.16% organic carbon. Aurostibite, a gold antimony compound, is particularly known to be insoluble in cyanide solution. The antimony dissolves in cyanide solution to form antimonates, which retards gold dissolution. Industrial practice of extracting gold from aurostibite generally consists of producing a flotation concentrate, which is leached in a pipe reactor at low alkalinity and high oxygen pressure with about 20g/L cyanide.
                  The proposed new approach is efficient and allows the extraction of gold directly from an ore at atmospheric pressure and a low cyanide concentration at pH 10.5. The effects of grinding, pre-treatment, lead nitrate, kerosene and cyanide concentrations have been investigated. The maximum gold extraction obtained on the ore was 87.9% using 800ppm NaCN, 500g/t lead nitrate, 30g/t kerosene, DO (dissolved oxygen) 10ppm and pH 10.5 in 168h. The associated cyanide consumption was 1.3kg/t. The additions of lead nitrate and kerosene increased gold extraction. In comparison to a P80 of 74μm, a P80 of 30μm significantly increased gold extraction. Gold in solid solution in gudmundite and arsenopyrite was believed to be responsible for the un-leached fraction until mineralogical analysis of hydroseparation concentrates of leach residues showed that most of the un-leached gold occurs as aurostibite, either as locked grains in sulphides/sulpharsenides or as grains with passivation rims of an Au–Sb–O phase. Coarse gold was also found. Gold extraction was not sensitive to cyanide concentration from 250 to 1200ppm NaCN and high pH was detrimental. Decreasing the cyanide concentration reduced the cyanide consumption from 1.39 to 0.85kg/t. The removal of coarse gold using a Knelson concentrator and a Mosley table prior to leaching increased the gold extraction to 90.4% (leach residue at 0.77g/t). Previous work by Mintek on a Central zone sample indicated that only 53% of the gold is accessible to direct cyanidation ( Following a preliminary assessment by Mintek that indicated that only 53% of gold could be recovered by direct cyanidation, a contract was allocated to CANMET/MMSL to increase gold extraction using cyanidation under normal conditions ( The Central zone sample (38 The sample has a significant amount of pyrrhotite (2.8%), metallic antimony and stibnite (0.18%), some berthierite and gudmundite (0.8%), and a small amount of pyrite (0.2%). Characterization of gold in two samples had previously indicated the presence of native gold and electrum (44% and 46%), as well as a significant amount of aurostibite (AuSb The samples were ground in 3 After achieving maximum gold dissolution from a series of tests, it was decided to examine two leach residues by making hydroseparation concentrates and studying them by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). A novel laboratory technique called “hydroseparation” (HS) has recently been developed in Russia ( The quick lime Ca(OH) The duration of cyanidation tests varied from 96 to 120 At the end of each test, the pulp was filtered and the filter cake was washed with 1000 Carbon-In-Leach experiment was performed by adding activated carbon (Haycarb) to the slurry at the start of the test. The carbon was previously conditioned according to the following method. Approximately 500 Gold fire assay of leach residues and loaded carbon were performed in triplicate. The gold extraction was based on the metal content values of the processed tails and the direct sample head assay. To determine the mass balance in each experiment, the gold content of the calculated head sample was obtained by adding the gold content values of the tails, the liquid samples, the pregnant solution and the wash solution. Gold concentration in the solution was used to plot the extraction kinetic curves. Free cyanide was determined by titration with silver nitrate using rhodamine as an indicator. For the free cyanide concentration, the controlled value was a time weighted average obtained by the summation of the average content values ( The preg-robbing study was conducted to determine the capacity of gold preg-robbing. One lot of Freewest ore was divided into four homogenous parts. Each part was agitated with a cyanide solution containing a known amount of dissolved gold. The pulp density was 45%. The test conditions were: 1 The initial response of the ore to direct cyanidation is surprising, considering that ∼56% of the gold is in the form of aurostibite and that Mintek investigation indicated that only 53% of the gold is available to direct cyanidation, an additional 7% Au can be extracted using Carbon-In-Leach and 20% Au were included in sulphide minerals ( It was observed previously that Pb(NO The interaction of lead and antimony during dissolution of aurostibite in cyanide solution is unknown. The significant amount of pyrrhotite (2.8%) in the ore also has impact on gold leaching and cyanide consumption. Pyrrhotite is a mineral with an iron deficient surface with complicated mechanisms. The mechanism for formation is by diffusion of Fe and polymerization of the residual S. A general reaction describing the overall dissolution and oxidation of pyrrhotite can be expressed according to Eq. The reaction of pyrrhotite is inhibited by the formation of iron hydroxide layer and by the presence of lead hydroxide or oxide on the surface of pyrrhotite particles (  The leaching time was extended to 120 Preg-robbing was further investigated using the procedure published by Using 250 Leaching at pH <10 certainly decreased the concentration of antimony in solution (37  Increasing the kerosene addition from 30 to 80  The gold content of the sample obtained by fire assay is 8.00 Several particles of aurostibite and a single particle of free native gold were found by mineralogical study of the hydroseparation concentrates of two cyanidation residues (with 0.97 and 1.49 The removal of coarse gold (0.57 Gold can be efficiently extracted from the Central zone sample of Clarence Stream Property, NB. using a cyanide concentration as low as 250 We would like to thank Don Hoy, Freewest Resources Canada Inc., for the authorization to publish this paper, to Patricia Hunt for the SEM images, to Rolando Lastra for mineralogical analysis of the head sample, and Regina Karwowska for the chemical analyses.