Anaerobic co-digestion of grease trap and sewage sludge from a wastewater treatment plant is evaluated. Enzyme-lipase application, both addition and dosage, are evaluated by fitting the methane production of biochemical potential tests with the first order model. The enzyme addition effect, at 2, 5 and 10% of grease trap (%GTVSFED
                     −1) and the enzymes doses, between 0.25 and 1.67% (v/v), without and with grease trap presence were studied. Grease trap addition showed a negative effect on the waste biodegradability, which was completely overcome by the addition of lipase. Enzyme addition improved notably the methane production for all grease trap fractions studied. In regards to the dosage, the best result was achieved between 0.33 and 0.83% (v/v) of enzyme. The co-digestion of sewage sludge and grease trap may be a feasible process by using lipases due to the saving in operational costs and the increase in the biogas productionAnaerobic digestion is a consolidated technology in the treatment of organic solid waste. Among them, one of the most important applications has been the anaerobic treatment and stabilization of sewage sludge (SS) generated from the surplus of biomass produced in the aeration tank of activated sludge systems in wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) Grease trap (GT) is a solid waste (scum layer) obtained from the flotation process in a WWTP, which is composed by several types of oil and fat. Normally, GT is collected and disposed in landfills; however, this waste must be stabilized prior to disposing due to strict regulations and the associated problems with this type of waste (such as foul odors). Anaerobic digestion might be used in order to degrade and stabilize GT along with SS. An important advantage of this is that the same existing facilities for sewage sludge degradation can be used, thereby not comprising further investment costs. Moreover, the GT, due to its high lipid-content, represents an attractive source for biomethanization, due to the higher methane yield obtained when compared to proteins or carbohydrates. Anaerobic co-digestion is a process where several wastes are used as substrate, for instance, SS and lipid-rich waste The enzymes application can improve the anaerobic degradation of lipids, since catalyzes the hydrolysis of long chain fatty acids. Enzymes are biodegradable and harmless for the anaerobic treatment processes and aquatic ecosystems; in addition, their contribution to the BOD in the waste stream is negligible. Lipases have been used in anaerobic treatment of fat-wastewater Batch anaerobic digestion tests were carried out to assess the SS-GT biodegradability. All the experiments were done in duplicate. Anaerobic sludge (inoculum) from a pilot-scale anaerobic digester treating mixed waste-activated sludge was used as inoculum for the anaerobic test. Serum bottles, with a volume of 60 For this experiment mixed SS (60% primary sludge and 40% secondary sludge) and GT from a conventional WWTP in Valladolid (Spain) were used. 1 Two series of anaerobic batch experiments were carried out in order to evaluate: (1) the effect of the enzyme addition and (2) the enzyme dosage. For experiment 1, three concentrations of GT were evaluated: 2, 5 and 10 (%w as %GT In the case that the hydrolysis of the particulate organic matter is the rate limiting step, a first order equation (Eq. Finally, once the covariance matrix is available, an approximation of the standard deviation ( Total solids (TS) and volatile solids (VS) concentrations in all samples were determined by heating at 105 The kinetic parameters  For all GT concentrations enzyme doses, the first order model adequately described methane production as it can be observed from the values of the determination coefficient ( Once the effect of the lipase addition was evaluated, several enzyme doses (0.25, 0.33, 0.83 and 1.67%, v/v) were tested, with and without the presence of GT. Nevertheless, it is worth to point out that this experiment was carried out with substrate and inoculum from the same origin but taken at different time, which can certainly exert an effect on the results, as discussed below. The enzyme addition without GT (only SS as substrate) was tested in order to evaluate the potential effect of the enzyme on the SS degradability and its contribution to the total methane produced. In regards to the application of enzyme in the anaerobic degradation of sewage sludge, the When GT is added (5%), there is a clear positive effect of the enzyme addition on the biodegradability when the dose is equal or higher than 0.33%. At 0.25%, there was not a clear effect of the enzyme addition on the degradation kinetic compared to the one performed at the same conditions in experiment 1, which has to be related with the GT characteristics used for this experiment. Lipases action is an interfacial phenomenon which depends on the concentration and the interface characteristics, thereby in this case, a 0.25% is a too low concentration in order to overcome the mass transfer limitation for the lipase can access to the lipids present in the GT. Furthermore, these interfacial problems have been seen increased when substrates with a high suspended solids content are used, such as SS As the previous case, the reaction curve-type model agrees with the experimental data for all enzyme doses, showing determination coefficients ( The economical assessment of the benefit of applying lipase for the anaerobic co-digestion of SS and GT cannot be done directly since batch tests were used in this case, and continuous or semi-continuous systems are usually used in full scale plants. Nevertheless an approximation can be made through the use of the kinetic parameters estimated during the fitting process. Taking as example, for instance, the results from experiment 1 (with 5% of GT and an enzyme dose of 0.25%, v/v) and a given waste flow of 100 Grease trap from wastewater treatment plant is an increasing concern in the plant solid waste management. This study demonstrates the feasibility of the anaerobic co-digestion of sewage sludge and grease trap by using lipase. The enzyme addition, lipase-type, can benefit the biodegradation process, increasing significantly the production rate and the total production of methane. Lipase doses between 0.2 and 0.5 The University of Valladolid group is member of the Consolider-Novedar network. Andres Donoso-Bravo is supported by the