This paper discusses a study of silver precipitation in elemental form in the S2O3
                     2−–S2O4
                     2− system. The nature and kinetics of this process were determined. Using the method described here, silver precipitation is characterized by an induction period, followed by a conversion (precipitation) period, until almost all the silver is precipitated, leaving in solution a metal amount less than 1 ppm. Aggregates of individual crystals with a size less than 0.5 μm were obtained. In thiosulfate medium 1 mol dithionite precipitated 2 mol silver, whereas without thiosulfate in the reaction system, 1 mol dithionite precipitated 6 mol silver. In the kinetic study and in the induction period, the inverse of this parameter was proportional to [S2O4
                     2−]0.4 and an apparent activation energy of 108 kJ mol−1 was obtained. During the conversion period, the reaction order with respect to [S2O3
                     2−] was n
                     =−3, and with respect to the initial [S2O4
                     2−] it was a 0.9. An activation energy of 52 kJ mol−1 was obtained. On the basis of the behavior described, an empirical mathematical model, including the induction and conversion periods, was established, which fits well with the experimental results. The precipitation process was applied to an industrial effluent (a fixing bath); metallic silver was obtained with a recovery of more than 99%.In the last few years the price of silver has undergone a spectacular rise in spite of the increased number of digitalization processes in different fields of photography and radiology. Photographic processes consume a large volume of silver. For example, the fixing baths used to remove silver halides in development contain large amounts of silver (5–12 g L Other silver-containing effluents ( In gold hydrometallurgy, the ammonia–copper thiosulfate system has been well studied as an alternative method (  Electrowinning ( Metallic silver can also be recovered by cementation ( Silver precipitation as sulfide ( Ion exchange resins ( Silver recovery from thiosulfate effluents presents great interest from the environmental as well as the economic point of view. Effluents with silver concentration less than 0.005 g L This paper is a study of silver precipitation in the S All the reagents used in this study (silver nitrate, sodium thiosulfate, sodium dithionite, NaOH and sulfuric acid) were of reagent grade. The industrial effluent used in the application of the silver precipitation process was a fixing bath from the photographic industry in which silver had been previously recovered by electrolysis, leaving in the effluent a silver concentration close to 1 g L All the experiments were carried out in a conventional reactor of 0.5 The general experimental conditions used were: temperature, 25 °C; pH, 6.0; stirring rate, 400 min The nucleation of silver precipitates started when solid sodium dithionite was added to the silver-thiosulfate solutions (the dithionite dissolution in this system is instantaneous). The progress of the reaction was followed by taking samples of the solution throughout the experiment and testing Ag by atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS). Before these analyses, each sample was added to a cyanide-containing solution to stop the silver precipitation reaction. Variations in the mass balance due to the sampling and reagent addition were corrected. Solids obtained at different conversion values were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X-ray energy dispersive analysis (EDS). A silver precipitation experiment was carried out in the following conditions: temperature, 25 °C; pH, 6.0; stirring rate, 400 min The process shows an induction period (0–7.5 min); during this period a silver precipitate is formed but with a very low level conversion (X For 120 min or higher, some silver re-dissolution was observed that increases with time. This is related with a parallel process of dithionite oxidation according to the following reaction: In the presence of thiosulfate, 1 mol dithionite precipitates 2 mol silver. The presence of sulfites in the residual liquids after precipitation was confirmed by iodometry and by ionic chromatography; a quantitative analysis was carried out by iodometry, indicating that almost all the dithionite was oxidized to sulfite. Thus, the stoichiometry of the process, in these experimental conditions, can be described by the following equation: For comparative purposes, an additional experiment was carried out in absence of thiosulfate in the reaction system in the following conditions: 25 °C; pH, 6.0; stirring rate, 400 min Analysis by chromatography and by iodometry confirmed the absence of sulfites and the presence of sulfates in the residual liquids. In the absence of thiosulfate, 1 mol dithionite precipitates 6 mol silver. In this case, the stoichiometry of the process can be described by the following equation: The effect of stirring speed, temperature, and concentrations of OH The effect of stirring speed was determined in the interval between 0 and 900 min The effect of temperature was determined in the interval of 15–60 °C. Sulfur content in these precipitates was determined by elemental analysis: 15 and 25 °C, < The process, in which Ag At 25 °C, the standard Gibbs free energy for this process is − The effect of temperature on the induction time is shown in The effect of OH The effect of thiosulfate concentration on silver precipitation was determined in the interval of 0–110 g L The silver thiosulfate complex is very stable with a pK This pK value indicates that the non-complexed silver concentration is very low and this concentration decreases sharply as the thiosulfate concentration increases; this affects the silver precipitation rate obtaining a negative apparent reaction order of − The deviation from linearity for the point corresponding to the experiment carried out without thiosulfate is due to the fact that the mechanism for this reaction is quite different: in the presence of thiosulfate (11.2–110 g L The effect of initial dithionite concentration on silver precipitation was determined in the interval of 0.75–12.8 (0.006 M–0.1 M) g L The effect of the initial silver concentration was determined in the interval between 0.31 and 3 g L According to the results obtained for the induction period, the expression for this parameter is: The deviation of the According to the results obtained for the precipitation period, the expression for the conversion  From expressions  The optimum parameters corresponding to the silver precipitation process were applied to an industrial fixing bath in which silver was partially recovered by electrolysis. The main components of the bath after industrial electrolysis are: 1.05 g L One experiment was carried out in the following conditions: temperature, 25 °C; pH, 8.0 (adjusted by using NaOH 0.5 M); stirring rate, 400 min A second experiment was carried out in the same conditions, but at pH 6.0.   Silver precipitation in the system Ag The stoichiometry of the silver precipitation in thiosulfate medium using sodium dithionite, in the experimental conditions employed can be described by the following equation: The stoichiometry of the silver precipitation without thiosulfate in the reaction system, using sodium dithionite, in the experimental conditions employed, can be described by the following equation: The solids characterization using XRD and SEM-EDS confirms the formation of metallic silver in the form of aggregates of individual crystals with a size less than 0.5 μm. For a reaction time higher than 120 min, little silver re-dissolution was observed that increases with time. Once dithionite was consumed by silver precipitation and by oxidation, re-oxidation of silver, in presence of thiosulfate and oxygen, occurred. An apparent activation energy of 52 In the conversion period, the apparent reaction order with respect to OH Based on the behavior described, an empirical mathematical model, including the induction and conversion periods for the silver precipitation by using sodium dithionite was established, and this fits well with the experimental results obtained. The precipitation process in the system Ag The authors thank the CONACYT of the Mexican Government and the CICYT of the Spanish Government (PPQ2001-3524) for their financial support. Thanks are also due to the Serveis Científicotècnics de la Universitat de Barcelona for their assistance in this work.