To assist in identifying faults that have a significant potential for displacement at or near the ground surface, we carried out in-depth investigations on fault gouges and a fracture infilled with clay (clay vein) in the Kojaku Granite on the Tsuruga Peninsula, central Japan. We sampled several fault gouges at different stages of evolutions and clay-rich infilling of a fracture with no evidence of offset. Based on our field observations, gouge in an active fault is characterized by 1) stacked layers of different colors made up of comminuted fragments and clays, and 2) injection of the fragments and clays from the gouge into the surrounding rocks, indicating an accumulation of seismic-induced shearing. Our thin-section observations and X-ray diffraction analyses show that all our samples are similar in the degree of fragmentation and mineral composition, and because of this, our study became focused mainly on microscopic features using laser diffraction particle size analysis, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). We identified the mineralogical and textural characteristics of the samples in order to improve our ability to discriminate between active and inactive faulting. Particle size distribution analysis showed that the gouge in the active fault contains the greatest abundance of finer particles due to multiple slip events, which contrasts with the clay-rich infilling of a fracture. SEM examination of the quartz particles showed that the gouge in the active fault contains more particles that have retained sharp and smooth crystal surfaces (formed by fracturing) than do either the gouges in minor faults (that show no evidence of recent shear) or the clay-rich infilling of a fracture. In contrast, TEM observations of very fine clay minerals (approximately <0.2μm) showed that the minerals in the gouge from the active fault are abraded and corroded to an equal or higher degree than the minerals in gouges from minor faults with no recent shear. Clay minerals in the fault gouges underwent abrasion and dissolution due to repeated fault activity, whereas relatively hard quartz particles that are wrapped with relatively soft clays have been less affected by abrasion. Repeated fault activity involving granite fragmentation in a fault zone results in the continual addition of new quartz particles from the granite, and these particles exhibit sharp and smooth crystal surfaces. Based on the results of the multiple methods described above, we show that examination of the surface textures of quartz particles is a useful tool for understanding the differences between active and inactive faulting in granitic rocks.Near-surface faulting in brittle regimes often results in the development of fault gouge (e.g., On the other hand, fractures filled with clay minerals described as “clay veins” occur in quartzo-feldspathic rocks due to hydrothermal alteration ( Several approaches to determining the activity of faults have included the use of faulted materials for particle size analysis (e.g., Samples were collected from fault gouges and the clay-rich infilling of a fracture defined as a clay vein in the Kojaku Granite in the western part of the Tsuruga Peninsula, central Japan ( Geological surveys have been conducted as part of the safety assessments for nuclear power plants in this area ( Joints are developed in the granite of the study area. Most joints are subvertical, though minor subhorizontal joints have also been observed. The most common strike of the subvertical joints is NNE-SSW to NE-SW, but a secondary group strikes orthogonally at NW-SE ( We collected clay samples for analysis from three sites in fault gouges (sites 1 to 3) and from one site in the clay-rich infilling of a fracture (site 4; Fault gouge 1 is located in the fault zone of the Shiraki-Nyu Fault which comprises a fault core and adjacent damage zones in the Kojaku Granite (the terms ‘fault core’ and ‘damage zone’ are as defined by The fault core is composed of incohesive cataclasite and fault gouge (the fault rock terminology is from A dark brownish fault gouge (2–6 Multiple sets of composite planar fabric can be identified in the fault zone. The composite planar fabric within the brownish fault gouge shows a dextral strike-slip sense of movement on horizontal sections ( Fault gouge 2 occurs along a NNE-SSW-oriented fault exposed in granite bedrock ( The granite bedrock in contact with the gouge is still massive and intact, except for alteration and minor fractures ( The foliated part of the gouge includes a composite planar fabric showing a dextral sense of shear ( The gouge at site 3 is pale gray and 2–6 We collected a pale gray to green clay sample from clay-rich infilling of a fracture exposed along a road cut (site 4; Examination of all the samples under the optical microscope clearly indicates a significant grain size reduction and the formation of clay minerals ( The mineral compositions of the fault gouges and the clay-rich infilling of a fracture have been determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using powder films of the bulk samples and oriented smear slides of < We analyzed the particle size distributions using a laser diffraction-scattering particle size distribution analyzer (HORIBA LA-950V2) housed at Toki Research Institute of Isotope Geology and Geochronology, Japan Atomic Energy Agency (JAEA), Gifu, Japan. This analyzer has light sources of a 650 The measured samples display multimodal distributions, with several particle size frequency peaks ( Mean, median, and modal values for a total of five samples from each site indicate that the smaller values are in fault gouge 1, and that the higher values that characterize the clay-rich infilling of a fracture and fault gouges 2 and 3 vary considerably (  Quartz fragment types were classified ( The results show that fault gouge 1 is dominated by Type 1 quartz fragments ( The shapes of the fine clay particles from fault gouges 1, 2, and 3 were examined by TEM. Samples from outcrops (samples 1-4 from site 1, samples 2–4 from site 2, and sample 3-a from site 3) were prepared by placing one drop of a diluted suspension of the clay onto a copper micro grid (3 Both subrounded and subangular particles were observed by TEM in all the samples. However, subrounded particles were more visible in fault gouge 1 ( For quantitative analysis, the circularity (form factor; To examine particle roundness or angularity, we made histograms of circularity measured from particles in TEM images from samples 1-4, 2-4, and 3-a. However, elongate particles with Ψ The field observations show clear differences in terms of multiple slip events between the fault gouge at site 1 and the other gouges at sites 2 and 3. Fault gouge 1 consists of laminated layers defined by different colour intensities that are due to variations in fragment size, density, and mineral content ( With respect to fault gouges 2 and 3, there are no typical structures that indicate an accumulation of shearing, though simple shear structures ( In contrast to the field observations, thin-section observations and the mineral compositions determined by XRD analysis did not allow us to make conclusive discriminations between these various gouges. The foliation, defined by an alignment of clay minerals and fine fragments, can be identified, along with a decrease in fragment size, in some parts of fault gouges 2 and 3 (e.g., The opaque minerals in fault gouge 1 are characterized by their fragmentation ( We discuss in this section a further constraint to discriminate between active and inactive faulting in terms of an analysis of their particle size distribution. In numerous previous studies (e.g., The proportion of coarser particles is generally higher in fault gouges 2 and 3 than in fault gouge 1. Median and modal values from a total of five measurements for each sample are smaller in fault gouge 1 than in fault gouges 2 and 3, and the clay-rich infilling of a fracture ( The surface textures of quartz fragments in fault gouges have been studied extensively by SEM observations of samples from the study area show that Type 1 quartz is clearly dominant in fault gouge 1 whereas Type 4 quartz fragments are more common in fault gouges 2 and 3, and in the clay-rich infilling of a fracture from site 4 ( Particle size reduction caused by faulting is driven by two distinct mechanisms: splitting and abrasion ( Type 1 quartz is also found in the other sample locations, and two possibilities can explain the coexistence in the same clays of fresh Type 1 quartz and Types 3 and 4 quartz fragments with deep undulations. First, most of the Type 1 quartz from fault gouges 2 and 3 and the clay-rich infilling of a fracture from site 4 could be attributed to splitting along existing microcracks and grain boundaries during sample preparation. Open microcracks are commonly found in the granite of the study area ( TEM observation of the clay minerals showed that hexagonal, lath, or angular clay mineral shapes are better preserved in fault gouges 2 and 3, whereas many clay minerals in fault gouge 1 have an abraded and rounded appearance ( The TEM observations of the clay minerals seem to contrast with the SEM observations for quartz. Numerous quartz fragments in fault gouge 1 are fresh and less abraded than the severely abraded clay minerals. An obvious reason for this observation is that quartz has a much greater hardness and thus resistance to abrasion than the clay minerals. In addition, coarser quartz fragments (several tens of microns, as shown by SEM observation) are generally enveloped by finer clay minerals, which are generally < We propose a schematic model ( Our microstructural studies using SEM and TEM, especially the examination of the surface textures of quartz fragments, have allowed us to discriminate between active (i.e., ongoing development with recent shear) and inactive (no recent shear) fault gouges, and the clay-rich infillings of fractures where there are no offsets. The microstructural studies were more useful than our thin-section studies using the optical microscope or our analyses of particle distributions. The accumulation of case studies from other areas will contribute to our understanding of the applicability of SEM and TEM observations to fault gouges and infilled fractures. We have used an integrated analysis of particle size distributions, SEM observations of quartz particles, and TEM observations of clay-size minerals, and field and thin-section observations to study fault gouges from the active Shiraki-Nyu Fault (fault gouge 1), gouges from minor inactive faults (fault gouges 2 and 3), and the clay-rich infilling of a fracture (clay vein) in the surrounding host granite. Our main findings are summarized as follows. Based on our field observations, fault gouge 1 in the active Shiraki-Nyu Fault is characterized by laminated layers, syntectonic injections of gouge material into the adjacent cataclasite, and occurrence of cataclasite fragments. They provide evidence of multiple faulting events along the gouge. Fault gouges 2 and 3 are accompanied by shear-related structures but retain original features of typical clay veins in the granite, such as anastomosing networks of fractures with clay infillings. However, such gouges are difficult to distinguish from fault gouge 1 using only thin-section observations and the compositions of the clay minerals. Particle size distribution analysis supports the suggestion that the gouge of the Shiraki-Nyu Fault, with its abundance of particles finer than 10 SEM observations of the surface textures of quartz fragments indicate that new quartz fragments have been continually added to fault gouge 1 in the Shiraki-Nyu Fault due to the continual brecciation and disaggregation of the rocks during recent repeated fault activity. TEM observations indicate that abrasion (together with some dissolution) of clay minerals during repeated fault activity has also affected the fault gouge 1 in the Shiraki-Nyu Fault. In addition to field observations, the more detailed examination of particles by electron microscopy, especially the surface textures of quartz, can be effective for discriminating earthquake-related fault gouge from clayey materials that infill inactive faults and fractures, and which developed by syn- to post-faulting alteration/weathering. We thank G. F. McCrank for constructive comments on the manuscript. We also thank N. Okubo and K. Kondo for assistance with the TEM work. The manuscript was improved by constructive reviews of F. Balsamo and anonymous reviewers. A. Stallard is thanked for helping with English language. This study was supported in part by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the