Waste stabilisation ponds (WSPs) are used worldwide for wastewater treatment, and throughout their operation require periodic sludge surveys. Sludge accumulation in WSPs can impact performance by reducing the effective volume of the pond, and altering the pond hydraulics and wastewater treatment efficiency. Traditionally, sludge heights, and thus sludge volume, have been measured using low-resolution and labour intensive methods such as ‘sludge judge’ and the ‘white towel test’. A sonar device, a readily available technology, fitted to a remotely operated vehicle (ROV) was shown to improve the spatial resolution and accuracy of sludge height measurements, as well as reduce labour and safety requirements. Coupled with a dedicated software package, the profiling of several WSPs has shown that the ROV with autonomous sonar device is capable of providing sludge bathymetry with greatly increased spatial resolution in a greatly reduced profiling time, leading to a better understanding of the role played by sludge accumulation in hydraulic performance of WSPs. The high-resolution bathymetry collected was used to support a much more detailed hydrodynamic assessment of systems with low, medium and high accumulations of sludge. The results of the modelling show that hydraulic performance is not only influenced by the sludge accumulation, but also that the spatial distribution of sludge plays a critical role in reducing the treatment capacity of these systems. In a range of ponds modelled, the reduction in residence time ranged from 33% in a pond with a uniform sludge distribution to a reduction of up to 60% in a pond with highly channelized flow. The combination of high-resolution measurement of sludge accumulation and hydrodynamic modelling will help in the development of frameworks for wastewater sludge management, including the development of more reliable computer models, and could potentially have wider application in the monitoring of other small to medium water bodies, such as channels, recreational water bodies, and commercial ports.The growing problem of water scarcity ( Waste stabilisation ponds (WSPs) are simple, highly efficient, low-cost, low-maintenance and robust systems for non-potable wastewater treatment and reuse ( Evolution of pond hydraulics over time is particularly important as removal efficiencies are strongly dependent on local concentrations, and thus dependant on hydraulics ( Traditional methods of surveying sludge height, such as a ‘sludge judge’ ( With the availability of more advanced and reliable computational fluid dynamics (CFD) models in recent years, there has been an increasing interest and success in modelling hydrodynamics of WSPs, along with other parameters such as nutrient and pathogen removal ( The overall objective of this study is to determine the effect of sludge distribution and accumulation on the hydrodynamics of waste stabilisation ponds. Specifically, the aims of this study are to: 1) design and build a remotely operated vehicle (ROV) with a dedicated software package to collect, process and analyse high-resolution data of the sludge accumulation and distribution, 2) develop, calibrate and validate a 2D computational fluid dynamics model for WSPs, and 3) model the hydrodynamics, and the impact of sludge accumulation on pond efficiency in a series of ponds with varying sludge distributions and volumes, ranging from low uniform to highly channelized systems. Three sites were selected for this study based on sludge volume and spatial distribution. All sites are located in the southwest of Western Australia, experience a Mediterranean climate with yearly average temperatures ranging between 5 and 31 °C, and average rainfall between 690 and 1000 mm ( A remotely operated vehicle (ROV) was purposely designed to enable the collection of high-resolution bathymetry, which is necessary to compute sludge accumulation and distribution characteristics. A sonar unit was installed in the bottom of the hull of a remote control boat. The ROV is 1100 mm in length with stabilisers fitted to the sides to improve the buoyancy of the boat, as well as to improve stability when manoeuvring it in the water under various environmental conditions, including strong winds ( The sonar unit (Lowrance HDS-5, Lowrance Electronics, Tulsa, Oklahoma, USA) was selected as the built-in GPS allows for the simultaneous acquisition of water depth and map coordinate data; the unit also allows for continuous data logging, and saves files to a memory card. At specific locations, point measurements of sludge height were taken using manual measurement with a sludge judge ( The remote control boat has been tested extensively on in excess of 100 WSPs across Australia, as well as in some lakes and stormwater wetlands. Profiling of ponds can be completed in anywhere between 20 min and 2 h, depending on pond size. For Sites 1 and 3, boat profiling of these ponds was completed in 20–30 min, while a sludge judge survey took 1–1.5 h. Furthermore, sludge judge surveys for these ponds yielded 25 and 42 data points, respectively, while remote control boat surveys yielded 27192 and 30500 data points. Of the sonar measurements, 1513 points for the uniform pond and 1886 points for the uneven were used to generate grids for plotting and analysis. To streamline the data processing and analysis, and for reporting purposes, the data processing and analysis as described above was written into a program package, that we have called SludgePro A two dimensional (2D) model was chosen for this study, as it is capable of demonstrating the impact of variable sludge accumulation on flow pattern, as shown previously by The post-processed water depth data set from SludgePro In the HD module, the initial surface elevation was set at 0 m, with a flooding depth of 0.1 m and a drying depth of 0.05 m. The bottom friction/bed resistance was specified using Manning's number, and this value was used to calibrate the model. In the AD module, the tracer released into the model was defined as conservative, initial concentration set to zero and dispersion was chosen to be proportional to the current; the dispersion coefficient range was used for model calibration. Each model was set to run for 91.5 days with a time step of 1 s, with a 5-day warm up period for the model to reach steady state, and 86.5 days of tracer simulation. This period was chosen to allow for adequate time for >95% tracer to exit the system. Flow rates input into the model were the real average inflows obtained from pond managers, corresponding to the time field tracer tests were conducted. Tracer testing was conducted using Rhodamine WT (Keyacid Rhodamine WT, Keystone Aniline Corporation, Chicago, USA), containing 20% true dye. The testing was conducted at Sites 2A and 3 during Autumn-Winter 2013 for a period of 7 weeks (equivalent to approximately 3 nominal residence times in these ponds); the Rhodamine WT signal was monitored at the outlet at 15 min intervals. This monitoring period is typically sufficient to characterise the residence time distribution (RTD) ( At each site, pond hydrodynamics were modelled for the bathymetries collected with the ROV and a no sludge scenario. The availability of additional bathymetry for Sites 2 and 3 allowed for the assessment of the evolution of residence time distribution over time. For each site, the input flow rate, velocity, and tracer mass input were kept constant between scenarios to allow direct comparison of the effect of sludge volume and distribution on pond residence time distribution. The mean residence time ( The comparison of point measurements of sludge height using the technology developed here and sludge judge show that there is a very clear and strong correlation (R The study sites were all profiled using the ROV, with Site 1 showing a uniform sludge blanket, with a little accumulation on the ponds walls; at the time of profiling (2011) the sludge infill was calculated to be 34% ( Sludge accumulation rates were calculated for Sites 2 and 3. For Site 2, the rate was estimated to be 0.12 m Modelling outputs for Site 2A (May 2013, 22% sludge infill) and Site 3 (July 2013, 45% infill) were compared to the tracer tests conducted during this period. For Site 2A, the field and model tracer was only added into the system at the northern inlet, located at (118,46) ( The agreement between the tracer data and the modelled outputs is shown in A summary of the modelling results is provided in By comparing the flow patterns in the ponds between scenarios, we can see the evolution of the flow as a result of sludge accumulation and distribution patterns. At Site 2, the no sludge scenario shows that a preferential flow path has formed between the inlets and outlet ( A comparison of the sludge spatial distribution between the sites is shown in The coupling of sonar technology with a remote control boat has several advantages over traditional sludge measurement techniques, as it collects many more data points in a shorter period of time (i.e., increased measuring efficiency) with higher spatial resolution (i.e., smaller grid spacing) while requiring less manual labour, and significantly reducing profiling time. The sonar technique is comparable in results to current sludge measuring methods (i.e., In general, a sludge judge survey can only capture pond-scale features of sludge distribution (due to low spatial resolution), while a survey with sonar determines the sludge bathymetry, showing the sludge blanket (including channels and pockets) in sufficient detail for bathymetry-induced changes to the flow to be accurately predicted. Extensive testing of the boat has satisfied the requirements of the development of a reliable tool for the collection of high-resolution data of bathymetry, and thus sludge distribution in ponds. The high-resolution data collected is also very suitable to create bathymetry files for input into a CFD model. For all the modelled sludge scenarios, it can be seen that the reduction in residence time is roughly proportional to the accumulation of sludge within the pond ( While the reduction in residence time at Site 1 is as expected with the nominal and mean residence time almost identical for 34% infill ( Overall, the results show that accumulation of sludge has the most significant influence on the hydraulics in WSPs, with residence times expected to decrease almost proportionally to the infill of sludge. However, the distribution of sludge within ponds has an additional effect on the hydrodynamics within ponds, with the formation of a bench of sludge near the inlet having a slight positive effect, while the formation of a channel has a slight negative effect. The significant reduction in residence time due to short-circuiting, will detrimentally impact both treatment efficacy and efficiency of these ponds, which will then cascade to the following ponds in the treatment train. In particular, this will affect the quality of treated water, including, but not limited to, higher biological oxygen demand (BOD), total suspended solids (TSS), nitrogen and phosphorus (N and P), and less pathogen removal; effective reduction of all of these parameters is key in meeting water discharge regulations ( In general, past CFD studies on WSP hydrodynamics have focussed on pond design parameters, such as length-to-width ratio, inlet and outlet configurations, effects of wind, and thermal stratification (e.g., Our ability to obtain sludge distribution and accumulation data cost-effectively and rapidly using sonar will prove invaluable into the future. This technology will help in the development of frameworks for wastewater sludge management, and the technology could potentially have a wider application in the monitoring of other small to medium sized water bodies, including reservoirs, channels, recreational water bodies, and commercial ports. Most importantly, high-resolution bathymetry can be obtained without the need to go out onto WSPs in a boat, thus addressing several important safety considerations. Additionally, the portability and convenience of this technology could be applied for use on a monthly basis, over two to three years, to collect valuable data on sludge accumulation rates. In addition to the ponds illustrated in this study, the ROV has been successfully deployed on over 100 other Australian WSP of various geometries and sludge distributions, demonstrating great benefit to increasing safety and operations related to sludge management, a clear benefit to managers of WSP systems. As mentioned previously, high-resolution bathymetry, such as that collected with the boat, could improve the agreement between field and modelled scenarios ( From this study we have demonstrated that the developed remote control boat (or ROV) with sonar successfully measures sludge distribution with high-resolution, allowing the construction of detailed plots of the sludge blanket, showing the formation of features such as channels and pockets. In addition, we have demonstrated that this higher resolution data can be input as bathymetry into a 2D hydrodynamic model. Applying the model to study the flow of three sites, we have shown that pond hydraulics is mainly influenced by the accumulation of sludge, with residence time decreasing almost in proportion to the percentage of sludge infill. However, we have also shown that distribution of sludge (i.e., bench, channel) has an additional effect on hydraulics, which needs to be researched further, in addition to how this interacts with other factors such as pond inlet/outlet configurations, flow rates, wind, and pond geometry. This project was funded by