The passivation, oxidation and combustion of tungsten nanopowders (NP) (a
                     s
                     ∼100 nm), produced by an electrical explosion of wires (WEE) method, has been studied in air medium. The phase transformation for W nanopowders under air-oxidation was investigated. The oxidation process and an analysis of passivated powders were studied by FESEM, EDS, XPS, XRD, TEM, DTA-TGA and size distribution analysis was also observed by a video camera. After the comprehensive testing of passivated, oxidized and burned powders, a chemical process of oxidation of W nanoparticles was suggested.nanopowder physical vapors deposition electrical explosion of wires differential-thermal analysis thermogravimetric analysis machine for NP obtaining by EEW field emission scanning electronic microscopy binding energy X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy particle size analysis average particle diameter, μm specific surface area, m specific electrical energy liberated in the wire, a.u. (ratio of electrical energy liberated in the W wire to the energy of sublimation of W) weight concentration of tungsten and oxygen, a.u. enthalpy of oxides formation determination of The application of tungsten nanopowder (NP) mainly arises from its properties as a functional material. Nowadays the well-studied method for W NP synthesis, as well as for other nanopowders of metals, is physical vapors deposition (PVD) Another attractive high speed method (∼200 g/h per each machine) of industry scale metal nanopowder production is an electrical explosion of wires (EEW) Electroexplosive metal powders have a high metal content (up to 98% mass for Al NP) after slow passivation by air We failed to find out any relevant information in recent periodicals on W NP oxidation by air. The majority of literary sources concerning metal nanoparticles oxidation, provide information on reactive metals Al, Ti, Fe This paper reports a DTA-TGA, XRD, SDA, TEM, FESEM-XPS and video-study of the electroexplosive W NP oxidation and combustion in air. A chemical processes characteristic for W NP oxidation by air are proposed.     XRD, TGA and chemical analysis showed that the final combustion product of both the samples consisted of two phases: unreacted tungsten and WO Two samples of W NP studied in this work were produced under the same electric conditions in Ar (1.5 atm) in the explosive chamber of the EEW machine. The pressure of Ar in the explosive chamber was slightly higher than atmospheric, which leads to the gas adsorption on the surface of particles immediately after the latter form from the plasma gas. The probable mechanism of particle formation during EEW process is described elsewhere and it is out of the scope of this work According to XRD data ( W According to particle size analysis (PSA), the sample “NPW-air” had a relatively narrow size distribution in the range of 20–200 nm with the maximum at 60 nm (  After the desorption of the passivation coating (2.7% mass decrease in TG curve), the oxidation of the sample “NPW-StAc” has the similar character as for the sample “NPW-air” as shown in The studied W NPs of both types do not react with air nitrogen even partially: we did not find nitrides in the final products of their combustion. This is the main difference between aluminum and tungsten nanopowders burning scenario in air Metal particles of tungsten nanopowder, produced by electrical explosion of wires, are spherical with a smooth surface and a diameter less than 1 μm. An explosion of W wire results in β-W phase formation in the finest fraction of the powder. The passivation period of W nanopowder is approximately 25 h using air and approximately 2 h using stearic acid as passivators. During this period an oxide coating of less than 5 nm thickness forms on W nanoparticles. The composition of an oxide layer for W NP is W This work has been supported by the Korea Research Foundation Grant (KRF-2002-042-D00074) and was performed by using the facilities of Research Center for Machine Parts and Materials Processing (ReMM) at the University of Ulsan. Authors also are grateful to Dr. D.V. Tikhonov for useful discussion and Dr. Mikhailova O.V. for comments and remarks.