Natural polyelectrolytes are suitable coagulants for the treatment of industrial and minicipal wastewaters because they are safe and have environmental benefits. Chitosan, a natural cationic polyelectrolyte, and other similar coagulants were used in the treatment of an olive oil water suspension as a model for the processing wastewater. The effect of chitosan, starch, alum and ferric chloride on the coagulation of oil droplets were determined by the jar test apparatus and turbidometric measurements. Olive oil emulsion samples were prepared by the use of surface active agents and other agents that could form stable oil water emulsions. The effect of parameters such as pH, ionic strength and optimum dosage of the coagulants were determined in the jar test experiments. Following the jar experiments, with the optimum concentration of the suitable coagulant, the emulsions were placed in an induced air flotation (IAF) cell to separate the coagulated oil droplets from solution. In the air flotation experiments, the effect of temperature, surfactant concentration and air flowrate were determined on the decrease of turbidity and COD of the emulsion samples. In the jar experiments, chitosan and alum used together at concentrations of 15 and 25 ppm, respectively, at pH 6 produced the lowest turbidity values. In the air flotation experiments, a concentration of 100 ppm of chitosan, an air flowrate of 3 l/min, aeration time of 45 s, temperature of 20 °C and pH 6 produced optimum levels. At optimum conditions of coagulation and flotation stages, the COD of the olive oil emulsion could be reduced by 95%.Coagulation is a process by which small particles are connected to each other forming flocs large enough to be separated from solution in a reasonable amount of time. Cationic polyelectrolytes are often referred to as primary coagulants nonionic and anionic polyelectrolytes are defined as either coagulant aids or flocculants. It is speculated that the primary coagulant polymers enhance the coagulation of negatively charged particles by a process of adsorption and particle surface charge neutralization. When the concentration of the polyelectrolyte in the solution is increased beyond a certain limit, the overall surface charge of the particles can become positive and the emulsion could be restabilized. Coagulant aid polyelectrolytes are believed to destabilize suspensions by adsorption of particles as well as the formation of bridges between the particles and the polyelectrolyte.  An effective method for use with coagulation of oil–water emulsions is the induced air flotation (IAF) process in which the air bubbles can reduce the density of the oil droplets and increase the efficiency of the separation process ( Olive oil–water emulsions were prepared by the addition of surfactants and other chemical stabilizers including sodium dodecyl sulphate, aniline, butanol, di-sodium and tri-sodium phosphates. A commercial surfactant called Texapone was also used. Olive oil was prepared by the Sefid Rood Edible Oil Manufacturing Company, Rood Bar, Gilan, Iran. Chitosan in the form of flakes were purchased from Serva, Feinbiochemica, Heidelberg, New York, USA. The jar test apparatus was a Phipps & Bird Inc., Richmond, Virginia, USA apparatus with six stirrers. A Partech Turbidometer was used to measure the turbidity of the samples and a Gallenkamp COD measuring device measured the COD of the oil–water emulsions. Chitosan was solubilized in 1% acetic acid solutions and mixed at a temperature of 50 °C ( To make the olive oil–water emulsions, different emulsifying agents were used including butanol, n-amilic alcohol, di- and tri-sodium phosphate, sodium dodecyl sulphate and Texapone. Highest turbidity was sodium dodecyl sulphate ( No significant effect was noted for chitosan concentration (20–100 mg/l) on the pH of the emulsion solution containing olive oil and sodium dodecyl sulphate and the optimum pH resulting in the lowest secondary turbidity was observed between the values of 6.0–6.5 ( At an optimum pH value of 6, the optimum dosage for chitosan to cause a decrease of 90% in secondary turbidity of the olive oil–water suspensions was 50 mg/l ( In the jar test experiments, the optimum pH for starch was around 7. The optimum dosage of starch was at 150 mg/l. However, since this natural polyelectrolyte is ampholytic, it was not able to effectively coagulate the negatively charged oil particles. Similar to the results obtained for starch, ferric chloride did not prove to be an effective coagulant in reducing the turbidity of the emulsion samples. It was obtained that at a maximum dosage of 300 mg/l with the optimum pH of 7, the residual turbidity could only be decreased to 145 NTU. To determine the optimum level of alum for coagulation as a first step in the jar test experiments, coagulant increase was determined as residual turbidity decreased. At a concentration of 225 mg/l alum, the residual turbidity was reduced to less than 70 NTU and the optimum pH was 6.5, and to reduce the turbidity of the oil emulsion samples by 90% (to value of 25 NTU), 150 mg/l of alum was necessary Since chitosan and alum were the most effective coagulating agents, their combined influence was studied in subsequent jar experiments. The optimum pH values for using chitosan and alum separately, were 6.0 and 6.5, respectively. The preliminary experiments showed optimal floc formation of oil droplets, at two levels of 25 and 50 mg/l ( The effect of ionic strength was investigated on the dosage of chitosan necessary to reduce the turbidity of the samples. At pH values of 5 and 6, the concentration of chitosan required to reduce the turbidity to a value of 25 NTU decreases with an increase of the ionic strength of the solution ( The emulsion samples used to study the variables in the induced air flotation experiments had to be prepared with the appropriate concentration of a suitable surfactant. For this purpose, with a dosage of 50 mg/l of chitosan, the effect of various concentrations of the surfactant sodium dodecyl sulphate was studied on the primary and residual turbidity of the emulsions at constant aeration conditions. The percent reduction in turbidity of the olive oil/water emulsion samples is shown in Starting with an initial turbidity of 250 NTU, the effect of the air flowrate through the flotation cell is presented at 50, 100 and 200 mg/l of chitosan in the olive oil/water suspension ( In previous experiments, it was shown that at 100 ppm for chitosan and a flocculation period of 3 min, 90% of the primary turbidity could be reduced. The effect of aeration time for the induced air flotation experiments is shown in The effect of temperature on the flotation process was investigated at the optimum conditions of an aeration flowrate, 3 l/min, residence time, 45 s and 100 ppm chitosan, temperatures of 10, 20, 30 and 40 °C, had little effect on the flotation process. In the experiments with the jar test apparatus, temperature had a substantial effect on the coagulation phenomena and decreased turbidity. Simulating olive oil wastewater as a model solution, the influence of various parameters were investigated during the coagulation and induced air flotation treatment stages. Alum as the main coagulant and chitosan as a coagulating aid was most effective in reducing the primary turbidity of the emulsions (90%). Ferric chloride and starch were not effective coagulating agents. The coagulated olive oil particles could be effectively removed during the process of induced air flotation for the conditions of the experiments performed in this study.  The authors wish to acknowledge that this research work (project no. 613/1/327) was funded by the Research Council of the University of Tehran.