Screening is an indispensable unit operation in coal preparation. Coals often cause structural damage of a large vibrating screen during large-scale screening process. In this paper, structural vibration and strain signal of a vibrating screen were tested and analyzed for investigating the dynamic influence of screening coals on the vibrating screen. Several experiments were conducted with the empty-load operation and screening process of two different screening capacities. The obtained fundamental vibration characteristic indicated that the screening coals made the screen structure experience an enhanced vibration for the discovered additional random vibration, and the structural strain increased by 14.79% to improves the possibility of structural damage. Aiming at the emerging random vibration, a stationary test and ergodicity test were adopted for analyzing the captured vibration signal. The results demonstrated that random vibration of the vibrating screen was stable and ergodic, which means that any section of the captured signal is enough to be analyzed for representing the vibration properties of the whole screening process. Additionally, statistical characteristics of the random vibration also changed along with the screening capacity. Eventually, these new dynamic characteristics were applied into analyzing mechanics characteristic of the bearing beam theoretically and the maximum error is within 14%, while the error can reach up to 40% in a traditional calculation method without influence of screen coals considered.cross-section area of the beam structure (m) mean value of all the mean value of all the mean value of all the time average values mean value of the set average function sampling rate (Hz) maximum excitation load (N) stiffness coefficient of the damping system (N/m) stiffness coefficient of the damping system in the vertical direction (N/m) actual sampling time of each subsample (sec) inertial bending-moment caused by FRT (N·m) flexural bending-moment caused by BV (N·m) random bending-moment caused by ALRRT (N·m) data size of each subsample vibrating mass of the screening system (kg) number of the isometric subsamples  appearance time of “+” appearance time of “−” round time self-correlation function under the meaning of the set average self-correlation function under the meaning of the time average re-sampling interval (s) set average function time average value defined section modulus of the rectangular beam section displacement, acceleration and velocity of the screen structure in angular speed of the exciter (rad/s) vibrating direction angle (degree) standard deviation of each subsample mid-value of all the standard deviations significance level time delay (sec) shape function of the beam structure material density of the beam structure (kg/m Coal is the main energy resource in China and provided 62% of the total energy consumption in 2016 Proper mechanical design of a large vibrating screen is vital to ensure the safety, reliability and stability of the screen operation. Generally, a vibrating screen is designed based on a linear single degree of freedom (s-dof) or an uncoupled 2-dof vibration model For the process design aspect of a vibrating screen, a virtual test can be performed instead of physical tests in order to decrease the experimental cost and improve the experimental efficiency. For example, the discrete element method (DEM) has been widely used to simulate the motion process of the particle material In this study, the vibration and strain tests were performed in a CWKS1218 vibration screen. As shown in Thus, the theoretical vertical acceleration amplitude of the screening structure is to be 31.12 m/s As shown in During the experiment, the screened material was coal with the properties given in  Among the signal of the steady-state operation with empty-load and the steady-state coal-screening, partial signal with a time interval of 0.4 s were extracted for analysis, as illustrated in Next, the dynamics situation at positions on the lateral plates where both ends of the bearing beam were connected to will be discussed. It was reflected by the average value of the two captured values of each group of test positions during the experimental measurements. Here the comparison of the average strain values at location Ls3/Rs3 under conditions of empty-load and coal-screening is shown in Aiming at the empty-load operation and screening process, the overall signal was divided into a number of subsections. The amplitude of each subsection was calculated, and then corresponded with the initial moment of the subsection. Finally, the amplitude-time curve was drawn to qualitatively analyze the relationship of the strain values over time, as shown in Obviously, there were strain fluctuations at each measurement point. The strain value at location Ls3/Rs3 (next to the feeding end) was always maximum, while the strain value at location Ls2/Rs2 (next to the excitation position) was approximately minimum. Actually, as studied by Peng et al. As shown in From the point of structural vibration, if the screening process can be verified via the stationary test for random vibration, then it can be regarded as a stationary random process, which will be of great help for vibration analysis. According to the stationary random vibration theory The captured random vibration data of the screen structure in the screening process is firstly divided into The standard deviation of each subsample (denoted by The standard deviation of each subsample Random vibration of the vibrating structure has been discovered in the screening process. According to the stability test method, the whole vibration acceleration signal in the vertical direction at the measurement point Ra1 during the screening process was taken as a sample. For an actual situation with Stability is the necessary, but not sufficient, condition for a random process to be ergodic. After verifying stability of the random vibration during the screening process, a further ergodicity test should be performed so as to use any subsample to clarify the whole statistical random characteristics in the entire screening process. The ergodicity test method can be summarized as follows The random vibration data in the screening process which has been inspected by the stationary test and is firstly divided into Such Choose the After the processes above, if it is discovered that the mean value of all the time average values The acceleration signal which has been examined for stability was further taken as a sample for the ergodicity test. According to this method, for the actual situation with A Matlab program was developed to obtain the mean value of all the time average values as According to the detailed theoretical analysis that has been conducted by Peng et al. In this paper, as random vibration of the vibrating screen is stable and ergodic, the theoretical calculation for the three motions above satisfy the detailed demonstration in Furthermore, the corresponding normal strain at each end of the bearing beam would be: Unlike the improved method with all the FRT, BV and ALRRT considered, the traditional method only take the FRT into account. Thus the corresponding normal strain would be: The main parameters of the bearing beam are as follows: the material density is Aiming at the structural damage of a large vibrating screen caused by large-scale coal-screening, structural vibration and strain signal of a vibrating screen were tested and analyzed to investigate the dynamic influence of screening coals on the vibrating screen in this paper. The results obtained are as follows: Compared with the empty-load operation, the vibration of the screen structure during the screening process increased. With the screening process considered, the increased vibration of translational motion of the screen structure raised the structural strain value by 14.79%. Moreover, additional swing vibration has resulted in a larger strain at the position that is next to the discharge and feeding end than the exciting position. Such larger structural strain improves the possibility of structural damage. Random vibration of the vibrating screen during the screening process was analyzed to be a stable and ergodic vibration process. Hence such vibration can be evaluated using one sample or several samples obtained from actual measurement in order to obtain the whole statistical parameters. Qualitatively, with an increasing screening capacity, the statistical parameters of vibration all improve. The random vibration can be acquired by an existing large vibrating screen and used to design a new large vibrating screen. Then the whole FRT, BV and ALRRT can be considered into the mechanics analysis of the bearing beam structure for a more precise design. This work is supported by the National 