Column flotation is widely used for material separation such as coal cleaning, mineral beneficiation, water purification and oil recovery. Flotation columns typically have small diameter-to-height ratios, posing a severe limit on their throughput and carrying capacity. This paper addresses this issue. A fast-switching solenoid valve was added to the air intake line of a 5-cm diameter flotation column equipped with a sparger to change the flow pattern of air supply from steady to rapidly oscillatory. The flotation tests were carried out at semi-continuous mode for a coking coal sample at various throughput levels controlled by adjusting the solids content or volumetric flowrate of the feed slurry. It was found that use of oscillatory air supply to replace steady air supply could significantly improve the throughput without sacrificing product yield and increase the carrying capacity of the column, which was consistent with the enhanced bubble surface area flux in the column.Froth flotation is used in several industries, including coal cleaning, mineral beneficiation, wastewater treatment, soil recovery, oil recovery, and paper deinking. Flotation machines can be classified into mechanically agitated cells and columns. Compared with mechanical cells, columns have the advantages of lower capital and operating costs, higher separation efficiency (higher product grade and recovery) and better flexibility for automatic control [ An important performance indicator for a flotation column, which is pertinent to throughput, is the carrying rate. The carrying rate is defined as the mass of solids overflowing per unit time per unit column cross-sectional area [ Previous work [ The aim of the present study is to examine the limit of the throughput and the carrying capability of column flotation with oscillatory air supply. In the present work, the flotation tests were carried out at laboratory scale and in semi-continuous mode for a coking coal sample at various throughput levels controlled by adjusting the solids content or volumetric flowrate of the feed slurry. The changes in the limits of the throughput and froth carrying rate were linked to the changes in the measured bubble surface area flux caused by changing the flow pattern of the air supply from steady to rapidly oscillatory, and their implications for column flotation practice were discussed. A coking coal sample was collected from the feed stream of a coal flotation plant in Australia. Particle size analysis was conducted using dry sieving and wet sieving for materials above and below 75 μm, respectively. As can be seen from Methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC, 98% pure, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) was used as frother. Process water from the plant was used throughout the experiments. Flotation tests were carried out using a laboratory-scale flotation column, as shown in A coal sample was pre-conditioned in a feed sump before being pumped into the flotation column. The flotation tests were carried out in semi-continuous mode, with returning the concentrate and tailing streams to the feed sump [ Steady-state was reached after aeration for a period of time equivalent to three times of the particle retention time [ The carrying rate, An Anglo-Platinum Bubble Sizer (APBS) was used to measure bubble size based on a sampling-followed-by-imaging technique [ Bubble size was obtained by analyzing the captured images off-line using ImageJ. The equivalent circular diameter, Sauter mean bubble diameter, d Preliminary column flotation tests with steady air supply for the coal sample under study suggested that the preferred flotation condition was 30 cm of froth depth, 2 cm/s of superficial air velocity, With the overall economic objective taken into consideration, a flotation process requires a trade-off between the plant yield and product grade, as well as a compromise between the production and the plant yield [  The concentrate yield obtained under oscillatory air flow condition at feed solids content of 10% w.t. was by average 68.2%, which was comparable with that (i.e., by average 60.1%) under steady air flow condition at a feed solids content of 5% w.t., while the concentrate ash content of the former was approximately 2 percentage points higher than that of the latter. It is, therefore, suggested that the use of oscillatory air could potentially double the feed solids content and thus the throughput, while keeping the product yield and ash content within the target flotation performance zone (represented by the shaded area in  Note that the obtained concentrate yield with oscillatory air supply at a feed flow rate of 2.7 L/min was no lower than that with steady air supply at a feed flow rate of 0.9 L/min, while under both conditions the concentrate ash contents were <5%. It was, therefore, suggested that the use of oscillatory air could potentially triple the feed volumetric flowrate and thus the throughput, while still meeting the requirement for the product yield and ash content. Combining Option A – tripling feed volumetric flowrate; Option B – doubling feed volumetric flowrate with 150% of the standard feed solids content; Option C – 150% of the standard feed volumetric flowrate with doubling feed solids content; Option D – tripling feed solids content. As shown, among these options tested, Option A gave the best flotation performance with the highest concentrate yield and the lowest concentrate ash content (or the highest product grade), so it was considered a preferred way of tripling the throughput. Apparently, one should improve the throughput by increasing the volumetric flowrate of feed rather than increasing the feed solids content since the latter would reduce not only concentration yield but also product grade (see According to the literature, the superficial air velocity in flotation columns should be kept at up to 2–3 cm/s, because excessive aeration would cause the bubbly regime of the collection zone to be disturbed [ A flotation test was also carried out with quadrupling the throughput capacity by doubling the feed volumetric flowrate to 1.8 L/min and doubling the feed solids content to 10% w.t. It was found that the concentrate yield was reduced to 38.3%.  The curves of carrying rate versus feed mass flux obtained in the present work with steady air supply are consistent with those obtained by others [ The carrying capacities at a feed volumetric flowrate of 0.9 L/min were 2.0 t·h A comparison in the carrying rate between steady and oscillatory air supply was also made at a constant feed solids content of 5% w.t. but different feed volumetric flowrates, and the results are shown in The results presented in   Other experiments have been made to fundamentally understand the effect of different air flow patterns on column flotation performance [ The present work has explored the possibility of improving the throughput and carrying capacity of column flotation with diffused aeration by using a fast-switching solenoid valve to change the flow pattern of air supply from steady to oscillatory. In addition to the change in the flow pattern of air supply, feed solids content and feed volumetric flowrate were increased to determine the limit of the throughput improvement. The results showed that the throughput could be tripled with oscillatory air supply replacing steady air supply, while maintaining the product yield and ash at the set criterion (i.e., yield ≥60% and concentrate ash content ≤5%). The use of oscillatory air supply to replace steady air supply could more than double the froth carrying capacity of the column. The improved throughput and carrying capacity can be at least partly accounted for by the enhanced bubble surface area flux in the column. This work was supported by the