Introduction
                  Comminuted fractures of the proximal ulna are severe injuries often associated with bone and ligament injuries of the elbow joint (Monteggia lesion, radial head fractures, dislocation of the elbow). The treatment of these fractures is very demanding and the functional results often fairly mediocre due to associated injuries. Based on a single-center retrospective study, we report the results of the treatment of these fractures fixed using a double-plate technique. The aim was to evaluate the feasibility and reliability of this fixation mode and to compare it with other fractures series using a single plate fixation (in terms of bone union, elbow joint function, and complications stemming from the plates).
               
                  Patients and methods
                  Eighteen patients sustained a comminuted proximal ulna fracture between 2002 and 2006. The fractures were associated in five cases with a Monteggia type lesion, in two cases with elbow dislocation, and in four cases with a Mason 3 radial head fracture. Four patients had an open fracture. These comminuted ulna fractures included nine Mayo Clinic IIIB fractures. Bone fixation was performed with two third-cylinder tubular plates, one plate on each side of the proximal ulna. This allows more versatile solutions for screw insertion. Functional assessment (according to Broberg and Morrey) and radiological evaluation (bone healing) were provided at 6 months and at the longest follow-up by an independent surgeon.
               
                  Results
                  Sixteen of 18 patients achieved bone union. No septic complications occurred and no hardware removal was required on patient request. In 67% of the cases, the Morrey score indicated excellent or good results with a mean score of 82.
               
                  Discussion
                  There are no reports in the literature on the technical point of fixation concerning complex fractures of the ulna. Two plates mean the possibility of twice the number of screw insertions for epiphyseal reconstruction . This fixation remains easy to perform and provides stable anatomic reconstruction of the ulna.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV. Retrospective study.Fractures of the proximal ulna group olecranon fractures, coronoid process fractures, and metaphyseal fractures. The most complex fractures, often associating these three fractures, are a formidable challenge for the surgeon. They are often comminuted and associated with ligament lesions, a fracture, and/or dislocation of the radial head, the latter of which are vital in the stability of the elbow. The objective of surgery is first to obtain bone union, but also to restore a stable joint, articular congruence, strength, and a satisfactory and painless arc of mobility. Classical surgical treatment of these complex fractures should include open plate osteosynthesis, which provides better results than pinning and tension band plating Two cadaver biomechanics studies have been conducted. King et al. The problem with these fractures being fixation of the proximal olecranon and coronoid process, it seemed logical to osteosynthesize these complex fractures with two plates positioned on the medial and lateral sides of the ulna so as to increase the number of screws The posterior plate removal reported in 20% of cases The objective of this study was to compare our results with published series using a single plate. Twenty-four patients were operated between December 2002 and December 2006 for a proximal ulnar fracture placing two plates. These fractures were sometimes associated with a fracture of the radial head and/or elbow dislocation. Only 18 patients were seen again (six were lost to follow-up) by a single surgeon with an AP and lateral X-ray of the operated elbow and an AP image of the forearm. Nine females and nine males were thus included in this study.  The mean age was 56.3 years (range, 35–78 years) and ten patients had fractured their dominant upper limb. Twelve had isolated elbow injury. Four were considered to have multiple injuries and six presented another associated fracture. Three fractures were open Cauchoix 1 and one Cauchoix 2. Two patients had paralysis of the radial nerve. We used the Mayo Clinic classification, which is based on three variables: displacement, stability, and comminution ( All the patients had emergency surgical treatment the day of the injury (15 cases) or the next day (three cases), under general anesthesia (15 cases) or locoregional anesthesia (three cases), installed in the supine position with a pneumatic tourniquet. Using a posterior approach, completed in one patient by an anterior approach for osteosynthesis of the coronoid process, the ulnar fracture osteosynthesis consisted of two plates (a lateral plate and a medial plate) ( As for the associated radial head fractures, the five partial fractures required non-surgical orthopaedic treatment (two cases), fragment removal (two cases), or screw osteosynthesis (one case). The four total fractures required osteosynthesis (three cases) or resection of the radial head (one case). Eight patients wore a simple scarf for a few days with no immobilization and with rehabilitation initiated rapidly. The ten other patients had circular cast immobilization (nine cases) or posterior orthosis (one case) for a mean 28 days (range, 2–6 weeks) before beginning rehabilitation. The results were evaluated using the Broberg and Morrey functional score The postoperative X-rays were reviewed to assess the joint reduction and the absence of subluxation. The radiographs taken at the time of revision made it possible to evaluate bone union, osteoarthritis, absence of synostosis and heterotopic ossifications. Given the low number of patients included in the study, the statistical test used was the Mann-Whitney nonparametric test, testing the identity that makes no hypothesis on the analytical distributions F1(x) and F2(x) of two populations, 1 and 2. It therefore tests the H0 hypothesis: F1 The mean follow-up at review was 30 months (range, 8–56 months). Sixteen patients out of 18 (89%) showed union after the first intervention within a mean 3.5 months. The two patients who presented pseudoarthrosis showed union after surgical revision.  The mean flexion was 129° (range, 90–140°), extension lag was 17.5° (range, 0–35°) for a 111.5° arc of mobility (range, 70°–140°). Pronation was 84° (range, 65–90°) and supination was 70° (range, 10–90°) for a 154° arc of mobility (range, 90–180°). The patients with immobilization had less mobility in the flexion–extension arc: 108–119° ( The mean Broberg and Morrey score was 82 (range, 53–99). According to the Broberg and Morrey classification, these results were considered excellent in two cases, good in ten, fair in four, and poor in two cases. On the postoperative X-rays, seven joint reductions were deemed incomplete and three radial heads dislocated. A single patient had both incomplete reduction and associated radial head subluxation. The Broberg and Morrey score was significantly higher ( No soft tissue complications were found. One patient presented an early osteosynthesis complication (dislocation of the elbow due to insufficient osteosynthesis of the coronoid process) with surgical revision for coronoid process osteosynthesis. Five patients presented elbow stiffness (three in pronosupination and two in flexion/extension). Two patients required arthrolysis with removal of the two plates in one and placement of a radial head prosthesis in the other. Three patients underwent removal of the material (two on principle and one for discomfort, but this involved removal of a posterior plate and revision for nonunion). Two patients developed discrete heterotopic ossifications with no functional consequences (Broberg and Morrey score, 98 and 89). No synostosis was found. Six patients developed grade 1 osteoarthritis according to the Broberg and Morrey classification. These were four of the seven patients who had joint reduction considered incomplete, one patient who had not undergone bone union initially, and one who had radial head subluxation postoperatively, with these patients undergoing radial head arthroplasty during surgical revision. This study has several shortcomings: the small number of subjects, the retrospective aspect, and the absence of a comparison between this study and another group. It would indeed have been advantageous to compare our series of patients treated with two plates with a series of patients in our department treated by a single plate. Unfortunately, the small number of patients treated with a single plate was insufficient for a reliable comparison, and these single-plate patients often had less complex fractures. It is also difficult to compare the present series to other series in the literature since these are often specific series (type II Monteggia, fracture dislocation, fracture of the ulna associated with a fracture of the radial head, etc.): the patients were not all treated with a single posterior plate. Our results (89% bone union) on a small series seem inferior to others reported in the literature since despite the complexity of these fractures, nonunion was not frequent. McKay and Katarincic The results of our series seem satisfactory in terms of the mobility reported by various authors ( Doornberg et al. Teasdall et al. Bailey et al. In their series of fracture and dislocation of the ulna, Mortazavi et al. Studying the results of comminuted fractures of the proximal ulna in 18 patients, Platz et al. The study conducted by Kloen and Buijze Morrey et al. These same series report Broberg and Morrey scores equivalent to those that we found ( In the present series, no material was removed because of discomfort; on the contrary, the only plate removed for discomfort was a revision posterior plate. According to King This study confirms the importance of good joint reduction with a better functional score and less progression toward osteoarthritis. Doornberg et al. Eriksson et al. Bailey et al. We also showed that the results of these fractures were related to the fracture of the coronoid process, with better results in type 0 or 1 fractures, showing that good osteosynthesis of the coronoid process is a major component of osteosynthesis of these complex fractures. For Doornberg et al. It is certain that proper fixation of the coronoid apophysis guarantees good joint reconstruction. Different techniques for this are described. Mortazavi et al. We found that placing a lateral plate and a medial plate provided good visibility of the reduction of the coronoid process and made it possible to apply fixation to this apophysis using two screws (one in each plate), providing the size of the fragment is sufficient. We used the association with an anterior approach in one case, but like O’Driscoll We have preferred using two one-third tubular plates. Ring et al. In a recent cadaver study, Buijze et al. In certain highly comminuted fractures, King The lower number of screws in a single plate is compensated by the compression effect contributed by the posterior plate. Nevertheless, certain fractures presenting a medial fragment and a lateral fragment are, in our opinion, better suited to double-plate osteosynthesis. Although Gordon et al. Complex fractures of the proximal ulna require a combination of different techniques whose objective is joint reconstruction as close to perfect as possible because this seems to be the best guarantee of a good prognosis. The difficulty is osteosynthesis of the coronoid process and restoration of the joint cavity. The simplicity of osteosynthesis using two plates gives the operator time to come to terms with other problems. Plate positioning considerably reduces the discomfort caused by the prominence of the posterior plate, while increasing the number of screws for stable fixation. None.