Thirty years ago, the analysis of longwall pillar stability (ALPS) inaugurated a new era in coal pillar design. ALPS was the first empirical pillar design technique to consider the abutment loads that arise from full extraction, and the first to be calibrated using an extensive database of longwall mining case histories. ALPS was followed by the analysis of retreat mining stability (ARMPS) and the analysis of multiple seam stability (AMSS). These methods incorporated other innovations, including the coal mine roof rating (CMRR), the Mark-Bieniawski pillar strength formula, and the pressure arch loading model. They also built upon ever larger case history databases and employed more sophisticated statistical methods. Today, these empirical methods are used in nearly every underground coal mine in the US. However, the piecemeal manner in which these methods have evolved resulted in some weaknesses. For example, in certain situations, it may not be obvious which program is the best to use. Other times the results from the different programs are not entirely consistent with each other. The programs have also not been updated for several years, and some changes were necessary to keep pace with new developments in mining practice. The analysis of coal pillar stability (ACPS) now integrates all three of the older software packages into a single pillar design framework. ACPS also incorporates the latest research findings in the field of pillar design, including an expanded multiple seam case history data base and a new method to evaluate room and pillar panels containing multiple rows of pillars left in place during pillar recovery. ACPS also includes updated guidance and warnings for users and features upgraded help files and graphics.Pillar design is one of the fundamental elements of mining engineering. Pillars are necessary to control the great weight of the overburden during all phases of underground mining. Without stable pillars, ground control is impossible. Pillars have been used since the earliest days of mining. The first scientific pillar design method for US coal mines was developed more than a century ago. Yet, as late as the 1980s, no design technique had achieved wide acceptance, and few pillars were truly engineered The advent of modern longwall mining added to the difficulties. Longwall gate pillars were expected to maintain access to the longwall face, including the tailgate side of the panel. However, early pillar design methods did not consider the heavy abutment loads that are generated by longwall mining. The 1984 Wilberg Mine Disaster, in which 27 miners were trapped by a fire and could not escape because roof falls blocked the tailgate entry, tragically illustrated the potential consequences of inadequate gate entry ground control. The analysis of longwall pillar stability (ALPS) was developed in direct response to the Wilberg Mine Disaster. The two-dimensional “abutment angle” concept was developed to provide estimates of retreat mining abutment loads, based on an extensive stress measurement research program When applied to the few available case histories, however, it was clear that the ALPS pillar SF could not predict tailgate stability on its own. Roof support, entry width, and most critically, roof geology, needed to be considered, as well. The coal mine roof rating (CMRR) rock mass classification was developed so that geologic factors could be quantified and integrated into the longwall pillar design process. Ultimately, a large database of case histories was collected during visits to longwall mines throughout the US, and modern multi-variate statistical techniques were used for the first time to analyze the data Pillar design for room-and-pillar retreat mining was pursued next. Before 1994, pillar recovery operations had been associated with about 25% of all roof fall fatalities underground; in addition, at least 12 massive pillar collapses had occurred After more than a century of underground coal mining, many of the remaining coal reserves in the US are affected by multiple seam interactions. These very complicated phenomena can result in subsidence or stress transfers that cause roof falls, rib failure, floor heave, and even coal bursts. The analysis of multiple seam stability (AMSS) was developed to help mine planners assess the likelihood and potential severity of such interactions. The AMSS database included 344 case histories representing the most difficult conditions encountered in the Western and Central Appalachian coalfields Today, the ALPS, ARMPS, and AMSS pillar design methods are used in nearly every underground coal mine in the US. Their success can be attributed to three main factors They are reliable because they are based on case histories that represent the broad range of actual mining experience in the US. They are transparent because they employ concepts that can be easily understood even by non-specialists. They are user-friendly because the input parameters are readily available and because they have been available on high quality, easily understood computer platforms. Although no statistics on pillar failure are collected on a regular basis, it is clear that improved pillar design has greatly reduced failure incidence in US coal mines. Longwall tailgate blockages are rare, typically only affecting short segments of the gateroad. Squeezes are very unusual today during pillar recovery, and massive collapses are almost unheard of. The near-universal use of barrier pillars, particularly under deep cover, has significantly reduced the risk of coal bursts. Better pillar design has also contributed to the greatly improved overall ground control safety record of the US industry. The connection is the clearest in the case of pillar recovery. Once miners realized that squeezes resulted from inadequate pillars, and not from “poor caving,” they were free to install more roof support and leave large final stumps. With more effective ground control only one miner has been killed by a pillar recovery roof fall in the decade since 2007, compared with 19 in the decade prior There has been one significant blemish on this record, however. In 2007, the catastrophic pillar failure at the Crandall Canyon Mine resulted in the deaths of six miners and three rescuers. The MSHA investigation found that a root cause of the disaster was that the “dimensions of pillars within the active workings, as well as dimensions of the adjoining barrier pillars, did not provide sufficient strength to withstand stresses” The Crandall Canyon Disaster confirmed the need for reliable, user-friendly pillar design techniques for coal mining. In the initial wake of the disaster, the ARMPS program was strengthened with new pop-up user warnings and an expanded help file. Significant technical improvements, notably the pressure arch loading model, were also made. AMSS and ALPS were also upgraded, but not to the same extent. In the years since, it has become clear that the piecemeal manner in which the three programs developed and evolved resulted in some weaknesses. In certain situations, users may find it difficult to select the most appropriate program to use. Other times, the results from the different programs are not entirely consistent. To simplify and improve the pillar design process, the analysis of coal pillar stability (ACPS) now integrates all three of the older packages into a single pillar design framework. ACPS users begin with the “input project description” screen ( ACPS has been designed so that different users may attack a design problem different ways, yet get consistent answers. For example, development of a three-entry longwall gate system may be analyzed using either of the project types. In the past, because ALPS and ARMPS used different loading models, users could get different SF values from the two programs. The basic ACPS input screen for room-and-pillar/development projects is very similar to the current ARMPS screen. The most significant change is that the “advanced geometry” option, which was formerly available only in ALPS, is now available for any project. The “advanced geometry” option allows all entry spacings, crosscut spacings, and crosscut angles to be specified for each individual pillar in a pillar row ( ACPS calculates the stability factor for a pillar system, rather than stability factors for individual pillars, because experience has shown that the pillars within a system work together. Thus, if an individual pillar is overloaded, it will normally transfer its excess load to adjacent pillars. If those pillars are adequately sized, the process ends there. A pillar squeeze occurs only when the adjacent pillars are also undersized. Then they fail in turn, resulting in a “domino” of load transfer and pillar failure. The ACPS SF is therefore a measure of the overall stability of the pillar system. For retreat mining, the pillar system includes all of the pillars on the extraction front (or “pillar line”), and extends outby the pillar line a distance of 2.8 times the square root of the depth of cover (in meters). For a panel beneath 400 m of cover, for example, the breadth of the pillar system is (2.8 × 20) = 56 m. The width of the pillar system is the sum of all entry center-to-center spacings. The area of the pillar system is its width multiplied by its breadth. For ease of computation, the dimensions of the pillar system are the same for both development and retreat analyses. Next, the strength of each pillar within the pillar system is determined, using the Mark-Bieniawski pillar strength formula. The individual pillar strengths are multiplied by the load-bearing areas of the pillars, and these are summed to determine the total load-bearing capacity of the pillars within the pillar system. The load calculation begins with the tributary area approximation, which states that the pillars carry the entire weight of the overburden directly above them. When the panel is deeper than it is wide, a “pressure arch” is assumed to transfer some of the tributary area load to presumed solid coal on either side of the panel ( The SF is determined by dividing the load-bearing capacity of the pillars of the pillar system by the applied load. The design criteria suggested by NIOSH are still considered to be appropriate ( When the “retreat” option is selected, the data input screen again is very similar to the one used in ARMPS. The user can specify the following ( Whether there is just the active retreat mining in the panel being evaluated, or if there are pre-existing worked-out panels (side gobs) on one or both sides of the panel The extent of the active gob, and the width of any side gobs The width(s) of the barrier pillar(s) separating the active panel from the side gobs The depth of any slab cuts taken from the barrier pillars Whether a row of bleeder pillars has been left within a side gob, and the width of those bleeder pillars. The process for calculating the SF is essentially the same as it was in ARMPS. First, each barrier pillar SF is determined, considering the barrier tributary area loads, any pressure arch loads, and any loads due to the slab cuts. Then the load on the AMZ is determined, considering the development load, front and side abutment loads (possibly reduced by the pressure arch effect), and any loads transferred back to the AMZ from inadequate barrier pillars. The most significant new feature is the manner in which ACPS treats leave pillars within the Leave pillars do not affect the calculation of the barrier pillar SF. Indeed, since the front abutment does not generally increase the load on the barrier pillar, and since slab cuts cannot be extracted when leave pillars are modeled, the barrier pillar SF is usually the same for both development and retreat. Leave pillars do affect the calculation of the pillar system SF, however. ACPS defines a new pillar system for retreat mining that includes only those pillars on the active pillar line, excluding the leave pillars ( AMSS provided two distinct evaluations of potential effects of a multiple seam interaction. The first is a pillar SF calculation that incorporates the multiple seam loads. Both the single seam tributary area loads and the multiple seam Lam2D loads are adjusted by the pressure arch factor described by Mark The second evaluation is of the entry stability with a focus on the expected integrity of the roof and ribs. The ACPS calculations for this evaluation have been adjusted based on a new statistical analysis of an expanded database. The additional case histories helped to fill several gaps in the original database: While all original case histories were from the Central Appalachian and Western coalfields, the new ones are all from Northern Appalachia The lowest CMRR in the original database was 45, while 16 of the new cases have a CMRR of 40 The new data includes a number of overmining cases where the depth of cover was less than 150 m. In all, a total of 53 new case histories were added from three mines. Two of the mines were described by Castner, and the third was described by Stankus et al. The logistic regression analysis resulted in slightly different weightings for the factors included in the predictive model. For example, as shown in A new feature of ACPS is a “CMRR estimator” that helps users select appropriate values of this critical entry stability parameter. The tool can be used when reliable geologic data is available from core logs or underground observations, but no strength testing has been conducted. The ACPS CMRR estimates are conservative and coalfield-specific and based on experience with the most common roof geologies throughout the US. For example, the CMRR of Central Appalachian shale is estimated to be about 45, while the estimates for weaker Illinois Basin shales are 38–40. The longwall gate entry module closely resembles the former ALPS program on which it is based. The most significant changes are that the SF results for the longwall “development,” “bleeder,” and “isolated” loading conditions are now consistent with the equivalent calculations in the “room-and-pillar” module. This was accomplished by incorporating the pressure arch into the longwall gate loading model and by using the Mark-Bieniawski pillar strength formula throughout. The ALPS “classic” option, which used the Bieniawski formula, was eliminated, as was the ALPS “sizing” option. Other new features of longwall gate entry module are that panel widths and abutment angles can be specified for individual panels, and the CMRR estimator can be used to help obtain input CMRR values where they help determine the appropriate tailgate pillar SF. The simplified longwall tailgate input screen is shown in The multiple seam option is only available for the development phase of an ACPS longwall gate entry project. In retrospect, the AMSS multiple seam loading model for longwall extraction made unrealistically conservative assumptions for the longwall extraction phases, so these calculations were not carried over into ACPS. Significant advances have been achieved in the science of pillar design during the past 30 years. User-friendly empirical design methods have made valuable contributions to coal mine safety. By integrating ALPS, ARMPS, and AMSS into a single pillar design framework, ACPS represents the logical next step for pillar design. ACPS also incorporates the latest research findings in the field of pillar design, including an expanded multiple seam case history database and a new method to evaluate room and pillar panels containing multiple rows of bleeder pillars.