Effects of mechanical activation on physicochemical properties and alkaline leaching of hemimorphite from Lanping, Yunnan province were studied. The results showed that both dry milling and mechano-chemical milling could enhance zinc extraction rate and shorten the leaching time. Scanning electron microscope (SEM), particle size distribution (PSD), X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis demonstrated that different milling times and modes could form different morphologies, particle size distributions and crystal structures, thus influence zinc recovery differently.Zinc is an important base metal in the galvanizing and battery manufacturing industries and is conventionally produced from minerals (sphalerite, marmatite, calamine or smithsonite, hemimorphite, etc.) by hydrometallurgical routes ( Extensive work has been carried out on the treatment of zinc silicate ores by hydrometallurgical and pyrometallurgical methods. Sulphuric acid leaching has been found to be most versatile and some commercial plants are in operation based on this process ( Recently, ammonia has drawn immense attention as a leaching agent for it has a number of inherent advantages due to its low vapor pressure, such as low cost, low toxicity, good complexing ability and easy regeneration ( Meanwhile, mechanical activation exhibits a wide range of potential applications. It has been reported that mechanical activation substantially accelerates the leaching kinetics of several sulfide and oxide minerals, even at ambient pressure ( In order to find a better way to leach hemimorphite, we investigate the effects of mechanical activation on physical properties and alkaline leaching of hemimorphite from Lanping, Yunan province. In this paper, it is found that mechanical activation not only changes its morphology, decreases its particle size, causes structural disorder, but accelerates zinc leaching rate and enhances its zinc recovery as well. The investigation was carried out with the sample of hemimorphite from Lanping, Yunnan province. XRD analysis showed that the major mineral phase was hemimorphite (JCPDS No. 79-1148) which contains some Al NH Leaching of the unmilled and milled powder was carried out in a pyrex glass reactor (500 The leaching experiments were carried out for various durations (15 The following reaction could occur in ammonia–ammonium chloride leaching solution and zinc ammonium complex was formed ( The unmilled sample (< The milling chamber contained 20 The milling chamber contained 15 The unmilled concentrates as well as the activated samples were characterized by thermal and differential thermal analysis, electron microscopy, particle size analysis and X-ray diffraction. Microstructural analysis was done by using JSM-5600LV scanning electron microscope. Particle size distributions of the samples were measured by laser diffraction (Mastersize 2000) in liquid mode. The specific surface area was obtained from the particle size distribution. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was studied by a D/max2550 diffractometer (Rigaku, Japan) using Co-Ka radiation ( The SEM micrographs of the unmilled sample and the activated samples for mechano-chemical milling and dry milling respectively, are depicted in The initial sample presented a natural rough surface, having different sizes ( Agglomerate formation is common during dry grinding and is usually explained by agglomeration of the structurally modified particles following the initial reduction of particle size. This happens because of the tendency of the activated material to reduce its surface free energy ( The typical changes after intensive milling in a planetary ball mill were an increase of specific surface area, as well as a decrease of particle size. The initial sample had a small specific surface area and a big median particle size. It was clearly seen that the effect of dry milling and mechano-chemical milling on powders were similar, both making In addition, the size reduction was nearly completed within 15  The consumption of energy during milling has an influence on the structural disordering of hemimorphite. The X-ray diffractograms of the unmilled sample and dry milled ones for various times are delineated in The XRD patterns of the unmilled sample indicated the presence of predominant hemimorphite (JCPDS No. 79-1148). There were no new peaks observed during milling, indicating that no phase change occurred during milling. The energy supplied by milling caused structural disorder through the distortion or breakage of the crystalline network. This was evident from the reduction of the intensities of XRD peaks. As the activation time increased, the line of hemimorphite peaks broadened and the intensity weakened as well, which were typical presentations of milled powders. However, after milling for 480 The variation of crystallite size and strain with time of activation was calculated from the line broadening of the hemimorphite reflections using Scherrer's formula: Clearly, both dry milling and mechano-chemical milling could cause the crystallite size decreasing, whereas the lattice strain increases with the activation time. In the present study, the crystallite sizes varied from 4325 to 663 Furthermore, there were very sharp changes of crystallite size and lattice strain for milled samples at the initial stage, which appeared to have a definite correlation with the changes of morphologies, specific surface areas and particle sizes after different activation time. One hour later, both crystallite size and lattice strain of hemimorphite did not vary significantly as milling time increased.  According to the metallurgical dynamics theory ( At the first stage of leaching, the diffusion and mass transfer velocity was fast, owing to the high solution concentration. As the reaction continues, the residue gradually covers the surface of the particles, and, the solution concentration was lessening additionally. These made the diffusion and mass transfer velocity slow down which could not supply enough ammonia for zinc–ammonia complex. Therefore flat stage appeared. However, 3  Comparing with the unmilled leaching curve, there were two important characteristics for activated ones. Firstly, the leaching rate increased critically at the initial stage (within 15 The leaching data with milling time in Comparative studies were performed between chemical leaching after mechanical activation and mechano-chemical leaching samples at the solution concentration of 5.0 This could be explained as follows. During mechanical activation the crystal structure of a mineral is usually disordered and generation of defects or other metastable forms can be registered, as shown in Mechanical activation of hemimorphite resulted in an enhancement in specific surface area because of milling to submicroscopic particle sizes and substantial increase in structural disorder. The crystallite size decreased with prolonged milling time, whereas the lattice strain increased. Agglomeration was the reason why the median particle sizes increased after a minimum value. The conversion of crystal structure to amorphous state led the decrease of endothermic peaks. The incrassation of amorphous layers and the refinement of the particle size induced the degeneracy and broadening of the X-ray diffractograms of hemimorphite. Alkaline leaching showed that zinc recovery of hemimorphite was enhanced with prolonged milling time and mechano-chemical milling mode had a better improvement for zinc recovery than dry milling. These were attributed to the increased specific surface area and the amorphization of mineral particles.