Local mechanical properties in aluminum cast components are inhomogeneous as a consequence of spatial distribution of microstructure, e.g., porosity, inclusions, grain size and arm spacing of secondary dendrites. In this work, the effect of porosity is investigated. Cast components contain voids with different sizes, forms, orientations and distributions. This is approximated by a porosity distribution in the following. The aim of this paper is to investigate the influence of initial porosity, stress triaxiality and Lode parameter on plastic deformation and ductile fracture. A micromechanical model with a spherical void located at the center of the matrix material, called the representative volume element (RVE), is developed. Fully periodic boundary conditions are applied to the RVE and the values of stress triaxiality and Lode parameter are kept constant during the entire course of loading. For this purpose, a multi-point constraint (MPC) user subroutine is developed to prescribe the loading. The results of the RVE model are used to establish the constitutive equations and to further investigate the influences of initial porosity, stress triaxiality and Lode parameter on elastic constant, plastic deformation and ductile fracture of an aluminum die casting alloy.Die casting process is characterized by forcing molten metal under high pressure into a mould cavity. Aluminum pressure die cast components are widely used in vehicle constructions due to lightweight requirements and economic benefits, e.g., reduction of production steps for complex components in one process Recent experiments have shown that the Lode parameter and stress triaxiality have profound effects not only on material ductility but also on void growth However, it is difficult to realize such loading conditions experimentally. As alternative, a computational method based on RVEs containing an initial spherical void at the center is developed. The stress state of RVE during the loading history is controlled. The finite element method (FEM) calculations performed on the representative volume element (RVE) have been widely used to analyze the mechanical properties of a material through microscopic to macroscopic levels. At macroscopic level, a RVE is regarded as a small continuum unit with uniform mechanical properties. At microscopic level, a RVE exhibits a heterogeneous microstructure, and the stress and strain distributions are inhomogeneous. In this study, micromechanical analysis is carried out to clarify the influences of initial porosity, stress triaxiality and Lode parameter on plastic deformation and ductile fracture. In addition, the influence of different stress states defined by the same stress triaxiality and Lode parameter is investigated. Ductile alloys used in engineering structures often contain impurities such as second-phase particles where voids can nucleate. Aluminum cast alloys also contain initial voids (shrink and gas porosity) The micromechanical model employed here assumes that ductile material failure occurs when the deformation becomes highly non-uniform and localizes into a thin planar band as a result of nucleation, growth and coalescence of voids The macroscopic Cauchy stress Σ The macroscopic hydrostatic pressure stress Σ The deviatoric part of the macroscopic Cauchy stress tenor The second and third invariants of the stress deviator are defined as The stress triaxiality η is defined as the ratio of the hydrostatic stress to the effective stress Relative to a fixed Cartesian frame, the RVE as a material point is described by the coordinates X The macroscopic logarithmic strain The RVE is subjected to the following macroscopic deformation gradient The left Cauchy-Green tensor is defined by: The right Cauchy-Green tensor is defined by: The logarithmic, or true strain is defined by: The deviatoric part of the macroscopic logarithmic strain tenor The equivalent strain In order to study the effects of stress triaxiality and Lode parameter, boundary conditions of the RVE should be prescribed such that stress triaxiality and Lode parameter remain constant during the loading history The aim of this section is to provide an effective method to keep the RVE under specified (constant or arbitrary) stress state (stress triaxiality and Lode parameter) path in the entire course of the loading and unloading. Seven springs are added to the RVE to control the load/unload of each stress component in accordance with the prescribed route and state using the relation between the internal force of spring and spring extension, as show in Each of the 6 springs shares a node with a corner point of the RVE, while the other one, the load node, bears the load. Because the displacements of the six load nodes are directly coupled with the master spring deflection, the forces are transmitted to the RVE. The prescribed macroscopic stress state of the RVE is ensured through coupling the load node displacements of six springs with the one of the master node as explained below. The periodic boundary condition constraints between the displacements of the nodes belonging to the faces of the RVE and the spring displacements are given in The relations between internal force of each spring, the RVE surface force and elongation of the spring are: Surface Surface Surface The relations between the current surface areas of the RVE and elongation of the springs are: Surface Surface Surface In The macroscopic stress state of RVE can be expressed as: This equation set determines the relations between the spring deflection The numerical procedures are successfully applied to both arbitrary-proportional (e.g. constant stress triaxiality and Lode parameter) and non-proportional loading conditions. Other methods can be found to specify the loading paths. In a similar way, Tegoglu The material investigated in this study is the aluminum alloy Castasil®-37 (AlSi9Mn). The true stress–true strain curve of matrix material reported in The material parameters are listed in The stress–strain relation is implemented in ABAQUS by using the UMAT user subroutine. Geometric nonlinearity is included and the rate independent J The influence of porosity on material properties is investigated under the assumption that pores are distributed homogeneously. The initial void volume fraction of the RVE The tensile direction is the first direction. For small deformations the behavior is purely elastic and the macroscopic Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio can be calculated as, The influences of porosity on the macroscopic Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio are quantified based on the results of RVE calculations and fitted with two functions given in Under uniaxial tension, the macroscopic equivalent plastic strain of RVE can be calculated as, The influences of initial porosity on yield stress and strain hardening are quantified and fitted with the function given in   After the critical point, further deformation can only take place in a uniaxial straining mode, corresponding to flow localization in the ligament between radially adjacent voids. The shift to this uniaxial straining mode indicates the onset of void coalescence. Stress triaxiality is a critical parameter controlling material ductility, especially at high triaxiality. Several studies concluded that micro voids dilate rapidly at high stress triaxiality and ductile fracture is promoted In this section, micromechanical analyses are conducted to study the influence of stress triaxiality on plastic deformation and ductile fracture. For this purpose, eleven different stress triaxiality levels ranging from −3 to 3 (−3, −2, −1, −0.5, −0.33, 0, 0.33, 0.5, 1, 2, 3) are considered. The Lode parameter is kept constant (as −1, 0 and 1) during loading path. An initial porosity of 5% is considered.  At the beginning of the deformation, the greater is the absolute value of stress triaxiality, the lower is the yield stress. For the same absolute value of stress triaxiality, there are small differences between yield stresses, and the Lode parameter has insignificant effect on the yield stress. After a certain deformation, the hardening rate is affected by the sign of the triaxiality, material hardening is lower at positive stress triaxialities than at negative stress triaxialities The influence of the sign of the triaxiality on the hardening behavior increases with increasing absolute triaxiality. The same effect is obtained for all Lode parameters, but it is more pronounced with an increase of the Lode parameter. The effect of stress triaxiality on micro void dilatation has been fairly well understood and investigated in many studies and in references therein The Lode parameter ξ (or equivalently Lode angle, θ) is used to distinguish between different shear stress states in three dimensional stress states. According to the numerical investigation by Zhang et al. In this section, the influence of Lode parameter on plastic deformation and ductile fracture is investigated through micromechanical analyses. For this purpose, nine different Lode parameters ranging between ξ = −1 and 1 (−1, −0.75, −0.5, −0.25, 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1) are considered. Three stress triaxialities (−1, 0, 1) are considered and kept constant during loading path. An initial porosity of 5% is used. The corresponding evolutions of macroscopic equivalent stress versus macroscopic equivalent strain for Lode parameters ranging from −1 to 1 are provided in The evolution of void volume fractions at different stress triaxiality levels of η = −1,  0,  1 for the Lode parameters ranging from −1 to 1 are shown in The corresponding evolution of macroscopic equivalent stress versus macroscopic equivalent strain for the Lode parameters ranging from −1 to 1 are provided in It is necessary to point out that here the plastic deformation localization during the last stage of material's ductile fracture is not taken into account. In such a situation the voids’ interaction and localization mechanisms need to be considered. Stress triaxiality and Lode parameter cannot determine uniquely the distribution of equivalent plastic strain and the porosity evolution at a material point, because different principal stress directions lead to variance of plastic deformation distribution, for which the cell model has an orientation as mentioned previously. For example, both simple shear and pure shear have a stress triaxiality η = 0 and a Lode parameter ξ = 0, however the principal direction varies during the loading process for the former and keeps unchanged for the latter. In this section, the influence of different principal stress directions characterized by the same stress triaxiality and Lode parameter on plastic deformation and ductile fracture is investigated through micromechanical analyses. For this purpose, three different stress triaxialities of η = −1, 0, 1 for a constant Lode parameter of 0 are considered, respectively. In each case, different principal directions obtained with different combinations of stress components are realized. An initial porosity of 5% is considered. In this study, the influences of initial porosity, stress triaxiality and Lode parameter on plastic deformation and ductile fracture are investigated. This is achieved by using a micromechanical model consisting of a representative volume element (RVE) with a spherical void located at the center of the equally sized cell. Fully periodic boundary conditions are applied on the RVE. A numerical method is proposed to exert prescribed loadings on the RVE. Numerical calculations under proportional loading conditions are conducted, allowing for constant stress triaxiality and Lode parameter. The following conclusions can be drawn from this study: The proposed method enables to perform RVE calculations under any specified arbitrary stress paths (proportional or non-proportional loading) with high computational efficiency and accuracy. The stress state has a strong influence on material mechanical behaviors including damage behavior, plastic hardening of the matrix material and void evolution, thereby the triaxiality is the key parameter governing the void evolution. The macroscopic stress–strain response and the void growth and coalescence behavior of the RVE obtained from detailed finite element analyses indicate strong correlations with the stress triaxiality and the initial void volume fraction. Stress triaxiality and the Lode parameter greatly affect the development of void volume fraction. At positive stress triaxiality, the Lode parameter has almost no effect on the stable void growth but a significant effect on void coalescence, and as a consequence, on fracture strains. At negative stress triaxiality, the Lode parameter has an effect on material yield and hardening through affecting porosity evolution. For the same stress triaxiality and Lode parameter, the void growth and coalescence behavior of the voided RVE is also affected by the combination of stress components, especially, the onset of void coalescence at high stress triaxiality depends on it. The presented work is supported in part by the Notation: Fixed boundary conditions: Periodic boundary conditions: For surfaces For surfaces For surfaces Multi-point constrain equations: Using Examples: Uniaxial tension Biaxial-tension Pure shear