The equilibrium selectivity and operational capacity of two commercial (Lewatit MonoPlus TP 207 XL and TP 220) and four novel monosized macroporous ion exchange resins are characterized as a function of pH and chloride concentration in conditions relevant to nickel and cobalt recovery from laterite leach solution. The four novel functionalizations were mixtures of acetic acid, picolyl, and sulfonic acid. Resin with the acetic acid functionalization displayed higher operational capacity and lower selectivity for nickel and cobalt over other metals than those with picolyl functionalization. The presence of potassium chloride generally had either a negligible or positive effect on metal loading in the context of nickel laterite processing by decreasing loading of unwanted metals such as iron, aluminum, calcium and magnesium. Significant potassium loading was seen on resins involving the sulfonic acid group. In picolyl based resins the presence of chloride increased cobalt loading by a small amount. The magnitude of these effects varied significantly between resins. Of the novel resins, the functionalization combining acetic acid and picolyl seems the most promising as it displays a higher capacity than the bis-picolylamine resin and better selectivity for nickel and cobalt over other metals than the iminodiacetic acid resin.Chelating ion exchange resins have been of interest in the context of nickel and cobalt recovery and impurity separation for decades. Most recently, the resin-in-pulp process has been developed for nickel and cobalt recovery from laterite ores ( In these processes, the selectivity of the resin for nickel and cobalt over other metals present in laterite leach liquor is of the utmost importance. As such, significant research has been undertaken to determine the resin most applicable to nickel and cobalt resin-in-pulp. To date, the majority of studies on resin-in-pulp have been undertaken using resin functionalized with iminodiacetic acid due to its high operational capacity at pH 3–5, but bis-picolylamine functionalized resin has been considered as well ( The aim of the present research is to characterize the properties of six ion exchange resins that incorporate functional groups made of picolyl, acetic acid, and sulfonic acid. Two commercial products were tested — Lewatit MonoPlus TP 207 XL and Lewatit MonoPlus TP 220 (hereafter referred to as TP 207 XL and TP 220, respectively). The other four resins are developmental resins that are not commercially available. All resins were produced by Lanxess ION in Germany. Each resin was produced in a similar manner, starting with the production of a macroporous, monodisperse, bead polymer of polystyrene crosslinked with divinylbenzene. The beads were then functionalized with primary amino groups using the phthalimide process. The final step is reaction of the amino groups with the picolyl, acetic acid, and/or sulfonic acid groups to produce a resin suitable for metal loading ( Most previous resin-metal selectivity characterization has been conducted through column testing, where metal selectivity is determined by analyzing breakthrough curves for different ions. Column ion exchange is fundamentally a batch process, so solution conditions within the column fluctuate. The results of such column tests are difficult to relate to CSTR resin-in-pulp technologies because in resin-in-pulp processes, the pH and solution conditions in each tank are fixed and controlled ( Summaries of the resin properties are presented in The functional groups studied in this work were chosen for various reasons. Iminodiacetic acid and bispicolylamine functionalities are used on a number of commercially available ion exchange resins and are used extensively in a range of base metals applications. AP resin functionalized with a mixture of acetic acid and picolyl was chosen to see if the well known selectivity of bispicolylamine for base metals over iron could be achieved using less expensive precursor reagents. PS resin was chosen for similar reasons, and also because incorporation of sulfonic acid groups has been shown to improve resin kinetics in other applications ( Batch tests of resin loading were conducted in 250 All salts used in this work were analytical grade of 99.5%+ purity. Sulphuric acid used in elution and resin protonation was 98% purity supplied by Merck. Aqueous ammonia supplied by Merck and was 25% purity by weight. A powder of nickel and nickel oxide was used which was assayed at 99% nickel with silica as impurity; 98% of the nickel reported as nickel metal with the remaining 2% as nickel oxide. Each resin was received in either the sodium form or the protonated form. In either case, samples of the resin were conditioned prior to use in the same way. Approximately 100 Equilibrium batch tests were carried out in the following manner — first, 5 The initial concentrations of metals in each test were selected to be high enough to ensure that metal ions would need to compete for adsorption sites on the resin. If the resin were able to adsorb all metals, any insight to the relative resin-metal affinities would have been obscured. Nickel was present in all solutions to act as an index element to allow comparison between other metals. The salt forms of the metals used and initial solution concentrations are shown in In several tests, steps were taken to avoid precipitation of metals. In the Ni-Fe(III)-Al tests the base was added slowly to prevent the formation of Fe(OH) After equilibrium was reached, the resin was separated from the solution by vacuum filtration and washed with de-ionized water. The resin was then contacted with an eluent. For the majority of tests this eluent was 1 Once the tests were complete, samples of the feed solution, final solution, and resin eluate metal content were determined using Atomic Absorption Spectrometry (AAS) and Inductively Couple Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS). In house AAS was performed for the Ni capacity, Ni-Mn, and Ni-Cu tests. For the Ni-Al-Fe and Ni-Co-Mg-Ca tests, the assays were outsourced to either ALS Laboratories in Brisbane or the University of Queensland School of Agriculture and Food Sciences for ICP-MS analysis. Mass balances across all tests agreed to within 10%. In order to ensure the reproducibility of these results, twelve points from the maximum operational capacity test regime were duplicated. All twelve of the repeated experiments agreed with the original results to within 10%. However, the precision of these tests diminishes as the metal concentrations approached the detection limit of the analysis procedure. In particular, tests involving low metal–resin affinities such as most of the S resin series are subject to higher variability. Results of the equilibrium batch tests described in 2.4.2 are shown In In In In In In measuring the capacity of any resin, a distinction must be made between the true capacity and the operational capacity. The true capacity of the resin refers to the total number of functional groups per unit volume resin and is not a function of pH, temperature, or metal concentration. The operational capacity refers to the amount of ions loaded onto the resin at a given set of conditions. In this work the focus was on operational capacity since it is the metric which is of more practical relevance. Under the conditions shown in The separation factor (SF In the case of TP 207 XL and TP 220, the selectivity order calculated in the current work can be compared to those provided in other sources. While the methods and solution conditions used to determine selectivity in previous work differ from the methods detailed in this paper, it can be seen from As many plants use saline and hypersaline process water, determining the effect of chloride ions in solution on resin-metal interaction was deemed important. It was expected that the addition of chloride to load solutions would depress the loading of the metals with the strongest tendency to form aqueous phase chloro-complexes. The aqueous species activity coefficients were calculated using the Harvie modified Pitzer model included in Outotec's HSC Chemistry software package version 7.14. This model predicted that in the presence of chloride, Fe(III) and Co activity were depressed relative to other metals. However, the observed metal–resin loading was not consistent with these changes in solution phase species activities. Of particular industrial relevance is cobalt. Cobalt is known to form chloro-complexes at high chloride concentration, thus cobalt loading on resin was expected to decline in the presence of chloride. The presence of 25 With the exception of the results discussed in the previous paragraph, nickel loading in the presence of chloride was relatively unchanged on all resins. Several tests showed declines of nickel loading of 5% or less, but these results are within the bounds of experimental error. If there is a systematic effect of chloride on nickel loading, it is relatively small under the conditions tested. Similarly, copper loading was relatively unchanged, with the exception of the PS resin, which saw an average increase in copper loading of 20% in the presence of chloride. The presence of chloride has a negligible effect on total ferric iron loading with the TP 207 XL, AS, and AP resins. All 3 of these resins incorporate the acetic acid group, which forms strong bonds with ferric iron. The TP 220 and PS resins, which rely on the picolyl group and its lesser affinity for ferric iron, saw ferric iron loading decreased by 50% at pH 2.3 in the presence of chloride and a negligible difference at pH 1.5. Aluminum loading was not appreciably affected by the presence of chloride on any resin except AS, where Al loading was reduced by half in the presence of chloride. Manganese, calcium, and magnesium behaved similarly in these tests. All three metals showed a 30-50% reduction in loading TP 207 XL and AS resin in the presence of chloride. The other four resins tested displayed a low affinity for these metals regardless of chloride concentration. Lower loading of Fe(III), Al, Mn, Ca, and Mg in the presence of chloride may be attributable to competition with the potassium ion (chloride added as KCl). From To summarize, the changes in loading of metals for which resin has a weak affinity can be largely understood as a function of potassium competition. However, the curious behavior of Co, Cu and Fe(III) on the TP 220 and PS resins suggests a more complex interaction between these metal ions, picolyl and chloride. Further experimentation is required to fully delineate the effects of chloride, potassium competition, and solution ionic strength on these resins. Through this experimental program, each loaded resin sample was eluted with concentrated H In the case of Mg, Mn, Ca, Al, Fe(III), and Co, 150 Copper was by far the most strongly loaded metal. As can be seen in Sulphuric acid was less effective at eluting copper from TP 220 and AP resin, with recovery of 60 and 40% respectively. The remaining copper was eluted from TP 220 using a strong ammonia eluent, but approximately 10% of the loaded copper remained on the AP resin even after this second ammoniacal elution. It is clear that there is potential for copper poisoning of the AP resin. The loading behavior of each resin was further evaluated through contact with a solution similar to industrial nickel laterite leachate ( The resin selectivity observed in these synthetic industrial solution experiments agreed with the metal selectivity orders shown in These results have important process implications. Using resin with a higher useful operational capacity reduces the total resin inventory required for a given flow rate of nickel and cobalt. This represents a reduction in capital cost due to resin inventory and tank/column size. Additionally, since loaded resin is typically eluted with acid as per Eq. The savings are increased further since eluted resin is then recycled back to the loading circuit. There, the loaded protons are exchanged into solution where they must be neutralized in order to maintain constant pH in the loading circuit. As a result, increased resin selectivity for metal value reduces reagent costs in both loading and stripping circuits. Finally, assuming quantitative elution of resin, increased resin selectivity results in higher eluate purity. Depending on the route chosen to make a saleable product, higher purity eluate could lead to a savings in downstream purification costs. From this research, several general trends can be seen in the equilibrium behavior of resins with different functional groups. The use of acetic acid in functional groups (TP 207 XL, AP, AS) leads to a higher operational capacity but poorer selectivity for Ni and Co over Fe, Al, Mn, Mg, and Ca. Alternatively, resins with picolyl functionalization (TP 220, AP, PS) offer improved selectivity of nickel and cobalt over other metals, but at the expense of operational capacity. The sulfonic acid group (AS, PS, S) exhibited low operational capacity for all metals tested under these conditions. The presence of 25 The authors would like to acknowledge Lanxess ION in Germany, particularly Dr. Fries, Dr. Klipper, Dr. Schelhaas, and Mr. Stolle for hosting a site visit and providing resin samples for this research. The help of Ambrosia Ivana during experimentation is appreciated. The support of the University of Queensland School of Chemical Engineering and the Parker Cooperative Research Centre is also recognized.