The objective of this study is to highlight the accomplishments, weaknesses and trends of damage mechanics and research needed for further development. The growing interest in damage mechanics is a proof that the accomplishments are significant. However, one of the messages is that the damage mechanics, in its focus on the dilute density of micro-defects and homogeneous solids, did not address the problems that are of primary interest in applications. The list of references in this paper is restricted to the current papers that list the older works.Damage mechanics (DM) is a relatively new field of inquiry into the response and reliability of materials weakened by many randomly distributed microcracks of irregular shapes and random in size and orientation. The initial model DM models apply to the class of irreversible rearrangements of microstructure driven by a Damage evolution includes nucleation of new, and propagation and clustering of existing microcracks. Driven by the stress concentration (hot spots) microcracks grow along the internal surfaces of poor cohesive strength (weak links such as grain boundaries, interfaces separating phases of different properties) and heterogeneities (inclusions) which are also typical microcrack nucleation sites. In general, both hot spots and weak links are randomly distributed within the material microstructure. The basic question of whether a formal structure of damage models exists was only recently explored by proposing two formal structures in addition to the traditional formalism of internal variables. The first of these formalisms The traditional local continuum models of non-equilibrium, irreversible deformation processes are based on the thermodynamics with internal variables and principle of determinism, material objectivity and local action. Principle of determinism implies that future depends on the past. The principle of local action implies that the effect of micro-defects, which are randomly distributed within an `infinitesimally small neighborhood' of a material point The simplest class of local continuum models ( In Superscripts In From the second law of thermodynamics, the irreversible entropy production rate An idiosyncrasy of damage is that only Leaving the damage modeling in composites to another chapter some of accomplishments will be listed below. Uniaxial compression models of The problem of plastic-damage interaction and formulation of the rate form of a rational damage-elasto-plasticity theory was formally addressed by Non-local continuum damage models were suggested by The arbitrary selection of damage parameter and constitutive relations is a burden encumbered during the early phases of development of DM. Some of these arbitrary concepts and continuum models were later repudiated by micromechanical models that is, in combination with linear elastic fracture mechanics (LEFM), rightfully credited for the development of the scientific basis of DM. To be acceptable an internal variable must be identifiable, measurable and related to the dominant mode(s) of irreversible rearrangements of the material microstructure. To this end the damage flux at a `material point' Assuming that the volume is not smaller than RVE each joint probability distribution depends on the distance between defects where The described algorithm was extensively employed in DM. The characterization of a population of random micro-defects within an RVE entails precise and painstaking experimental measurements of the sizes, shapes, locations and orientation of The string of assumptions introduced to render the homogenization An interesting modification of standard micromechanics models was, in the context of concrete and rock failure, suggested by In principle, the tensors Kinetics of damage evolution can also be deduced from lattice simulations Experimental characterization of microcrack populations and its evolution is, due to their size, a daunting task. Advanced methods of quantitative non-destructive characterization of internal damage are still in development stage The experimental challenges are many. The identification of passive (closed) cracks obscured by the texture features of similar size, and the dependence of data on the magnification and image resolution are vexing and often mentioned problems. Additionally, most of the test data are recorded on materials with large features (concrete, rocks) in a homogeneous state of strain. The number of very delicate tests needed to form a representative sample required for the identification of universal trends will discourage even the most persistent experimentalist. It seems that in the absence of detailed micro-scale data the damage characterization of damage from measurements of effective compliance Despite its many accomplishments many essential aspects of DM are in dire need of further research. Analytical modeling of the growth of short (micro) cracks within a material characterized by a random distribution of barriers (capable of trapping cracks) is a serious task that is more than matched by the complexity of experimental observations. Distributions of local stresses (that drive the damage) and material texture (that resist damage evolution) are statistical in nature. Moreover, this statistics changes as the damage evolves. The damage evolution can be stable and gradual in ductile and Most current continuum and micromechanical models are focused on the uniaxial tension of homogeneous materials to take advantage of the deterministic micro structure and the fact that all microcracks are active and normal to the applied tensile tractions. However, the damage evolution in homogeneous (damage sensitive) materials subjected to long range tensile stresses is unlikely to be stable. The specimen failure will occur at very modest damage as soon as one of the microcracks becomes critical rendering the rest of damage irrelevant. Literature focusing on much more interesting problem of damage in brittle solids subjected to compressive tractions is meager. The micromechanically based non-associative model of a specimen in compression, that includes the friction over the mating surface of sliding microcracks as an additional energy dissipation mechanism ( To illustrate the current limitations and future needs of DM it suffices to discuss the deformation of a grained rock subjected to a slowly incremented axial contraction As the applied shear stress is further enhanced the distance separating adjacent microcracks diminishes and the effect of the interaction of closely located cracks on their propagation increases. Within this At large confinements At lesser confinements the local stresses at crack tips can be rendered tensile by interaction with its neighbors. As a cluster of interacting (correlated) cracks grows the elastic energy release stored at the cluster tip increases rendering the growth even faster. The synergetic effect of microcrack interaction on the rate of cluster elongation, known as Modeling of the softening regime (defined by the negative specimen tangential stiffness) is an interesting and controversial problem. The material of the softening specimen cannot be statistically uniform without violating the second law of thermodynamics The goal of this narrative is not only to highlight some of the accomplishments but also to reaffirm the practical value of DM. However, the application of DM models is currently limited to modeling deformation of ductile and damages tolerant materials (composites) regardless of the stress sign and to damage sensitive materials (rocks, concrete, silicone, epoxy, iron, bones, etc.) subjected to the macro-scale compression. The fact that the DM is not frequently used in industry can be blamed on the early models focus on the wrong problem, i.e. on damage in damage sensitive specimens subjected to tensile tractions. Secondly, as argued in this study most DM models focus on the least eventful and important part of the deformation (local process regime) and dilute concentration of micro-defects. Finally, the experimental data are not always in tune with the analytical models with arbitrary and poorly identified measures of damage. Thus, it is not surprising that the aircraft design concepts of reliability, damage tolerance, multiple damage sites and residual strength have little in common with DM as defines herein. The damage can, both rightly and wrongly, be perceived as an overture to failure. Indeed, it seems to this author that DM must address the reliability of damaged structures to convince the industry of its practical value. This task will require a more detailed (and different) statistical characterization of the thermodynamic state (distribution of hot spots and weak links) and its change as the damage evolves. To say this is one thing, to do it is still other. In view of the complexity of in-line experimental characterization of damage it seems that the practical solution, at least a temporary one, should be sought in computer simulations coupled with the methods of statistical mechanics (or computational micromechanics A combination of DM and plasticity is applicable to metals in which a growing microcrack can be trapped by the ductile deformation (dislocation bands). Further progress in the application of DM models to the problems of fatigue, creep, comminution, high velocity impact on and penetration through solids, materials subjected to very low (cryogenic) temperatures, corrosion, aging, solidification, hydraulic and thermal fracturing, etc. is a matter of time. The current weaknesses of DM provide the most fertile fields of future research. For example, experimental characterization of damage and its evolution during deformation are certainly both a weakness and an interesting field of work. Characterization of damage and reconstruction of damaged material from the test data From a purely analytical viewpoint the characterization of a thermodynamic state is a reasonably well investigated on all scales. The same cannot be stated for the change of a thermodynamic state. The damage potentials (and damage functions) are based on flimsy grounds. A model is often assumed to be associative without given it too much thought. The statistical homogeneity and isotropy of damage are assumed even when the test data and simple reasoning does not supports these assumptions. Some of these sins were committed when we did not know better and in a total absence of test data. However, perpetuation of these mistakes and formulation of new continuum theories that are not based on physics and materials may actually be even harmful. Finally, unlike plasticity DM cannot live and die investigating mean field (local process) regime. Microcracks have a strong tendency to grow and become macrocracks and the thermodynamic states can be unstable. Hence, it is not the damage potential that should be sought but the limit function (surface). The transition from statistically homogeneous state to the state dominated by a large cluster(s) is very important. The day when a DM model will provide a realistic estimate of the residual strength of a damaged (aged) structure or the fatigue limit it will come of age. This, of course, does not mean that all that was done in the past is wrong. To the contrary, it seems to this author that the acceptance of DM is growing very rapidly. There is no doubt here that most if not all of the current weaknesses of DM will be soon become history. The author gratefully acknowledges the financial support in the form of a grant from the Engineering Science Division of the Army Research Office and the Office of Basic Energy Sciences of the Department of Energy to Arizona State University that made this work possible. The author also acknowledges the help of his friends and colleagues D. Allen, M. Basista, Z.P. Bazant, G. Dvorak, J.L. Chaboche, P.M. Mariano, B. Mobasher, P. Ladeveze, G. Rodin, D. Sumarac and G. Voyadjis.