The phase transformation of laterite minerals reduced at temperatures up to 800 °C and the phase reversibility with cooling were investigated in this study. The phases were studied by in situ synchrotron radiation based X-ray powder diffraction with temperature resolved studies. The degrees of reduction were confirmed by a leaching of reduced ore with ammoniacal solution. Key features, which were observed in this study, include the role of dehydroxylation in releasing nickel and cobalt from the main gangue minerals in which these metals are incorporated. The transformation of hydrated gangue, goethite in limonite to magnetite and the serpentine minerals to the olivine phases in the saprolite and control of these phase transformations, in particular the recrystallisation of magnesium silicate to the forsterite phase were also investigated.The standard reduction roast ammoniacal ammonium carbonate leach process developed by The ores tested in this study include limonite and weathered saprolite. The typical chemical analysis of these ores is shown in Reduction was carried out in a fixed bed apparatus shown in Analysis of the mineral phases in this study was carried out using synchrotron radiation based X-ray powder diffraction (SRXRPD) in the Australian National Beamline Facility at the Photon Factory in Japan. This facility was accessed through the Australian Synchrotron Research Program. The analysis included elucidation of mineral phases of reduced ore and in situ analysis of structural changes induced by heating and reducing atmosphere. The procedure includes loading the ore in a 0.5 mm quartz capillary tube. The capillary tube is placed and aligned in front of the X-ray beam using a goniometer. Heating of the sample from room temperature to 800 °C was achieved using a tube furnace. Studies were conducted in a vacuum with gauge pressure of 1 Torr. X-ray wavelength of 1.1 Å and current of 400 mA were used in the analysis. The effect of heating limonite ore under a low oxygen partial pressure is shown in The effect of an ex situ reduction using a reduction potential of 1:1 CO:CO Similar tests were conducted for weathered saprolite (see The effect of introducing the reduction gases after calcination on the saprolite mineral phases is shown in The effect of temperature on the leaching behaviour of limonite is shown in The effect of the history of reduction on the nickel recovery from weathered saprolite is shown in The difference in the nickel and cobalt recovery achieved from various laterite minerals is clearly as a result of the changes induced by the reduction history on the mineral phases. The results from this study suggest that temperature of reduction can have a significant effect on the metal recovery. Increasing the temperature up to 600 °C for limonite appears to provide the optimum recovery. Whereas weathered saprolite reduction is favoured at 800 °C. This appears to be associated with complete dehydroxylation, which is achieved at this temperature. As temperature is increased further, recovery is reduced. The history of reduction appears to also have a significant effect on the efficiency of the process, in particular for saprolite ores. Reduction after the calcination of weathered saprolite at temperatures above 700 °C leads to the formation of forsterite, which renders Ni and Co in its phase inert. Reduction conditions during the dehydroxylation stage appear to have a significant effect on the mineral transformation during reduction affecting metal recoveries. Phases formed at 800 °C are not reversed upon cooling the laterite minerals. Analysis of the mineral phases by in situ SRXRPD provides a versatile tool, which allows the changes in the phases to be analysed as they occur during the reduction process. This work was performed at the Australian National Beamline Facility with support from the Australian Synchrotron Research Program, which is funded by the Commonwealth of Australia under the Major National Research Facilities Program.