  Auer, Gerhard; Lailach, Gunter; Meisen, Ulrich; Schuy, Werner; Julius, Udo; GERMANY assigned to Bayer Aktiengesellschaft    Kariya, Akio; Hamajima, Takumi; Morimoto, Satoshi; Ishimaru, Toshiaki; Kakutani, Akihide; JAPAN assigned to Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd. An aqueous solution of an alkali hydroxide is stored and held in a tank. An electrode is disposed in the tank, and a member coated with a Ti-derived film is disposed in the tank so as to be surrounded with the electrode. In this state, a power source applies a negative potential to the electrode and a positive potential to the member to flow electricity between the electrode and the member immersed in the aqueous solution. Thus, the Ti-derived film coated on the surface of the member is chemically removed by the aqueous solution.  Richmond, Geoffrey; Dreisinger, David B.; AUSTRALIA  A method for extracting copper from a mineral feed containing copper sulphide mineral 1, which involves crushing and blending the feed followed by leaching of the feed in an autoclave. The conditions in the autoclave are controlled so that the presence of oxygen at superatmospheric oxygen pressure maintains the ratio of ferrous to ferric ions at a level so as to facilitate the leaching of copper from the feed. The leaching is carried out in the presence of acid which may be itself generated by oxidising conditions in the autoclave. Further leaching is carried out in a series of tanks after which the solids are separated from solution in a series of steps including treatment in a hydroclassifier 30, a clarifier 32 and a polishing filter. Copper is extracted from the resultant leachant at a copper extraction station with a final copper product 54 being retrieved in electrowin cells.   de Nora, Vittorio; BRAZIL assigned to Moltech Invent SA A cell for the electrowinning of aluminium comprises at least one noncarbon metal-based anode having an electrically conductive metallic structure which is suspended substantially parallel to a facing cathode. Such metallic structure comprises a series of parallel horizontal anode members, each having an electrochemically active surface on which during electrolysis oxygen is anodically evolved. The electrochemically active surfaces are in a generally coplanar arrangement to form the active anode surface. The anode members are spaced apart from one another by inter-member gaps forming flow-through openings for the circulation of electrolyte driven by the escape of anodically evolved oxygen. The electrolyte may circulate upwardly and/or downwardly in the flow-through openings and possibly around the anode structure.   Robey, Marvin; Kuttner, Ralph; USA A mineral ionizing device consisting of a container filled with water and containing a solid-mineral, cylindrical first electrode, a second electrode coaxially located within the first electrode, a vibration unit which produces a vibration within the container, a set of protrusions located on the surface of the second electrode and a periodic current reversing unit which applies a dc current across the first and second electrodes. The combination of the vibration unit, the protrusions and the current reversing unit aids in releasing gaseous bubbles which form on the surface of the second electrode. The application of the dc current causes the mineral in the first electrode to release mineral ions into the water which results in the production of very clean mineral water.   Redey, Laszlo I.; Gourishankar, Karthick; USA assigned to The United States of America as represented by the United States Department of Energy A method of controlling the direct electrolytic reduction of a metal oxide or mixtures of metal oxides to the corresponding metal or metals. A nonconsumable anode and a cathode and a salt electrolyte with a first reference electrode near the nonconsumable anode and a second reference electrode near the cathode are used. Oxygen gas is produced and removed from the cell. The anode potential is compared to the first reference electrode to prevent anode dissolution and gas evolution other than oxygen, and the cathode potential is compared to the second reference electrode to prevent production of reductant metal from ions in the electrolyte.   Li, Lin-Feng; Yao, Wayne; Chen, Muguo; USA assigned to Reveo Inc. A solid-state hydroxide (OH-) conductive membrane provides up to five times higher ionic conductivity and surface oxygen exchange rate than conventional MIEC membranes, while operating at significantly lower temperatures and providing reduced overall system cost. The hydroxide conductive membrane utilizes a porous ceramic backbone, pores of which are injected with an electrolyte. A catalyst is provided as discrete layers disposed at the anode and cathode. The membrane of the present invention may be utilized in combination with an external voltage source to drive the oxygen generating reaction. Alternatively, the pores may be metallized and a pressure gradient utilized to drive the reaction. The membrane, thus, provides discrete materials to provide ionic conduction, electronic conduction and structural support.