This study aims to investigate the effects of various levels (0–3%) of snakehead (Channa striata) protein hydrolysate (CSPH) on the physicochemical properties and oxidative stability of fish emulsion sausage from shortfin scad (Decapterus macrosoma). The addition of CSPH at various levels does not affect the proximate composition of the shortfin scad emulsion sausage, except for a slight decrease in moisture content with the addition of 2 and 3% CSPH. Proximate compositions were measured for moisture content (66.5–73.3%), ash (1.7–2.6%), protein (18.83–19.59%) and fat (7.91–9.07%). The addition of CSPH slightly increased the hardness, cohesiveness and springiness of the sausage (p < 0.05). A microstructure study found finer fat globules in the sausage with CSPH at higher concentrations (3%). In general, the incorporation of CSPH at all levels had no impact on the L*, a*, and b* values of sausages during storage. The lipid oxidation of fish emulsion sausage was successfully retarded by 3% CSPH during 12 days storage, as evidenced by lower PV (2.67–3.00 mg of lipid peroxide/kg sample) and TBARS (23.27–26.86 μg MDA/ml) values. Thus, CSPH may help retard lipid oxidation during the refrigerated storage of cooked fish emulsion sausage.Snakehead fish ( Fish protein hydrolysates (FPH) are fish proteins that are broken down into peptides of various sizes ( Sausage is a product in which meat flesh is mixed with additives, stuffed into suitable casings, and heat processed ( The physicochemical properties of sausages are important characteristics in determining the quality of sausage produced. The texture and flavour of emulsion-type sausages are vital properties to be concerned in order to meet consumers' requirements. Both flavour and texture are also important in determining the appearance of emulsion sausage in terms of packaging, colour additives, and sensory properties ( Oxidative stability is a measure of an oil or fat's resistance to oxidation. Lipid oxidation is of great concern to both the food industry and consumers, since it causes the development of undesirable off-flavours and potentially toxic reaction products ( Thus, the production of snakehead ( Snakehead ( Preparation of snakehead The emulsion sausage was prepared as described by The chemical composition (moisture, protein, fat and ash) of fish emulsion sausages was determined per The microstructure of sausage with Texture profile analysis (TPA) was performed using a TA-XT2 texture analyser (TA.XT Plus Stable Micro, USA) as described by A chromameter (Minolta Chroma Meter CR-300, Japan) was used for colour measurement of the sausage. The colorimeter was calibrated with a white tile prior to colour measurement. The sausage samples were cut into 6 cm long halves. The measuring heat flat of chromameter was placed fully on the samples and the CIE L* value (lightness), a* value (redness/greenness), and b* value (yellowness/blueness) were recorded. Colour measurements were carried out by taking the readings from three different position of the samples. Analyses were performed in triplicate. Each 60 mg sample was dissolved with distilled water (4.87 ml), linoleic acid (0.13 ml), ethanol (96%) (10 ml), and sodium phosphate buffer (50 Mm, pH, 7.0) (10 ml) in a glass tube. The tubes were kept in the dark (at 60°°C) with tightly-sealed silicone rubber caps. Analyses were performed in triplicate, with BHT and trolox as a positive control and the mixture without the sample as a negative control. Lipid oxidation was determined by measuring the peroxide value ( The TBA values of the samples were measured following All treatments were carried out in triplicate (n = 3). Statistical analysis was performed using one-way analysis of variance (One-way ANOVA) to determine differences between the means of the samples. Significant differences among the means were identified by using Fisher's Least Significant Differences (LSD) at p < 0.05. Data analysis was performed using Minitab Statistical Software, version 14.0 (Minitab Inc.).  The microstructure of shortfin scad emulsion sausage with the addition of CSPH was analysed using Scanning Electron Microscope. The microstructures of fish emulsion sausage containing different amounts of CSPH are illustrated in The microstructure obtained in this study was similar as reported by  At day 0, there were significant differences only for hardness (p < 0.05). The increase in sausage hardness with the addition of CSPH at different concentrations might be plausibly due to antioxidative properties of CSPH in the sausages during storage. The protection of the muscle membrane against lipid oxidation via antioxidants may also maintain membrane integrity of muscle fibres and reduce moisture loss, in turn having an effect on the sausage textural properties ( In comparison, the findings from this study are in accordance with a study conducted by  In addition, the a* values of all samples decreased from day 0 to day 12 (p < 0.05). There were significant differences in a*value between samples at days 6 and 12 (p < 0.05). The oxidation of myoglobin pigment of fish meat may result in the decrease of a* values. Similarly to a study by The b* values of all samples were increased after day 6 (p < 0.05). There were significant differences in b* values among the samples at day 6 and 12 (p < 0.05). Fading of the colour of cured meats resulted from an increase in b* values ( The changes in peroxide value of shortfin scad emulsion sausage with addition CSPH during storage are shown in  The decreased TBARS values of sausages with CSPH added after day 6 may be due to the loss of volatile secondary oxidation products. The reaction of these secondary oxidation products with free amino acids, proteins and peptides contained in the sausages resulted in the formation of Schiff bases ( These findings are similar to those of a study conducted by In conclusion, shortfin scad emulsion sausages were successfully produced. The addition of CSPH at various concentrations was not shown to affect the proximate composition of the shortfin scad emulsion sausage, except for a slight decrease of moisture content of the sausages with the addition of 2 and 3% CSPH. The addition of CSPH slightly increased the hardness, cohesiveness and springiness of sausage. In terms of microstructure, finer fat globules were visualized in the sausage added with CSPH at higher concentrations. In general, the incorporation of any concentration of CSPH had no impact on colour values of sausages during the storage. CSPH, especially at 3%, was shown to retard lipid oxidation of sausage during extended storage of 12 days, as evidenced by the lower PV and TBARS in comparison with the control. Therefore, CSPH may be used to retard lipid oxidation during the refrigerated storage of fish emulsion sausage.