The aim of this study was to determine the polyphenols, glucosinolates and ascorbic acid content as well as antioxidant activity of beverages on the base of apple juice with addition of frozen and freeze-dried curly kale leaves. Upon enrichment with frozen (13%) and freeze-dried curly kale (3%), the naturally cloudy apple juice was characterized by an increase in phenolic compounds by 2.7 and 3.3-times, accordingly. The antioxidant activity of beverages with the addition of curly kale ranged from 6.6 to 9.4μmol Trolox/mL. The obtained beverages were characterized glucosinolates content at 117.6–167.6mg/L and ascorbic acid content at 4,1–31,9mg/L. The results of sensory evaluation of colour, taste and consistency of apple juice and beverages with the addition of kale did not differ significantly prior to pasteurization (P≤0.05), whereas after the pasteurization the evaluated factors decreased significantly.In development of novel foodstuffs exhibiting bioactive properties a particularly important role is played by fruit and vegetables and their processed products, being rich sources of biologically active compounds. Epidemiological studies show a positive correlation between consumption of fruit and vegetables and prevention of diseases, such as atherosclerosis, cancer, diabetes, arthritis and many others ( Currently, the use of curly kale as a food raw material is limited, its industrial processing is also low (mainly by freezing). Fresh curly kale is seldom consumed due to low sensory appeal. The proposed introduction of curly kale in the form of a beverage based on apple juice allows to obtain a food product with attractive sensory quality and beneficial composition of bioactive compounds (phenolic acids, flavonoids, glucosinolates). Apple juice seems to be a good base for the new product, since it is often consumed and is a potent source of bioactive compounds by itself. The characteristic compounds for naturally cloudy apple juice include catechins, procyanidins, consisting primarily of (−)-epicatechin units and hydroxycinnamic acids (mainly chlorogenic and dihydrochalcones) ( The aim of this study was to determine the content of biologically active compounds (vitamin C, polyphenols and glucosinolates) and antioxidant activity of a beverage based on apple juice with the addition of frozen and freeze-dried curly kale leaves. Additionally, the bioactive compounds content in the beverage was compared in the fresh form and after thermal processing. Ultra pure water was produced in the laboratory (Direct-Q UV3 Water Purification System Millipore, Billerica, USA). Sodium acetate (C Curly kale Curly kale was collected in the form of whole plants. Afterwards the leaves were separated and the stems were discarded. The leaves were sorted, cleaned and cut into approx. 3 In order to avoid qualitative changes during freezing, the process was conducted in a two-step manner. During the first step the raw material was submerged in liquid nitrogen (−196 Prior to freez-drying the raw material was frozen as described above in order to obtain a frozen intermediate product and afterwards it was subjected to freeze-drying using a Labconco Corporation Freeze Dryer 6L (Kansas City, USA) at a pressure of 13.3 The apples were sorted, cleaned and comminuted using a food processor (Zelmer, type 986.87, Rzeszów, Poland), then subjected to pressing using a Para-press laboratory press (Arauner Kitzingen, Kitzingein, Germany) at 0.3 In order to determine the polyphenols content a 10 Determination of phenolic compounds was performed using the LC Agilent Technologies 1200 Rapid Resolution (Waldbronn, Germany) system equipped with a UV–Vis detector (DAD 1260,Waldbronn, Germany) and a Poroshell 120, SB-C18 column (4.6 ABTS Briefly, triplicate 0.5 The samples (beverages) was homogenized with meta-phosphoric acid (10 The sensory evaluation was conducted for apple juice and the obtained beverages based on apple juice with the addition of frozen and freeze-dried curly kale before and after pasteurization. Evaluations were performed in individual booths by a trained panel of 10 judges, who were informed of the evaluation conditions. Members of the panel were subjected to evaluation of repeatability through multiple evaluation of the same sample under the same conditions. A structured linear scale of 100 Statistical calculations were performed using a Statistica ver. 9.0 computer software (StatSoft; Krakow, Poland). All analyses were carried out in three replicates. The analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Fisher’s least significant difference (LSD) multicomparison test were performed. Statistically significant differences were reported at P The cloudy apple juice obtained from Shampion apples was characterized by content of phenolic compounds amounting to 395 Addition of curly kale in frozen and freeze-dried form caused a significant (P In the obtained raw beverage with the addition of freeze-dried curly kale the phenolic acids accounted for 57% of total phenolic compounds. But flavonoids were the dominant group of phenol compounds in the raw beverage with the addition of frozen curly kale (54%). Compared to apple juice, a 2.2-fold and 3.2-fold increase of phenolic acids content was observed in the obtained beverages with the addition of frozen and freeze-dried curly kale, accordingly. According to literature data the phenolic compounds content in green curly kale ranges from 268 to 676.5 The phenolic acids content in the obtained beverages was increased after pasteurization, they accounted for 60% and 50% in case of beverage with the addition of freeze-dried and frozen curly kale, accordingly ( It was established that ferulic acid was the dominant phenolic acid, which accounted for 28% and 30–33% of total acid content in non-pasteurized and pasteurized beverages, accordingly, whereas it was not detected in apple juice. The studies conducted by The flavonoids content in the obtained beverages with the addition of curly kale was also significantly higher (P The addition of frozen curly kale was a better source of kaempferol and quercetin in the obtained beverages. However, the loss of flavonoids originating from apple juice was greater after the addition of frozen curly kale compared to the loss due to the addition of freeze-dried curly kale. The loss of catechin content upon addition of freeze-dried curly kale amounted to approx. 25%, no loss of (−)epicatechin was observed, whereas the content of proanthocyanidins was decreased by approx. 7%. In case of addition of frozen curly kale the presence of (+)catechin was not detected, the content of (−)epicatechin and proanthocyanidins was decreased by 55% and 28%, accordingly. The higher losses due to the use of freeze-dried curly kale compared to frozen curly kale were observed only in case of phloridzin (by 21% and 11%, accordingly) ( Antioxidant capacity of the obtained beverages with the addition of curly kale ranged from 6.6 to 9.4 The total phenolic acid content were strongly correlated with the antioxidant activity of the obtained beverages (R Thermal processing of plant materials may cause a decrease of antioxidant activity as well as its increase, which mostly depends on the processing conditions as well as the type of raw material ( The glucosinolates content in the obtained beverages ranges from 117.6 to 167.6 Prior to pasteurization the content of glucosinolates was significantly higher in beverages with the addition of frozen curly kale in comparison with freeze-dried form of the additive (total glucosinolates content higher by approx. 19%). The pasteurization process (90 In the beverages containing frozen form of kale greater thermally induced degradation of indole glucosinolates was observed. Higher thermal stability of aliphatic glucosinolates was confirmed by numerous previous reports ( Glucoiberin was the dominant compound among aliphatic glucosinolates present in the obtained beverage and accounted for 20% to 28% of the total glucosinolates content. The second compound was sinigrin, which amounted to 9–11%. Glucobrassicin, which accounted for 25–34% of the total glucosinolates content, was the dominant compound among indole glucosinolates ( The ascorbic acid content in the obtained beverages with the addition of frozen and freeze-dried curly kale was significantly lower (P Cabbage vegetables are generally considered as a potent source of vitamins in diet. According to literature data the content of ascorbic acid in curly kale is in the range of 23–150 The decrease of ascorbic acid content was also observed after thermal processing of beverages and apple juice (90 The differences between results obtained after sensory evaluation of colour, taste and consistency of the apple juice and beverages with the addition of curly kale were not statistically significant (P PCA gives the possibility of replacing the input set of correlated features by a small number of uncorrelated principal components, which are linear combinations of the variables. On the basis of the correlation matrix, two main components were separated, which in 91% explain total variability. The first main component (PC1) explains 75.29% of variation, while the second (PC2) 15% of variation. Correlation between input variables for PC1 and PC2 was shown in Addition of frozen and freeze-dried curly kale leaves into the natural cloudy apple juice caused a significant increase of polyphenol content and antioxidant activity in the obtained beverages. Additionally, it contributed to an enrichment with glucosinolates, which are not present in apple juice. The freeze-dried form caused a higher increase of phenolic compounds content in the obtained beverage compared to the frozen form. Cloudy apple juice obtained from the Shampion variety was characterized by high phenol compounds content and proved to be a good base for beverages with the addition of curly kale. Flavonoids were the dominant phenolic compounds in the case of beverages with the addition of frozen curly kale, whereas phenolic acids were dominant in case of freeze-dried kale. The obtained beverages were characterized by a significantly lower ascorbic acid content compared to apple juice. It is caused by a significant loss of ascorbic acid during the preparation of intermediate kale products from leaves and during pasteurization of beverages. This study was supported by a grant within the framework of project “Bioactive food” POIG 01.01.02-00-061/09.