The post-peak strength behavior of rocks is important for stability analysis of underground excavations. This paper studies the confinement and plastic strain dependent post-peak strength of intact rocks. First, the post-peak behavior of rocks is studied by conducting triaxial compression tests on a coarse marble. The post-peak strengths of the rock under different confining pressures and plastic strains are obtained using the recorded stress–strain curves. A strength degradation index is then proposed to represent the post-peak strength degradation, and a negative exponential function, which includes a shape parameter n, is used to describe the relation between the strength degradation index and the confining pressure. Parameter n is plastic strain dependent, which decreases with the increase of plastic strain. The proposed strength degradation model can well capture the post-peak strength envelopes of the coarse marble under different plastic strains. Finally, two sets of triaxial compression test data from previous studies are used to further verify the strength degradation model. The peak and post-peak strength behaviors of two marbles are well represented using the proposed model. The approach proposed in this study also provides a simple yet useful method for determining the realistic residual strength of intact rocks.The study of strength and deformation behavior of rocks has long been recognized as an important topic in rock mechanics. With the advance of construction technologies, many large geotechnical engineering structures such as deep tunnels for mining, boreholes for oil or gas production, tunnels for storage of radioactive waste, and wells for injection of carbon dioxides, are being constructed at great depth, where the associated geological conditions are very complex. Therefore, it is important for geotechnical engineers to evaluate rock strength under such conditions. A good estimate of rock strength will facilitate cost-effective design and long-term stability of these engineering structures. The peak strength of rocks represents the maximum loading capacity that a rock can sustain. It is commonly used as an important input parameter in stability analysis of engineering structures. The Hoek-Brown (H-B) model, which considers the nonlinearity of the strength envelope, is widely used to estimate the peak strength of rocks ( Large-scale in-situ tests have been conducted in some engineering projects to directly evaluate rock strengths for design. For example, in-situ block shear tests are generally conducted in large civil projects to obtain shear strength of rock masses. The tested blocks are about a half to 1 Many researchers had studied the complete stress–strain relations of rocks after the development of stiff servo-controlled test machines ( Although the post-peak behavior of rocks has been extensively studied using laboratory testing, there are still no good models for determining post-peak strength of rocks. Traditionally, the models (i.e., H-B model or Mohr-Coulomb (M-C) model) used for estimating peak strength are used to evaluate the residual strength of rocks by replacing the peak strength parameters in these models with residual strength parameters ( When studying the post-peak strength behavior of rocks in laboratory tests, the residual strength obtained from the stress–strain curve can be questionable. As presented in In this paper, confinement and plastic strain dependent post-peak strength is studied by conducting triaxial compression tests on a coarse marble. A model is proposed to represent the post-peak strength envelopes through the introduction of a strength degradation index. The proposed model is further validated by examining two sets of triaxial compression test data from previous studies. The possibility of estimating the residual strength of rocks using a model that considers confinement and plastic strain dependent post-peak strength is also discussed. Coarse marble samples for laboratory tests were collected from a copper mine in Zhenping City, located in Henan Province, China. A large rock block with a rough dimension of 60 Triaxial compression tests were performed using a hydraulic servo-controlled testing system with a maximum load capacity of 3000 The complete stress–strain curves of the coarse marble specimens under various confining pressures are presented in  The test results of the coarse marble under different confining pressures are summarized in In this section, the test data are examined and a model is proposed to determine the confinement and plastic strain dependent post-peak strength of the studied coarse marble. A strength degradation index is introduced to obtain the post-peak strength envelopes of the rock. In order to obtain the confining pressure and plastic strain dependent post-peak strength, the plastic strain at a certain post-peak deformation stage should first be determined. The plastic strain is determined from the obtained stress–strain curves by subtracting the elastic strain from the total strain according to plasticity theory, i.e., A simple method for subtracting the elastic strain from the total strain in the complete stress–strain curve is illustrated in Using the above mentioned method, the post-peak strengths at different confining pressures and plastic strains can be obtained. Variations of the post-peak strengths with confining pressure at different plastic strains are presented in  Under zero confining pressure, the post-peak strength of a rock is zero for very brittle rocks, and the corresponding strength degradation index reaches a maximum value of 1. As confining pressure increases, the strength degradation reduces and the The calculated post-peak strengths and strength degradation indices at different confining pressures and plastic strains are summarized in The fitted curves using the proposed negative exponential function are shown in Substituting Eq. In the model, the post-peak strength σ The post-peak strength envelopes for the coarse marble, which are obtained from the above model, are shown in The proposed strength degradation model can represent confining pressure and plastic strain dependent post-peak strength envelopes for the coarse marble studied in this paper. In this section, two sets of triaxial compression test data are used to further validate the proposed model. Triaxial compression tests on Tennessee marble were carried out by The post-peak strengths of Tennessee marble under different confining pressures and plastic strains are obtained by examining the complete stress–strain curves in the same way as those used for the coarse marble above and the results are summarized in The corresponding model for determining the post-peak strength is The parameters in the model are the same as those in Eq.   The post-peak strengths of the coarse marble studied by  The above studies show that the proposed strength degradation model captures the post-peak strength envelopes at different plastic strains. The post-peak strength of a rock is estimated by multiplying the peak strength with a scale factor, which is a function of the confinement and plastic strain dependent strength degradation index that ranges from 0 to 1. Parameter The fitted curves using Eq. Parameter The fitted parameters using Eq. As mentioned above, because the level of straining to a specimen in a laboratory test is limited due to the limitation of the test facility or the risk of damaging the triaxial cell, the residual strength cannot be reached in most tests. However, using the proposed model in this paper, the residual strength of intact rocks can be obtained. The peak and residual strength envelopes for the three rocks are illustrated in One shortcoming of the study is that all the investigated rocks are marble. In addition, the microstructure information such as mineralogical composition and grain size of studied marbles was not provided in the original publications. It is generally accepted that the rock behavior, including the post-peak behavior, is significantly affected by the internal microstructure and the associated micro-cracking process during loading ( The post-peak behavior of rocks, especially the post-peak strength, is important for stability analysis of underground excavations. Triaxial compression tests using specimens of a coarse marble from a copper mine are conducted to study the post-peak behavior of the rock. The test results reveal that confining pressure influences the post-peak behavior and the post-peak behavior changes from brittle to ductile with the increase of the confining pressure. By examining the obtained stress–strain curves of the coarse marble, the post-peak strengths under different confining pressures and at different plastic strains are obtained. As the confining pressure increases, the post-peak strength increases and the strength difference between the peak and the post-peak strengths decreases gradually. In addition, under a given confining pressure, the post-peak strength decreases with the increase of the plastic strain. A strength degradation index is introduced to represent the post-peak strength degradation behavior. By analyzing the test data of the coarse marble, the relation between the strength degradation index and the confining pressure is found to be well described by a negative exponential function. A strength degradation model is proposed to determine the post-peak strength of rocks by multiplying the peak strength with a scale factor, which is a function of the strength degradation index that ranges from 0 to 1. It is seen that the proposed model can capture the post-peak strength envelopes of the coarse marble at different plastic strains. Two sets of triaxial compression test data from previous studies (i.e., Tennessee marble and the coarse marble studied by For different rock types, the post-peak behavior will be different, and the parameter The authors would like to thank the Editor and the two anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments and suggestions which greatly improved the quality of the manuscript. The research work presented in this paper is in part supported by the