Hybrid bitumen extraction (HBE) at reduced temperature (e.g. 20 °C) is a potential option for retrofitting the commercial Clark hot water-based extraction (CHWE) process for mineable oil sands. In this work, the impact of solvent addition during HBE on the effectiveness of paraffinic froth treatment is evaluated. Bitumen froth samples generated from pilot scale runs of HBE, during which either diesel or cyclohexane were added to presoak the oil sand ore, and from standard CHWE were studied. The settling behavior of aggregates in heptane-diluted bitumen froth was monitored by tracking interface positions with time in an autoclave or in a column. In addition, water, ash, and asphaltene contents of diluted bitumen were measured, as well as density and viscosity. Results suggest that, 10 wt% (based on bitumen content) of added petroleum diesel in HBE gave a slightly lower emulsion settling velocity but similar water/ash contents in diluted bitumen, compared to values for baseline froth samples from CHWE. However, addition of 10 wt% cyclohexane in HBE had a negligible effect on emulsion settling velocity and bitumen product quality. Interestingly, only a small amount of asphaltene precipitation was critical to the establishment of zone settling behavior and, hence, the yield of clean bitumen. The correlation between settling velocity and de-asphalting percentage is also discussed.Oil sand is a mixture of sand, clays, water, and bitumen, an extra heavy petroleum oil ( The overall goals in oil sands operations are to optimize bitumen extraction efficiency and product quality while minimizing operating costs and environmental impacts ( A second advantage provided by HBE is the significant improvement in tailings dewaterability ( As most of the solvent added during the presoaking step of HBE ends up in the froth, there is a concern that this additive could have negative impacts on downstream froth treatment. In particular, the PFT process may be sensitive to the addition of additives other than a paraffinic solvent, particularly the addition of aromatic compounds. To address this concern, the present work was undertaken to assess the effects of HBE, and particularly the effects associated with the type of solvent added, on the settling behaviour of water and solids in the diluted bitumen during froth treatment, and on water/solids content in the diluted bitumen product. Bitumen froth samples from the HBE were produced in a continuous, pilot-scale extraction run using a 20-L flotation unit. The protocol for pilot HBE has been reported in detail previously ( For comparison, froth from the standard water-based (WBE) process at 50 °C was also generated using the identical pilot flotation facility, and designated as ‘reference’ (REF). The important difference between the two extraction processes was that the HBE entailed soaking the oil sand ore with a small amount of solvent in a tumbler prior to the addition of water, and was operated at 20 °C. The HBE froth samples are denoted by solvent name abbreviation in the figures that follow. Froth composition (bitumen, solids, water, and additive content) was determined by Dean-Stark analysis. Composition data of froth samples from the HBE and the WBE for the two ores are presented in As illustrated in In the mixing stage, the froth and After no further movement of the UI interface was observed, the system was left for another 60 min, following which about 110 mL of supernatant (i.e. diluted bitumen product, dilbit) was collected through the sampling tube for further analysis. The transfer of the supernatant from the autoclave to the sampling container was driven by the pressure difference between the autoclave and ambient atmosphere ( It is noted that the term “paraffinic froth treatment (PFT)” in this study refers to the PFT process conducted at ambient temperature (i.e. 22 °C), for more details and higher measuring accuracy of settling tests. While this PFT is not actual current commercial process mostly operated at 70–90 °C, the data will be comparative between the various tests without losing representations. Column settling tests of these heptane-diluted bitumen froth emulsions were also conducted to further validate the impact of the HBE process on the effectiveness of froth treatment. The density of the dilbit was measured at 22 °C using an Anton Paar density meter (DMA 4500). Dilbit viscosity at 22 °C was measured using a viscometer (Anton Par SVM 3001 Stabinger), following the standard ASTM D7042 procedure. Water content in the dilbit from both autoclave and column settling tests was determined by Karl Fischer titration (Mettler model DL18). Dry bitumen was obtained by evaporating the solvent (i.e. heptane) from the diluted bitumen product in a rotary vacuum evaporator (Buchi Rotavapor). Solids content in the bitumen product was analyzed using an ashing method in a Thermolyne furnace following a modified ASTM D482 protocol. Ashing was conducted by placing about 5 g dry bitumen in a pre-weighed, pre-dried crucible, followed by burning away the bitumen using a Bunsen burner in a fume hood, and then in a muffle furnace at 800 °C for 6 h. Asphaltene content in the dry bitumen was quantified using a custom-built asphaltene analyzer that is based on near-infrared (NIR) spectroscopy ( The settling rate (  For confirmation, column settling tests of those bitumen froth samples were also performed, as shown in  We considered that the negative impact of diesel on the emulsion settling rate was minimal, and could easily be mitigated by the use of a lighter paraffinic solvent and higher temperature in the PFT. Several previous studies have suggested that the lighter the paraffinic solvent used to dilute bitumen froth, the more rapid the sedimentation of aggregates, and that the settling rate of bitumen froth diluted by pentane is about one to two orders of magnitude faster than that of heptane-diluted bitumen (  In this work, we also determined the water and solids contents in the dilbit as a function of S/B, ranging from 1.0 to 2.5 in heptane-treated PFT for CC6- It is well documented that the sedimentation behavior of aggregates in diluted bitumen emulsion largely depends on the structure and size of the aggregates and properties of the oil phase ( As shown in Similar to the trends observed in literature ( To model the hindered (i.e. zone-mode) settling rate, Kynch originated a well-known theory of kinematic sedimentation ( Among the six parameters that are needed to calculate Results of To understand the main factor controlling the quality of bitumen product in the PFT, the total content of solids plus water in dilbit is plotted in In this communication, the effects of a novel hybrid bitumen extraction (HBE) process and the associated extraction additive on paraffinic froth treatment (PFT) performance are described. The settling rate of aggregates in heptane-diluted bitumen froth emulsion was determined by monitoring interface positions with time in an autoclave or in a column. Results show that 10 wt% of petroleum diesel, scaled by bitumen mass, used in the ambient HBE produced a slightly lower emulsion settling rate, but 10 wt% of cyclohexane in the HBE yielded settling rates comparable to those for baseline froth samples from higher-temperature aqueous extraction process. The settling rates largely depended on the de-asphalting percentage in the PFT, and the Richardson–Zaki model successfully predicts the experimental settling data in the studied range. Furthermore, compositions of diluted bitumen product including solids and water content, were also quantified. The inclusion of 10 wt% of either cyclohexane or diesel in the HBE to the heptane-based PFT has a negligible impact on bitumen product quality, producing similar solids and water content in diluted bitumen. Remarkably, a small de-asphalting percentage (about 3% to 5%) is sufficient to trigger zone settling, thus yielding a marketable bitumen product containing less than 1000 ppm total solids and water. The authors declare no competing financial interest. F. Lin and C. J. Pang contributed equally to this work. Financial support from the © Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, as represented by the Minister of Natural Resources, 2019.