The dental-arch surfaces preferentially used in mastication were studied by measuring functional and occlusal surface areas and comparing these to the number of chews required to swallow foods of different texture properties. The functional surface of the teeth was defined as the total area of visible wear facets on post-incisal teeth, adding to it the contacting areas of restored teeth where no facets were visible. Occlusal surface area was taken as the total area of the occluding parts of post-incisal teeth. Both surfaces were measured with computer image processing on dental-stone casts of the teeth of 31 young adults. Functional surface areas (mean 168 mm2, four quadrants) were positively correlated with occlusal surface areas (mean 739 mm2, four quadrants). The left:right area ratios were more variable for functional than for occlusal surfaces. Functional surface-area ratios markedly different from 1.0 might reflect functional side-preponderance of masticatory activity. Correlations between tooth surface area and the number of cycles were examined with five different food samples of known texture during side-imposed mastication. Depending on the elastic moduli of the foods, significant negative correlations were found between the left:right ratios of functional or occlusal surface areas and the left:right ratios of cycle numbers. The rheological properties of the food particles chewed were assumed to be the key factor in the correlations with either the functional or anatomical occlusal surfaces.Mastication is regulated by sensory feedback activity, which exhibits large variability within and between individuals ( Mastication is also affected by physiological factors such as bite force ( Here we examine the hypothesis that the side with the wider wear-facet area corresponds to the side more predominantly involved in chewing and, other experimental conditions remaining equal, that chewing on this side corresponds to a smaller number of mastication cycles. Subsequently, we aimed to identify which dental surface (functional or occlusal) was predominantly used, and we wondered if this could be related to the food particles chewed. With this in mind we have compared the functional and occlusal surface areas on both sides of the mouth with the number of chews measured electromyographically during complete mastication sequences with foods of different textures ( The initial sample of 36 students who participated in a previous investigation ( Full impressions of both arches were taken with irreversible hydrocolloid and casts poured ( Only the quadrants from canines to third molars were studied [ Each intact tooth was side-illuminated at different intensities and incidence angles in order to delineate wear facets and the total occlusal surface areas. With binocular lenses, wear facets were clearly seen on the occlusal portion of intact teeth. They were marked and dyed on the plaster casts with a blue pencil according to the method described by Another procedure was used for casts from participants with full occlusal restorations, such as crowned teeth, as functional contact zones were not visible on these teeth. In this case, functional contacting zones were revealed with an occlusion-test foil strip (blue unilateral colouring film indicator; ®GHM Hanel; 8-μm thickness) placed between opposing teeth while maintaining the casts in the intercuspal position. With the casts held in occlusion, slight lateral movements were simulated using groove–cusp guidance. These movements started with intercuspal contacts and were extended within the limits of already marked facets on intact teeth. The colour-film marking was visually checked from ipsi- and contralateral sides. Among the 124 quadrants studied, 13 from eight participants included a single crown restoration. The wear-facet area determined for the restored teeth was added to the functional surface area. It was important to know if the method applied to determine the crown contact areas was correct. So we used this method where it was easy to apply, i.e. on wear facets. In order to obtain precise comparisons, areas were measured on 10 teeth with no dental restorations on a set of casts displaying easily visible wear facets. These casts were prepared as described above and were photographed axially. On this photograph the wear facets were contoured and blue dyed directly. A second photograph of the casts was made after foil marking the wear facets by the method used for contacting zones. Marked areas were evaluated from both photographs by the scan and digitizing procedure. A comparison of the mean values showed no significant difference (Student paired test was After digital recording of wear facets, the casts were used for occlusal surface markings [ With the view axis centred on the distal outline of the first bicuspid and perpendicular to the cast occlusal plane, two pictures were recorded for each quadrant, one showing functional surfaces and the second after dyeing the occlusal surfaces. Finally, eight digital images were obtained for each set of casts. The same distance, constant zoom power and optimal contrast settings were maintained during all scanning and recording procedures under artificial light. In addition, for each participant, a black square (50×50 mm), positioned at the same height (20 mm) as the cast occlusal surface, was digitized to calibrate the recordings. This square was also used to evaluate the repeatability of the scanning procedure, which was 1509 mm Five types of food were tested: canned frankfurters without skin, fresh coconut, toffees and two cheeses, French Comté (cheese 1) and Swiss Sbrinz (cheese 2). These foods have different mechanical properties providing a wide range of textures. They were prepared in cylindrical samples of constant size (1.5 cm dia., 1 cm height). The number of chewing cycles from first bite to the terminal swallow was calculated (for further details, see The Pearson’s correlation coefficient between functional and occlusal surface areas and also between functional or occlusal surface areas and chewing-cycle number, was calculated. Mean areas (four quadrants), calculated for all participants ( Summing areas of upper and lower teeth in order to establish left:right area ratios showed that ratios were closer to 1.0 for occlusal surfaces than for the functional surface areas. All participants, except three, had less than 10% difference between left and right occlusal surface areas ( Functional masticatory movements involve centric occlusal contacts as teeth move into and out of the intercuspal position during the closing phase and beginning of the opening phase of the masticatory cycles ( As different methods have been used for measuring wear-facet areas ( In contrast to other studies ( Some human studies ( The notion of preferred side of mastication has no universal definition. Side preference can be determined by observing lateral jaw movements, muscular activity or the side preponderance of quadrant surfaces. Side preference for mastication is known to be associated with different characteristics of the mandibular lateral excursion such as its side frequency, movement amplitude or muscle activity ( After their initial appearance, wear facets increase in area with time as a result of masticatory function, especially contact with abrasive food particles. This abrasion effect can be more marked laterally or anteriorly depending on the past functional and acquired habits of the individual. About 45% of the population studied presented a balanced left:right wear facet or functional surface-area ratio, whereas 55% had a unilateral preponderance of abrasion. The left:right wear facet or functional surface ratio also allows the evaluation of an individual’s preferred chewing side. From this point of view it seems that a left:right wear-facet ratio close to unity corresponds to a balanced functional stimulation of the masticatory apparatus and contributes to its harmonious development and maintenance. We appreciate the co-operation of Dr. A-M. Gourdon and Dr. D. Compagnon, Prosthetic Department (UFR d’Odontologie d’Auvergne) for dental cast supplies and preparations. We thank J-F. Martin for his statistical advice and Professor Hiiemae for helpful reviewing of the manuscript.