The corrosion behavior of four commercial Pb–Ag alloys electrodes in the zinc sulfuric acid solution was investigated using scanning reference electrode technique (SRET). The results show that SRET is more sensitive for studying not only the uniform corrosion behavior of the Pb–Ag electrodes, but also the localize corrosion of the Pb–Ag electrodes. Under free corrosion conditions, lead corrosion (anodic) zone appeared on the edge of electrode while hydrogen evolution reaction (cathodic) zone appeared on the centre of the specimen. The absolute anodic potential and localize corrosion of the four electrodes decreased with the increase of immersion time. At the end of 10 h of free corrosion condition, the electrode Pb-0.69% Ag alloy displays the best corrosion resistance, followed by the electrodes Pb-0.62% Ag alloy, Pb-0.25% Ag-0.1% Ca alloy and Pb-0.56% Ag alloy. During polarization study and potential decay, the electrode Pb-0.69% Ag alloy had the lowest Quasi Electromotive Force (QEMF), followed by the electrodes Pb-0.62% Ag alloy, Pb-0.25% Ag-0.1% Ca alloy and Pb-0.56% Ag alloy, it means that the electrode Pb-0.69% Ag alloy had the highest corrosion resistance, followed by the electrodes Pb-0.62% Ag alloy, Pb-0.25% Ag-0.1% Ca alloy and Pb-0.56% Ag alloy in the zinc sulfuric acid solution. Also, linear polarization confirms the same trend as that of the SRET.Lead-silver and lead-silver-Ca or Sb, Sn or Sr alloys have been used as anodes in zinc electrolysis industry for long time ( Electrochemical activity and corrosion property of lead alloys anodes have been a subject of numerous investigations ( The scanning reference electrode technique (SRET) is a non-invasive electrochemical method allowing the real-time measurement of localized variation of potential over the surface of an electrochemically active specimen during localized corrosion, without interrupting the process taking place ( As known, Pb–Ag alloys are very important for zinc electrowinning in acid sulphate solution, but Pb localized corrosion and corrosion products cause a decrease of life of the Pb–Ag alloys. So it is necessary to develop a useful measurement to probe the corrosion pattern and corrosion rate of lead alloys during zinc electrolysis. It is reported that scanning reference electrode technique (SRET) was employed to detect corrosion pattern and corrosion rate on the anodic behaviour for magnesium alloys and steels during the polarization ( The working electrodes used in this work were Pb–Ag and Pb–Ag–Ca alloys. Their fabrication technology for lead alloys is as follows: first, the silver powder, calcium powder and a small amount of lead ingots were heated above their respectively melting points for melting. After their melting in proportion, they were mixed and cooled to make a primary alloy. Then the primary alloy and the other lead ingot were melted in proportion again. After their melting, they were mixed evenly, and casted at range of temperature of 390–430° C. Also, after a period of natural aging (more than 2 weeks) of the casting alloy, the casting alloy were rolled at temperature controlled below 55° C. This results in Pb–Ag–Ca alloy with good properties ( There are four electrodes for experiment as follows: Pb-0.56% Ag, Pb-0.62% Ag, Pb-0.69 % Ag alloys; and Pb-0.25% Ag-0.1% Ca alloy. Their chemical compositions are given in During SRET experiment, anodic and cathodic zones appeared on the surface of one electrode. All potentials were given with respect to a saturated calomel reference electrode Hg/Hg The Pb–Ag alloy plates were cut into small pieces of 1 × 1 × 1 cm then connected with a plastic isolated copper wire and cast in acrylic resin. The electrical contacts were made with plastic insolated copper wires and the piece was cast in acrylic resin. The exposed surface of specimen was 1 cm The solutions were used in the work were 4 L of electrolyte which consists of 180 g/L of H The SRET apparatus was an EG&G Model SVP100 equipment ( Also, linear polarization testing was carried out from initial potential of -0.25 V to a finial potential of 0.25 V vs Ag/AgCl at constant scan rate of 0.166 mV/s to study the corrosion rate of the four electrodes (  In this experiment, after the electrodes were immersed into the zinc sulfuric acid solution, the electrochemical behavior of the four electrodes has been studied by scanning reference electrode technique in the zinc sulfuric acid solution at 25 °C. The results are shown in  Based on 2-D corrosion activity map of the electrode Pb-0.56% Ag alloy in the zinc sulfuric acid solution at 25 °C,  Based on 2-D corrosion activity map of the electrode Pb-0.62% Ag alloy in the zinc sulfuric acid solution at 25 °C, Compared the  Based on 2-D corrosion activity map of the electrode Pb-0.69% Ag alloy in the zinc sulfuric acid solution at 25 °C, Compared  Also, it was found the corrosion of lead substrate decreased with the increase of immersed time. After 5 h, the lead corrosion became weak. In addition, after 10 h immersion, the hydrogen evolution reaction became strong and the lead corrosion was weak. The reason is that the thickness of the PbSO Based on 2-D corrosion activity map of the electrode Pb-0.25% Ag-0.1% Ca alloy in the zinc sulfuric acid solution at 25 °C, Compared the maps of the four electrodes, it was found that at 10 h immersion, the electrode Pb-0.69% Ag alloy had least lead corrosion, followed by the electrodes Pb-0.62% Ag alloy, Pb-0.25% Ag-0.1 Ca alloy, Pb-0.56% Ag alloy. It was found although the electrode Pb-0.25% Ag-0.1 Ca alloy had less Ag element than the electrode Pb-0.56% Ag alloy, but the electrode Pb-0.25% Ag-0.1 Ca alloy had higher corrosion resistance than the electrode Pb-0.56% Ag alloy. The reason is that the plastic deformation of the Pb–Ag–Ca alloys with calcium content of over 0.06% causes Pb  In this test, after the free surfaces of the four commercial Pb–Ag electrodes as anodes were immersed into the zinc sulfuric acid solution at 25 Seen from After the free surfaces of the four electrodes were immersed into the zinc sulfuric acid solution, the four electrodes were polarized at a current density of 50 mAcm The QEMF evolution of the four electrodes in the zinc sulfuric acid solution at 20, 40 and 60 min is given in When the current was cut, the potential decay curves of the four electrodes were recorded. Compared the potential maps of The QEMF of corrosion cell as a function of immersion time during potential decay after 1 h of polarization in the zinc sulfuric acid solution at 25 °C for each Pb–Ag alloy electrode is plotted in From the above results, the specimens surfaces show that the electrodes Pb-0.62% Ag alloy and Pb-0.69% Ag alloy had the better corrosion resistances than the electrodes Pb-0.25% Ag-0.1% Ca alloy and Pb-0.56% Ag alloy during decay period after polarization, since the electrodes Pb-0.62% Ag alloy and Pb-0.69% Ag alloy has the higher silver contents than the electrodes Pb-0.25% Ag-0.1% Ca alloy and Pb-0.56% Ag alloy.  The following conclusions may be drawn from the results of this paper work: Under free corrosion conditions in the zinc sulfuric acid solution at room temperature without stirring, the anodic zone appeared on the edge of electrode while cathodic zone appeared on the centre of the specimen. The absolute anodic potential and localize corrosion of the four electrodes decreased with immersion time. After 10 h immersion, the electrode Pb-0.69% Ag alloy displays the best corrosion resistance, followed by the electrodes Pb-0.62% Ag alloy, Pb-0.25% Ag-0.1% Ca alloy and Pb-0.56% Ag alloy. When the four electrodes are galvanostatically polarized at a current density of 50 mA/cm During 1 h potential decay after the galvanostatic polarization at 50 mA/cm The corrosion rates of the four Pb alloys electrodes obtained by linear polarization and SRET have the same trend. SRET is sensitive to study not only the uniform corrosion behavior of the Pb–Ag specimens, but also the localize corrosion of the Pb–Ag specimens in the zinc sulfuric acid solution. We have not Conflicts of Interest. The authors are gratefully thankful to