The author has developed five kinds of techniques on electrostatic separation of particle size utilizing the balance of the electrostatic and gravitational force. The first is an inclined plate conveyer system. A plate conveyer consisted of parallel electrodes was constructed and four-phase electrostatic traveling wave was applied to the electrodes to transport particles on the conveyer. Particles were separated with size under the voltage application of appropriate frequency based on the feature that small particles were transported upward against the gravity but large particles were apt to fall down. The second technique is an inclined tube system. The principle is common with that of the inclined plate system. The third technique utilizes a circular electrostatic conveyer similar with the mass spectroscopy but utilizes the feature that small particles fly high altitude compared to that of the large particle. The forth technique, a vortex system, also utilizes the difference of flying locus of small and large particles. The last technique is the combination of the linear conveyer and an electrostatic separation roller located at the end of the conveyer. Small particles were attached onto the roller charged by a charger roller. Although the yield was reduced to realize the high separation performance with the former four techniques, relatively high yield was realized without reducing the separation performance with the roller system. This technique is expected to be utilized to the separation of toner and carrier particles used in electrophotography.Electrostatic traveling-wave transport of particles has been studied and fundamental performances have been clarified by an experimental and numerical investigation, because it has a potential to realize a sophisticated particle supplier in electrophotography In addition to these applications, the author is developing some techniques to separate particle size utilizing the electrostatic traveling wave In this report we have introduced five separation methods utilizing the electrostatic traveling wave and studied feasibility of these methods. The effectiveness of these techniques have been evaluated with small carrier particles used in the magnetic brush development system of electrophotography The first method utilizes a balance of the electrostatic force and the gravitational force. An electrostatic conveyer is inclined in A conveyer and a power supply used for the inclined linear separation system are shown in Traveling-wave propagation is achieved utilizing four amplifiers (Matsusada Precision, HOPS-1B3) and five function generators (Iwatsu, SG-4105), one of which is used to control phase-differences of the other four generators. Rectangular voltage was applied to electrodes, because it is the most efficient for the particle transport Spherical particles made by the polymerization method (Toda Kogyo) were used for experiments It has been reported that particles were transported almost linearly with time, even when particles were placed on the conveyer without prior charging  A numerical calculation was conducted to simulate these experimentally observed characteristics. The calculation method was almost the same with that reported in Ref. Eq. Calculated results shown in In conclusion, the inclined linear system is excellent for the separation but the yield of separated particles is low. The second method utilizes an inclined tube conveyer. The system configuration is shown in  To investigate the reason why the separation performance highly depended on the air gap a numerical calculation was conducted on trajectories of small and large particles. The numerical method was the same with that of Although the high separation performance was realized by this system, the yield of small particles reached at the top end of the tube conveyer was extremely low. Introduction of the small particles to the tube was rate controlling and it must be improved for the practical use. A circular system was intended to apply a principle of the mass spectroscopy. When particles were introduced in circular traveling-wave field created by a circular conveyer shown in  A vortex separation system shown in  The last is a roller system that utilizes the difference of flying altitude and the balance of the Coulomb force and the gravitational force. It is composed of two parts. One is a parallel electrode array that transports particles by virtue of the electrostatic traveling wave, the same as the linear conveyer, and another is a charged separation roller located on the upper side of the array as shown in Particles mounted on the left side of the linear conveyer were charged in contact with the insulation film on the conveyer and transported to the right side where the separation roller was approximated. Low-frequency wave, 5 Particles used for experiment was the same with those used for the circular system, i.e., mixed of the small and large particles.  Five techniques have been developed on the electrostatic separation of particle size. They are inclined linear system, inclined tube system, circular system, vortex system, and roller system. Feasibility of these systems was evaluated with respects to separation and yield performance of carrier particles, several tens micrometer in diameter, used in two-component magnetic development system of electrophotography. All of five systems showed good separation performance but it is a trade-off of the yield performance. However, relatively high yield was realized above all systems with the roller system without reducing the separation performance. The system is possible to build in the developer of the electrophotography machine by replacing the separation roller to a photoconductor drum and it is expected to realize a continuous supply of classified particles. The author would like to express his thanks to Yoji Okada, Tetsuya Kashima, and Shinjiro Umezu for their help of carrying out the experiment. This work is supported by Grant-in-aid for Scientific Research (B) of Japan Society for Promotion of Science and Nippon Sheet Glass Foundation for Materials Science and Engineering.