3D printing, also known as additive manufacturing or “rapid prototyping”, is a low cost technology that uses a 3D computer representation to create solid objects from a feedstock material. In the literature studies report that 3D printed models for orthopedic conditions can improve surgeons’ evaluation of patient-specific anatomy and pathology by way of tactile and visual experience From November 2014 to June 2015, 40 patients were enrolled at our clinics. Selected patients were affected with a distal radius fracture (AO classification, 23-A/B/C) eligible for surgery because of presence of displacement, dislocation of fragments and instability. A CT scan with a thickness of 0.625 The printed fractured bone was evaluated by the surgeons and used for preoperative planning and selection of surgical approach and selection and placement of osteosynthesis hardware; specifically, ideal screw location and orientation was evaluated ( All patients were operated with modified Henry volar approach under local anaesthesia. Patients reported an enthusiastic general appreciation about the use of this new technology in our hospitals. There was a substantial improvement in comprehension of the fracture before and after seeing the 3D printed models (average of +3 points on the grading scale) ( While surgical planning was not changed after checking the 3D printed models, the plates selected during pre-operative planning fitted perfectly during the operation. The addition of 2D and 3D CT scan to radiographs led to improved diagnosis of fracture line comminution and involvement of the articular surface, articular gaps or steps. A 1:1 3D printed model provides an additional tactile and visual experience, increasing the appreciation of articular surface gaps of ≥2 The accuracy of the 3D print is dependent on the technical capabilities of the machine; commercial 3D printer have an accuracy of 0.1 Three-dimensional printed models are an innovative method to facilitate tangible pre-operative evaluation of the fracture pattern, help planning the surgical procedure and improve patient's compliance through better understanding. Medartis (Basel, Switzerland) covered the costs of the 3D Printed models. None.