Strontium ranelate (S12911) has previously been shown to stimulate bone formation and inhibit bone resorption in rats. To determine whether strontium ranelate affects normal bone remodeling, we studied the effect of strontium ranelate on alveolar bone in monkeys. Strontium ranelate, at dosages of 100, 275, and 750 mg/kg per day, or vehicle, were given by gavage to 31 normal adult monkeys (Macaca fascicularis) (15 males, 16 females), aged 3–4 years. Treatment for 6 months with strontium ranelate resulted in an increase in plasma strontium concentration. Histomorphometric analyses of indices of bone formation and resorption were determined in standardized areas of alveolar bone. Treatment with strontium ranelate decreased the histomorphometric indices of bone resorption (osteoclast surface and number) with a maximal significant effect at the highest dose tested. In contrast to this inhibitory effect on bone resorption, strontium ranelate maintained bone formation. Although the amount of osteoid tended to increase, strontium ranelate, even at the highest dose, had no deleterious effect on bone mineralization, as evaluated by mineral apposition rate and osteoid thickness. These findings show that strontium ranelate decreases indices of bone resorption while maintaining bone formation in the alveolar bone in monkeys.There is growing evidence that strontium influences bone remodeling by affecting both bone resorption and bone formation. In vitro, strontium inhibits bone resorption In the present study, we investigated the effects of strontium ranelate on bone remodeling in adult monkeys. Monkeys have been used to analyze the effects of various drugs on bone remodeling, A total of 31 cynomolgus monkeys ( For kinetics analysis, blood samples were taken from each animal prior to dosing and at sacrifice, and samples were stored at −20°C until analyzed. Plasma strontium levels in the monkeys were determined with a method adapted from Mauras et al. using an inductively coupled plasma (ICP) emission spectrometry technique at the Laboratoire de Biochimie (Hôpital Lariboisière, Paris, France). Minimum concentration (C At time of killing, the right half-mandible was removed, cleaned of skin and connective tissue, and dehydrated in 70% ethanol. The specimens were then dissected in two parts: one including the incisors and the canine, which was decalcified and embedded in paraffin; the other included the molars and was embedded undecalcified in methylmethacrylate. Ten frontal sections through the incisors were stained and analyzed morphologically for detection of pathological signs. Serial horizontal sections 4–5 μm thick were obtained from the molar teeth, from the cervix to the apex of the roots, using a Jung K microtome equipped with a tungsten carbide blade. Every fifth section was kept and stained with toluidine blue or Masson–Goldner trichrome. Every 15th section, 8–10 μm thick, was kept unstained and viewed by epifluorescence for analysis of dynamic bone parameters. Histomorphometric indices of formation and resorption were determined on standardized areas of alveolar bone located between the roots Pharmacokinetic parameters (C As shown in The administration of strontium ranelate markedly decreased the histomorphometric indices of bone resorption, but had no effect on trabecular bone volume in alveolar bone The present study shows that 6 month treatment with strontium ranelate significantly reduces the indices of bone resorption while maintaining those of bone formation in alveolar bone in normal adult monkeys. These results confirm our previous findings in ovariectomized rats showing that strontium ranelate decreases bone resorption, but not bone formation. The administration of strontium ranelate, a molecule containing two atoms of stable strontium, was associated with increased plasma strontium concentrations. Comparable dose-dependent changes have been reported previously in rats, mice, and humans treated with strontium. Our reasons for selecting alveolar bone to study the effects of strontium ranelate on bone remodeling in monkeys were based on previous observations by us and others that alveolar bone is turned over at a high rate, possibly as a consequence of constant stimulation, due to the pressure imposed to the bone by the teeth as a result of swallowing saliva, and chewing. The effects of strontium ranelate on bone resorption were observed after 6 months of treatment, which may be longer than the duration of one remodeling cycle, as was the case in baboons. In contrast to its effects on bone resorption, strontium ranelate did not inhibit bone formation which was associated with a significant rise in the extent of single tetracycline-labeled surface. The trend for an increased amount of osteoid was not related to a deleterious effect on the mineralizing process, because MAR and osteoid thickness were not affected. These results are in accordance with the finding that strontium increases trabecular bone formation in rodents In spite of the fact that strontium ranelate decreases the indices of bone resorption while maintaining bone formation in alveolar bone, the amount of trabecular bone was shown to remain unchanged. A possible explanation for this discrepancy is that the relative amount of bone that surrounds the roots cannot be increased due to anatomical and biomechanical constraints associated with a very high level of stress imposed by the repetitous biting that occurs during swallowing and chewing. Further studies will indicate whether longer term treatment with strontium ranelate in ovariectomized animals leads to an increase in alveolar bone volume in animals with osteopenia. The fact that strontium ranelate inhibited bone resorption but not bone formation in a nonhuman primate indicates that this agent may be of potential clinical interest in the prevention and treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis. Further experimental and clinical investigations are warranted to determine the potential beneficial effects of this compound on bone in osteopenic states.