In groundwater studies, the numerical modeling of complex boundary conditions can be made easier by considering reservoirs and pipes as “reservoir” finite elements, which can store or release large volumes of water at almost constant hydraulic head. The numerical code to be used must solve the complete conservation equation with unlinked functions for the water retention curve and the unsaturated hydraulic conductivity, and the ability to describe these as step functions. Four examples illustrate the performance of the “reservoir” element: reservoir pumping, laboratory variable-head permeability test, vertical flow in an open borehole, and pumping test with well storage.Groundwater problems often involve very pervious features such as reservoirs or pipes, in which the hydraulic head, In ground water seepage studies, for the simple case of a lake, one may either add a lake water mass balance that updates the hydraulic head BC at the interface between the lake water and ground water This paper proposes a so-called “reservoir” element with special features. This element can be used only with numerical codes solving the complete conservation equation that takes into account the highly non-linear equations due to the water retention function and the unsaturated hydraulic conductivity function. The paper describes how to define the two functions for a reservoir element. Examples are then provided to illustrate how this reservoir element performs. The paper shows how the numerical modeling of complex groundwater problems may be eased by using reservoir elements. The finite element code Seep/W Several numerical codes neglect unsaturated flow, solve an abridged conservation equation, do not use The retained code accepts independent functions Starting with physical properties, the water content in the reservoir element must take constant values for the full and empty conditions (saturated and residual water contents), with a steep change between them ( Here are a few suggestions for efficient modeling. First, the finite reservoir elements must have a small height of 1 or 2 In theory, the combined two functions, The cylindrical reservoir has a diameter of 1.00 As expected, the position of the water level in the reservoir is directly proportional to time and pumping rate ( When water level rises or falls in a reservoir, it is possible in the retained code to define the boundary condition (BC) as total head The 2nd example is for a falling-head permeability test in a rigid-wall permeameter. The apparatus is shown in In The inflow flow rate, The outflow flow rate, Eq. Eq. This can be expressed for any Thus, plotting experimental data as ln With any numerical code, the boundary condition (BC) at the lower boundary is easily specified as a constant head. However, the BC is complex at the upper boundary of the specimen. First, Eq. Thus, Initially, For this 2nd example, the special BC function of The 3rd example is that of an open borehole that intersects several ( The relationship between the static water level, In the 3rd example, Is it possible to solve this problem using the special BC function of the retained code? There would be no finite elements for the open borehole. Three constant From a practical viewpoint, The 4th example is that of a pumping test performed in a confined aquifer, taking into account the influence of water stored in the well casing. The horizontal aquifer, of constant thickness The first term on the right side of Eq. Numerically, this problem is not easy to model. At the interface between the well and the aquifer ( The grid ( Key numerical results are presented in The paper has proposed and defined a finite element with special material properties, called a “reservoir” element. Reservoir elements are useful with a numerical code that solves the complete conservation equation and can accept unlinked functions for the water retention curve and the unsaturated hydraulic conductivity. In the reservoir element the water content takes constant values when it is either full or empty (saturated and residual water contents), with a steep change between the two states. The difference between saturated and residual water contents is adjusted to reflect the holding capacity of the real object, taking into account any internal volume reductions. The hydraulic conductivity of the reservoir element, even when it is empty, is always much higher than that of soils and rocks, which reflects the easiness to store or release water. Several recommendations have been provided to define the functions The reservoir element was used in a 1st example of pumping a cylindrical reservoir at a constant rate: the mean difference between the numerical and theoretical water level positions at any time was found to be less than 0.1 The four examples have shown that reservoir elements are very useful to model numerically groundwater problems with complex boundary conditions. Usually, pipes and reservoirs must be defined as constant-head boundaries along which the This research was subsidized by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC).