Mineral matter transformation and the behavior of mineral matter in the coal during gasification, provide more information on the suitability of a specific coal source for combustion or gasification purposes. Therefore, the chemistry and mineral interactions have to be understood in order to determine the suitability for fixed bed gasification purposes with regards to mineral matter transformations and slagging properties.
                  Although a suite of minerals important for the gasification process were identified [Van Dyk JC, Melzer S, Sobiecki A. Mineral matter transformations during Sasol-Lurgi fixed bed dry bottom gasification – utilization of HT-XRD and FactSage modelling. Minerals Engineering 2006; 19: 1126–35], some of the minerals, i.e. anorthite and calcite, with a specific behavior at different concentrations in the mineral structure and the transformation thereof was not studied and highlighted in detail. A number of other researchers [Reifenstein AP, Kahraman H, Coin CDA, Calos NJ, Miller G, Uwins P. Behavior of selected minerals in an improved ash fusion test: quartz, potassium feldspar, sodium feldspar, kaolinite, illite, calcite, dolomite, siderite, pyrite and apatite. Fuel 1999; 78: 1449–61], [Kondratiev A, Jaks E. Predicting coal ash slag flow characteristics (viscosity model for the Al2O3–CaO–‘FeO’–SiO2 system). Fuel 2001; 80: 1989–2000] and [Kondratiev A, Jak E. Applications of the coal ash slag viscosity model for the slagging gasification technologies (viscosity model in the Al2O3–CaO–‘FeO’–SiO2 system), 18th Pittsburgh Coal Conference, Newcastle, Australia, December 2001]) also did not investigate these gasification changes and mineralogical deformation during specific gasification conditions in detail.
                  The principle aim of this paper is to identify the role of Ca-containing mineral species towards the in situ capture of CO2 during gasification, as well as understanding the chemistry and interpret the mechanism of CO2 capture by means of high temperature X-ray diffraction (HT-XRD), in combination with FactSage modeling. The CaO content of a South African and another coal source investigated in the present study, were 6 mass% and 30 mass% respectively. The basic components present in the coal, or specifically CaO, only act as a fluxing component up to a specific percentage, where after the ash fusion temperature starts to increase again. At this turning point the (Si+Al):Ca molar mass ratio is 2.75, which implies that after the turning point, the formation of anorthite is maximized and can thereafter only remain at the same level.
                  The anorthite formation, when the Ca content increases, follows the inverse trend of the ash flow temperature prediction curve with the coal containing 6% CaO. The decrease in anorthite formation, with increasing Ca content, after the turning point in the graph, can be explained by the fact that more of the crystalline phase becomes a liquid (slag), and thus also the increase in the amount CaO in the slag will be observed. At the turning point, it is also interesting to note the stabilisation of the amount of other Ca-containing species. These are the minerals that are responsible and available for the mechanism where CO2 can be captured on Ca to form CaCO3. The formation of CaCO3 can also be observed from the turning point where the (Si+Al):Ca molar mass ratio is <2.75, which corresponds with the formation of other Ca-containing species.
                  Thermodynamic modeling with FactSage results indicated that anorthite can only form to the point where the (Si+Al):Ca molar mass ratio is >2.75. Anorthite (CaSi2Al2O8) forms within the gasification zone and all non-reacted Ca react with CO2 to form CaCO3 further down in the combustion zone.Mineral matter transformation and the behavior of mineral matter in the coal during gasification, provide more information on the suitability of a specific coal source for combustion or gasification purposes. Therefore, the chemistry and mineral interaction have to be understood in order to determine the suitability for fixed bed gasification purposes with regards to mineral matter transformations and slagging properties. During a previous study by Van Dyk et al. FactSage ( The specific value for Sasol in using these thermochemistry models can be used to analyze equilibrium conditions for reactions occurring between inorganic and/or organic materials, as well as providing insight into the mineral reactions and slag formation. The database will assist in understanding, as well as predicting, what can and will happen with specific coal and mineral sources inside the gasification process. For example, the areas in which thermochemistry are used today: In industry to help understand and improve extraction and manufacturing processes. In basic R&D to confirm experimental work by doing only the needed work thereby reducing the amount of experimental work. To improve energy production. To optimise yields. In order to simulate the S–L FBDB gasification process as close as possible to the actual gasification process, similar flows (kg/h) and conditions (temperature, pressure and mass flows) were used in the modeling and it was assumed that the coal consists of moisture, fixed carbon, volatiles and minerals. The input into FactSage has to be in elemental form i.e. carbon (C), hydrogen (H), nitrogen (N), sulphur (S) and oxygen (O) whilst the mass flow for the fixed carbon and volatile matter are normalized to an elemental composition similar to that of an ultimate analysis. The ash consists of different mineral species and the ash flow is normalized to a mass flow for the different mineral species. The gasification process is schematically given in For modeling purposes the gasifier was treated in three distinct zones: the drying and devolatilization zone, gasification zone and the combustion and ash zone. The model operates on the principle that the coal (inorganic and organic components) flow from the top downwards in the gasifier; and the gas from the zone below flows upwards into the zone that is being modeled, i.e. the coal that flows into the drying and devolatilization zone are brought into contact, to react with the gas that flows out of the gasification zone – thus a counter-current effect. Based on HT-XRD analyses the predo minant phases of the base case coal sample were found to be quartz, muscovite, calcite, dolomite, hematite, anhydrite, rutile and kaolinite. Between 600 Although a suite of minerals were identified as important during the gasification process, one of the minerals with a specific behavior at different concentrations in the mineral assemblage is that of calcite. Calcite and its break-down reactions thereof were not only studied and highlighted as important by Van Dyk et al. The principle aim of this paper is to describe the mechanism of Ca-containing mineral species related to in situ capture of CO The predominant mineral phases of a South African Highveld coal sample studied previously were found to be quartz, muscovite, calcite, dolomite, hematite, anhydrite, rutile and kaolinite The HT-XRD analysis were conducted by Corus R&D, The Netherlands The HT-XRD technique is a new advanced analytical technique for characterizing mineral matter transformations in coal and the investigation into this technique started off with Corus R&D. Corus R&D assisted in standardizing and setting up the technique at Sasol Technology R&D, and this is the reason why two analytical laboratories were used for characterization purposes. The base sample was first analyzed by Corus R&D where-after the results also served as a bench-mark for further work and development at Sasol Technology. A similar base case coal sample was submitted to Corus and Sasol Technology. The pre-preparation of the sample differ slightly between the two laboratories due to set-up and product analysis done on the equipment. The main difference is that Corus started off with the original coal sample, where Sasol Technology started with a sample ashed to 500 In summary the sample preparation and HT-XRD were prepared and conducted as follows: Firstly a representative sample with particle size distribution of -1mm of the SCS coal blend was ashed at 500 A summary of the experimental parameters used during the HT-XRD analysis were as follows (Sobiecki, 2004): As the current study is predominantly focused on the Ca-containing species, emphasis will be put only on those mineral species containing Ca. The mineral transformations occurring from 500 In the temperature range >500 In summary, based on the South-African coal sample studied, no additional CaCO The current fixed bed gasification operation in South Africa is currently operated with a coal source where the (Si+Al):Ca ratio is ±9.1 The CaO content of the South African and other coal source investigated in the present study were 6 mass% and 30 mass% respectively. The basic components present in the coal, or specifically CaO, only acts as a fluxing component to a specific percentage, where after the AFT starts to increase again. At the turning point of the curve the (Si+Al):Ca ratio is 2.75, which is the stoichiometric ratio of anorthite. It thus implies that after the turning point the formation of anorthite is maximized and its amount can thereafter only remain at the same level, or decrease with increasing temperature as the anorthite starts to become a slag-liquid. The mineral composition (mass%) of the 2 coal sources modeled, are given in A FactSage model has been developed In the FactSage modeling anorthite formation was predicted with the sample having 6% CaO present in the coal ( The naming convention SiO However, a significant difference was obtained in the coal containing the 30% CaO ( When looking at Thermodynamic modeling with FactSage results indicated that anorthite can only form to the point where the (Si+Al):Ca ratio is >2.75 ( Anorthite (CaSi The current S–L fixed bed dry bottom gasification operation in South Africa is currently operated with a coal source where the (Si+Al):Ca ratio is ±9.1 The anorthite formation, when the Ca content increases, follows the inverse trend of the ash flow temperature prediction curve with the coal containing 6% CaO. The decrease in anorthite formation, with increasing Ca content, after the turning point in the graph, can be explained by the fact that more of the crystalline phase becomes a liquid (slag), and thus also the increase in the amount CaO in the slag will be observed. At the turning point, it is also interesting to note the stabilisation of the amount of other Ca-containing species. These are the minerals that are responsible and available for the mechanism where CO Thermodynamic modeling with FactSage results indicated that anorthite can only form to the point where the (Si+Al):Ca ratio is >2.75. Anorthite (CaSi