Quicklime is a product rich in calcium oxide produced in industrial kilns. The process involves thermal decomposition of minerals with high content of calcium carbonate. The kiln feed properties vary with the geological formation from where the mineral is quarried or mined. Characterization of feed properties is necessary to achieve an optimized kiln production. In this work the decomposition of four different types of calcite ore was investigated by comparing conventional constant heating rate and dynamic heating rate thermogravimetric methods.
                  The conclusion of this work is that the conventional method always “overshoots” the calcination temperature when continuously heating during calcination compared to the dynamic rate method that resembles the kiln by holding temperatures constant during the calcination event. This justifies the used of the dynamic rate method. By a correct experimental parameter setup the dynamic rate method can be adapted for individual kilns and feed fractions, giving new additional value to the kiln operator and increasing the high value use of limestone deposits. This new method to characterize calcination properties of kiln feed materials can be utilized in normal kiln operations and when developing new mixes of different quality limestone. The results show differences when comparing the methods and different materials even though CaCO3 is present only as calcite. In addition, the dynamic rate method is faster than the conventional method. Besides quicklime production the method can also be applied in other industries calcining limestone, such as cement clinker production.From an industrial perspective the thermal decomposition behavior of different minerals is of practical importance. Quicklime is an industrial product with a high concentration of calcium oxide (CaO) produced in industrial kilns by thermal decomposition of minerals rich in calcium carbonate (CaCO Limestone is an abundant rock. The main component is CaCO Limestone is used in a wide range of applications and the quality requirements are high. Many limestones contain significant amounts of dolomite (CaMg(CO The production of limestone through quarrying involves several steps; overburden removal, drilling, blasting, loading and hauling to the processing plant. The processing comprises of operations such as crushing, grinding, sizing, washing, sorting, and scalping before product storage. The whole production process requires extensive sampling and quality control (e.g. Quicklime is used in many applications, as such or through the further processing by slaking and carbonation. The use can be divided into four main areas: construction, chemical and industrial, environmental, and metallurgical (e.g. The most common production technologies for quicklime are shaft kilns and rotary kilns. The theoretical energy consumption according to The kiln process is highly dependent on quality parameters of the limestone feed (e.g. In this work the decomposition of four limestones intended for quicklime production has been investigated by dynamic heating rate thermogravimetry (DRTG) and conventional constant heating rate thermogravimetry (CRTG). The purpose of the work is to compare lime kiln feed properties determined by these two methods. The compared parameters are (i) the extrapolated onset temperature of the CaCO Calcite has five structures, calcite I–V. At ambient pressure, as in these experiments, CaCO The CaCO The decomposition event evolves along a reaction zone. The reaction zone starts at the surface of the CaCO A SEM (Scanning Electron Microscopy) image of a lime surface can be seen in Several processes are involved in the decomposition; (i) heat transfer to the particle surface and through the CaO and CaCO Dolomite, CaMg(CO In a CO In air, at 700–750 At 750 The materials investigated are two very high purity high calcium limestone in single calcite phases (samples A and D), one dolomitic limestone (sample B), one high purity high calcium limestone with quartz and dolomite phases (sample C) and one dolomite mineral with only a small calcite phase (sample E). X-ray diffraction (XRD) was used to determine the crystalline content of the samples. Diffraction data were collected by continuous scans in the 2θ-interval 10–80° with a Bruker d8 Advance instrument in θ–θ mode and Cu Kα radiation (40 In conventional TG the sample temperature is changed in a predetermined scheme set by the user. In dynamic heating rate the temperature change varies in a user non-predetermined way ( The extrapolated onset temperature studied in this work is defined as the point of intersection of the tangent drawn at the point of greatest slope on the leading edge of the peak with the extrapolated base line ( TA Instruments Q600 STD (CRTG) and TA Instruments Q500 HiRes™ TG (DRTG) were used for the analysis. The Q600 has a horizontal furnace and balance design. It operates with dual beams up to 1500 Since some samples contain a dolomite phase the decomposition reactions need to be established. The CaMg(CO In the lime kiln the feed material remains in almost isothermal conditions as long as the decomposition reaction proceeds, in this way the DRTG resembles the kiln. Therefore the influence of the DRTG experimental setup is of interest, i.e. does the DRTG allow for wide enough variation to simulate different kiln types, e.g. shaft kilns with long residence times and rotary kilns with shorter residence times? In addition to the DRTG-CRTG comparison a short evaluative series on the influence of the experimental parameters of heating rate and resolution setting of the DRTG was performed to investigate this. The experimental setup can be seen in Comparative studies on conventional and dynamic rate thermogravimetry (also called high resolution TG) can be found in literature ( The kinetics of thermal decomposition of CaCO To be able to distinguish the calcite and dolomite decomposition samples B and E were analyzed in different atmospheres. This is important for the comparison of the DRTG and CRTG of the lime kiln feed, in Due to the rapid reaction at 900  In summary, the results show that in high pCO The obtained temperature–time profiles of experimental runs No. 1–8 (see The difference between CRTG and DRTG is clearly shown in In In The results show that there are differences between the kiln feeds. The residence time of the lime kiln is easy to control. Comparing maximum decomposition rates in %/min and the temperature at which this occurs, as in In the shaft kiln limestone feed is usually coarse, e.g. a 40–90 The results also show that kiln feed A and B have similar calcination properties under pCO To study the effect of experimental parameters of the dynamic rate method the heating rate and resolution setting were varied in an experimental series with sample A, For the Q500 the resolution setting can be set between −  By adjusting experimental settings, primarily the resolution setting, the calcination event can be adapted to specific kiln residence times. By standardizing and verifying the method for a specific kiln the results can be utilized in kiln process control, e.g. as an operating parameter in an automated control system on the kiln, or in the quarry for quality control and as a parameter for mixing. Adapted to the specific kiln the potential is achieving an improve quicklime quality, a more stable calcination process, a reduced kiln energy consumption and thereby reduced costs and environmental impact, e.g. lower CO The method can also be adapted to other industries calcining limestone, such as cement clinker or blast furnace processes. At pCO The rate of thermal decomposition as defined by CRTG and DRTG varies between different materials although CaCO The conventional TG always “overshoot” the calcination temperature while continuing heating during calcination. The DRTG resembles, or mimics, the kiln by holding temperatures constant, or near constant, during the calcination event. DRTG experimental resolution setting has a more significant impact on the experimental result than the heating rate. When DRTG experimental setup is properly adjusted for the individual kiln, this new thermogravimetric method provides the kiln and the quarry operator with valuable new information on kiln feed behavior. The new method to characterize calcination properties of kiln feed materials can be utilized in normal kiln operations and when developing new mixes of different quality limestone. Besides quicklime production the method can also be applied in other industries calcining limestone, such as cement clinker production. In addition, DRTG can provide additional value for the industrial operator by reducing the experimental time. Further work should focus on full scale application at a specific kiln and determining of kiln feed properties at different pCO The author would like to acknowledge Rainer Backman at Umeå University for valuable discussions and Dan Boström at Umeå University for the XRD analysis and valuable discussions. Erik Viggh at Cementa Ab and Umeå University is acknowledged for proof reading of the manuscript. The Swedish Mineral Processing Research Association (MinFo) is acknowledged for project support. The