The synthetic indium-bearing zinc ferrite (IBZF) was mechanically activated by a stirring ball mill and subsequently studied for the leaching behavior and kinetics of extracting indium from IBZF. The effect of the change in crystalline phase, lattice distortion, particle size, specific surface area and morphology introduced by mechanical activation (MA) was also investigated. The activated IBZF showed different physicochemical characteristics and was found to be easier to dissolve in sulphuric acid than the unmilled sample. MA enhanced the leaching reactivity of IBZF. When IBZF was mechanically activated for 30 and 60min, the activation energy decreased from 68.8kJ/mol to 54.4 and 44.7kJ/mol, respectively. The leaching process of unmilled IBZF was controlled by chemical reaction, but became the hybrid controlled process after MA. The reaction orders of the unmilled, activated for 30 and 60min IBZF dissolution with respect to H2SO4 concentration were 0.69, 0.58, and 0.54, respectively.Indium plays an important role in many fields due to its quite unique physical unique physical and chemical properties ( Mechanical activation (MA), usually carried out by high-energy milling, refers to the use of friction, collision, impingement, shear or other mechanical actions to change the crystal structures and physicochemical properties of the solids ( The investigations were carried out using synthetic IBZF. The mixture of analytical grade ZnO, Fe The equipment of MA was achieved with a customized stirring mill driven by a commercial available drill press quipped with a speed-tuned motor. For each grinding experiment, the IBZF samples (50 The unmilled IBZF as well as milled samples were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), particle size analysis and specific surface area ( Morphology analysis was performed by S-570 Scanning Electron Microscopy (Hitachi, Japan). Particle size analysis was measured using Mastersizer 2000 laser diffraction particle size analyzer (Malvern, UK) with deionized water as a dispersing agent. Samples were leached in a 1000 Aliquots (∼  The particle size and The morphologies of unmilled sample and samples milled for various time are illustrated in The indium extractions of unmilled and activated IBZF are shown in The effect of reaction temperature on IBZF dissolution for the unmilled sample and samples activated for 30 and 60 The influence of sulphuric acid concentration on the indium leaching rate of unmilled and activated IBZF was examined in the range of 0.5 to 2.5 In order to understand the mechanism of a leaching system, kinetic model is needed to satisfactorily explain the results. Sharp's method of reduced half time of reaction was used to select the kinetic model for unmilled sample in our previous study ( Equation: − The three selected models were applied to determine the activation energies of unmilled and activated IBZF samples. Eqs. The rate constant of activated mineral ( As Δ The use of the kinetic models also allows for the determination of the reaction orders with respect to H The results obtained from this investigation show the effect of MA on the dissolution kinetics of the synthetic IBZF. MA caused the decrease in crystalline phase and particle size, the variation of morphology and the increase of lattice distortion and specific surface area. The leaching experiments of unmilled and mechanically activated samples showed that MA enhanced the reactivity of IBZF and increased the leaching rate and kinetics. The activation energies of the unmilled, activated for 30 and 60 This work was financially supported by