Aluminum nitride (AlN) ceramics were prepared by hot-pressing with Y(NO3)3·6H2O as sintering additive. The mechanical properties including flexural strength, Vickers’ hardness, and fracture toughness were studied. The relative density and mechanical property of the monolithic AlN were improved by adding Y(NO3)3·6H2O, which decreased the porosity. At 2wt% Y2O3, the AlN ceramic exhibited the highest strength of 383MPa, the highest hardness of 15.39GPa, and the highest fracture toughness of 3.1MPam1/2. However, doping with more additive, the strength, hardness, and toughness of AlN ceramics decreased because of the weak interfacial bonding between AlN matrix and the yttrium aluminates phase.Aluminum nitride (AlN) may be highly suitable as substrates and packages for IC/LSI because of its high thermal conductivity (theoretical value of 319 Commercially available AlN powder ( The decomposition profile of Y(NO The TG-DTA curve ( From previous reports The formation of liquid phase (Y Fracture surface profiles of each sample are shown in The densities and mechanical properties of the sintered AlN ceramics are summarized in  Porosity significantly influences the mechanical properties of ceramic materials. The existence of few pores can lead to a considerable decrease in strength and hardness because pores reduce the force-bearing area under the loaded state and stress concentration at pores makes them possible crack sources, which can lead to fracture. In this study, monolithic AlN has lower mechanical properties due to of its numerous pores. Introducing the additive eliminates the pores in the matrix and improves the mechanical properties of the ceramic. The mechanical properties of samples AY4 and AY6, however, are worse than those of sample AY2, even though they have higher densities. This indicates that other factors also influence the mechanical properties of AlN ceramics. In addition to porosity, another important factor which influences mechanical properties is the residual stress for sintered bulk ceramics When the additive content is less than or equal to 2  The AlN matrix and yttrium aluminate has a lower interfacial bonding strength, which makes crack propagation easier because of the decrease in fracture energy. Due to the brittleness of the yttrium aluminate and the mismatch of its TEC with that of the AlN matrix, numerous micro-cracks will be generated at the AlN/yttrium aluminate interface. Hence, the mechanical properties such as Vicker's hardness, flexural strength, and fracture toughness decrease with the addition of excess yttrium aluminate phase. Because of this, AY4 and AY6 have poorer mechanical properties compared with AY2 even though they have higher densities. In addition, grain size is another main factor influencing the mechanical properties of the ceramic materials. Ceramic materials of small grain size and homogeneous particle size have better mechanical properties AlN ceramics have been prepared by the addition of Y(NO Thanks are due to the support by