Damages caused by flash floods hazards are an increasing phenomenon, especially in arid and semi-arid areas. Thus, the need to evaluate these areas based on their flash flood risk using maps and hydrological models is also becoming more important. For ungauged watersheds a tentative analysis can be carried out based on the geomorphometric characteristics of the terrain. To process regions with larger watersheds, where perhaps hundreds of watersheds have to be delineated, processed and classified, the overall process need to be automated. GIS packages such as ESRI's ArcGIS offer a number of sophisticated tools that help regarding such analysis. Yet there are still gaps and pitfalls that need to be considered if the tools are combined into a geoprocessing model to automate the complete assessment workflow. These gaps include issues such as i) assigning stream order according to Strahler theory, ii) calculating the threshold value for the stream network extraction, and iii) determining the pour points for each of the nodes of the Strahler ordered stream network. In this study a complete automated workflow based on ArcGIS Model Builder using standard tools will be introduced and discussed. Some additional tools have been implemented to complete the overall workflow. These tools have been programmed using Python and Java in the context of ArcObjects. The workflow has been applied to digital data from the southwestern Sinai Peninsula, Egypt. An optimum threshold value has been selected to optimize drainage configuration by statistically comparing all of the extracted stream configuration results from DEM with the available reference data from topographic maps. The code has succeeded in estimating the correct ranking of specific stream orders in an automatic manner without additional manual steps. As a result, the code has proven to save time and efforts; hence it's considered a very useful tool for processing large catchment basins.The evolution of a drainage system over space and time is affected by many variables such as lithology, tectonic lineaments, geomorphology, soil and the area's landcover. Many of these variables are mirrored in the landscape topography, which can be quantified and classified using concepts of geomorphometry. The measurement of shapes or geometries of any natural geomorphological features is termed as geomorphometry ( Therefore, today's state-of-the-art techniques should be applied. These include Remote Sensing (RS) data and processing using Geographic Information Systems (GIS), with the added availability of high resolution digital elevation models (DEM) from earth observation satellites and the progress made in computer sciences. Due to the increased power to process these large amounts of data even on PCs or laptops and the progress statistical and mathematical methods, many difficulties have been resolved and new problems can be tackled ( To apply the complete workflow from DEM preprocessing to the extraction of morphometric parameters to larger regions, where perhaps hundreds of watersheds have to be delineated and classified, the process has to be automated. Although the complete process can be implemented straight forward, the extracted results still create different problems with regard to their credibility in using the data in geomorphological and hydrological models ( Despite the validation of stream extraction from DEM has received considerable attention, the assessment of the achieved results still lags behind. The validation procedure for a drainage network should be carried out prior further processing, as in the case of hydrological models. Generally, there are two main approaches for drainage network validation: quantitative and qualitative methods ( This work introduces a new implemented automated workflow based on an ArcGIS Spatial Analyst toolbox enriched by Python scripts and ArcObjects based Java code to extract stream network from DEM with stream segmentation according to Strahler's theory. The model runs in a batch to produce different drainage network configurations by iterating through a range of threshold values. The workflow includes selection of a threshold value to achieve the optimum drainage configuration by comparing the extracted network configuration results from DEM with the available reference data from topographic maps. The automated workflow delineates watershed sub-basins according the stream order. Evaluation of the results is done statistically by comparing the extracted stream number for each order with the results of the traced stream numbers from a topographic map sheets 1:50,000. The compared parameters include the number of streams for each order according to Strahler theory and the number of sub-watersheds for each order. The best match determines the optimum threshold value used for stream extraction and represents the most plausible stream configuration compared to the topographic map. The adapted workflow was applied to Wadi Feiran basin, which is one of the prominent drainage systems in the southern Sinai Peninsula. It is located at the southwestern part of Sinai between Latitude 28° 30' and 28° 55'N and Longitudes 33° 20' and 34° 03'E and covers an area of about 1790 In this study, a DEM was used to extract morphological data that were further translated into morphometric parameters for each sub-basin in the study area. The DEM is a digital representation of cartographic information in a raster form created from terrain elevation data. The Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER) Global DEM Version 2 (ASTER GDEM) data of Wadi Feiran Basin were collected from the Land Processes Distributed Active Archive Center (LP DAAC) established by National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). The ASTER GDEM is available from the The drainage network and the morphometric parameters (e.g., drainage frequency, drainage density and bifurcation ratio) were extracted using topographic maps of scale (1:50,000). The whole basin of Wadi Feiran is covered by 11 sheets of topographic maps and this scale corresponds to spatial resolution 25 This section presents the methodology to process a DEM in order to facilitate interactive watershed delineation and stream network extraction. Criteria and steps used to extract the stream network and basin delineation will be thoroughly illustrated. The workflow was based on tools available in the ArcGIS 10.1 toolbox; in particular tools from the Spatial Analyst extension were used ( If the characteristics of the underlying objects are known (i.e., the number of streams and their length for each order of stream), the extraction of the stream network can be easily implemented in GIS ( DEM generation (if not given)→filling of pits and depressions→calculation of local flow directions→calculation of flow accumulation→extraction of drainage network→Strahler order segmentation→vectorization of drainage network. A common problem with drainage network delineation using DEM is the presence of sinks, particularly in flat areas and depressions. Therefore, sinks are commonly removed prior to DEM processing for drainage identification. Small sinks have been observed downstream in the basin, in addition to some small parts of the catchment areas. For this reason, a fill process was used to fill each depression in DEM with an appropriate limit. A filled DEM process should be iterated until all sinks are filled and the elevation raster is void of depressions. Therefore, sinks have to be removed from a DEM through the filled process. The next step creates the flow direction raster. A flow direction raster shows the direction water will flow out of each cell of a filled DEM. A widely used method for deriving flow direction is the D8 method. This method is used by ArcGIS and assigns a cell's flow direction to one of its eight surrounding cells either adjacent or diagonally, in the direction with steepest downward slope. The D8 method produces good results in high gradient slopes, but tends to result in parallel flow lines along less steep areas ( Stream network delineation is performed in the next steps. Most methods of stream delineation were developed for D8-based approaches, assuming that flow dispersal is limited from each cell to only one of eight principal directions separated by Though the workflow is well known and applied in many research projects, it is worthwhile to have a closer look at some of the basic steps. The focus of the discussion is to combine the tools to an automated workflow, which may be implemented using ArcGIS Model Builder, for example. Two main issues have been addressed in the stream extraction process; the first one was updating the algorithm related to the Strahler order. For re-ordering the segmented streams, a tool based on Python has been implemented. The second issue was implementing an iteration loop for the determination of an optimal threshold value. For each iteration, the stream network has been extracted. The configuration of stream networks for each threshold value should be created with a difference not only in the stream number for each order, but also reaching in the order of the stream. A workflow is implemented to generate several drainage networks depending on a given maximum stream order as input value (i.e., the order of the main stream as an expert guess based on previous studies or evaluation of topographic maps). Starting with an initial threshold value (input value) which will generate a main stream with lower order than the specified maximum one, the algorithm will iterate by decreasing the threshold value in each loop by a specified step size until the given order for the main stream is reached. The threshold value obtained is the starting value for a more detailed evaluation to determine the optimum value. Given a range of threshold values and a step size, the model given in Generally, the stream ordering process is a method of assigning a numeric order to links or segments in a drainage network. The order systems supported by ESRI's Stream Order tool were proposed by The next issue to be discussed in the workflow is the determination of the pour points for each node of the Strahler ordered stream network. Pour points are indicated by the location where water would flow out of the cell. Thus, a pour point should be located within an area of high flow accumulation because it is used to calculate the total contributing water flow to that given point. As the pour points have to be aligned with the flow accumulation layer for the automatic extraction of the watersheds, the manipulation of raster cells is necessary. Accessing raster cells using Python is not possible in a straight forward manner, thus the necessary algorithm has been implemented in Java using the ArcObjects API. The algorithm uses Strahler re-ordered streams, as well as Strahler raster, as input. As output of the algorithm a new raster with pour points is created. The resulting pour points are based on the confluence locations of the stream segments, but are moved one pixel upstream for each segment of lower or same order than the order of the confluence point. The algorithm is given in pseudo code in A drainage basin acts like a funnel, collecting all the water within the basin area and channeling it into a waterway. The drainage basin includes both the streams that convey the water, as well as the land surfaces from which water drains into those channels. Each drainage basin is separated topographically from adjacent basins by a ridge, hill or mountain, known as a water divide. Watersheds or basins draining into one another area found in the form of a nested hierarchy. The topography helps to determine where and how water flows from one area to the next. However, each large drainage basin can be broken into smaller drainage basins with its own topographic and hydrologic characteristics; these are called sub-watersheds, or sub-basins for short. Delineation of a watershed entails determining the boundary of the watershed, i.e., the ridgeline. The ridgeline joins the highest elevation points, and thus becomes the boundary of the watershed. The most important aspect for defining and delineating a watershed is to fix the outlet of the drainage course. Basically, the location of the outlet defines the area of the watershed. The delineation of drainage basins can be done manually based on the contour lines of topographic maps. On the other hand, the widespread availability of elevation data in digital format has bolstered the development of automated tools that can be used to delineate drainage basins and their associated stream networks. The traditional manual method of basin delineation starts by digitizing the pour point. By comparing the results of the stream network with the topographic map visually, pour points are identified and digitized. The snap pour point tool is used to ensure that the digitized points are dragged to the point of highest accumulated flow. In the final step the watershed tool is used, which requires the input of flow direction (raster layer) and pour point (vector or raster layer). As in the extraction of a stream network, it is important not to use the simplification option while converting the raster map to vector features. Otherwise, the delineated stream network and basins will not match exactly, which is a prerequisite for the following steps to automate counting and join the drainage network. Identifying and digitizing pour point for a large number of sub-basins is a time consuming labor. Therefore, an automated workflow was implemented. The suggested tool is divided into two parts. The first part aims to input the extracted pour points files that originated from Java script as explained before. The second part implements the delineation of the watersheds using the watershed tool. This tool needs the flow direction layer as input data and converts them to vector format ( The analysis for Wadi Feiran was implemented based on manual evaluation of a topographic map 1:50,000 by The results show that there is an increase in the number of streams with decreasing threshold values, especially at stream order 1, 2, 3 and 4 ( The Root Mean Square Distance (RMSD) method was used to examine the difference between the results from the automated process and the data from topographic map sheets. The results show that the least total difference is observed at threshold values between 137 and 134 ( After extracting the drainage network, the corresponding watersheds have to be delineated. Basically, the location of the outlet defines the area of the watershed. Thus the most important aspect for defining and delineating a watershed is to fix the outlet of the drainage course. It should be mentioned that the total number of streams for each order should have the same number of delineated basins. The classification of sub-watershed was based on their nested hierarchy up to the main stream represented by the downstream of basin ( GIS techniques were used to delineate hydrographic basins and extract stream network based on a DEM, with emphasis on stream segmentation according to Strahler's theory using an automated workflow. An algorithm implemented in Python enabled the correct and accurate counting of the stream segments for each order, whereas a pour point tool programmed based on ArcObjects in Java helped to delineate the watersheds for each stream order. The former tool was developed to find an optimal threshold value for modeling the raster layer of the drainage network automatically starting from some initial values. The intermediate results of the iteration provide a chance to evaluate the extracted stream networks against topographic maps. The implementation of the adopted tools on range of different DEM sources (e.g., SRTM and Tandem x) has not been applied here to present its effect on the number of extracted stream order at different resolutions. Thus, it would be recommended as future work to apply this tool on different DEM source for evaluating the optimal threshold value with different resolutions. The results of the automated workflow can be used to calculate all morphometric parameters for each sub-basin (e.g., stream frequency, stream density, overland flow, bifurcation ratio, length ratio) based on the stream order number, stream length and basin areas. The new tool was developed to delineate the hydrographic basin area for each stream order through the smallest basin order, which is useful in hydrological applications such as geomorphological unit hydrographs and rainfall runoff models. It saves time and effort by automatically estimating the correct number streams for each stream order without additional manual steps, especially useful for large catchment basins. Furthermore, this research is intended to point a way forward to update the topographic maps of the southern Sinai Peninsula, as well as for the geologically similar regions of Egypt's eastern desert and the western part of Saudi Arabia. The automated workflow can be used on different DEM resolutions and can additionally be applied on different areas in the world experimentally. The code can be used in the future for generating hydrological models, especially models related to topographic parameters like geomorphic unit hydrographs and instantaneous unit hydrographs. The code succeeds in obtaining data about the smallest basin order 1 and 2, which cannot be easily derived from topographic maps. These data (i.e., stream length, stream number and basin area of smallest basin order) should be used as important factors in hydrological models. The authors wish to thank the Research Centre "ROCEEH" funded by the Heidelberg Academy of Sciences and Humanities for supporting this research by providing computer lab facilities and funding publication costs. We would like also to thank Dr. Andrew Kandel at Heidelberg Academy of Sciences and Humanities for his supporting about language revision work.