Dispersivity of clay soils is one of the most important issues that should be considered in civil engineering projects. Dispersive soils are clay soils that are easily washed in water with low concentrations of salt; these clay soils usually contain high levels of sodium ions in their adsorption cation sites. Kaolin, sepiolite (fibrous clay), and bentonite soils are among the most important and useful industrial materials. Therefore, in this study, these three clay soils were selected to investigate dispersivity potential by adding 4% of dispersive materials (Sodium hexametaphosphate) and performing shear strength, crumb, double hydrometer, pinhole tests, and chemical experiments. Results indicated a change in the Sodium Adsorption Ratio (SAR) in the following order: kaolin > sepiolite > bentonite. Stabilization practices using chemical methods were done after performing soil divergence with sodium hexametaphosphate. CaCl2, CaSO4, AlCl3, and Al2 (SO4)3 were used for chemical stabilization to assess the effect of ion valence on soil improvement parameters. Results obtained for chemical properties showed that, stabilization potential was in the following order: kaolin > sepiolite > bentonite; meaning that clay soils with lower cation exchange capacity have more remediation potential and are more susceptible to dispersion. The role of calcium and aluminum cations was prominent in improving mechanical and dispersivity properties, respectively. In general, further dispersion potential of clays in the same Na+ concentration was found to be related to a decrease in the cation exchange capacity, specific surface area, and plastic index. Soil dispersion was directly associated with diffuse double layer and electrostatic forces while; soil strength parameters were mainly dependent on cementation and connection of soil particles to each other. Consequently, it was observed that, clay soils with suitable engineering properties (higher strength and compaction or lower Atterberg limits) are more sensitive to dispersion compared to other types of clay with higher CEC and plasticity values.Dispersive soils, also known as sodic and erodible soils cause a significant challenge for environmental management, agricultural applications, infrastructure construction, and jeopardizing sustainability of many particular sites ( Laboratory investigations on erosive behavior of consolidated soils utilized a rotating cylinder apparatus indicated that, the amount and type of clay, organic matter, pH, water content, temperature, type and concentration of ions in the pore and eroding fluids, and thixotropy affecting the stress required to initiate erosion (critical shear stress τc) significantly ( Dispersive clay soils represent a particular kind of fine-grained soils, which cannot be determined by visual classification or using standard identification – classification tests such as particle size analysis, plasticity, and comparable tests. The crumb and the double hydrometer tests are considered to be straightforward in order to be performed in the field and laboratory, just as preliminary evaluation of dispersive soil. Pinhole test provides evident results in terms of classification of dispersive and non-dispersive soils. Results of the tests have given some uncertainty in classification of the category of medium-dispersive soils, because of lack of defined criteria for the class, particularly with regards to low-value flow rate. In such cases, it is necessary to integrate chemical tests along with existing ones ( The type of ions in the clay soil is one of crucial issues that must always be considered, when they are encountered as natural resources of the earth dams, and so on. Past experiences indicated that, ignoring this factor while implementing the water structures has made many problems and caused damages to the structures by erosion and changes in physical and mechanical soil properties ( Dispersion of clay minerals is also related to their composition, structure, and especially nature of exposed external surfaces, as these surfaces interact with surrounding fluids. For instance, concerning evaluating nature of outer surfaces of non-swelling clay minerals (kaolinite and illite) evidently, marked differences may be anticipated. Thus, the exposed basal surfaces of asymmetric 1:1 layer structure of kaolinite has indicated that, it contains of both alumina octahedra and silica tetrahedra, whilst chemical composition of clay mineral has demonstrated that, it has a small Cation Exchange Capacity (CEC) with a minor permanent negative charge and no fixed interlayer cations. In contrast, exposed basal surfaces of symmetric 2:1 layer structure of illite consists only of silica tetrahedra, whilst it has a high permanent negative charge compensated by fixed interlayer cations, as well as a distinctly more increased CEC than that of kaolinite based on its chemical composition ( Clay minerals are among some of the most important industrial minerals. Millions of tons of clay minerals are utilized annually in a large variety of applications including geology, process industries, agriculture, environmental remediation, and construction ( Accordingly, the present research was conducted to evaluate dispersivity of different clay soils (kaolin, sepiolite, and bentonite) and compare them in terms of soil stabilization using conventional methods. Besides, the effect of cation and accompanied anion in soil improvement was also assessed. To investigate the effect of types of clay minerals on soil dispersion, three different clay soils were selected: 1) Kaolinite soil obtained from Ore mine in north eastern of Iran, 3) fibrous (Sepiolite soil) clay mineral obtained from north eastern of Iran, and 3) Bentonite soils obtained from south eastern of Iran. To determine composition of mineral deposits and mineral purity reservoirs, powder samples were prepared and studied by X-ray diffraction. Diffractograms were recorded by using a Philips X-ray diffractometer (Model PW, 1840-Copper target-scanning speed of 0.5 degree per minutes- Voltage 4 kV- Amperage 20 mA) between 4-70° (2 θ). Figures Calcium Carbonate Equivalent (CCE) ( Engineering properties were determined according to ASTM methods. Atterberg limits (i.e., liquid limit and plastic limit) were determined according to the ASTM D-4318 Standard Test. To determine compaction characteristics, the standard Proctor compaction test was performed according to ASTM D-698 on clay soils. Particle size distribution of the samples was obtained through the hydrometer analysis (ASTM 2006 D-422). Specific gravity of soil solids (Gs) was determined according to ASTM D-854. The effect of dispersivity on shear strength parameters such as friction angle and cohesion of the clay soils (ASTM D3080-04) were conducted by a series of direct shear tests. Samples were tested with three normal stresses of 50 kPa, 100 kPa, and 200 kPa. The experiments were done by using a direct shear box with dimensions of 60 mm × 60 mm × 30 mm. All samples preparation condition included optimum moisture content and maximum dry density. The soil was placed in the mold in three identical layers, and was compacted gently using a small tamper until reaching determined dry unit weight. Specific Surface Area (SSA) was determined using the BET (theoretical background of adsorption isotherm equation of The clay samples were mixed with 4% of Sodium hexametaphosphate (Calgon) with optimum moisture content; then samples were incubated for 30 days at room temperature (22–26 °C), and were blended every day with constant moisture (optimum moisture content). The following tests were conducted to evaluate dispersivity of the soils: Generally, this combination of the tests is very useful to indicate if the soil is sodic and dispersive, done by immersing fragments in fresh water. Cloudy or muddy water is an indicator of dispersive soil. In the Pinhole test, distilled water is allowed to flow through a 1.0 mm diameter hole drilled through a compacted specimen. In dispersive clays, the hole is rapidly eroded and the water becomes muddy. For non-dispersive clays, there is no erosion and the water is clear. First, particle size distribution was determined using the standard hydrometer test in which the soil specimen is dispersed in distilled water with a chemical dispersant. Then, a parallel hydrometer test is done on a duplicate soil specimen, but without using a chemical dispersant. Soil sodicity represents combined effects of (1) salinity as measured by electrical conductivity of the soil, and (2) soluble Na ESP is calculated as proportion of the cation exchange capacity occupied by the sodium ions. ESP was calculated from ESP may also be calculated by replacing CEC in An ESP of 15 (~SAR 13) is generally taken to be the threshold, below which soils are classified as nonsodic, and above which soils are dispersive suffering from serious physical problems at the time of applying the water ( After dispersion process and ensuring of dispersion, soils were chemically stabilized with different salts. To test the effect of anion and cation type on stability of various clay soil samples, CaCl Shear Strength Pinhole Test Chemical Test To determine significant differences between treatments, mean values were compared based on Duncans̓ Multiple Range Test (DMRT) (p-value<0.05). All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS software (Ver. 17.0) and graphs were drawn in Microsoft Excel 2010. Main chemical, physical, and engineering properties of studied clay minerals are presented in Tables Kaolin clay soil has the lowest liquid limit, cation exchangeable capacity, and specific surface area. Sepiolite soil properties are in intermediate level relative to two other clay soils (kaolin and bentonite soils). Results of chemical experiments ( Concentration of Na ion in soil pore water layer is one of influential factors in soil dispersivity, because of sodium ion, which is less electronegative due to its mono-valence. Potassium cations are also monovalent, but they enter in interlayer spaces of clay minerals, and are trapped due to their smaller sizes than Na ions. Presence of Na ions in soils results in an increase in the osmosis potential and a decrease in the attractive Van der Waals forces between soil particles. Usually, soils whose concentration of soluble salts in pore water is less than 1 meq/lit (10 meq/100g) are not considered dispersive ( Results obtained from Crump test indicated that, sepiolite reacted more compared to other clay soils in distilled water, while bentonite soil showed the least reaction ( Results obtained from double hydrometer test are presented in Results obtained from Pinhole test according to standard criterion are shown in Results of different tests conducted on all soil samples have indicated different outcomes in relation to dispersivity criteria. Thus, dispersivity of soils needs to be investigated by different methods. In general, potential of dispersivity of soils could be as follows: kaolin > sepiolite > bentonite. It can be concluded that, bentonite soils with high CEC may adsorb high Na concentrations and endure earlier dispersion. Results of a study on the influence of mineralogy and pore fluid composition on slaking rates of three silty clays containing 20 % kaolin (Hydrite R), montmorillonite, and illite at constant concentration of pore fluid (0.01 N), but at low and high SAR values revealed that, low plasticity and highly flocculated soils have higher slaking rates (  Chemical stabilization was done with CaCl Trend related to the effect of chemical stabilizers on soil flocculation using the Pinhole test showed the following order: AlCl Through chemical stabilization of the soils, sodium was exchanged by Ca With an increase in the concentration of divalent ions of calcium and trivalent ions of aluminum round clay minerals, these ions are replaced by sodium ion, which is less electronegative due to its mono-valence: thus, thickness of double layer decreases leading to an increase in the attractive forces between minerals.  Results obtained from shear strength test for different clay soils (kaolin, sepiolite, and bentonite) under different conditions (non-dispersive, dispersive, and chemically stabilized) are presented in Strength of dispersive soil increased with an increase in the lime (0.5–1.0% hydrated lime), alum (0.6–1.0% (25% solution of Aluminium sulfate) to 1.5% of total dry weight of soil) and gypsum (a minimum of 2% by mass of gypsum) content up to specific Limit ( Spatial arrangement of the clay minerals is amongst the most obvious factors influencing dispersion and migration of clays particularly regarding fabric, their micro-aggregate structure, morphology, surface area, porosity, and particle size distribution. These factors are all highly variable requiring to be reviewed on an individual clay mineral basis later. However, it should be noticed that, generally the clay minerals of most interest with respect to fines migration have formed during diagenesis ( To demonstrate changes in carbonate amount, CCE was measured for different clay soils and also after treatment by CaCl Dispersion (breakdown of soil into single particles) is controlled by soil texture, type of the clay, soil organic matter, soil salinity, and exchangeable cations. The clay soils (kaolin, sepiolite, and bentonite) demonstrated different engineering characteristics; and they had the following order: bentonite > sepiolite > kaolin clay soils in terms of Atterberg limits, optimum moisture content, and cation exchange capacity. Based on exchangeable amount of Na after dispersion, values of sepiolite and kaolin soils were half and one-third of bentonite soils, respectively. The lower CEC, the more stabilization potential of clay soil will be. This usually means that soils with low CEC are more likely to develop required amount of calcium or aluminum cations (or other divalent and trivalent cations) to overwhelm dispersivity, while soils with high CEC are less susceptible to dispersivity. Variation of strength parameters and dispersivity was in the following order: kaolin > sepiolite > bentonite. Results revealed that, dispersivity potential of low electrolyte concentration increased because of repulsive forces dominating attractive forces. With a further increase in the specific surface area and cation exchange capacity, dispersivity potential decreased. Since, clays with low plastic index and consequently low CEC will be applied in hydraulic structures. Therefore, potential dispersivity is very important in this regard. According to treatments of chemical stabilizers (CaCl The role of di and trivalent cations as an added substance for controlling of soil dispersivity can mainly be ascribed to pH and ion exchange effects, overcoming soil dispersivity, improving cohesion, and friction angle of soil, and also causing an increase in the soil strength due to the change from an arranged structure to a more flocculated structure. In the current study, the effect of type of the clay, type of cation and anion on soil dispersivity was evaluated using a combination of tests. It is highly recommended to investigate mechanical properties of the soil and amount of ions for soil remediation with respect to pH ranges, Na content, and CEC values of clay soils in future studies. Hanie Abbaslou, Ali Reza Ghanizadeh & Hojat Hadifard: Conceived and designed the experiments; Performed the experiments; Analyzed and interpreted the data; Contributed reagents, materials, analysis tools or data; Wrote the paper. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The authors declare no conflict of interest. No additional information is available for this paper.