A bioleaching study aimed at recovering metals from hazardous spent hydroprocessing catalysts was carried out. The exhaust catalyst was rich in nickel (4.5mg/g), vanadium (9.4mg/g) and molybdenum (4.4mg/g). Involved microorganisms were iron/sulphur oxidizing bacteria. Investigated factors were elemental sulphur addition, ferrous iron addition and actions contrasting a possible metal toxicity (either adding powdered activated charcoal or simulating a cross current process by means of periodical filtration). Ferrous iron resulted to be essential for metal extraction: nickel and vanadium extraction yields were 83% and 90%, respectively, while about 50% with no iron. The observed values for molybdenum extraction yields were not as high as Ni and V ones (the highest values were around 30–40%). The investigated actions aimed at contrasting a possible metal toxicity resulted not to be effective; in contrast, sequential filtration of the liquor leach had a significant negative effect on metals extraction. Nickel and vanadium dissolution kinetics resulted to be significantly faster than molybdenum dissolution ones. Furthermore, a simple first order kinetic model was successfully fitted to experimental data. All the observed results supported the important role of the indirect mechanism in bioleaching of LC-Finer catalysts.Spent hydroprocessing catalysts contain middle-high concentration of base valuable metals, such as nickel (Ni), vanadium (V) and molybdenum (Mo); they represent a large amount of refinery solid waste and have been classified as hazardous waste by the Environmental Protection Agency in the USA In this paper, a biotechnological environmentally friendly strategy, involving bioleaching abilities of Fe/S oxidizing bacteria ( In comparison with conventional technologies, biotechnological leaching processes may not seem competitive: a significantly longer leaching time are required to achieve extraction efficiencies which are comparable to those observed using other leaching methods. Nevertheless, bioleaching can offer attractive features, especially considering environmental issues: processes are more cost efficient, simpler and more environmentally friendly than their chemical counterparts Chemical reactions involved during metal bioleaching from exhaust catalysts can be simplified as follows for a bivalent metal, Me A factorial experiment was implemented where the three following experimental factors were investigated: the presence of elemental sulphur (S Spent catalysts come from Italian refinery LC-Fining units. Their chemical composition was evaluated by means of inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES), after acid digestion of spent catalyst. In particular, 1 X-ray diffraction analysis (Siemens D-500 diffractometer) revealed the presence of the following mineralogical forms, in order of abundance: Al In order to remove hydrocarbons, exhaust catalysts were pre-treated by washing with a mixture of aqueous solutions of ethyl alcohol 1% (v/v) and Tween 80 0.1% (v/v): 50 A mixed culture of three strains of Fe/S oxidizing bacteria ( Experiments were performed in autoclaved 250 The 9K medium above described (Par. 2.2) was also used as medium for bioleaching experiments conducted in the presence of iron. For experiments in the absence of iron source, culture was carried out in a modified 9K medium, where ferrous sulphate (FeSO For each bioleaching treatment in Periodical measurement of pH was carried out by Inolab Multi 720 (WTW). Molybdenum, nickel, vanadium and aluminium were determined by atomic absorption spectrometry (Varian Spectra AA 200). Samples were conveniently diluted by deionised water at pH 2 (with HCl) before atomic absorption determinations. The experimental activity was aimed at finding the best operating conditions for nickel, vanadium and molybdenum extraction from exhaust LC-Finer catalysts by bioleaching. The main factors considered were elemental sulphur, ferrous iron and the application of strategies inhibiting an eventual toxic effect of highly concentrated metals ( The strategies chosen for inhibiting the metal toxicity were two: (i) either adding activated carbon as metal adsorbers (like in a carbon-in-leach operation, The experiments were carried out on washed spent LC-Finer catalyst, as described in the Material and Method section. The washing pre-treatment was necessary because of the high organic compound content, supposed to inhibit Fe/S oxidizing bacteria metabolism     Results displayed in As concerns molybdenum, it showed both extraction yields and process kinetics significantly lower than nickel and vanadium, even in the presence of Fe This research has been carried out with the financial support of