This paper presents a study on the reactivity of natural limestones from five deposits in Turkey. The conversion rates of carbonates in size fractions of the samples were measured in a stirred suspension of 2.5 l at 20 °C and a constant-pH value of 5 obtained with the addition of HCl solutions by a pH control pump. Particle size and the dolomite content of the limestones were found to be the most influential parameters in the reactivity measurements.Reactivity of limestone particles, measured as the conversion or dissolution-reaction rate of the particles at a constant acidic pH value ( The work reported here was undertaken to measure the batch, constant-pH reactivity of limestones obtained from five different sources in Turkey. Since the most cost effective and energy efficient FGD system requires a critical consideration of both grinding energy expenditure and conversion rate of sorbent limestones, the limestone samples were selected so as to have a range of grindability work indices as well as differing chemical and mineralogical compositions. Limestone samples were subjected to chemical and X-ray diffraction analyses, and their Bond grindability work indices, The samples were crushed to minus 3.32 mm, and ground dry in a centrifugal mill with a corondum jar and balls. The ground samples were then wet sieved into various size fractions and dried in an oven at 70 °C. Porosity measurements with the BET instrument revealed that the limestone samples could be considered non-porous. The specific gravity of the samples varied between 2.70 and 2.74 without any trend with regard to the sample location or the size fraction. Batch conversion (or, dissolution) rates of the size fractions of the limestone samples were measured at room temperature (∼20 °C) and constant pH of 5, which is a typical value in industrial slurry scrubbers, using the experimental set-up shown in The mass fraction of carbonates dissolved in a period of time, referred to as conversion, was determined by the stoichiometric ratio of HCl added to that required for complete dissolution of total carbonates present in the test sample in accordance with the following reaction:  As a suitable parameter for comparing the extent of conversion of the size fractions of various limestones, the fractional conversion of the total carbonates in 60 min is presented in Reactivity measurements with natural limestone samples from five different deposits in Turkey yielded results similar with previous work in the sense that particle size is the most influential parameter. Conversion rates of natural limestones composed mainly of calcite were independent of the sample source. The presence of dolomite in one of the samples, however, inhibited the dissolution rate. Financial support by the Research Fund AFP-2001-03-05-02 of the Middle East Technical University is gratefully acknowledged.