The Analysis of Retreat Mining Pillar Stability (ARMPS) program was developed by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) to help the United States coal mining industry to design safe retreat room-and-pillar panels. ARMPS calculates the magnitude of the in-situ and mining-induced loads by using geometrical computations and empirical rules. In particular, the program uses the “abutment angle” concept in calculating the magnitude of the abutment load on pillars adjacent to a gob. In this paper, stress measurements from United States and Australian mines with different overburden geologies with varying hard rock percentages were back analyzed. The results of the analyses indicated that for depths less than 200 m, the ARMPS empirical derivation of a 21° abutment angle was supported by the case histories; however, at depths greater than 200 m, the abutment angle was found to be significantly less than 21°. In this paper, a new equation employing the panel width to overburden depth ratio is constructed for the calculation of accurate abutment angles for deeper mining cases. The new abutment angle equation was tested using both ARMPS2010 and LaModel for the entire case history database of ARMPS2010. The new abutment angle equation to estimate the magnitude of the mining-induced loads used together with the LaModel program was found to give good classification accuracies compared to ARMPS2010 for deep cover cases.In the early 1990 s, the Analysis of Longwall Pillar Stability (ALPS) was introduced by Mark as a chain pillar design software and was generally accepted and used by the United States coal mining industry The LaModel program is generally used in the United States coal mining industry to model the stresses and displacements for complex mine geometries, multiple-seam coal mines, and topographic relief which cannot be analyzed accurately by ARMPS2010 or ALPS. LaModel is a displacement-discontinuity (DD) variation of the boundary element method, and because of this formulation, the program can analyze large areas of single- or multiple-seam coal mines Using the LaModel calibration method with a relatively small deep-cover database, the LaModel program was shown to classify the case histories slightly better than ARMPS2010 The abutment angle concept is used to calculate the magnitude of abutment loading adjacent to a gob area in the ALPS and ARMPS programs. LaModel also utilizes similar calculations as part of its calibration process because the abutment angle equations are determined as the best available methods for estimating abutment loads. The concept considers an angle between the vertical plane and the panel roof in order to calculate the transferred load to the abutments when the panel is mined ( In 1990, Mark analyzed the abutment stress measurements collected from five different mines Currently, active mines have significantly different panel dimensions as compared to the mines where the data were collected for the derivation of the abutment extent formula and the 21° average abutment angle. More recent in-situ stress measurements of abutment loading conducted in Australia and in theUnited States showed that there can be significant deviations in the measured abutment magnitude and extent, as compared to the predicted values from the present empirical formulas used in ALPS, ARMPS, and LaModel The mine cases used to derive the default 21° abutment angle have significantly narrower panel dimensions and relatively shallower overburden depths than most modern longwall panels. The original empirical abutment formulas were derived from the stress measurements collected from these mines and have not been updated to include the changes in mine dimensions. In this paper, more recent in-situ stress measurements are used to re-examine abutment loads with consideration of geology.  To re-examine the abutment angle, a database was developed with the addition of more recent stress measurements. Six stress measurement case histories from Colwell et al. and another six case histories from Hill were added to the database Out of the 28 cases, 12 cases that have the full side abutment measurements have been further analyzed. Of those 12 cases, 10 cases are from different mines. One is operated in the United States and 9 of them are from Australian mines. Geologic core logs were available for 8 of the mines, and more information on the geology was gathered from consulting reports. The available core logs and descriptions of the geologies from the reports were used to determine the hard rock (HR) percentage of the overlying strata for each case. Hard rock percentage is calculated considering the thickness of hard rock (sandstone and limestone) that is higher than 1.5 m from the core log AU1 mine: The AU1 mine’s coal seam varies in thickness from 1.8 to 2.7 m. The overlying strata mostly consist of sandstone and laminate units. Enough information was not available to construct a representative stratigraphic column; however, the geologic formations that were present in the immediate roof were known. The depth of cover around the instrumentation site is approximately 265 m. The chain pillars are developed on 45 × 100 m centers with a 5.0 m entry width and the panel is 205 m wide. The immediate floor is strong with minimum slaking potential. There were no stratigraphic data to determine the hard rock percentage of the overlying strata. AU2 mine: The AU2 mine operates with a seam thickness from 2.9 to 4.2 m, and the seam thickness is approximately 3.6 m at the monitoring site. The stratigraphic sequence can be seen in AU3 mine: The seam thickness for the AU3 mine varies from 3.4 to 4.0 m, and a typical stratigraphic column near the instrumentation site is presented in AU4 mine: At the AU4 mine, 4.8 m of coal is extracted. The overlying strata consist of layers of generally competent and strong layers of shale, sandstone, conglomerate, volcanic tuff and coal seams ( AU5 mine: The seam extracted at the AU5 mine is relatively flat and is 2.5 m in thickness. Overlying the seam, there is a 300-m-thick sequence of major sandstone and shale units. That sequence is overlain by a massive sandstone of 160 to 180 m in thickness. AU6 mine: The coal seam at the AU6 mine is 6.5-m-thick, but the development thickness is 3.2 m. Immediately overlying the seam is a competent volcanic tuff layer of 1.49 m thickness. Sequence of shale and sandstone layers follow with some minor coal seams. There is a very strong sandstone/conglomerate unit lying 15–18 m above the roof ( AU7 mine: The AU7 mine operates at a depth of cover of 405 m with a variable seam thickness from 1.8 to 3.7 m. The panel widths are 200 to 250-m-wide (rib to rib), and they are supported by 48-m-wide chain pillars, which have 5.2-m-wide nominal cut-throughs at 100-m centers. The overlying strata mostly consist of sandstone intermixed or interbedded with siltstone ( AU8a-b mine: Two sets of measurements were taken from the AU8 mine. The depth of cover changes from 500 to 535 m. The seam thickness varies from 5 to 6.6 m. The overlying strata mostly consist of thick sandstone layers and siltstone giving a 72% and 95% hard rock ratio, respectively ( AU9 mine: The depth of cover for the AU9 mine typically ranges from 300 to 350 m. A sandy soil cover of 1 to 5 m depth overlies a low-to-very-low strength, highly weathered sandstone on the surface. Highly competent and massive sandstone units exist between depths of 50 to 200 m ( US1a-b mine: Two sets of measurements were collected from the US1 mine where the overburden depths were 595 and 625 m, respectively. The panels are supported by 6-m-wide yield pillars on both sides of 24-m-wide chain pillars. First measurements are taken next to a 195-m-wide panel, while the other set of measurements are collected next to a 183-m-wide panel. The hard rock ratio of the overlying strata was calculated as 54%. The strength and stiffness of the surrounding strata of the coalbed are uncommonly high for coal measure rocks. Except for the dark-gray shale, all the rock types have uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) values from 197 to 120 MPa. The absence of roof and floor fractures or joints together with the thick sandstone result in a hard-to-break main roof and greater pillar loads at this site In-situ stress measurements constitute the stress profiles. A sample stress profile plotted using the measured values can be seen in Tulu and Heasley have explained the back-calculation for laminated overburden stress distribution approach in detail, and the same procedure is used for calculating the abutment loads in this study Finally, the value of the abutment angle is back calculated from the ratio of abutment load to total panel load according to the subcritical or supercritical panel formulas. Considering available subsidence information to determine the panel condition (subcritical or supercritical) will help give a more precise result. Where available, this information was taken into account in this study. The back-calculated abutment angles are shown in Next the hypothesis that there was a correlation between the geology and the abutment angle was tested.  As seen in For the regression analysis, the Based on the field data analyzed in this paper, the proposed abutment angle determination is shown as the red line in In order to confirm its applicability, the new abutment angle equation was tested on the case histories that were used for the development of the ARMPS2010 design criteria. The stability factors for 640 cases were calculated using both the ARMPS2010 and ARMPS-LAM programs. The database used for the analysis includes 640 cases, of which 520 were successful and 120 were failed case histories. The failed cases include: 14 collapses, 81 squeezes, 16 multipillar bursts, and 9 local bursts. The analyses aimed to compare the new abutment angle equation with the classification success of the ARMPS2010 design criteria. The failure classification rates of the ARMPS2010 design criteria were matched and compared. First, shallow cases ( SF values for the same case histories were also calculated by ARMPS-LAM using the new abutment angle equation. Since the new abutment angle equation was proposed for deep cover cases, both programs used the original 21° abutment angle. The limit SF value was determined as 1.84, so that the classification accuracy of failed cases is set to be 91% and is the same as the ARMPS2010 classification accuracy. This suggests that if one uses ARMPS-LAM for design purposes, 1.84 should be taken as the limit SF. The results are given in A second set of analyses was conducted using the 215 deep cover case histories that utilize barrier pillars. Out of those 215 cases, 182 of them were successes and the remaining 33 were failures. These cases were initially analyzed using 21° abutment angle and standard ARMPS2010 design criteria that use 1.5 for both ARMPS2010 SF and barrier pillar (BP) stability factor (SF) values. Corresponding classification accuracies are given in The same case histories (deep cover with BP) are reanalyzed using the ARMPS2010 program with the new abutment angle equation ( Both the active mining zone (AMZ) and BP SF values were calculated for the same 215 cases using ARMPS-LAM with the abutment angle calculated with the new suggested equation. A minimum of 88% accurate failure classification is targeted for the limit SF values to be considered. That classification accuracy is achieved with an AMZ SF of 1.45 and BP SF of 2.2. An 88% failure classification accuracy is achieved with a success classification accuracy of 46% ( As seen in The classification accuracies of both ARMPS2010 and ARMPS-LAM for different cases are presented in For deep cover cases, an ARMPS-LAM SF of 1.45 and BP SF of 2.2 were found to be applicable when the new abutment angle equation is used together with the laminated model. However, if ARMPS-LAM is used for shallow cover cases, the limit ARMPS-LAM SF should be taken as 1.84. The ARMPS2010 design software for retreat mining pillar design uses the empirically derived abutment angle of 21° that was derived from field studies conducted in the mid-1980 s and through the 1990 s The re-analysis of the abutment angles presented in this paper showed that for higher overburden depths, the re-analyzed abutment angle appeared to be much less than the traditionally used 21° abutment angle. Based on the field data analyzed in this paper, researchers propose a new abutment angle calculation that considers depth to panel width ratio (see Using the proposed new abutment angle equation, cases used to develop ARMPS2010 were re-analyzed with the ARMPS-LAM software. It was observed that the ARMPS2010 design criteria was slightly better at classifying the cases when the shallow cover database is considered. However, when the deep cover cases are considered separately, the classification accuracy of ARMPS2010 is improved with the newly proposed abutment angle equation. If the deep cover cases with a barrier pillar are considered separately, 88% of the failed cases and 46% of the successful cases were correctly classified by ARMPS-LAM compared to using a constant 21° abutment angle (88% and 34% respectively). It can be concluded that, for deep cover cases, a better separation can be achieved by the new abutment angle equation. Also, the ARMPS-LAM program gave better separation for deep cover cases and was almost equally successful when shallow cover cases were considered. The fact that ARMPS-LAM provides a real mechanical explanation for the load transfer is an important factor to be considered in mine layout design. ARMPS-LAM software can be considered as a design tool, especially for deep cover ( Finally, in this study, there was no apparent relationship between the hard rock ratio and the abutment angle, which might be due to insufficient information about the overlying strata. Since there is no doubt that the overburden geology plays an important role in load distribution around the panels, a more comprehensive investigation with detailed geological information is planned to be conducted in the future. This study was sponsored by the Alpha Foundation for the Improvement of Mine Safety and Health, Inc. (ALPHA FOUNDATION). The views, opinions and recommendations expressed herein are solely those of the authors and do not imply any endorsement by the ALPHA FOUNDATION, its Directors and staff. The findings and conclusions in this report are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the official position of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Mention of any company or product does not constitute endorsement by NIOSH.