Reverse anionic flotation of carbonate-containing iron ores is quite a challenging process. Studies on this ores conducted in many laboratories or beneficiation plants have obtained poor concentrate grades and separation between quartz and iron minerals, even when valuable minerals are adequately liberated. The presence of carbonate minerals, such as siderite, causes a detrimental effect on quartz flotation recovery (froth product) and separation selectivity between quartz and iron minerals. In this work, the effect of carbonate minerals on quartz flotation from iron mineral was investigated using sodium oleate as collector, starch and calcium as regulators. Microflotation, adsorption, PHREEQC calculation, and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) measurements were conducted in the investigation. Carbonate minerals (i.e., siderite and dolomite) adversely affected the floatability of quartz and separation between quartz and hematite. Starch dosage experiment results clearly showed that the reduction of quartz recovery in the presence of carbonate minerals was mainly related to starch. In addition, mineral dissolution and sodium carbonate dosage experiments evidently exhibited that CO3
                     2− dissolved species of carbonate minerals passively affected quartz flotation recovery. By contrast, both starch and CO3
                     2− dissolved species of carbonate minerals adversely affected the flotation recovery. FTIR showed that the strong drop-off in quartz recovery in the presence of carbonate minerals was due to the adsorption of CaCO3 precipitations on quartz surfaces and further their interaction with starch molecules. The appearance of CaCO3 precipitations was caused by reaction of Ca2+ from the hydrolysis of CaCl2 and CO3
                     2− dissolved species of carbonate minerals. To decrease the passive effect, a potential strategy to improve the flotation performance of iron ores that contain carbonate minerals at strong alkaline pH is suggested to remove carbonate minerals before separation between hematite and quartz.Cationic/anionic reverse flotation is a widely applied technology to improve the quality and reduce impurity of iron concentrates ( Use of the aforementioned reagents under strong alkaline pH is difficult in reverse anionic flotation of carbonate-containing iron ores. Studies on these ores conducted in many laboratories or beneficiation plants have obtained poor concentrate grades and separation between quartz and iron minerals, even when valuable minerals are adequately liberated ( Carbonates are salt-type minerals. Their dissolution characteristics play a major role in determining the nature of the interactions that occur in bulk solution or on mineral surfaces ( In this study, flotation tests, solution chemistry calculations, adsorption measurements, and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) measurements were conducted to determine how carbonate minerals affect the floatability of quartz and to find ways to decrease their unwanted effects. Pure siderite sample was obtained from Anshan City, Liaoning Province, China. Pure quartz and dolomite samples were purchased from Yingkou City, Liaoning Province, China. The siderite and hematite samples were carefully ground in an iron ball mill and processed by gravity concentration. The dolomite and quartz samples were carefully ground in a porcelain ball mill with porcelain grinding balls. All products were wet sieved to obtain particle size fractions in the range of − Sodium oleate, calcium chloride, corn starch and sodium hydroxide with more than 98% purity were obtained from different chemical companies in China. Sodium oleate was used as anionic collector, and calcium chloride was used as quartz activator. Unmodified corn starch (the ratio of amylopectin to amylose is 2.85) that was employed as the depressant of iron minerals, was dissolved in distilled water by adding 20 Microflotation experiments were carried out in a 30 Comparison flotation experiments were conducted to determine the effect of carbonate mineral dissolution on quartz flotation recovery. The experiment where dissolved species of carbonate minerals are not stripped is called “direct flotation”; otherwise, it is called “flotation after stripping dissolved species of carbonate minerals.” The direct flotation method is as follows. A 2.0 The flotation method after stripping dissolved species of carbonate minerals is as follows. First, a carbonate mineral sample (X g) was dissolved in distilled water for 30 Ultraviolet spectrophotometry was performed to measure the amount of sodium oleate adsorption on the mineral surface before and after adding starch in the absence and presence of carbonate minerals. This method aims to show the effect of starch on the adsorption of sodium oleate on quartz. A 2.0 Perkin Elmer Spectrum One FTIR spectrometer was used to determine the reagent–mineral interaction with the type of Nicolet 380 FTIR. Prior to the test, pure minerals were ground to −      Siderite and dolomite are carbonate minerals that are easily dissolved in water (  Calcium is often added to activate quartz in reverse anionic flotation of iron ores.  In conclusion, the strong negative effect of carbonate mineral on quartz flotation recovery at strong alkaline pH is due to the adsorption of CaCO  The presence of carbonate minerals, such as siderite and dolomite in samples, has a strong negative effect on reverse flotation of hematite using sodium oleate as collector, and starch and calcium chloride as regulators at strong alkaline pH. A concentrate with low level of Fe grade is produced in reverse flotation of hematite from quartz in the presence of carbonate minerals. This result is due to the strong drop-off in the quartz recovery in froth products after adding carbonate minerals. The strong drop-off in the quartz recovery in the presence of carbonate minerals is caused by both starch and CO A potential strategy to improve the flotation performance of iron ores that contain carbonate minerals is suggested to remove the carbonate minerals. For example, if iron ores contain siderite, siderite can be floated under neutral condition in the first step, and then the separation between iron minerals and quartz is conducted under alkaline condition. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial supports from the