The potential environmental implications of a Pb (Lead)-Zn (Zinc) sulfide tailing impoundment were found to be dependent on its geochemical characteristics. One typical lead-zinc sulfide tailing impoundment was studied. Ten boreholes were set with the grid method and 36 tailings were sampled and tested. According to the results of metal content analysis, the tailing samples contained considerably high contents of heavy metals, ranging from 6.99 to 89.0 mg/kg for Cd, 75.3 to 602 mg/kg for Cu, 0.53% to 2.63% for Pb and 0.30% to 2.54% for Zn. Most of the heavy metals in the sample matrix showed a uniform concentration distribution, except Cd. Cd, Pb, Zn, and Mn were associated with each other, and were considered to be the dominant contributors based on hierarchical cluster analysis. XRD, SEM and XPS were employed for evaluation of the tailing weathering characteristics, confirming that the tailings had undergone intensive weathering. The maximum potential acidity of the tailings reached 244 kg H2SO4/ton; furthermore, the bioavailability of heavy metals like Pb, Cd, Cr, Cu, and Zn was 37.8%, 12.9%, 12.2%, 5.95%, and 5.46% respectively. These metals would be potentially released into drainage by the weathering process. Analysis of a gastrointestinal model showed that Pb, Cr, Ni and Cu contained in the tailings were high-risk metals. Thus, control of the heavy metals’ migration and their environmental risks should be planned from the perspective of geochemistry.Numerous heavy metals have been detected in Pb-Zn sulfide mines; these metals occur in minerals such as sphalerite, galena, chalcopyrite, nickel pyrite etc. When the minerals are processed, these metals are delivered into the tailing impoundment as associated elements in the tailings. Multiple heavy metals present in tailings could severely threaten ecological security and human health due to their acute toxicity and carcinogenicity ( This study was initiated with the following detailed objectives: (1) to measure metal contents in legacy tailing samples and determine the distribution patterns of multiple elements in tailing profiles; (2) to identify the ecological risks of heavy metals contained in the tailings; (3) evaluate the potential risks of heavy metal migration from a mineralogical perspective. The present study was focused on the FanKou Pb (Lead)-Zn (Zinc) mining district, one of the largest and most representative polymetallic sulfide mines in Asia, north of Guangdong Province, South China. The mining district is globally known for its profitable mineral deposits and tremendous production, and the abundant sulfide ores have been continuously mined and smelted to extract economically valuable polymetallic sulfides. An abandoned tailing impoundment (between 113°39′18″E-113°39′54″E and 25°02′24″N-25°03′18″N), with reserves of approximately 4.92 million tonnes of Pb-Zn mine tailings, was selected as the targeted impoundment. A simplified geological map is depicted in Ten boreholes ((labeled as R Tailings were wet-digested in by microwave digestion equipment (WX-8000, CEM, America) by Method 3051A. The metal contents in the digestion and also the extraction solutions were determined using a flame atomic absorption spectrophotometer (AAS, ZA3000, Hitachi, Japan), while trace elements at significantly low contents were detected through inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS, 7500, Agilent, America), and major elements like Ca, Mg, Al were determined with an inductively coupled atomic emission spectrometer (ICP-AES, ICAP-7000, Thermo, America). Water content was determined by drying the sample at 105 °C for 24 hr. pH was determined in a 1:2.5 ( The particle-size distribution was measured using a laser diffraction Particle Analyzer (JL-1177, Chengdu Jingxin Powder Testing Equipment Co., Ltd., China). The primary mineralogical phases were identified by an X-ray diffractometer (XRD, Brucker D8, Germany) in the continuous scan mode using Cu The chemical fractions of heavy metals were determined through the five-step sequential leaching procedure (Tessier method) ( The depth of the ten boreholes ranged from 7.20 m (D1) to 26.50 m (C2). The tailings profiles consisted mainly of grey and fine silty clay, with a color gradient from reddish to dark grey. The basic descriptive statistics for heavy metal contents in tailings samples are shown in Quantitative comparison of the geochemical characteristics exhibited uniform elemental distributions for all the studied profile tailings, mostly associated with spatial heterogeneities in compositional distribution. The spatial distribution of metals contained in the tailings is depicted in The main physicochemical properties of the representative composite tailing sample (RTS) are presented in The grain size distribution of the representative composite tailing sample (RTS) is shown in Some elements structurally incorporated by adsorption or precipitation onto the residual ferric minerals casually cover and adhere to the primary mineral surfaces, alleviating their oxidative dissolution rates. The mineralogical transformation of Ca-bearing carbonates to gypsum by consuming H XPS spectra of the RTS were studied to identify its surface weathering. The valence states of typical elements (Fe and S) are shown in As clearly represented in An explorative hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA, As shown in our previous study ( The Tessier leaching tests and human gastrointestinal tract model were utilized together to predict the environmental risks of the tailings. The potential mobilization, bioavailability, and toxicity of heavy metals in mine tailings are strongly tied to their geochemical form or their binding strength rather than their total contents. The Tessier sequential leaching procedure is often used to analyze metals’ chemical fractions ( Bioavailability is a direct indicator of the ecological risk of heavy metals. As shown in Geochemical characteristics and ecological risks of mine tailings were tested. As the distribution characteristics of the metals showed, the tailing samples contained considerably high contents of toxic contaminants, ranging from 6.99 to 89.01 mg/kg for Cd, 75.29 to 602.39 mg/kg for Cu, 0.53% to 2.63% for Pb and 0.30% to 2.54% for Zn. There were no noticeable differences found over all profiles and depths for the total metal contents, except for Cd. Weathering of the minerals was identified by SEM and XRD analysis. With the Valence state analysis of Fe and S, it could be further confirmed that the tailings had undergone intensive weathering and corrosion, resulting in the gradual migration of heavy metals. MAP of the tailings reached 244 kg H The authors declare that they have no competing, personal and financial interests in this manuscript. This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Plan (No. 2018YFC1802803), Guangdong Provincial Science and Technology Program (No. 2015B020237003), the 2017 Central Special Fund for Soil, Preliminary Study on Harmless Treatment and Comprehensive Utilization of Tailings in Dabao Mountain (18HK0108). The authors declare that they have no competing, personal and financial interests in this manuscript.