This paper reports the systematic investigation on the flocculation, sedimentation and consolidation characteristics of kaolinite using guar gum as a green flocculant. In-situ flocculation behavior of kaolinite at various pH, guar gum dosages, and ionic strength were studied using a light scattering technique. The effect of these parameters on the settling rate, solid consolidation, and supernatant liquid clarity was recorded. The morphology of kaolinite and flocculated kaolinite aggregates were analyzed using FESEM. The morphology studies suggest that it is poorly crystalline with multiple steps on edge, broken edge; laminar with high aspect ratio and have rough basal surface. The complex irregularity on the basal surface and the presence of multiple steps in the edges, broken edges (hydroxyl groups) have facilitated the guar gum adsorption. The isoelectric point of kaolinite is pH 3.96. The pH, ionic strength and flocculant dosage have a significant effect on the kaolinite settling rate. The guar gum has exhibited excellent turbidity removal efficiency at pH 5. The turbidity removal is inefficient at pH 10. However, guar gum has shown high turbidity removal with 80% transmission at pH 10 in the presence of a KNO3 electrolyte.The removal of water from mineral tailings by flocculation is one of the major mineral processing activities. Recently, synthetic flocculants like polyacrylamide are in use for the sedimentation of minerals from the process tailings and wastewater. However, their environmental compatibility is a matter of great concern. Presently, the demand for green flocculants is increasing due to their environmental compatibility. Guar gum is also known as guaran. It is a natural non-ionic polysaccharide composed of galactose and mannose. It is a chain of (1 → 4)-linked Ma and Pawlik Guar gum has many applications in mining and mineral processing industries. Many researchers have reported its use in froth flotation and flocculation process The Indian iron ore contains a significant amount of gangue minerals such as silicates and aluminium silicates. These minerals liberate at finer sizes. Therefore, the tailings generated in an iron ore processing plant are fine in size. One of our earlier studies suggests that d The basal faces of 1:1 tetra-octahedral aluminosilicate consists of tetrahedral siloxane (-Si-O-Si-) species and octahedral, alumina (Al The design of a dewatering system requires a thorough analysis of the solid-liquid system and slimes stability behavior. The stability of particle can be changed by controlling the pH, ionic strength, addition of flocculant and coagulant The environmental policies have enforced legal rules for the disposal of waste by the mineral industries. It is essential to redesign the dewatering operation to meet the current challenges. The present work has been undertaken to study the sedimentation behavior of kaolinite using guar gum as a flocculant. The spectroscopic techniques are used to understand the influence of different process parameter on the flocculation and consolidation characteristics. The kaolinite sample was supplied by M/s. Ashapura Minechem Ltd., Trivandrum, India for the sedimentation studies. The particle size of the kaolinite sample was measured using Malvern particle size analyzer (Mastersizer 2000). The surface area and density of the kaolinite sample were determined by using smart BET surface analyzer (SORB 92/93) and Helium-Mercury pycno meter (Smart Pycno 30), respectively. Guar gum was used as a flocculant for settling studies of kaolinite dispersions. It was procured from M/s. Otto Chemicals Ltd, India. The polysaccharide solution was prepared by dissolving 0.1 g of guar gum in 100 ml of distilled water. The guar gum powder was poured into continuously stirred distilled water using a magnetic stirrer. It was further stirred for 6 h to ensure complete dissolution of the guar gum in water. The stirring rate was maintained at 1100 rpm during the preparation. The flocculant solution was prepared every day to maintain its freshness. The ionic strength of the solution was maintained using potassium nitrate, and the pH was regulated by using analytical grade sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid solutions. The kaolinite dispersions of 5% solids (w/w) were prepared in distilled water for the flocculation characteristic studies. The slurry was agitated at 800 rpm for two hours to obtain the homogeneity. The pH of slurry was maintained at pH 5 and pH 10. For each experiment, 20 ml of the slurry was pipetted out from the homogeneous slurry and put into the glass cell for the light scattering analysis. The suspension was prepared with a known volume of KNO The zeta potential ( The sedimentation/suspension stability of kaolinite dispersion was studied by using optical analyzers (TUBISCAN LAB Approximately 20 ml of 5% (w/w) kaolinite dispersions was taken in the glass cell of the turbiscan equipment. The height of the cell filled with the suspension was 40 mm. The temperature was maintained at 30 ± 2 °C during the analysis. A known volume of freshly prepared starch solution was mixed into the kaolinite dispersion, to study the effect of guar gum on the flocculation behavior of kaolinite dispersion. Then the cell was closed with a cap and was shaken by making it up and down for 20 times for better mixing of both. The vertical glass cell height was scanned 100 times in 50 min at an interval of 30 s. After the scanning, the cell was removed from TURBISCAN LAB The diffuse reflectance in terms of back scattering is considered to obey Eq. The flocculation studies were carried out using the multiple light scattering techniques with 5% (w/w) kaolinite dispersions. The experiments were conducted at pH 5 and pH 10 using different dosages of flocculant in the range of 0–1000 g guar gum/tonne of solid, i.e., 0, 50, 100, 200, 400, 600, 800, 1000 g/tonne of solid. The Turbiscan light scattering data (both transmission and backscattering) obtained for kaolinite dispersions in distilled water at pH 5 without starch dosage is shown in The surface morphology of kaolinite particles and their flocs formed at pH 5 and 800 g guar gum/tonne of solid dosage was studied using the scanning electron microscope (FESEM), Supra 55, Carl Zeiss, Germany. The kaolinite particles were dispersed in an aqueous solution and a drop of this dispersion was carefully placed on aluminium foil. The suspension drop was dried at room temperature and put on an FESEM stub to determine its morphology. In case of flocs, they were carefully collected from the consolidated sediment and placed on aluminium foil. After drying, the floc was placed on a FESEM stub for studying floc morphology and external surface structure. The consolidated sediment was also sheared using a magnetic stirrer rotating at 150 rpm. The flocs were collected at a different interval of time and subjected to morphology investigation as mentioned above. The particle size distribution of kaolinite sample is shown in The zeta potential of kaolinite dispersions at 0.001 mol KNO The effect of starch dosages on the particulate migration velocity or rate of settling at pH 5 and 10 are calculated from the light scattering data and is shown in   Ma and Pawlik The multiple light scattering measurements were carried out on a 5% (w/w) kaolinite suspension using different dosages of guar gum at pH 5 and 10. The scanning process monitors the downward particle movement in the suspension. The particle moves vertically downward by gravity and consolidated at the bottom and formed a clarifying and thickening zone at the top and bottom, respectively. The effect of guar gum on the percentage transmission and backscattering as a function of time is shown in The transmission (%) in the entire length of the cell, backscattering (%) in the entire length of the cell, clarifying zone and thickening zone are shown in The effect of starch dosages on the rate of floc growth and surface area per volume of floc were calculated using Turbiscan lab expert software and are shown in According to the DLVO (Dejaguin-Landau-Verwey-Overbeek) theory  The effect of KNO The zeta potential measurement of kaolinite particles in 0.001 mol KNO It is clear that the rate of settling of kaolinite particles increases in the presence of electrolyte KNO Apart from DLVO theory another significant factor that required to be considered for the adsorption of guar gum on kaolinite and their aggregation with or without electrolyte is a non-DLVO force of interaction. Peschel et al. The present work on the influence of guar gum on the sedimentation behavior of kaolinite is significant since it creates a major problem in the tailings dewatering. The scanning electron microscope images of the kaolinite particle show that the particles are poorly crystalline and have micro islands and microcrystallite in the basal surface. The particles have broken edges and multiple steps on the edges. These step sites on the edge and rough basal surface are the sites for guar gum adsorption and promote face-face and edge-face bridging during flocculation. The zeta potential study shows that the isoelectric point of kaolinite particle is pH 3.96. The sedimentation studies were carried out at different pH, ionic strength and flocculant dosage. The pH and ionic strength have a significant effect on the flocculation characteristics of kaolinite using guar gum as a flocculant. Guar gum has shown excellent turbidity removal efficiency with 83% transmission at pH 5 using 200 g guar gum/tonne of solid dosage. However, it has performed poorly at pH 10. Conversely, its turbidity removal efficiency has improved significantly in the presence of potassium nitrate with 80% transmission in the clarifying zone. The opaqueness of consolidated tailing decreases with the increase of guar gum dosage at pH 5 as floc size increases with the increase of dosage. The analysis of the settling rate, supernatant clarity and sediment consolidation suggests that 200 g guar gum/tonne of solid is the optimized dosage for dewatering of the kaolinite dispersions at pH 5. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the