Trituration is a mechanical process (a form of comminution) for reducing the particle size of a substance. In this manuscript, six different Raw Solid Materials (RSM) which are used in Homeopathy after successive grindings are studied before they are turned into homeopathic solutions. The impact of trituration, with the presence of α‑lactose monohydrate (milk sugar) seems to be quite great and interesting because of the variety of grain size which largely differentiate the properties of the materials. The grain sizes obtained triturations by hand according to C. Herring's suggestion leads, finally, measurement scale dimensions. The obtained results can be useful information for all the pharmacy industries, as well as for preparing any kind of powder.Usually, size reduction may be achieved by two methods, precipitation or mechanical process. During the precipitation method, the substance is dissolved in an appropriate solvent. Inorganic chemicals are prepared by precipitation method. In the mechanical process, the substance is subjected to mechanical forces using grinding equipment. Trituration is the term of several different methods used to process materials. In one sense, it is a form of comminution (reducing the particle size of a substance). In another sense, it is the production of a homogeneous material by mixing component materials thoroughly. The size reduction of the large pieces of material is achieved by applying compressive, impact, frictional and shear forces or combination of these on them [ In Pharmacopoeia, comminution is used to reduce the size of solid drug materials [ S. Hahnemann, throughout his life, experimented clinically with different methods of preparation of his potencies. Early in the 19th century, he started employing trituration as a method to render insoluble source material to soluble ones. Initially, he triturated to 2C (centesimal scale), but his further experiments led him to look into triturations up to a 12C level. Based on the original trituration of gold, made in 1818, he introduced trituration up to the 3C as a general method for use in homeopathic pharmacy from 1835 and onwards, thus distancing himself from the use of solutions and mother tinctures. Finally, he decided that 3C was the optimum level up to which a source material should be triturated before converting into a liquid potency. He found that 3C triturated medicines were more effective, with constituents retained to a much higher degree and improved in storage qualities. This standard method of preparing homeopathic potencies was documented in various pharmacopoeias, for example the German Homeopathic Pharmacopoeia GHP [ As a result, it is suggested that at least l× triturations produced by machine need to be analyzed for mixing quality. The manufacturing conditions for triturating higher dilutions should then be based on the optimum conditions determined for the l× [ Our samples were prepared in a decimal scale. In the process, respecting the scale of trituration, a progressive division and diminution of the solid medical substance takes place through mechanical subdivision. So, the visible particles of the substance become gradually transformed as the number of triturations ascends. During trituration of RSM, their fragmentation may be random, and depends on several different factors that will not be discussed in this study. While in homeopathic pharmacology trituration is aimed at as much as possible increase in the solubility of sparingly soluble RSM, in dentistry dental amalgam is formed by combining particles of an alloy with mercury. This process aims to agglomerate solids with mercury and to solidify mercury at ambient temperatures [ The comminution process belongs to the basic operations in pharmacy. Since humans produced their first phytopharmaceuticals themselves, they realized that the extraction of an active component is more optimal in finer substances. Dissolving depends on the interplay of solvent molecules and the particles which the substances (solute) form. The dissolving occurs on the surface of the substance. The basic operation of dividing solids into fractions by applying mechanical forces results in an increase of surface area, the magnitude of which depends primarily on the particle size, as it is demonstrated in  Also, the initial size and not the grain hardness of the starting RSM plays a key role in the final shaping of the materials before turning them into homeopathic solutions [ The larger the surface of a certain amount of a substance is, the faster it is dissolved. Therewith, the relationship between the particles' size of a powder and its dissolving ability in the solvent could be proved. Mathematically these facts can be expressed with the Noyes-Whitney-Equation [ m = mass of solute, t = time, A = contact area between solvent – solute, d = Thickness of the diffusion layer, Cs = concentration of solute its surface, Cb = concentration of solute in the bulk of the solvent, D = Diffusion coefficient, depends on the temperature specified by the Arrhenius equation [ The Noyes-Whitney-Equation states that the rate of dissolution is directly proportional to the surface area of the solute particle diffusion coefficient and the concentration of solute particles. Several lines of evidence suggest that homeopathic high dilutions (HDs) which are prepared after trituration can effectively have a pharmacological action, and so cannot be considered merely placebos. However, until now there has not been a unified explanation for these observations within the dominant paradigm of the dose-response effect. Paolo Bellavite et al. in their paper so far presented the major hypotheses and their experimental evidence and/or theoretical background are summarized. Each of the presented models has strengths and weaknesses, and none is fully convincing, because it cannot explain all the experimental observations [ In this study, the samples were six starting RSM which are used in homeopathy as remedies after successive grindings with α‑lactose monohydrate before they are turned into homeopathic solutions. The materials used were: Calcium Carbonate by scraping the inner of an oyster's surface by M. Fillianos pharmacy supply. Because the sample was not uniform, it was grinded for 6 min and scraped for 4 min without lactose in a porcelain mortar. This is because it was proven in a previous study that the initial size and not the grain hardness of the starting RSM particles plays a key role in the final size-shaping of the materials before turning them into homeopathic solutions [ Sulfur, in a form of fine powder sulfur flowers, by Sigma-Aldrich GmbH Germany. Calcium Phosphate, extra fine powder by Sigma-Aldrich GmbH Germany (purity 96%). Iron in extra fine shavings by Ferac GmbH Germany (highest chemical purity >98%).    Commercially manufactured crystalline α‑lactose monohydrate of various particles sizes were obtained from DFM pharma GmbH & Co, KG, Gosh, Germany origin for pharmaceutical use by B. Kaliva pharmacy supply. Lactose is a basic constituent of milk produced in the mammal glands, obtained by evaporating the whey of the milk. It is of pure white color, faintly sweet taste and odorless. For homeopathic use, it ought to be re-crystallized, as the ordinary commercial product is not always perfectly pure. It must be kept in a dry place, as it becomes musty when exposed to humidity. No other known substance could reform hard mineral substances from sharp, flinty crystals to an inconceivably fine powder, so that they can be absorbable by body. Also, its preservative properties are great, keeping the minutest particles of triturated metals untarnished by oxidation. All the samples were prepared by hand, according to the decimal scale. The equipment required are: Hand mortar and pestle made from ceramic composition unglazed by rubbing with wet sand, sterilized particularly suitable for grinding, mixing and triturating medium-hard to hard substances. This guarantees its neutrality for the subsequent analysis. A sterilized scraper (porcelain spoon) A measuring tile A timer A balance (kern S72, version 4.07-centimeter accuracy 0, 00 g). Camera Canon EOS 600D with lens EX SIGMA 105 mm1:2.8 DG MACRO and ring light flash NISSIN DIGITAL MF18 MACRO used for taking photos of the materials Mastersizer micro, with a size range of 0.3–300 μm (Malvern instrument 2006 UK) for RSM up to 3× trituration. Zetasizer Nano series (Nano ZS, Malvern instruments LTD) for RSM samples beyond 6× trituration. SEM (SEM Quanta 200, FEI) TEM (TEM microscope Jeol 2100, 200 kV) The whole trituration process was effectuated with dry and moisture free, samples. The main reason requiring dry grinding is that moisture in the pores of the material samples affects the effect of the final grinding products. These materials have been selected on the basis of being insoluble in water in contrary to α‑lactose monohydrate which is the grinding medium, soluble in water and facilitates their granulometry in the measuring instruments. The Zetasizer system determines the size by first measuring the Brownian motion of the particles in a sample using Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS) and then interpreting a size from this using established theories [ For the samples' preparation the handmade C. Herring's method, decimal method of trituration, was adopted. The method is realized as following. Herring's trituration process that is another expression of S. Hahnemann's proposed method which has a centesimal base i.e. C. Herring method takes 1 part of RSM and 9 parts of lactose (total 10 parts) while S. Hahnemann's method uses 1 part of RSM and 99 parts of lactose (total 100 parts) Both methods participate in homeopathic trituration. Each sample was triturated for at least 1 h. The decimal scale was adopted, since a more suitable preparation was ensured as every decimal trituration gets double the time of grinding, so this scale is therefore universally adopted. Each separate potency is triturated at least for 1 h, so the sixth has had no less than 6 h of constant triturating. There is no need or advantage in doing so beyond the sixth decimal trituration, since S. Hahnemann proved conclusively, and by clinical experience fully verified the fact, that beyond that potency all medicines can be prepared in a liquid state. One part of the drug substance and 9 parts of α‑lactose monohydrate is taken. The α‑lactose monohydrate is divided into three parts in the ratio of 1:3:5 on a measuring tile. The process of trituration takes 60 min1 h. The entire process is divided into three stages. Each stage lasts for 20 min. In each stage, one part of α‑lactose monohydrate is added. Each stage is divided into two sub-stages that last for 10 min each. The process carried out in the first 10 min of each stage is repeated for the next 10 min. Each sub-stage of 10 min consists of grinding or pulverizing for 6 min and scraping and mixing for 4 min. Trituration is done for 6 min with pestle fully pressed down with firm grip and thumb on top. It is firmly moved in anticlockwise direction, in a circular fashion, going from center to periphery and back from periphery to center without lifting the hand -movement being at wrist joint. The mixture is then thoroughly scraped from the walls of the mortar with a spatula and mixed uniformly together. In all potencies, up to 6×, one part by weight of the preceding potency with nine parts by weight of sugar of milk is triturated for 1 h, as directed, to give the desired potency. For preparing the 1× potency samples, 1 part of 5 g of material and 9 parts of α‑lactose monohydrate were used and the produced paste is shown in After trituration, a certain amount of each triturated sample of 3× and 6× was plated and examined by a SEM microscope. The SEM examination allows the characterization of morphology and texture of the samples. In the images a, b, c, presented in The starting RSM can exist in many sizes and shapes. In terms of chemical engineering, particles are called the fragments/pieces that are characterized by a specific size, shape and density. The term particle (or grain) size refers to the structural make-up of such substances as granulates, powders, dusts, granular mixes, and suspensions. Particle size is usually expressed by the diameter of an assumed sphere that diffuses at the same speed as the particle being measured. Knowledge of the particle size, in conjunction with the comminution process, determines such details as grinding efficiency and ultimate product fineness. Comminution usually refers to the conversion of solid samples with large particles, mostly into powdery constituent substances of smaller particles' size. The aggregate state of the material to be homogenized does not undergo any changes during these processes, whereas the physical and chemical characteristics of the sample may change. The following classification into millimeter ranges can be applied as a quantitative definition of particle/ grain sizes as grinding efficiency and ultimate product fineness. Particles of homogeneous solid materials have the same density as the bulk of the solid. Particles derived from cleavage of complex solids (e.g. minerals) have densities that differ from the density of the bulk material which also can be attributed to the new packing mismatches [   In order to confirm the presence of nanoparticles in the samples, we performed TEM characterization in the sample consisting of α‑lactose monohydrate with iron in 3C potency. As it can be seen from the TEM image in In Pharmacopoeia of the People's Republic of China (2010 Edition), for TCM (Traditional Chinese Medicine), powder is an important intermediate or end product of TCM preparation. The physicochemical and medicinal properties of a TCM powder are directly related to the particle size of the powder. Thus, the physicochemical and medicinal properties of TCM preparations may improve by making TCM powders into superfine powders [ The pharmaceutical industry uses lactose as well as saccharose as inactive ingredients of drugs. Some patients with severe lactose intolerance may experience symptoms of many allergic reactions after taking homeopathic medicine that contains this substance. People who are severely, “allergic” to lactose (not just lactose intolerant) should not use remedies containing this ingredient. This should be taken seriously into account by the homeopathic Pharmacopoeia and the research turned to finding other materials as saccharose that would replace lactose. Lactose and saccharose have the same molecular formula; however, their structure (arrangement of their atoms) is different. A major difference between lactose and saccharose with regard to digestion and processing is that it is not uncommon for individuals to be lactose intolerant (around two thirds of the population has a limited ability to digest lactose after infancy), but it is rather unlikely to be saccharose intolerant. However, according the homeopathic Pharmacopoeia lactose itself is still used. More research is required to replace this material. According to the experimental findings and the relevant discussion, it is expected that the resulted material after the 6× trituration has partly or completely different physicochemical and thus medicinal properties in comparison with the initial RSM because of the dramatic diminution of size [ This is the first time over that a research work deals with the size, morphological changes that occur during trituration. The observations made and the trained results should be the foundations of further research and quite helpful for everyone who is preparing homeopathic remedies from solid starting materials at least. Six starting homeopathic materials were investigated in this research. These materials were different both in their original form as well as in their physical origin. The experimental findings -grain size in micro or nanoscale -justified the grinding process, trituration, as the tool of turning the insoluble materials in soluble ones and so the preparation of homeopathic solutions is feasible. The first effectuated measurements for initial RSM up to 3× trituration revealed that the samples contained particles of 0.3–300 μm. All the samples 6× were not in the same dimension range. Appropriate measurements demonstrated that the constituents of the samples were in the nanoscale (0.177 μm–0.563 μm) except Iron (1.271 μm) and Generally, the four materials Calcium Carbonate, Calcium Phosphate, Iron and The formation of Iron agglomerates, may be probably attributed to magnetic effects occurring during grinding, resulting in an increase in the average size dimension. Calcium Phosphate aggregates may be due to the fineness of the material as well as to its original uniformity. The moisture of the grinding chamber may play a role in the formation of agglomerates also. Successive grinding is a useful tool for making superfine powder with good surface properties, like dispersibility and solubility. The observed gradual decrease in grains size, with small fluctuations, reaching almost 100% of the original size is quite significant as result. It is clear now that during C. Herring's trituration, there is a gradual decrease in grain size of the starting materials approaching the micro-nano measurement scale. Thus, in mother tinctures of homeopathic remedies following the trituration of insoluble RSMs the micro-nano particles are present and probably responsible for the physicochemical and medicinal properties of the remedy. The authors would like to express their gratitude to Dr. Peter Svec, at the Institute of Metal Physics Slovak Academy of Sciences Bratislava Slovakia, for the TEM images of the iron samples. Also, we would like to thank the pharmacists M & N Filliano, A. Hatzopoulou, V. Kaliva, for the gentle courtesy of various materials which are used in our research.