Electric arc furnace (EAF) dust is globally one of the biggest metal-containing waste fractions, with a composition that challenges the recycling of dust back to the steel process due to the high Zn and Pb content, which also prevents it from being landfilled. The current study presents a process flowsheet with zinc and lead removal from EAF dust via citric acid leaching, lead removal by precipitation, and further solvent extraction (SX) of zinc for recovery. The process produces fractions that can be directly routed back to a steel plant (leach residue), a zinc electrowinning process (pregnant leach solution, PLS), and a lead smelter (lead sulfate, PbSO4 precipitate). Moreover, zinc separation by solvent extraction from citric acid leach solution originating from EAF was performed successfully with minimal impurity content in the final electrolyte, using di(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (D2EHPA). The total lead removal from PLS was achieved with an addition of only 0.012 M sulfate ion (from sulfuric acid) at room temperature. The optimization of zinc separation via SX was performed at a temperature range of 25–55 °C varying the D2EHPA concentration (10–25 vol-%) with different O/A ratios. With an optimized EAF SX process (pH = 5, t = 15 min, T = 25 °C, 
                        
                           C
                           
                              D
                              2
                              E
                              H
                              P
                              A
                           
                        
                      = 20 vol-%, O/A = 1:1) and stripping process (t = 15 min, T = 25 °C, 
                        
                           C
                           
                              
                                 H
                                 2
                              
                              S
                              
                                 O
                                 4
                              
                           
                        
                      = 1 M, O/A = 3:1), the zinc content in the electrolyte could be enriched up to 50 g/L, and the amount of impurities in the solution decreased down to a level where they have no adverse effect on the zinc electrowinning process and final zinc recovery. Moreover, the iron-rich leach residue was also shown to be chemically suitable as a raw material for the EAF process. With the proposed roasting-leaching-precipitation-SX-EW unit operation, EAF dust can be converted into three different secondary raw material streams, suitable for integration into state-of-the-art processes.The electric arc furnace (EAF) is predominantly used in steel production. When smelting scrap steel in an EAF, three output streams are produced: iron matte, slag, and dust. The global production of EAF dust in steel production is approximately 12 Mt/year In primary production, zinc is recovered mainly via electrowinning (EW) The purification of the leachate can be done via several different stages, e.g., cementation Globally, the main zinc-containing secondary raw materials are galvanized steel and scrap brass Consequently, the current study develops the EAF dust recycling process further. The work continues from the work of Halli et al The roasted EAF dust employed in citric acid leaching was obtained from the Ovako Imatra Oy Ab steel plant in Finland. The details about the raw material and the pre-treatment (roasting), as well as citric acid leaching, were published in the previous work Low odor kerosene (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), 97% D2EHPA (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) and Cyanex 572 (Solvay, the Netherlands) were used in solvent extraction (SX) experiments and 95% sulfuric acid (VWR Chemicals, Belgium) in stripping experiments. Sodium hydroxide powder, 99% NaOH (VWR Chemicals, Belgium) was used together with sulfuric acid for pH modification. All the employed chemicals were of technical grade and the stripping and pH modification solutions were made in Milli-Q (Merck Millipore, USA) deionized water. The experiments were carried out in a 100 mL separation funnel, with shaking at 250 revolutions per minute (RPM) using a KS 3000i control incubated shaker (IKA, Germany). In the optimized conditions, both SX and stripping were also performed in a 500 mL separation funnel in order to simulate upscaling. After finishing the experiment, the separation funnels were allowed to settle for 5 min to allow phase disengagement. The collected aqueous phases were analyzed by AAS or ICP-OES. The metal extractions were calculated using Eqs. The effect of two different acidic organophosphorus extractants (Cyanex 572 and D2EHPA) on the extractions of Zn, Fe, and Mn from PLS was studied in a pH range of 2 to 6. As lead was the main impurity of the EAF citric acid PLS (the highest content, ~1 g/L, in the PLS and harms zinc EW AAS (Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy, Thermo Scientific iCE 3000, USA) for Zn, Pb, Mn, and Fe and ICP-OES (inductively coupled plasma – optical emission spectroscopy, Perkin Elmer Optima 7100 DV, USA) for other elements were employed to determine the solution compositions. The dried residues were analyzed using XRD (X-Ray Diffraction, X’Pert PRO Powder, the Netherlands).  Quantitative Rietveld analysis The lead sulfate precipitate formed can be transferred to secondary lead production where smelting of PbSO The purified PLS was subjected to a study of Zn separation. The main goal in solvent extraction was to achieve higher separation between zinc and dissolved iron. After lead removal, the composition of the Pb-free PLS was as presented in The separation factors of zinc concerning Fe and Mn were calculated and compared between D2EHPA and Cyanex 572 in the pH range of 3–6, see  The effect of D2EHPA concentration, see As can be seen in McCabe-Thiele analysis, see For stripping studies, the organic phase was loaded with ~18.5 g/L of zinc, ~100 mg/L of iron, and ~180 mg/L of manganese by a single stage extraction at pH 5, room temperature, and unit phase ratio. First, the stripping of zinc into sulfuric acid was carried out in a concentration range of 0.005 to 2 M at room temperature and a stripping time of 15 min. Similarly to To simulate the predicted results at optimized conditions, a single stage SX experiment (  A novel hydrometallurgical process flowsheet for Zn, Pb recovery by precipitation and solvent extraction from citric acid leach solution of EAF dust was suggested. The proposed flowsheet allows EAF dust to be suitable raw material not only for secondary steel production but also for secondary lead and zinc production. The conclusions of this study from the different stages are the following: From EAF dust citric acid PLS, lead was removed as lead sulfate (PbSO Further purification of lead-free leach solution was performed by solvent extraction where D2EHPA was found to surpass Cyanex 572 when comparing the selectivity of Zn over Fe at pH 2. McCabe-Thiele results indicated that at optimized solvent extraction conditions ( The Zn loaded D2EHPA solution was further treated with sulfuric acid and at optimized stripping conditions ([ The purified Zn solution is suitable for direct integration in Zn electrowinning process. Therefore, EAF dust what is considered waste, can be transferred into three different streams (Zn, Fe, and Pb) of secondary metal production. The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest. This work has been financed and supported by the