A monofractal and multifractal approach on quantification of hillocks on Al thin films deposited on glass substrates at a varying substrate temperature (Ts) has been reported in this work. The relationship between the fractal characteristics and mechanical properties of the hillocks are established. The lowest density and dimensions of hillocks were obtained at 95 °C while the highest at 65 °C. A power law relationship (with fractal dimension (D) as the power) is established between the perimeter and areas of the individual hillocks with a considerably large coefficient of regression (R2 ≈ 0.9) for all the temperatures. The fractal examinations of the segmented hillock structures revealed that these structures exhibit multifractal characteristics. The line profiles from optical profiling images of the hillock-dominant regions revealed non-uniform sinusoids which further confirm the fractal nature of these structures. The deformation mechanism of the hillocks under normal nanoindentation loading was described by evaluating the indentation impression against the nanoindentation curves.Substrate temperature Area Dimension of the grids of the box-counting procedure Coefficient of regression Number of grids Fractal dimension Generalized fractal dimension of the multifractal spectrum Proportionality constants Length scale Probability of distribution of gray values in grid (i,j) Average height of the grids Lipschitz-Holder/singularity strength exponent Multifractal spectrum Moment order Mass/correlation exponent Aluminum thin films are used as metallization networks in microelectronic systems and back contacts in thin solar cells [ The objective of this article is to demonstrate the use of monofractal and multifractal analysis in studying the evolution of hillocks in Al thin films deposited on glass substrates through sputtering at varying low substrate temperature ( The aluminum thin films were deposited on glass substrates by RF magnetron sputtering method at varying low substrate temperatures of 55 °C, 65 °C and 95 °C for a constant time of 2 h and RF power was maintained at 350 W. The sputtering system and process used in this work has been described in details in our earlier publications [ After the deposition, the samples were left to cool slowly inside the vacuum chamber for 3 h. To observe and study the hillocks in these samples, the surfaces were imaged in a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, ZEISS Gemini2). To recognize and analyze the hillocks, image processing method similar to that developed by Zaborowski et al. [ In a mono-fractal analysis of surfaces and structures, fractal dimension ( Box-counting method is the most suitable for evaluation of the fractal dimension of isolated structures such as pores, corroded surfaces, hillocks and phases in microstructures [ For a fractal structure, the relationship in Eq. (2) exists: In most structures, the scaling behavior may change from one point to another and as such mono-fractal analysis is no longer valid and therefore multifractal approach is recommended. In this approach, the most important is the multifractal spectrum and we adopted the approach used by Xu et al. [ From Eq. A plot of f(α) against α yields a continuous function known as the multifractal spectrum from which various multifractal measures can be extracted to explain the evolution of physical process such as the formation of hillocks. The generalized fractal dimension When the structure is mono-fractal, a plot of D(q) against q exhibits a non-increasing behavior or simply horizontal, however, when it is multifractal, the plot exhibit decreasing and sigmoidal behavior [ The thickness of the films measured by the 3D optical surface profilometry was 500–600 nm; the thickness of the films is not expected to change since the sputtering was undertaken at the constant time of 2 h and similar results have been reported for Al-Mg-B films [ The individual surface areas and perimeters of the hillocks for each T The computation of fractal dimension (based on box counting method) and the multifractal spectrum was performed, and the obtained values of related parameters summarized in Multifractal analysis is used to eliminate the effects of changes in data sets from one point to another. The mass exponent (also known as multifractal scaling exponent, τ(q)) was computed using Eq. The most significant parameters for describing multifractality of structures are multifractal spectrum f(α) and singularity strength exponent α which were computed according to Eq. The plots of generalized dimension D(q) against moment order q are represented in  The reduced moduli for the Al films in this study (an average of 15 points) were obtained as 135.1 ± 0.0013, 110.6 ± 0.024 and 145.5 ± 0.0010 GPa for the 55 °C, 65 °C, and 95 °C films respectively. These results indicate that films with high concentration and large sizes of hillocks exhibited the lowest and heterogenous mechanical properties. We further undertook indentation specifically on the hillock structures and the results are illustrated in The monofractal and multifractal analyses of hillocks in Al thin films deposited on glass substrates has been presented in this article. Through these approaches, the following conclusions can be drawn: The hillock formation is influenced by the low substrate temperature variation during magnetron sputtering. The smallest size of hillocks (area and perimeter) were observed at 95 °C with the largest determined at a substrate temperature of 65 °C. The line profiles extracted from the optical surface profilometry of the hillock-dominant regions of the micrographs might be associated with long wavelength surface variability (waviness) and fractal analyses into the FESEM micrographs revealed fractal nature of the surfaces. The multifractal spectrum, mass exponent and generalized fractal dimensions indicated that the surface hillocks are multifractal. From both monofractal and multifractal approaches, fractal dimensions (D) were determined. In all the cases, the values of D were seen to increase with the substrate temperature indicating that the complexity, growth and interconnection of the surface structures over hillocks from 55 °C to 95 °C. The values of the width of the multifractal spectra were obtained as 1.10, 1.03 and 0.96 indicating lateral growth of surface roughness due to the preferential development of surface structures over the hillocks at higher temperature. We acknowledge the university research committee (URC) of the    