Background and Objective
                  Unilateral subaxial non-subluxed facet fractures (USNSFF) are a pathology seen in traumatic events such as motor vehicle accidents. Management involves either rigid collar bracing or surgical intervention. There currently is no consensus on the treatment of these injuries; this review aims to examine the extant data for recommendations as to which treatment is more effective.
               
                  Methods
                  MEDLINE, Scopus, and the Cochrane trial register were all searched on January 16, 2020, comparing outcomes for surgical and conservative therapy for USNSFF. The meta-analysis examined rates of treatment failure (need for subsequent operative management) in conservative versus surgical management. The meta-analysis was performed using a random effects model, with visualization in forest and L'Abbé plots.
               
                  Results
                  We identified six retrospective studies describing 270 patients, with three studies describing 137 patients used in the meta-analysis. Overall, a surgical success rate of 97.7 % and a non-operative success rate of 79.7 % was observed. A random effects model risk ratio of 1.66 (95 % CI: 0.61–4.52) was obtained, suggesting efficacy of surgical management over conservative management.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The need for surgical intervention subsequent to initial management in the treatment of USNSFF was found to be lower in surgical treatment in contrast to conservative management. However, the studies that were included in the meta-analysis had patient cohorts with much higher rates of neurological deficit and ligamentous injury on presentation, indicating that these may be prognostic indicators of conservative management failure. Furthermore, those that did fail conservative management did not develop severely debilitating conditions. Accordingly, conservative treatment is generally sufficient as a first step in a majority of cases of USNSFF lacking neurological deficit or ligamentous involvement.Cervical facet fractures are one of the most common forms of spinal column injury [ There remains a paucity of literature addressing the treatment of USNSFF. A recent review of 368 patients combing multiple pathologies of facet fractures found that surgical intervention outweighed conservative management [ A comprehensive literature search was conducted on MEDLINE, Scopus, and the Cochrane trial register for articles published before January 16, 2020 in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. The following search term was used in all databases: ((unilateral OR (subaxial OR cervical)) AND (facet AND fracture)). Two of the authors (C.J.L and K.Y) performed the literature search independently, manually screening all titles and abstracts for relevance. All bibliographies of articles were manually culled for further literature selection. The inclusion criteria for studies included the following: (1) related to USNSFF, (2) had no bilateral involvement, (3) had no evidence of subluxation, (4) had 10 or more patients involved and (5) were written in English. All studies were human clinical studies involving patients. We excluded prior systematic reviews and articles not directly describing or quantifying outcomes in patients undergoing either surgical or conservative therapy for USNSFF. No disagreement was noted in literature inclusion between the two reviewers. Data extraction was performed independently by C.J.L and K.Y and then evaluated by Z.A.A for accuracy. The following data were extracted: number of patients, age, number with surgical treatment, number failed surgical treatment, number with non-surgical treatment, number failed non-surgical treatment, number presenting with neurological deficit, number presenting with ligamentous injury, mean follow up time, assessment measures, percent male, patient weight, fracture height, percent lateral mass involvement, displacement, comminution on presentation, radiculopathy on presentation, mechanism of failure in nonoperative patients, BMI, injury severity score, GCS, Charleston Comorbidity index, fracture angle, listhesis on presentation, smoking habits, and the side of the fracture (right vs left). To account for interstudy heterogeneity, a random-effects model was used to combine data into overall risk ratios, comparing rates of treatment failure (defined as surgical intervention subsequent to initial management) in both patients initially treated operatively and non-operatively were assessed. Only studies that included both treatment groups were included in the meta-analysis. The presence of statistical heterogeneity between studies was tested with Cochran’s chi-squared (Q) and the I An initial search yielded 1132 results; after exclusion criteria were applied, there were 29 remaining articles. Of those, six papers were included in the initial review that were: (1) related to USNSFF, (2) had no bilateral involvement, (3) had no evidence of subluxation, (4) had 10 or more patients involved and (5) were written in English ( The largest relevant study was reported by Pehler et al., describing 88 patients, 21 of whom underwent surgery for treatment, with the remaining 67 patients receiving non-surgical management. The average age of the patients at treatment was 43.8 years and the average follow-up time was 14.1 months. Treatment was considered successful if there was radiographic evidence of union at follow-up, and conversely was considered unsuccessful in the case of fracture instability, subluxation, progression of spondylolisthesis, new onset radiculopathy, or persistent radiculopathy caused by nonunion or malunion requiring surgical treatment. All patients treated surgically recovered well without any complications at the time of follow up. Of patients treated non-surgically, 16.4 % (11 of 67) failed non-surgical intervention. Of note, all of the patients that failed non-operative treatment had an absolute fracture height of at least one cm and 40 % involvement of the absolute height of the lateral mass. Though this particular pathology was shown to be associated with a higher rate of non-operative treatment failure, eight of the 56 patients treated successfully with immobilization collars also exhibited these particular characteristics. Of note, those who failed non-operative treatment had a statistically significantly greater average weight than those who did not. Overall non-operative treatment success was observed in 83.6 % of patients [ In 2017, van Eck at al. retrospectively reviewed the results outcomes of 74 patients with facet fractures all treated non-surgically with hard cervical collars, and none of which presented with a neurological deficit [ A retrospective study of 35 patients with unilateral subaxial non-subluxed facet fractures was conducted by Vedantam et al. in 2018 [ Twenty-five patients were retrospectively examined by Aarabi et al. which underwent a combination of surgery and conservative treatment of non-subluxed or minimally (<3 mm) subluxed unilateral subaxial facet fractures. The cohort had an average age of 38 years and a mean follow-up times of 12.1 months. Upon presentation, 14 patients complained of paresthesia, and ten complained of muscle weakness. Additionally, of the seven ligaments examined on each patient, on average three of these ligaments was damaged in some way. Ten of these patients were treated surgically via internal fixation, while the other 15 were treated using immobilization, with 12 using a Miami J hard collar and the remaining three using a halo vest. Treatment success was defined as radiographic evidence of solid fusion at follow-up while failure was determined by progressive translation, kyphosis, or non-solid fusion over time. Treatment was successful in nine out of ten patients treated with surgery (90 %), and six out of 15 patients treated non-operatively (40 %), leading to the conclusion that surgical intervention was the superior method of treatment in these instances. Of note, failure rates were significantly higher in younger patients, and 13 patients exhibited evidence of multiple injuries [ Spector et al. retrospectively reviewed 24 patients with an average age of 49 years, all of whom underwent immobilization treatment for unilateral subaxial non-subluxed facet fractures. The mean follow-up time for this cohort was three months, and on presentation six of the 24 patients presented with neurological deficit. Nineteen of the patients (79 %) were treated successfully with hard plastic cervical orthoses or halo vest immobilization; those that failed exhibited progressive subluxation due to posttraumatic cervical instability or progressive radiculopathy. It was observed that fractures spanning greater than 40 % of the absolute height of the intact lateral mass or those with an absolute height of greater than 1 cm were associated with a much greater risk of treatment failure [ A retrospective review of 24 patients was conducted by Halliday et al. in 1997 to examine the predictive value of MRI in determining fracture instability. The patients had a mean age of 39 years and an average follow up window of 24 months. Half of the patients were treated surgically with either anterior cervical discectomy and fusion or posterior fusion and instrumentation, and the remaining half was treated non-operatively with either a Miami J collar or Minerva Jacket for three months. Failure, defined as progressive subluxation at follow up, was observed in seven of the 12 patients treated non-operatively, putting the success rate for non-operative treatment at 42 %. Of note, 10 of these 12 patients presented with at least one ligament injured, and some had as many as four injured ligaments on presentation, though one of these patients was not evaluated for ligamentous involvement [ Overall, these studies examined a total of 270 patients, 43 of whom were treated surgically, with one failure, while the remaining 227 were treated non-operatively with stabilization techniques. Of these 227, 46 patients failed treatment and required further surgical intervention, resulting in a success rate of non-surgical intervention at 79.7 %. A meta-analysis of operation rates following initial treatment were examined in the three studies that included both treatment groups. Using a random effects model, a combined risk ratio was determined to be 1.66 (95 % CI: 0.61–4.52), suggesting that conservative management was associated with higher rates of treatment failure ( Although highly prevalent, the current guidelines for the treatment of USNSFF relies on a large element of clinical intuition and patient-specific factors [ Overall, there was a treatment efficacy of 97.7 % in surgical intervention, and an efficacy of 79.7 % in immobilization treatment. However, in analyzing the studies presented in this paper, there were two clear outliers in terms of non-operative treatment failure; while all other studies showed non-operative treatment success rates in the range of greater than 80 %, those conducted by Aarabi et al. and Halliday et al. showed non-operative success rates of approximately 40 % - a notable difference. Excluding those two studies from the analysis yields a non-operative success rate of 85 %. Upon further investigation, we discovered that the patients included in these studies that failed immobilization treatment nearly all had either neurological deficit, ligamentous injury, or both, suggesting a more severe underlying pathology for which surgery might be indicated. Aside from the studies by Aarabi and Halliday, each of the other studies had a final recommendation of initial conservative treatment with immobilization for these fractures, given its relatively high rate of success and low risk and cost of treatment. In approximately 15 % of cases, the patient may need surgical intervention subsequent to conservative treatment, but this saves 85 % of patients from the risks, costs, and extended recovery time associated with surgery. Furthermore, in all patients that did fail conservative treatment, none developed substantially debilitation conditions, instead most often developing subluxation and potentially associated radiculopathy, with one documented case of new-onset kyphosis. Accordingly, these results suggest that no serious risk is extended to patients by initial conservative treatment in those presenting without neurological deficit or ligamentous injury. While the ultimate results of the meta-analysis concluded that there is a significantly higher risk of treatment failure with initial conservative management, it must be noted that two of the three studies used in the meta-analysis were those outlined above as ones with cohorts consisting of higher rates of neurological deficit and ligamentous involvement on presentation and involved relatively small patient cohorts. Further, the L'Abbé Plot depicts the level of publication bias in the present analysis due to the relatively limited amount of literature published on the matter. Moreover, the most comprehensive and recent study (Pehler et al. 2019) indicated a risk ratio of 1.22, with a lower 95 % CI bound very close to 1 (95 % CI: 1.08–1.33), suggesting a less definitive indication than the other two included studies of the increased efficacy of surgical intervention as a means of initial treatment. Overall, the 95 % CI for the risk ratio was 0.61–4.52, indicating that – although not statistically significant – there may likely a benefit to surgical intervention in select patients, namely those with neurological deficit or ligamentous injury at presentation. Higher power studies are necessary to understand optimal management of these patients. Though the meta-analysis involved a relatively limited number of patients at 137, the entire systematic review included the analysis of a total of 270 patients with USNSFF, comprising a relatively large patient cohort indicating the present results. While these conclusions should not be accepted without question, they can provide spine surgeons with further evidence as to whether surgical intervention is necessary for the treatment of USNSFF. Our current study certainly has limitations; a systematic review is dependent on the quality and quantity of studies included. The few studies included were all small-scale retrospective reviews. Due to the nature and general paucity of studies published on the treatment of USNSFF, only six studies were included in this investigation, and only half of those were able to be used in the meta-analysis. The three studies that were able to be included in the meta-analysis were also subject to a substantial degree of publication bias; they all included patient cohorts with relatively high rates of ligamentous injury and neurological deficit on presentation and had relatively limited patient cohorts, all less than 90 patients. Given the limited scale of this investigation, outliers in clinical outcomes can have inappropriate weight in both systematic and meta-analyses, having a potentially inappropriate effect on results, illustrating the need for larger-scale prospective studies to validate any conclusions that can be drawn. Based on systematic review and meta-analysis of the literature, surgical management of USNSFF appears to be beneficial for patients that present with neurological deficit or ligamentous injury. It should be emphasized that these small sample, retrospective studies are often susceptible to highlighting results for certain patient populations. In this case, the three studies included for meta-analysis had a disproportionally high rate of patients that presented with either neurological deficits or ligamentous injury. Failure of conservative treatment was not associated with severe progression of symptoms and thus indicates that initial conservative treatment does not put undue risk on the patient. Accordingly, the literature suggests that conservative treatment is generally sufficient as a first step in a majority of cases of USNSFF lacking neurological deficit or ligamentous involvement upon presentation. Due to the paucity of literature on the treatment of USNSFF, higher-quality, large prospective randomized studies are needed to demonstrate the generalizability of these conclusions. This work has not been previously presented elsewhere. This work has not been supported by any funding. Dr. Nader Dahdaleh is a consultant for Spinal Elements Inc. The other authors report no conflict of interest concerning the materials or methods used in this study or the findings specified in this paper.