Feldspars are used as a fluxing agent in ceramics and glass production. However, the presence of iron-bearing minerals reduces whiteness of the ceramics. The objective of this work was to decrease the Fe2O3 content of a foyaite to <1% by flotation and magnetic separation, individually or combined, to make the sample suitable for white ceramics manufacture. The sample was prepared regarding its particle size distribution, characterised, and submitted to concentration experiments. Flotation was arried out to investigate promising anionic collectors and the most suitable conditions of dosage and pH. Wet magnetic separation was used in several stages, increasing the magnetic field. Lastly, magnetic separation was applied to the concentrate of the most efficient flotation test. Technological characterisation showed that the foyaite sample displays 3.2% Fe2O3 from pyroxene/amphibole. The most efficient flotation condition was the reverse flotation of iron-bearing minerals with alkyl sulphate as collector under 400 g t−1 at pH 4. The desired specification was reached after three cleaner stages, yielding a concentrate with 0.92% Fe2O3 and 74.6 wt.% recovery. By magnetic separation, the Fe2O3 content was reduced to 0.8% with 70.6 wt.% recovery, after five stages of concentration with the magnetic field varying from 0.78 to 1.12 T. The most efficient combined circuit comprised three stages of flotation followed by one stage of magnetic separation at 0.78 T. The concentrate presented 0.55% Fe2O3 and 71.2 wt.% recovery.Feldspars are sodium, potassium, and calcium aluminosilicates that constitute 60% of the Earth’s crust In Italy, Turkey, and China, flotation is used to concentrate feldspars Karagüzel It is also possible to directly float feldspars from silicates like quartz using cationic collectors if the feldspars are activated by hydrofluoric acid (HF). However, environmental limitations to the use of HF have motivated research about non-fluoride processes to separate feldspars and quartz The combination of flotation and magnetic separation has been used to remove iron/titanium-bearing particles from feldspars In Brazil, only high-grade feldspars are applied in ceramics and glass production since concentration is not a common practice The objective of this work was to use flotation and magnetic separation, individually and combined, to reduce the Fe The Mineração Curimbaba company supplied 100 kg (<149 µm) of foyaite that was collected to ensure it represents the currently mined area. The sample was prepared, characterised, and submitted to concentration experiments ( The material was homogenised and split in 2 kg aliquots for the removal of slimes (<44 µm) by siphoning. Representative aliquots were mixed with water (25% solids), stirred (23.3 s After that, the material was homogenised and split in 400 g aliquots to feed the concentration experiments. A head sample was taken for characterisation. The sample chemical composition was assessed by quantitative XRF analysis (Zetium spectrometer, PANalytical) in fused beads. Loss on ignition (LOI) was assayed at 1020 °C for 2 h and represents the weight loss at a selected temperature. The volatile materials lost usually consist of combined water from minerals (hydrates and hydroxy-compounds) and carbon dioxide from carbonates. Mineralogical composition was evaluated by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD — X’Pert PRO, PANalytical with X’Celerator detector) on ground samples with backload hand mount to minimise preferential orientation. The identification of the crystalline phases was performed by comparing the XRD pattern to the databases of the International Centre for Diffraction Data; semiquantitative mineralogical composition was assessed by Referent Intensity Ratio (RIR) method combined with the chemical composition. Scanning Electron Microscopy coupled with Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy (SEM/EDS) were carried out in selected fractions for evaluating the particle composition. The granulometric distribution was determined by wet sieving at 600, 500, 300, 212, 150, 106, 75, and 45 µm. Flotation tests comprised reverse flotation (flotation cell CFB-1000 EEPN from CDC) of iron-bearing minerals with anionic collectors since those minerals are present in lower content compared to feldspars The first set of flotation experiments was conducted with different anionic collectors comprising the fatty acids RADIACID (Oleon), LUPROMIN (BASF), FLOTIGAM 5806 (Clariant), KORTACID 0810 (Oleon), SYLFAT FA-1 SPECIAL (Arizona Chemical), the alkyl sulphate MDB 908 (AkzoNobel), and the sulphonate MDB 1425 (AkzoNobel). The experiments were performed with the rougher dosage of 400 g t Collectors that yielded the most promising results in the first set of flotation experiments were applied in the second set that was carried out under different rougher dosages (200, 400, and 600 g t To evaluate the repeatability of the flotation tests, the experiment using alkyl sulphate as collector at 400 g t The foyaite samples were submitted to magnetic separation in a Wet High Intensity Magnetic Separator (WHIMS, Inbras-Eriez), using the magnetic fields of 0.78, 0.93, 1.07, 1.14, 12.5, and 1.22 T. Approximately 50 g of material was added to the magnetic separator in each pass, until all the required material was processed. The magnetic product was separated for chemical analysis, and the non-magnetic product passed through again at the higher field. Magnetic separation tests were applied to the head sample (without previous flotation) and to the flotation concentrates obtained after two and four cleaner stages. The foyaite chemical composition is shown in The sample comprises different aluminium silicates as suggested by the high grades of SiO Considering the desired application of the studied material, the chemical analysis indicates that concentration is indeed required because the foyaite does not meet the company specification for white ceramics (Fe In According to the granulometric distribution ( In Alkyl sulphate (MDB 908) and sulphonate (MDB 1425) yielded the most satisfactory flotation performance because the Fe The RADIACID fatty acid was also selected because, despite the low recovery, it is the only collector capable of reducing the Fe In While the fatty acid leads to the highest removal of iron-bearing minerals, the mass recovery is very low (<30%). The recoveries corresponding to alkyl sulphate and sulphonate are very similar, and alkyl sulphate leads to the highest removal of Fe Regarding the effect of pH, at pH 3 none of the reagents was successful in removing iron-bearing minerals from the foyaite, since the Fe The increase of pH from 4 to 5 causes a decrease in the fatty acid performance as the Fe The influence of pH on flotation performance agrees with results reported in the literature The flotation condition that resulted in the most satisfactory performance is using alkyl sulphate as collector at 400 g t In Regarding the magnetic separation, there is a linear variation of recovery with Fe It is evident that both techniques, flotation and magnetic separation, show similar results regarding reducing the Fe Regarding the combined route ( It must be highlighted that the concentrate of the first step of magnetic separation displays the same characteristics (0.55–0.56% of Fe The subsequent four steps of magnetic separation (magnetic fields of 0.93, 1.07, 1.14, and 1.22 T) yield a final concentrate with ˜0.4% Fe Flotation and magnetic separation, individually applied or combined, were able to make the foyaite suitable for white ceramics production (Fe Fatty acid, sulphonate, and alkyl sulphate were suitable reagents for being used as collectors to the direct flotation of iron-bearing minerals. The most suitable flotation condition was using alkyl sulphate as collector under 400 g t Magnetic separation individually applied reduced the Fe The combined route composed of flotation followed by magnetic separation yielded a concentrate with 0.55% Fe Therefore, the studied foyaite, that has been applied in the construction industry, might be used for white ceramics production, after one of the proposed concentration routes is implemented to the mineral processing of this rock. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The authors thank Mineração Curimbaba that supplied the sample and conducted the XRF analysis; Laboratory of Mineral Processing (LTM-USP) and Technological Characterization Laboratory (LCT-USP) of the University of São Paulo in which the magnetic separation experiments SEM analysis were conducted; Juliana Livi Antoniassi for conducting SEM analysis; commercial reagent suppliers Oleon, BASF, Clariant, Arizona Chemical, and Nouryon;