Physical separation methods are usually the preferred extraction methods for inorganic contaminants. However, successful remediation of inorganically contaminated sites requires proper knowledge of the contaminants. This paper describes the magnetic and density characteristics of a soil polluted with municipal solid waste incinerator residues, allowing the best separation method or combination of methods for remediating the 0.250–1mm and the 1–2mm soil fractions to be selected. Magnetic characterization was performed using a CARPCO high intensity magnetic separator with increasing magnetic fields from 0.04 to 0.7Tesla. A second characterization using a factorial design was performed for three magnetic field intensities (0.08 and 0.4 and 0.7Tesla) and three relative density fractions (light, intermediate and heavy). The results showed that As, Fe and Sn can be concentrated into the magnetic fraction using low intensity magnetism but not Cu, Pb, Sb and Zn. Moreover, high intensity magnetic separation was not appropriate for concentrating the contaminants present in our soil. The association of the contaminants with iron likely explained this finding, especially for Sn. A significant overlap exists in the removal yields for magnetic and density separation of the different inorganic contaminants, ranging from 29% to 72% depending on the contaminants and the soil fraction. Density separation alone should be preferred to magnetic separation alone because of the better removal efficiency and the lower soil mass in the contaminated fraction afforded by density separation.Improper disposal of municipal solid waste (MSW) incinerator residues have contributed to the contamination of numerous sites with inorganic and/or organic compounds ( The selection of an appropriate decontamination method depends on the contaminants and the site characteristics ( In the past, soils polluted by MSW incinerator residues have been treated by gravimetric separation (spiral) ( Magnetic separation is achieved when magnetizable particles passing through a non-homogenous magnetic field are retained ( Thus, magnetic force is proportional to the product of the external magnetic induction and the magnetic gradient. In a homogeneous magnetic field, no gradient is present, thus the magnetic force is zero. If a gradient is present, the particles will move in the direction of increasing magnetic field ( In a magnetic separator, several competing forces can exist, such as gravity, inertial, surface and inter-particle forces ( Contaminants commonly retrieved in soil such as As, Cu, Pb, Sb, Sn and Zn are diamagnetic. However, contaminants can form paramagnetic minerals, especially when the Fe and manganese (Mn) content in the soil is high ( Gravity separation methods separate particles based on their relative density but also on their size and shape ( For soils with complex contamination, more than one remediation technology (technology train) may be needed. However, the chosen remediation methods must have little overlap to justify economically the use of successive treatment methods on a single soil fraction. The objective of this study was to characterize the magnetic and density properties of the coarse fractions (0.250–1 Soil heavily polluted with Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) incinerator bottom ash containing arsenic (As), copper (Cu), lead (Pb), antimony (Sb), tin (Sn) and zinc (Zn) was collected from a brownfield located in Québec City (Québec, Canada). Over 160 The composition and morphology of representative soil particles were studied using a Scanning Electron microscope (SEM, Carl Zeiss EVO® 50) equipped with an X-ray energy dispersion spectrometer (EDS, Oxford Instrument, INCAx-sight EDS). Polished thin sections (26 Magnetic separation was performed using a CARPCO 3 DM separations were performed on samples generated using the above magnetic separation protocol. However, magnetic separation was performed for only three input currents (0.5, 3.0 and 6.0 Dry soil samples were milled with a planetary ball mill (Pulverisette 6 model, Fritsch GmbH, Idar-Oberstein, Germany) using a tungsten bowl and tungsten balls. A mass of 0.5 Contaminant removal percentage values (CR expressed in %) are presented on a total contaminant mass basis and calculated following the general equation: Mass balance percentages (MB expressed in %) are presented to highlight contamination variability as well as sampling method and analysis quality to a lesser extent. Mass balance percentages were calculated using the following equation:    The difficulty in separating Pb, Cu, Sb and Zn using magnetism onto the soil can be explained by the origin of the pollution. In MSW incinerator bottom ash, contaminants are often present in their metallic form. Indeed, SEM observations of the 0.250–1 XRD analysis of the initial soil samples showed that crystalline Fe was mainly present as metallic iron (Fe) and magnetite (Fe Taking a closer look at using HIMS for this soil, the results indicated that low intensity magnetic induction (0.2 The proportion of soil mass removed by magnetic separation for both soil fractions varied between 25% and 33% at low magnetic induction and between 60% and 68% at maximum magnetic induction. In a remediation context, this result is a real limitation, especially at high magnetic induction. Indeed, the large amounts of soil residues generated by magnetic separation will need to be disposed of in an appropriate landfill site, increasing the cost of global treatment. However, if the recycling of ferrous material were possible, the soil mass removed by magnetic separation would no longer be seen as a limitation. In the present case, the use of a low magnetic induction corresponding to 0.5 The average densities measured for each magnetic fraction and shown on the right axis in  Magnetic separation at 0.5 Adding the separation products from the magnetic and the non-magnetic fractions for each relative density fraction yielded the DM separation for the complete soil for each fraction size ( Overall, density separation had higher removal efficiencies, especially for Pb and Sb, but magnetic separation was more efficient for the removal of Zn. However, DM separation removed less than 13% and 9% of the soil mass proportion for the 0.250–1  The present work led to a better understanding of the interactions between ferrous materials and the contaminants in a soil (particle sizes from 0.250 The work was supported by the