The effect of a residue from wine industry was investigated as a corrosion inhibitor for API P110 steel in hydrochloric acid. The extract was characterized using Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), hydrogen nuclear magnetic resonance (1H NMR) and chromatography. The influence of temperature (303–333 K) and grape peel extract concentration were studied using gravimetric and electrochemical experiments. The coupon surfaces were evaluated using microscopy techniques, FTIR-ATR and the contact angle. The by-product exhibited high weight loss efficiencies at 303 K with 4.0 g/L of the extract (83.81%) even after storage. The inhibition increased with the addition of an inorganic enhancer, indicating a synergistic effect between the active compounds and maximum efficiency of 94.48%. Polarization tests indicated that the inhibitor adsorbs on anodic and cathodic regions. The surface characterization techniques confirmed the formation of an organic film and a less attacked surface was observed for the inhibited system.Carbon steel is used in several applications such as construction, refining and chemical industry because of its mechanical properties and cost-benefit ratio [ Although conventional inhibitors, such as azoles and chrome-based inhibitors provide high inhibition efficiencies, they are frequently related to environmental and human health problems [ In this sense, extracts of different parts of plants have been studied recently as corrosion inhibitors. A new and low-cost extract based on Among the residual sources with inhibitory potential is the grape pomace from wine industry and derivatives, which represents more than 1000 tons in European countries and approximately 25% of the grape weight related to the wine production [ This paper reports the efficiency of microencapsulated grape peel extract as a corrosion inhibitor for API P110 steel in 1 M hydrochloric acid, using gravimetric and electrochemical measurements. The effect of temperature and the synergism with an enhancer were also studied. The fresh and stored grape peel extracts were characterized by infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), hydrogen nuclear magnetic resonance ( Alicante Bouschet grape pomace of Rio Sol winery (Lagoa Grande, PE) was dried at 333 K for 24 h. The grape peel was separated from the seeds and stalks using a 0.25 df depulper (Itametal, Itabuna, Brazil), followed by an aeroclassifier (SINTEL 663, Intecnial, Erechim, Brazil). The peel was extracted (50% ethanol, 50% water, 1:10 solvent substrate ratio) in an incubator (200 rpm) at 303 K for 1 h. Ethanol was removed using rota-evaporation at 303 K. The extract was microencapsulated with maltodextrin by spray drying at a ratio of maltodextrin: total solid content of 1:1. A lab-scale spray dryer LabPlant SD-06 (England) with inlet and outlet air temperatures of 453 K and 337 K, respectively, was used for microencapsulation. The powdered grape peel extract (GPE) was stored for 2 years prior to use. The extract was analyzed using a NICOLET is5 Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (FTIR-ATR) at 293 K, collecting 20 scans from 4000 to 650 cm The The phenolic compounds were quantified by spectrophotometric method using different concentrations of gallic acid (0–100 mg/L) [ Phenolic acids and non-anthocyanin flavonoids were analyzed by high-performance liquid chromatography with pulsed amperometric detector. The extraction was carried out in two steps, using the methodology proposed by Perez-Jimenez et al. [ A Waters® Alliance High Performance Liquid Chromatography model 2690/5 and a Waters® model 2996 photodiode array detector (210 and 600 nm for scanning; 270, 310 and 370 nm for quantification) were used for reverse-phase chromatographic separation analysis. The analysis required a C18 reverse-phase column, Thermo BDS HYPERSIL, 100 mm 9 4.6 mm and 2.4 lm at 313 K in gradient elution mode of phosphoric acid 1.5 mL/L in water (phase A) and acetonitrile (phase B), 1.0 mL/min, injection volume of 5 μL and run time of 30 min. The gradient for phase B was: 5% for 6 min, increasing to 12% up to 8 min, maintaining for 12 min, followed by a 20% gradually increase for 6 min, with a subsequent increase up to 30% up to 22 min and again up to 60% between 22 and 23 min, followed by maintenance for 2 min and finally a decrease to 5% at 26 min up to 30 min. Quantification was performed by external standardization through analytical curves from analytical standards. Chromatograms were obtained at 270 nm (catechin; epicatechin; gallic, protocatechuic, syringic and vanillic acids), 310 nm (p-coumaric acid) and 370 nm (miricetine, rutin). Anthocyanin extraction from the powdered extract using 10% formic acid in methanol and chromatographic analysis were performed according to Gouvêa et al. [ API P110 carbon steel, with the composition (wt.%) was used: C, 0.280; Mn, 1.220; Si, 0.280; P, 0.016; S, 0.002; Ni, 0.010; Mo, 0.110; and Fe, 98.1. The test samples having 5.85 cm The gravimetric inhibition efficiency (IE Electrochemical corrosion analysis was performed in a double wall cell at 323 ± 2 K with a silver/silver chloride electrode (Ag/AgCl) and a platinum wire. A saline bridge was employed to preserve the reference electrode against the aggressive medium. The effect of the extract concentration (0.6–4.0 g/L) was evaluated. The open-circuit potential (OCP) was recorded for 2 h before each measurement. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed using 10 mV peak-to-peak amplitude and frequency range of 10 kHz-10 mHz. The anodic and cathodic curves were obtained separately at a scan rate of 0.333 mV s Autolab Potentiostat/Galvanostat (PGSTAT302)) with the NOVA 2.1 software was used for the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and polarization curves. Scanning electron microscopy analysis was conducted using a Hitachi TM 3030 Plus instrument with an EDX Quantax 70 from Bruker. The samples were subjected to corrosion tests in a non-inhibitory system and a inhibitory one (4.0 g/L) at 313 K for 24 h. Samples for surface morphology examination were washed (distilled water and acetone) and then dried. The samples that were used to confirm the film were not washed. Carbon steel samples were also analyzed via confocal laser scanning microscopy with a ZEISS LSM 800 MAT and Zen 2.3 Blue edition software. The GPE and inhibitory film (4.0 g/L GPE) were analyzed using Spectrum 100 from a PerkinElmer Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (FTIR-ATR). In total, 32 scans were collected from 4000 to 650 cm The contact angles at room temperature (298 K) in distilled water against the GPE inhibitory film (4.0 g/L) and the test without inhibitor after 24 h of immersion at 313 K were measured using a goniometer of the optical contact angle (OSSILA). First, 0.5 μL of distilled water was dispensed onto the coupon surface. A digital video image processing program (OSSILA) was used to analyze and calculate the water angle with the coating (θ) from three different regions of the sample.  In relation to the The fresh encapsulated extract exhibited total phenolic content of 6593.8 ± 124.0 mg AGE/100 g and, 1813.94 + 40.74 mg/100 g after 2 years of storage, indicating approximately 70% of reduction. Despite the reduction, the phenolic content was compatible with other extracts in literature, such as extracts of The corrosion rate (CR) and gravimetric inhibition efficiency (IE Temperature caused the corrosion rate increase in the tests with the blank and the inhibitor ( The Arrhenius equation (Equation The parameters R, T and A correspond to the molar gas constant, the absolute temperature, and the pre-exponential factor, respectively. The regression coefficients ( Thus, GPE adsorption occurs by a physical mechanism, explaining the decrease in efficiency with temperature. Besides, the E Additionally, the apparent activation energy increased from 0.6 g/L to 1.0 g/L, which exhibited similar values with 1.0 and 2.0 g/L, and decreased in the presence of 4.0 g/L GPE. This variation can be related to greater physical adsorption of inhibitory molecules to the metallic surface with inhibitor concentration [ The adsorption of active molecules can be explained by electrostatic interactions between charged species or polarizable atoms and the metallic surface, or by the chemisorption of functional groups or alteration in its local electronic density and the metallic orbitals. The fraction of the coated surface (θ) was evaluated in adsorption isotherm models in order to study the adsorption mechanism [ Values of 1/y less than a unit imply the multilayer of inhibitory molecules on the substrate, while values greater than a unit indicate the occupation of more than one active site [ The 1/y value is less than a unit at all temperatures, except 313 K, which indicates that at this temperature the inhibitory molecules occupy more than one active site, while at the other temperatures, a multilayer coating is observed. It is important to affirm that the calculation of the standard free energy of the adsorption value (ΔG The synergism between inorganic enhancers and organic inhibitors has been investigated [ The corrosion rate of GPE-KI blend was lower than the corrosion rates of the isolated compounds, confirming a synergistic effect. The concentration of KI that promoted the lowest corrosion rate was 20 mM, corresponding to a 71.96% corrosion rate reduction in relation to the isolated enhancer (20 mM), and 79.42% reduction when compared to GPE (4.0 g/L). Halide ions have been reported as enhancers of some corrosion inhibitors in acidic media. The inhibition potential of these ions is influenced by ion size, concentration and electrostatic field. The interactions of these enhancers with the inhibitors leads to a higher surface coverage, mitigating the acid attack to the metallic surface [ The inhibition efficiency of halide ions is influenced by the ion radius and electronegativity, since higher ionic radius leads to differences in hydrophobicity, influencing the adsorption process. Atoms and ions with large atomic rays, such as iodide ( Stabilization of OCP was observed at 3600 s, between 0.45 and 0.51 V ( Nyquist plots for API P110 carbon steel in 1 M HCl for the inhibitory and non-inhibitory systems are shown in The inhibitory molecules in the metal-solution interface, which is characterized by a double electrical layer, modify the characteristics of the double layer. If the energy of interaction of an organic compound with the metallic surface is greater than the energy between water molecules and the substrate, the inhibitory molecules displace the adsorbed water molecules, modifying the metal-solution interface and, consequently, the double electrical layer [  In addition, the KI concentration that exhibited the best gravimetric results (20 mM) was evaluated by electrochemical tests. The synergism of GPE-KI blend was confirmed since the efficiency increased 29.42% from GPE (4.0 g/L) to GPE (4.0 g/L)+ KI (20 mM), and 8.57% from KI (20 mM) to GPE (4.0 g/L) + KI (20 mM). The double layer capacitance showed a 72.72% reduction in the presence of GPE-KI blend in relation to the blank. It is noteworthy that the higher value of C The KI tests, whether alone or combined with GPE, revealed some low frequency data dispersion. This observation might reveal the heterogeneity or roughness of the inhibitory film [ Polarization tests were performed to understand the current density and corrosion potential displacements in the presence of GPE. These modifications in Tafel curves are shown in The slight E The influence of immersion time in the inhibition efficiency with the greatest GPE concentration was investigated for 24 h by the EIS technique. The purpose of this evaluation was to understand the stability of the inhibitor using electrochemical tests for 24 h. Each point of the plot is a value of R Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) coupled to EDX was performed on API P110 coupons after their removal from acidification cells at 313 K and cleaning as described in item 2.5. The morphologies of the sanded material, and the coupons tested in the non-inhibitory system and the inhibitory one (4.0 g/L) were analyzed ( The morphology of the specimen submitted to the blank test was irregular, demonstrating the acid attack on the metallic surface. The test with GPE (c) exhibited a more uniform, revealing the inhibitor protection. Regarding the EDX data, % mass of the detected elements are show in The confocal laser scanning microscopy results confirmed a homogeneous topography for the sanded coupon ( The spectra of GPE and the inhibitory film are shown in The contact angle measurement allows the verification of the hydrophobic/hydrophilic character of an inhibitory film. The contact angle for the non-inhibitory test (blank) was 117.39°, while in the presence of GPE (4.0 g/L) was 120.53° ( The microencapsulated grape peel extract (GPE) stored for 2 years showed gravimetric efficiencies of 83.81% at 303 K and 68.97% at 333 K. The apparent activation energy values indicated physical adsorption and electrostatic interactions. Adsorption isotherms confirmed that molecules occupied more than one active site at 313 K, while at the other temperatures, a multilayer coating was observed. The electrochemical tests indicated increasing charge transfer resistance values with GPE concentration. The synergism of the GPE-KI blend was confirmed by gravimetric and electrochemical tests. The most efficient KI concentration was 20 mM. Electrochemical impedance showed a 72.72% reduction of the charge transfer resistance with GPE-KI blend. The double electrical layer compaction in the presence of KI revealed a modification in the inhibitory molecules adsorption. These ions adsorb on the coupon surface and interact with protonated inhibitory molecules due to their high polarizability. Confocal microscopy and SEM showed a more homogeneous surface for the inhibitory system. Aromatic compounds adsorbed on the coupon surface were confirmed by FTIR-ATR. The hydrophobic character of the inhibitory film was confirmed by contact angle analysis. Thus, the adsorbed organic compounds promoted the repulsion of water molecules, mitigating the corrosive process. This work was supported by The raw data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time due to time limitations.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors acknowledge E. Miguez for the The following are the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at