Biochar can be used in a large number of applications, ranging from heat and power production to soil amendment. The properties of carbonized biomass depend on the feedstock and the process conditions. Selection of suitable conditions to produce a char with the desired properties therefore requires knowledge of dependencies and influencing factors, both quantitatively and qualitatively. This paper reviews and summarizes the results from a large number of experiments on biochar production in order to give a general overview of the properties that can be achieved by feedstock selection and process design. Production processes include both torrefaction as well as slow pyrolysis at high temperatures. The data evaluation has shown that among all process conditions, the treatment temperature has by far the most dominant influence on all properties. Especially the rather narrow temperature range between 200 and 400 °C causes the most significant changes and is therefore very sensible to influences and possibly difficult to control.Biochar, the solid product of biomass pyrolysis, has been produced and utilized for several thousand years and is best known as charcoal (when produced from woody biomass). The applications of biochar are very diverse, ranging from heat and power production, flue gas cleaning, metallurgical applications, use in agriculture and animal husbandry, building material, to medical use. In an attempt to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, it has gained increasing popularity in the last years as a replacement for fossil carbon carriers in several of these applications. Carbonization decomposes parts of the biomass, but retains a large part of its carbon content. The properties are altered; the product becomes more carbonaceous and hence easier to use as a substitute in technical processes. Feedstock and carbonization conditions are chosen depending on the desired properties of the char. Torrefaction, a pyrolysis in the temperature range of up to 300 °C, significantly improves a number of problematic characteristics of raw biomass. Among them are mechanical properties such as grindability. These are often a limiting factor in co-firing and co-gasification applications, in which equipment designed for coal is to be used to process biomass. Other qualities such as a very high carbon content, can only be achieved by treatment temperatures. In addition to technical applications in heat and power generation, gas and water purification and metallurgy, biochar has been used as a soil amendment to improve soil fertility and sequestrate carbon. It is clear that the various fields of applications have different demands and requirements. This paper gives a broad overview on the properties of biochar and how they can be achieved by selecting feedstock and process conditions. It includes an evaluation of the UC Davis biochar database, containing 210 separate publications at the time of evaluation A short summary of the most important aspects of the production process is given in Section While fast pyrolysis and gasification also result in a solid with increased carbon content (so strictly speaking biochar), this is merely a by-product from the process and the quality often not sufficient for many applications. For example, chars from flash pyrolysis may often have comparably low carbon contents; the solid product from gasification may contain harmful substances such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons Most of the properties are evaluated graphically based on a large number of data, oftentimes several hundred individual measurements. In addition, values from single publications are used as examples to gain further insight or show individual trends. The selection and classification of the properties presented in this work was not always straightforward, as some effects resulting from physical and chemical properties may overlap and/or influence each other. Some properties are a direct result of others. All properties included in this review were found to be relevant for at least one practical application of biochar. Biochar is the solid product of biomass pyrolysis. Charcoal is produced from woody feedstocks and has been manufactured and utilized for several thousand years The goal of fast (or flash) pyrolysis is the production of a liquid oil. The condensable volatiles, which are released from the solid feedstock, should therefore quickly be cooled in order to avoid cracking into light gases or polymerization into char. The biomass is rapidly heated to the reaction temperature, typically within a few seconds. Gases are quenched to avoid secondary reactions. The liquid yield may be up to 75% of the dry matter of the feedstock In biochar production however, the main interest is the carbonaceous solid product. The evaporation of water and the release of volatile components cause an increase in the relative fixed carbon content of the solid. It is believed that polymerization of organic compounds in vapors and gases may lead to secondary char formation and increases the solid yield. The heating rate is low and the residence time long. In a traditional charcoal production process (charcoal pit), it may take several weeks until the carbonization is completed. Typical temperatures for slow pyrolysis are around 500 °C, but ultimately depend on the desired product properties. A very high carbon content of more than 95% may require treatment temperatures close to 1000 °C, which can be achieved for woody feedstocks, but pose problems for agricultural residues and other materials with low ash melting temperatures. These are therefore normally not treated beyond 700 °C. Pyrolysis in the temperature range between 200 and 300 °C is referred to as torrefaction. The main goal is to retain and concentrate most of the energy content in the solid, and significantly improve mechanical properties of the biomass (such as grindability), which may otherwise be limiting for some applications. Apart from the process conditions, the characteristics of the feedstock impact the conversion process and product properties. Biomass is mostly composed of the three organic compounds cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin. These behave differently during heat treatment and hence the composition of the biomass directly influences product yield and properties. Hemicellulose describes a group of polysaccharides with a branched chain-structure. It is the most reactive of the three main components and decomposes at temperatures of about 220–315 °C The amount of product that can be obtained from the pyrolysis of a given biomass depends on the process conditions, among them temperature and residence time. The attainable mass, energy and fixed carbon yields with their according process conditions are important for the design of an economic biochar production as they indicate the success of the conversion process. This section describes how the different yields are calculated and shows how and to what extent they can be influenced by variation of the process conditions. The mass yield y It is clear that biomass with a high water content will inevitably lead to a low mass yield and is therefore not the preferable feedstock for pyrolytic biochar production. If the mass yield is not directly determined using gravimetric measurements, it can be calculated based on the ash content of both raw biomass w It should be noted that both the gravimetric approach in An alternative approach is the yield calculation based on the ash-free part of the biomass. This corresponds to the ash tracer method used to calculate coal conversion  Biomass with larger lignin content is preferable to achieve a high mass yield. The lower structural stabilities of hemicelluloses and cellulose lead to earlier thermal degradation of these components. They contribute significantly to the yield of condensable gases while lignin, being more stable, contributes to the biochar yield The process temperature is the most important influencing parameter on the mass yield. Nevertheless, the amount of char produced from pyrolysis may be increased further by raising the residence time of pyrolysis gases in the pore structure to promote secondary char formation The energy yield y In general, the energy yield decreases with increasing temperature. Energy yields obtained from gravimetric mass yield determination show a somewhat larger range between 40 and 70% at a temperature of 700 °C. The data considered here indicates that the energy yield from woody biomass may be higher than that of straw-like biomass. Due to the uncertainties involved, it cannot be stated if this trend generally prevails. The quality of biochar is largely determined by its fixed carbon content. In accordance with the determination of mass yield ( Using Similar to the energy yield, the accuracy of the fixed carbon yield largely depends on the uncertainties involved with the determination of the mass yield. The fixed carbon yield, w The composition of biochar is an important indicator to determine its application. This section focuses on the chemical properties of biochars. It reviews proximate and elemental composition, energy content, pH-values, reactivity, degradation, and self-ignition processes that occur during storage in dependence on the process conditions temperature and residence time. The process of carbonization involves changes in the chemical structure of the fuel, mostly by detachment of functional groups. This applies to both naturally occurring bio and geochemical carbonization as well as technical carbonization for biochar production. The release of these hydrogen and oxygen containing groups results in a decrease in the respective ratios with carbon. The progression of the carbonization process can therefore be described by the evolution of the atomic ratios. The van-Krevelen diagram, presented by Dirk van Krevelen in 1950  It should be noted that the temperature range of 250–350 °C leads to the highest decrease in atomic ratios. A variation of only about 100 °C may decrease the O/C-ratio from 0.7 to 0.3. But it takes another 700 °C to achieve a further reduction from 0.3 to almost zero. The same can be observed for H/C-ratios: raising the treatment temperature from 250 to 350 °C causes the ratio to drop from 1.5 to 0.8. The further release of almost all hydrogen from the char requires very high treatment temperatures. The fact that the decrease in atomic ratios does not occur linearly in terms of treatment temperature, but at different rates can be seen more clearly in One main goal of biochar production is the change in chemical composition compared to that of raw biomass, most of all the increase in carbon content. This is due to the detachment of functional groups, containing oxygen and hydrogen. Therefore, an increase in reaction temperature leads to an increase in carbon content while resulting in a lower content of hydrogen and oxygen. This can be seen in The evolutions of the carbon and the oxygen content in wood-derived biochars ( The trends described for wood can also be seen for straw and grass (Figs. At short residence times of a few minutes, even relatively high temperatures might be insufficient to achieve complete conversion. In this time range, the influence of the residence time is important. However, the typical production conditions of biochar, especially on a commercial scale, involve slow heating rates and residence times of many minutes to hours or even days. For these conditions, the influence of residence time on the elemental composition is small. At moderate temperatures, even a significant increase in residence time (e.g. from 60 to 180 min) results only in a decrease in carbon content of a few percent An overview of the complete relative elemental composition (mean values) of woody and non-woody biochars produced at different temperatures can be seen in As in the figure before, the temperature range with the most significant change in composition (200–400 °C) can also be seen in It should be noted that Figs.  As a result of the higher carbon content in the biochar, the energy content increases with temperature. The most significant increase in energy content takes place at temperatures between 250 and 350 °C. Within this range of only 100 °C, the heating value is raised from less than 20 MJ/kg to values of 25–30 MJ/kg. Beyond 400 °C, the change in energy content is not significant. Prolonging the residence time also has a positive effect on the heating value, leading to a further increase. However, the effect is rather small compared to that of the temperature. In the torrefaction range, prolonging the residence time from one to two (or even three) hours increases the heating value by only a few MJ/kg. However, the same effect (or even more) can be achieved by maintaining the initial residence time and increasing the temperature by 20–50 K The carbon content that remains in the solid structure after the volatile components are driven off is referred to as fixed carbon. Some biochar applications, especially metallurgical, require very high fixed carbon contents of more than 90 or even 95% in order to substitute fossil carbon carriers The fixed carbon content of raw biomass is in the range of 10–30% and undergoes no significant change before the torrefaction range. Between 250 and 350 °C, the amount of fixed carbon is increased to about 50–60%. Even though this small temperature range shows to have the most effect on the fixed carbon content, fixed carbon contents of more than 90% require temperatures of 700 °C. It should be noted that these values are ash-free and that the final product, which is utilized, also contains a significant amount of ash. The increase in fixed carbon content is a direct result of the devolatilization process and hence the decrease in the amount of volatile matter. In the same manner in which the carbon content is increased from 10 to 90% (or even more) for 700 °C, the volatile matter content is reduced from 90 to 10% (or even less) for the same temperatures, see The most dynamic temperature range of pyrolysis is between 250 and 350 °C, where almost all properties undergo significant changes due to the (near total) decomposition of hemicellulose and the partial decomposition of cellulose and lignin. Part b of The main process during carbonization is the thermal decomposition of the biomass structure, resulting in the detachment of functional groups and the release of oxygen and hydrogen. As a result, biochars with low H/C-ratios (corresponding to a higher degree of carbonization) contain less functional groups and more aromatic structures than low-temperature chars It is believed that there are at least two different aromatic structures present in biochars: randomly organized aromatic rings form an amorphous phase and condensed polyaromatic sheets comprise a crystalline phase. During biochar production, random aromatic structures form quickly, followed by a structural rearrangement that increases the size of the aromatic system Part a of The type and amount of functional groups influence the biochar’s alkalinity, the ability to neutralize acids in soils. The partial detachment of functional groups leads to unpaired negative charges and hence the ability to accept protons. These functional groups include for example carboxyl –COOH (–COO A direct result of the increasing alkalinity is an increasing pH-value of biochar. The pH-value of biochar is an important property for agricultural applications such as soil amendment. It is also one of the properties, in which chars from pyrolysis differ significantly from chars produced via hydrothermal carbonization. The latter process involves the formation of organic acids, making hydrochars acidic. Raw biomass is typically slightly acidic or mildly basic with pH-values ranging between 5 and 7.5  As with other properties, the treatment temperature is the most influencing factor on the pH-value of biochars. Additionally, the pH-value can be raised by increasing the residence time. However, the effect is only significant in the first 5–10 min of carbonization The cation exchange capacity (CEC) is the amount of exchangeable cations (e.g. Ca Being a combination of charged surface functional groups and surface area, the highest cation exchange capacities are found for biochars produced at relatively low production temperatures, at which the surface area has significantly increased compared to the feedstock, but sufficient functional groups remain in the structure to provide negative charges. For example, the average CEC determined in Many parameters (e.g. elemental composition or fixed carbon content) are typically given on a dry and ash-free basis. The water is completely driven off during pyrolysis, the ash however largely remains in the solid product. It is important to know the ash content of the biochar, because the amount and type of inorganics can determine possible applications. A high ash content may also inhibit the use in high grade industrial applications. The increase in ash content may intensify ash-related problems during to the thermochemical conversion of biomass (e.g. low melting temperatures) The ash content of biochar is largely dependent on the ash content in the parent biomass. This varies greatly, depending on the type of biomass, but also on the harvesting techniques. A number of studies have shown that AAEM are partly released into the gas phase during thermochemical conversion This shows that the release of inorganics into the gas phase depends not only on the temperature, but is notably influenced by other conditions as well. Any biochar application involving thermochemical conversion of the material is influenced by the reactivity of the char. The conversion of the char can be described by the Boudouard reaction, the water gas reaction and the (partial) oxidation of carbon: The reactivity (i.e. the reaction rate of these reactions) depends on the temperature and on the concentration of the reactive gas. Furthermore, these reactions are surface reactions, involving a “reactive surface” to partake in the conversion While the surface area measured in a BET analysis gives an indication of the reactivity of the biochar, the correlation is not straightforward. Not the entire surface area is active or accessible to reactive gas molecules. The linear and non-polar CO An extensive review on the reaction rates of lignocellulosic chars can be found elsewhere No standardized test method exists for the determination of biochar reactivity. Thermogravimetric analysis is widely used to determine the temporal weight loss profile during a reaction and extract respective kinetic data. This is a convenient option, but the results should be handled with care because the effects of kinetics, mass transport and sorption dynamics cannot be distinguished. During gasification (or in fact any thermochemical conversion), the structure of the reactant is continuously changing. The reactivity is therefore not a constant property, but should always be compared to reactivities determined under the same condition. The reactivity of fossil coke is typically quantified using the coke reactivity index (CRI). This index is determined together with the coke strength after reaction (CSR) in a test that involves heating a coke sample at 1100 °C for two hours in a CO Any combustible bulk material is associated with the risk of self-heating and spontaneous combustion during storage and transport. Exothermic reactions lead to a temperature increase and thermal runaway can cause self-ignition. This phenomenon is especially associated with storing solid fuels in piles or heaps, where generated heat cannot be dissipated quickly Self-heating is to some extent a result of the reactivity of the material, but the propensity in general is not a material property, as the ignition temperature is. It depends on the particle size, the water content, the ambient temperature, the oxygen availability and the way the material is stored Regardless of the mechanisms causing self-heating, the autoignition temperature of biochar is lower than that of the parent biomass The exothermic reactions leading to self-heating of biochar during storage cause degradation and property changes, for example a slight decrease in fixed carbon content In addition to the characteristics resulting from the change in chemical composition during carbonization, the breakdown of the fibrous biomass structure leads to a change in physical properties such as mechanical stability. This section focuses on the influence of production conditions on the physical properties of biochar. The density of any bulk material is an important property for the design and operation of all handling and processing facilities. While the weight-based energy density of biochar increases with the treatment temperature (see Section  An example of the changes in bulk density throughout the carbonization process of mallee wood (a eucalyptus species common in Australia) can be seen in  While the treatment temperature can change the densities significantly, there is no visible influence of the heating rate during slow pyrolysis on the solid density determined in The porosity changes as a result of the escaping volatile gases during the carbonization process and so does the total surface area of the biomass. A large surface area is connected to a number of other biochar properties (e.g. cation exchange capacity or water holding capacity) and therefore prerequisite for a number of biochar applications. (While a large surface area is characteristic for biochars from pyrolysis, the residues of hydrothermal carbonization have a very low surface area The surface area is usually determined by BET-analysis (named after its inventors Brunauer, Emmet, and Teller), during which a sample is exposed to a defined gas atmosphere and the amount of gas, which is absorbed, measured. Typically, nitrogen at a temperature of 77 K is used. However, this bears some limitations as diffusion problems in micropores (diameter <  Å=2 nm) can occur and the surface area might therefore be underestimated. As an alternative, CO The surface areas (determined with N After an initial increase, the surface area of biochars may decrease again at high temperatures. This has been observed between 800 and 1000 °C (N Knowledge of the total surface area alone may not be sufficient for some applications. For example, a large surface area composed of many very small pores may not be easily accessible to some gases and the biochar’s ability to adsorb the respective gas therefore limited – despite a large surface. Similarly, an abundant number of pores in the nanometer range is of no relevance to plant-available water, as plants cannot overcome the capillary forces holding water in these small pores As must be expected from the increasing porosity (Section Other analytical options include pycnometry or mercury porosimetry. The differences in the total pore volume, resulting solely from different analytical techniques, have been demonstrated by Brewer et al. Two main processes that occur during pyrolysis influence the hydrologic properties of biochars: the decrease in functional groups alters the material’s affinity to water and the increase in porosity changes the amount of water that can be adsorbed. Despite the fact that biochars have been studied extensively, the interaction with water is not well understood and contradicting findings exist in the literature. Hydrophobicity is a result of the surface functional groups, whereas water holding capacity also depends on the porosity of the biochar’s bulk volume. These properties can have counteracting or overlapping effects and are therefore sometimes not clearly distinguishable from each other. A surface that attracts water is termed hydrophilic, one that repels water is termed hydrophobic. Hydrophilic substances are polar and hydrogen bonding causes a strong interaction with water. Hydrophobic materials are nonpolar in nature and exhibit only weak interactions with water, may however strongly interact with nonpolar liquids. It is believed that a further increase in pyrolysis temperature results in an even more hydrophobic character of the biochar, because more polar surface functional groups are removed and the aromaticity is increased. This is reflected in the decrease in the O/C-ratio However, other authors have shown that treatment at higher temperature may again decrease this hydrophobic character: Zornoza et al. The hydrophobicity of biochars is associated with remaining aliphatic functional groups. These are destroyed at temperatures between 400 °C and 500 °C. It is important to note that the biochar does not become hydrophilic at higher temperatures, because no polar functional groups are formed. It merely becomes less hydrophobic due to the absence of nonpolar functionalities. In addition, the effect of increasing porosity at higher temperatures becomes more dominant and the char may absorb more water. The water holding capacity, the ability of a material to contain and retain water, depends (among others) on porosity and interconnectedness of the pores Replacing fossil coal and coke in metallurgical processes has become a main focus of research activities on the technical applications of biochar. Some of these processes have certain requirements regarding the mechanical stability of charcoal, for example the production of iron in the blast furnace, where the carbon carrier has to support the weight of the iron ore. But also handling, transport and storage of biochar is influenced by its mechanical stability. Depending on the type and direction of the mechanical load (i.e. compression, tension, shear, impact) the stability can be expressed using different parameters, for example abrasion resistance, friability, tensile strength or compressive strength. The mechanical properties of untreated biomass are anisotropic, e.g. the strength is greatest in longitudinal direction (along the grain direction). This anisotropy is weaker in biochar as the structural complexity is lost during carbonization The ability to bear a load is best described using the compressive strength (in MPa) or the crushing strength (in kg/m The mechanical stability generally correlates inversely with the porosity (and therefore directly to the density) of the biochar. Any process that leaves cracks in the solid structure will result in a lower strength of the biochar. This mainly includes water evaporation and the release of volatile matter. Therefore, a low moisture content of the feedstock and a slow heating rate are beneficial if a high strength is to be achieved Nevertheless, few charcoals exhibit the required mechanical strength to replace fossil coke in blast furnaces without the need for briquetting The decrease in strength due to carbonization is also visible from the tensile strength, which is reduced significantly in torrefied straw compared to untreated material It should be noted that due to the different parameters determined and test methods used, the reported data on strength varied significantly from each other, making a meaningful comparison difficult and an exact quantification of the mechanical stability impossible. Also, very few studies actually determine the influence of production characteristics on the strength by considering a continuous range of conditions (such as a broad temperature range). Mostly, only a few samples, of which the origin is not always clear, are tested. The conclusion drawn from these investigations can therefore not be valid for all biochars. The change in mechanical stability during carbonization leads to a brittle char with improved grindability compared to raw material. Because carbonized biomass in general and torrefied wood in particular have gotten increasing attention during the last decades as a substitute fuel in co-firing applications, the description of how well the material can be pulverized in typical coal mills is an important measure to determine the amount of biomass that can be used in co-firing applications together with coal. One way to compare the grindability of biochar and coal is to determine the Hardgrove Grindability Indices (HGI). This gives specific information about the performance of the fuels in a typical coal pulverizer, i.e. a bowl mill or vertical roller mill. Other grindability indices are used to describe the performance of a fuel in different pulverizers, for example the impact grindability index or the bond work index. The determination of the Hardgrove index is an empirical test, in which the fuels are pulverized in a mill and the results of a sieve analysis compared to a calibration curve, obtained with a reference coal (with known HGI) in the same mill. Therefore, the grindability indices resulting from different experiments are strictly speaking not directly comparable to each other, may however help in making estimations. These restriction also apply to Another way to quantify the grindability is to measure the energy required for reducing the fuel to the desired particle size. (This gives the option to also compare different milling principles with each other). Depending on the production temperature of biochar, the energy required for grinding can be reduced by up to 90%, making it comparable with various types of coal. It should be noted that only by drying fresh biomass, this energy demand already decreases significantly As a result of the better grindability, the particle size distribution after the grinding process changes. Compared to untreated biomass, comminuting torrefied material results in a significantly higher share of smaller particles, similar to the particle size distribution after grinding coal. This was for example found in Biomass is highly anisotropic and the thermal conductivity varies greatly with the direction of heat flow, giving the highest value when heat flow is directed parallel to the grain direction (about 1.5–2.7 times higher than perpendicular to the grain size). In addition, a higher density is generally associated with a higher thermal conductivity. Therefore, the development of a porous structure leads to a decrease in thermal conductivity of biochars compared to their parent biomass. The dependence of thermal conductivity on the grain direction prevails also for chars, albeit not as dominant as for untreated wood. Due to the decomposition of biomass fibers and loss in structural complexity during carbonization, the conductivities measured in different directions approach each other with increasing pyrolysis temperature. In As for the thermal conductivity, the values of heat capacity depend on the temperature, at which the measurement is carried out. This is well demonstrated by Dupont et al. The electric properties are significantly changed throughout the carbonization process. The decrease in functional groups and the appearance of conjugated double bonds leads to an increase in conductivity for increasing pyrolysis temperatures. Electromagnetic interference (EMI) has become a problem due to the growing number of electronic devices emitting electromagnetic fields. In order to minimize the effects of electromagnetic radiation on (and from) a device, shielding might be required. The mechanisms of electromagnetic shielding are reflection and/or adsorption of high frequency radiation, the former being the more important one. Mobile charge carriers in the shield interact with the electromagnetic field and reflect radiation. Hence, shielding materials are often electrically conducting. The ESE of carbonized wood as a function of its resistivity is shown in Due to its electromagnetic shielding efficiency, biochar can be used as an additive in composite materials (e.g. building materials such as cement) to enhance their effectiveness in shielding against electromagnetic interferences Agglomeration is a common way to increase the strength and density of a material, make it more homogeneous, easier, and economic to transport, store and handle. Two types of agglomeration processes are suitable for biochar: press agglomeration and tumble agglomeration. In press agglomeration, agglomerates are formed by applying pressure, whereas in tumble agglomeration (or growth agglomeration) agglomerates are formed by growth during a tumbling process The lignin components of biomass is an important contributor to the pelleting of biomass. It softens during the process, acting as a natural binder to the material. The softening point of lignin is influenced by the moisture content of the biomass, ranging from 90 °C (moisture content 30%, wet-based) to nearly 200 °C (for dry wood) Lignin decomposes over a broad temperature range and depending on the production conditions, biochar may still contain a sufficient amount of lignin (cf. Section This paper gives a broad overview on the chemical and physical properties of biochar. In order to show general trends and draw valid conclusions, a large number of data, publications and measurements have been considered. All properties are a result of the feedstock characteristics and the carbonization process conditions. They can be selected and modified purposefully in order to achieve certain product properties. Biochar from woody feedstocks (i.e. charcoal) has been produced and utilized for thousands of years, but the phenomena occurring during production are still not completely understood, showing the complexity of the process. Consequently, contradicting conclusions can be found in the literature and results may differ greatly from each other. Biomass is mainly composed of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin. Most of the hemicellulose and a part of the cellulose are broken down during torrefaction up to about 300 °C. It is this temperature range of torrefaction, which proves to be very influential on many properties. The most significant changes in composition take place in the temperature window of 200–400 °C. This shows that torrefaction, which lies within this temperature range, is a highly sensitive process. For most of the properties, the general trend is clear. An increased degree of carbonization, realized by an increase in temperature and/or residence time, leads to a decrease in mass and energy yield. The relative carbon content of the char increases, while the oxygen and hydrogen content decrease. No clear dependence of the nitrogen content is visible. While the relative composition, based on dry and ash-free matter, suggests that a highly carbonaceous solid is produced, it should be kept in mind, that the devolatilization causes a significant increase in the ash content. This is of importance for practical applications, as the char and inorganics are used as an entity. As a result of the increasing carbon content, the energy content and amount of fixed carbon increase with temperature. The decrease in functional groups during pyrolysis leads to an increase in pH-value of the char. The devolatilizing gases leave a porous structure behind and the porosity (together with the pore volume and pore size distribution) directly influences a number of other properties, such as the density, mechanical stability, cation exchange capacity and water holding capacity. Even though the porosity generally increases during carbonization, it has been suggested that treatment at very high temperatures leads to a shrinkage of the solid structure, resulting in a final decrease in porosity and increase in density. For some properties, analytical limitations make a quantification difficult (e.g. the exact pore volume), while for others, there is simply not enough coherent data for the entire temperature range in order to show generally valid trends (e.g. mechanical stability). This emphasizes, where further research is needed, so that a targeted production of biochar with suitable properties for specific applications is possible. Many trends are remarkably homogeneous, despite the fact that the dependence is often reduced to the treatment temperature, and different species, residence times and reactors have less or even no influence. The trends and conclusion that can be seen and drawn from the evaluation of data considered in this study are summarized in In addition to the temperature, the residence time is displayed as an additional influencing process condition (blue boxes in the right of the figure). It can generally be said that the influence of increased residence time mimics the influence of increased temperature, as both lead to a higher degree of carbonization. However, the influence is of far less importance than for the treatment temperature (considering slow pyrolysis, i.e. excluding flash carbonization from the considerations). Trends are displayed by a solid black arrow. Assumptions, indicated by a black dashed arrow, are based on the evolution of the temperature influence. The authors are thankful for the financial support from the Research Council of Norway and the industry partners of the BioCarb + project, Elkem AS, Norsk Biobrensel AS, AT Biovarme AS, Eyde-nettverket, Saint Gobain Ceramic Materials AS, Eramet Norway AS, Alcoa Norway AS. The authors also express their appreciation to Professor Terese Løvås for her valuable comments and support of this work.