The aim of this research was to determine priming effects (PEs) triggered by mucus of earthworms (Aporrectodea caliginosa, Savigny) in relation to plant residue mineralization and humufication. The influence of mucus was compared with that of glucose and ammonium (NH4Cl) as some easily available substrates added in amounts equivalent to the amount of organic carbon (glucose) or ammonium (NH4Cl) in the initial mucus. To verify real PEs direct connected with plant residue turnover, fresh leaves fragments (Elytrigia repense) were mixed with quartz sand devoid of organic matter. The plant residue mineralization expressed in loss of organic carbon was stimulated (from 11% to 20%) by single-pulse inputs of all primers whereas humification expressed in increase (from 20 to 39%) of humic substances (HS) and humic acids (HA) contents was triggered only by earthworm mucus and ammonium addition. Thus, the real PE induced by earthworm mucus was confirmed for the first time. The greatest yields of humic acids as well as the greatest optical density of HA (HA aromatization) were found in samples treated by earthworm mucus. Hence, not only amount but the quality of soil humus was affected by earthworm mucus priming. The duration of the mucus-mediated priming effects may be delayed during 30–90 days depending upon soil parameters under study. The results highlight the importance of excretory activity of earthworms in quantitative and especially qualitative changes of humus.In soil biology the term priming effects describes the changes in the turnover of soil organic matter (SOM) mediated by adding organic or mineral substances: plant rhizodeposition, easy decomposable organic substances, mineral-N fertilizers Generally, many authors provide information on the influence of earthworms on transformation of plant residues when they are ingested. They did not, however, address the role of earthworms for priming effects inducing by earthworm mucus. It is not yet clear how affects single-pulse input of earthworm mucus on PEs in soils, when the ingestion is excluded. The pulse mucus impact can occur in making by the earthworms burrow walls (drillosphere). This is specifically true for mineralization and humification of plant residues. In terms of the effect of earthworm mucus on humification, information regarding induced by earthworm mucus changes in humic substances which were newly formed during plant residue decomposition is lacking. Humus is one of the important constitutes of soils affecting soil properties as well as global C cycle. For this reason, experimental model with earthworm mucus is crucial to develop both PE dynamic study and understanding of mechanisms related to mineralization and humification of plant residues. The aim of this study was to investigate whether the mucus earthworm can cause priming effects on plant residue mineralization and humification. Individuals of most abundant in grasslands and agricultural ecosystems endogeic earthworm species Endogeic earthworm To verify real PEs direct connected with plant residue turnover, the plant mass was thoroughly mixed (in 1:10) with quartz sand that was previously ignited at 700 °C so as to devoid of organic matter. Plant material for incubation was fresh leaves of couch grass ( The determination of humic substances (HS) based on the properties of solubility in the alkaline aqueous solutions used as extractants The experiment consisted of four independent measurements of the parameter investigated: four soil (plant) samples were taken from four pots. Data were subjected to analysis of variance procedures (one-way ANOVA). Statistical significances of the means were determined by Student–Newman–Keuls (S–N–K) test at Greater mineralization of fresh plant residue was observed during shorter first 15 days period, where nearly three times as much organic C was mineralized than between days 15 and 90 ( The greatest yields of HS and HA were found at 15–30 days whereas at the end of the experiment, the HS and HA contents decreased about by 2-times compared with that at 30 day ( Real priming effects are changes of SOM turnover whereas apparent priming effects are accelerated turnover of microbial biomass that is unconnected with SOM turnover Such accelerated by primers decomposition is usually explained as an activation of microorganisms trough an increased availability of energy The amount of labile carbon added can affect the direction and degree of priming effects. Fontaine et al. Based on new analytical instrumentation, the process of biodegradation and humification cannot be separated, and the relatively resistant organic molecules are selectively concentrated into humic substances Despite the high humification rates, when HS and HA yields were the greatest (between days 15 and 30) the formation of the humic substances was triggered by ammonium (by 20–45%) and earthworm mucus (21–29%). In addition, the earthworm mucus induced (by 20%) the greatest optical density of HA, i.e. appearance of relatively highly aromatic humic acids, that was observed at the end of the experiment ( In contrast to mucus and ammonium, glucose did not affect the humification rates. It seems likely that the stimulation of plant residue humification mediated by mucus and ammonium depends at least partially on the supply of nitrogen to soil microorganisms. Previously, we found that single-pulse inputs of Positive PE becomes evident in a release of soil-derived nitrogen, carbon or other elements while the negative PE in their immobilization In conclusion, there is evidence for the first time that earthworm mucus as a waste product of these invertebrates remaining in the soil can drive mineralization and humification of plant residues. The earthworm mucus caused strong qualitative changes in humic substance composition while the quantitative changes were rather small. In equivalent amounts, earthworm mucus cause similar or even greater priming effects in plant residue mineralization and especially humification compared with the well studied primers as glucose and ammonia. The duration of the priming effects may be delayed at least during 30–90 days depending upon soil parameters under study. Results of this study highlight the importance of excretory activity of earthworm in humus formation. It seems that earthworms can trigger this process even if a passage of the soil trough their intestines would be completely eliminated, what happens in burrow walls (drillosphere) of the invertebrates. This work was supported by grant from the