To liberate gold from refractory pyrite, oxidative destruction techniques that consume lots of energy and generate acidic waste streams are custom. As an alternative the “bio-reduction” of pyrite is proposed and investigated in this study. Bio-reduction is an anaerobic process based on sulfate/sulfur reducing bacteria which are thought to be able to use pyrite-sulfur as a possible electron acceptor. The conversion of pyrite-sulfur into hydrogen sulfide is advantageous because energy is saved and the generation of an acidic waste stream is prevented. In addition, the generated H2S can be used to produce elemental sulfur, or even gold lixiviants such as thiosulfate or bisulfide. Batch experiments under anaerobic conditions showed that two effects can inhibit bio-reduction; methane formation and sulfide accumulation. In a gas lift loop reactor operated at pH 5, temperature of 35°C, and with continuous sulfide removal no evidence of pyrite bio-reduction was found. Though the sulfate reducing bacteria survived, they did not utilize pyrite-sulfur as an electron acceptor under the chosen conditions.Sulfide minerals such as pyrite can contain significant concentrations of gold often present as sub-micron particles (Au A possible way to lower the energy demand and to prevent the formation of sulfuric acid is the reduction of sulfide minerals. Chemical reduction at elevated temperature with H If it is possible to achieve this reduction reaction at low temperature using bacteria as catalysts to liberate gold from pyrite, the large amounts of oxygen, the need for cooling, and the neutralization of sulfuric acid can be avoided. Furthermore, the generated H This paper investigates the feasibility of bio-reduction via thermodynamics, batch experiments, and a gas lift loop reactor experiment. Although pyrite's cubic lattice is very stable, it is susceptible to biological oxidation reactions. The primary role of bacteria in the bio-oxidation process of pyrite is the conversion of aqueous Fe Depending on the pH conditions the products of bio-reduction (Eq. Bio-reduction, like bio-oxidation, is a bacterial dependent process, so the conditions selected should be favorable for sulfate/sulfur reducers. Temperature and pH values selected are: 35 However, bio-reduction cannot be completely excluded since the actual Gibbs free energy value (Δ A hand specimen of pyrite from Huanzala, Peru, was ground to a particle size < A defined medium dissolved in demineralized water was used. All chemicals were of analytical grade and supplied by Merck. The medium of the batch tests contained (in g/L): KH Trace elemental solutions were based on Sludges from different sources proven to contain bacteria that were able to reduce sulfate (sulfur) were used. One sample, sand-filter backwash water (BWW), was taken from the wastewater treatment plant of a Dutch oil refinery. Other sludges were obtained from a lab-scale sulfate reducing reactor operated at pH 5 ( Batch experiments with 5 A reactor experiment with 250 The temperature of the reactor was maintained at 35 A gas composition of 95%H Samples of solutions were filtered over a 0.2 Different conditions were applied for batch tests, in duplicate, with pyrite and sludge. Three parameters were varied per run: Gas composition, pH, and temperature. Batch codes are based on these conditions: The first number represents temperature (°C), the second pH and the letter(s) H or HC refer to a gas phase of 100%H The consumption of H A steady decrease in pressure, as a result of sampling and pressure measurement, was observed for pyrite exposed to a H The rapid pressure decrease observed in the batch tests 55-7-HC and 55-5-HC was found to be a result of methane formation: at the end of the experiment ∼ Together with the consumption of hydrogen, the formation of sulfide by bacteria/archaea could be an indication that pyrite is reduced, though pyrite reduction is not the only sulfide producing reaction. Under the selected conditions, sulfate (sulfur) can be reduced as well, which was proven by blank sludge experiments (data not shown). A sulfate concentration of 0.1 to 0.2 Reduction of sulfate, either added via sludge and/or mineral, will contribute to the formation of sulfide Sulfide Batch tests were useful to select conditions for the gas lift loop reactor experiment. Methane formation, an unwanted side reaction, should be prevented as much as possible by choosing a CO The pH of the batch tests was buffered with phosphate. For pH 7 this worked, but batch tests performed at pH 5 started, through the addition of sludge, at an initial pH value of 5.7. The pH in the reactor was therefore kept constant by controlled acid/base addition instead. To achieve bio-reduction of pyrite it is essential to keep the sulfide At pH 5 sulfate reduction, and possible bio-reduction of mineral S, is favored at a temperature of 35 Results of a gas lift loop reactor run with pyrite at pH 5, 35 Pyrite in medium gives an initial sulfate value of 0.3 Other parameters measured during the reactor run are shown in A thermodynamic evaluation of pyrite bio-reduction showed that in theory it is possible for bacteria/archaea to gain enough energy from this reaction for their growth and maintenance. However, to achieve this, sufficient hydrogen should be available and the concentration of H Methanogenic bacteria/archaea are able to convert hydrogen and carbon dioxide to methane according to the following reaction: This reaction, with a standard Gibbs free energy of − Another side reaction is sulfate reduction. Sulfate reduction, as described in equation Eq. (4) results in the following standard Gibbs free energy values of: − To avoid methane formation and the accumulation of sulfide a controlled experiment was performed in a gas lift loop reactor at pH 5 and a temperature of 35 If bio-reduction of pyrite is not feasible via direct donation of electrons, but depends on the dissolution of the mineral, the reaction is expected to proceed very slowly at pH 5, 35 The reactor was operated over a period of 40 One source of hope for bio-reduction as a process is that this study only investigated cubic and rather pure pyrite. Thermodynamics for this type of pyrite are less favorable than for gold bearing pyrite ores, which always have high amounts of arsenic ( The use of batch tests was found to be efficient to screen different conditions for the bio-reduction process. In theory, bio-reduction is possible when hydrogen sulfide concentrations are kept sufficiently low. In batch tests two side reactions occurred: methane formation and sulfide accumulation as a result of sulfate reduction. To suppress methane formation and accumulation of sulfide a gas lift loop reactor run was performed at pH 5, 35 The WUR authors like to thank