Controlled sulphide precipitation was examined in this study for the recovery of copper and nickel–cobalt concentrates from liquors originating from leaching manganese deep ocean nodules in FeSO4–H2SO4–H2O solutions. The metal ions studied include Co2+, Cu2+, Fe2+, Ni2+, Mn2+ and Zn2+. Promising results were obtained when copper and nickel–cobalt concentrates were precipitated with 5.5% solution of (NH4)2S. This was added at optimised flow rate of 0.15 g S2−/min per 1 L of processed solution at the laboratory temperature, pH=1.0 (copper precipitation) and pH=3.0 (nickel–cobalt precipitation).Ores or concentrates in which small amounts of valuable elements accompany the main metal have been often processed in metallurgical industry. If metals are produced from such materials by hydrometallurgical methods, minor valuable metals are precipitated from leach liquors before the extraction of the main metal. Sulphide precipitation makes high degree of heavy metal removal possible over a broad pH range and has several advantages over hydroxide or carbonate precipitation, such as the low solubility and high stability of metal sulphides. Different reagents have been utilised as sulphide donors such as hydrogen, ammonium, sodium or calcium sulphides. A common problem associated with these precipitation agents is that they cause a rapid formation of metal sulphides, resulting in non-selective precipitation. In addition, such metal sulphides exhibit small particle size and difficult phase separation. One possible approach to overcome these difficulties is using controlled addition of sulphide ions. Controlled addition of sulphide ions, i.e. controlled concentration of sulphide ions in processed solutions, makes possible selective separation of metals, which precipitate both from alkaline or acidic solutions. The optimum concentration of sulphide ions, which is adequate for selective separations of individual metals, depends significantly on the solubility products of the corresponding metal sulphides and on the pH value at which the precipitation is carried out. For example, controlled sulphide precipitation was successfully applied for selective removal of Co from manganese sulphate solutions ( Controlled sulphide precipitation using (NH Solubility products of metal sulphides of interest are listed in In the initial experiments, precipitation curves of Co, Cu, Ni, Zn, Mn and Fe were established to determine optimum conditions for selective precipitation of their sulphides. In these experiments, the conditions of which were chosen using literature data ( pH value ranging over 1.0, 2.0 and 3.0 flow rate of (NH The results obtained were used to establish conditions of two-stage sulphide precipitation leading to formation of copper and cobalt–nickel concentrates. In this study, copper and cobalt–nickel concentrates were obtained from manganese deep ocean nodules originating from the IOM area, located in the Clarion-Clipperton ore field. These nodules were mined in July 2001 during an expedition organized and sponsored by IOM, joint organization, Szczecin. Content of valuable metals in the nodules, as seen in The nodules were leached in FeSO Experiments were conducted at the laboratory temperature in a stirred glass vessel having a provision for pH control. The pH value of processed solutions, which varied from 1.0 to 3.0, was adjusted by addition of H A two-stage precipitation, during which copper and cobalt–nickel concentrates were obtained, was conducted as follows: the pH value of processed leach liquor solution was adjusted to 1.0 and maintained at this value during addition of 5.5% (NH Selected precipitation curves measured under various conditions are illustrated in The results of two-stage sulphide processing of solution nos. 1 and 2 (see Controlled sulphide precipitation with (NH This study will be continued and experiments proposed will be focused on establishing conditions of selective zinc separation preceding nickel–cobalt precipitation. The work was supported by the Interoceanmetal, Joint Organization, Szcezcin, Poland and by the research intention MSM no. 223100002.