Thermal instability and setting was induced in pork by comminution, and the presence of NaCl and a salt mixture. Meat batter production by cooking (70 °C/30 min) produced almost complete protein denaturation and aggregation, mostly by hydrophobic interactions. It led to a firm and elastic gel with high water holding capability, these properties being greater in the gel with sodium tripolyphosphate. Pressurisation (400 MPa/70 °C/30 min) produced partial protein denaturation and differential scanning calorimetry and electrophoresis showed that both salt-soluble and salt-insoluble proteins remained native-like after treatment. The presence of these proteins, stabilised by hydrogen-bonds, were responsible for reductions in the mechanical properties but enhancement in water holding of the pressurised products. Tripolyphosphate partially counteracted the pressure effects in the pressure/heat combination.Sodium chloride addition is standard practice in the meat industry to improve the functional properties of the systems. It appears to play a key role in the solubilization of myofibrillar proteins for subsequent denaturation/aggregation to give good water–fat-retention and acceptable rigidity/elasticity of the meat gels ( Post-rigor pork meat (M) from a local market with a proximate (%) composition ( Moisture, protein, fat and ash of raw (C, S, SP), heated-only (S-H, SP-H) and pressure/heated samples (S-400, SP-400) were evaluated ( TPA of processed (nonpressurised and pressurised) samples was carried out on five samples (3.3 cm diameter, 2.0 cm height) by axial compression to 40% of their original height; pressurised samples frequently rupture at higher compressions. Force-time deformation curves were derived with a 5 kN load cell at a crosshead speed of 50 mm/min in a two-successive cycles to calculate ( The proteins of the untreated (M, C, S, SP), heated-only (S-H, SP-H) and pressure/heated samples (S-400, SP-400), were fractionated in quadruplicate according to their solubility in 0.6 M NaCl (Solution A) and then in a 50% (v/v) mixture of this and 8 M urea (Solution B). The protocol was as follows: 10 g of the sample were homogenised in an Omni-Mixer (ES Homogenizer, OMNI International Inc., Gainsville, VA, USA) for 90 s at 2–4 °C with 50 ml of solution A, then centrifuged (Beckman J2MC, Fullerton, CA, USA) for 30 min at 20 000 Fractions F1 and F2 from all samples were fractioned, in duplicate, by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) in a Phastsystem horizontal apparatus (Pharmacia LKB Biotechnology, Uppsala, Sweden), using 12.5% polyacrylamide gels subjected to 4 mA, 250 V and 3W. The samples were treated as described by Thermal behaviour of all the samples generated was studied using a Perkin Elmer Differential Scanning Calorimeter DSC7/TAC7DX/PC (Norwalk, CT, USA) as decribed by One-way analyses of variance with an Compositional data are shown in All parameters were, in general, significantly higher in SP than in S formulations (  Processing ( All F1 fractions from unprocessed samples presented the typical profile for muscle proteins ( Heating-only treatments yielded F1 fractions with practically no salt-soluble proteins (residual bands in Pressurisation changed the F1 profiles similarly for both formulations ( A common feature in the F1 and F2 fractions of both the heated-only and pressure/heated formulations ( Some protein fractions were already denatured by either heating (F1 and R1 from S-H and SP-H) or urea extraction (F2 and R2 from any raw or processed sample), and were not analysed. Fresh pork muscle M ( DSC traces of the F1 fraction from the different raw samples were similar to the trace of F1S in Salt-insoluble proteins (R1) from raw meats and batters exhibited similar DSC profiles in all cases ( All meat samples and their R1 fractions showed a minor event at 20–40 °C that reappeared in the second scans. Cooking (70 °C, 30 min) caused practically complete protein denaturation (residual actin at around 74 °C; In contrast, the transitions in the middle zone of the DSC traces survived the pressure/heat treatment (400 MPa, 70 °C, 30 min), the enthalpies were 3.7 and 3.2 J/g for the pressure/heated S and SP formulations, respectively ( Curve F1S-400 of All the R1 fractions from pressurised products exhibited, to greater or lesser extent, the minor endotherm at 20–40 °C. This reversible minor event occurring consistently in all samples (first and second heating-scans), except in the aqueous-saline protein solutions and may be due to the melting of some lipid material. R1 fractions from pressure/heated samples also exhibited a broad transition (50–80 °C) with an enthalpy of about 2 J/g (difficult to assess because of shallowness) for both S and SP formulations ( R1 fractions must be also related to the R2 fractions ( On the other hand, the (F1 and R1) native-like fractions of proteins correlated with the rheology of the respective pressurised products ( Comminution alone enhanced the meat-setting properties in that the thermal stabilities of myosin and actin were modified and protein salt-solubility was increased. Salt, and especially salt plus TPP, increased protein solubilization, particularly of myosin, and induced thermal instability in the whole system. The addition of TPP increased the water-holding capacity and mechanical properties of common cooked gels. A dramatic increase in hydrophobic interactions with a parallel reduction in covalent cross-linking were mainly responsible. TPP was effective in increasing the water-holding capacity and mechanical properties of pressure/heated SP formulations with respect to the S ones. TPP affected the pressure/heated and heated-only batters in similar ways but pressure modulated its effect by protecting the structures stabilised by H-bonds from subsequent thermal denaturation. DSC was useful for tracing the gelling process experienced by the meat batter formulations when subjected to pressure/heat processing. DSC revealed that both salt-soluble and salt-insoluble moieties may constitute the native-like fraction that survived the pressure/heat treatment. These hydrogen-bonded, native-like structures help explain the differences between the functional properties of pressure/heated and heated-only gels. To the Comisión Interministerial de Ciencia y Tecnologı́a (CICYT) for financial support under Project ALI99-1105.