In this paper we develop a socio-technical analysis of the European electricity system. We show that the relationship between high-level grand visions of an integrated European system and more pragmatic bottom-up processes of electricity system development have been a feature of the European regime for coordinating cross-border electricity flows since the 1920s. Following a period when radically different visions of a European system were proposed, the nation-state emerged as the key site of system building and constituted the core of the technological and institutional configuration. However, European grand visions persisted and this led to the creation of various forms of transnational collaboration and coordination. We discuss whether this inherited technological and institutional configuration is compatible with the contemporary desire for a European low-carbon transition and we emphasise the need for more detailed analysis of socio-technical regimes and their dynamics to inform policy and enrich transitions theory.This paper develops a historical perspective on the relationship between a European internal electricity market (IEM) and national energy policy responses to the decarbonisation agenda. While much of the recent debate and discussion at the European level is focused on how to deliver more integrated energy and climate policies, it tends to be conducted without recognition of the long history of multi-level alignments and tensions between pan-European and (sub-) national electricity governance. In this paper we show that the relationship between high level The paper is written with a view to providing historical depth to the tension at the heart of current European energy and climate policy. Despite the efforts of the European Union (EU) in creating a harmonised approach to decarbonisation The process described above has resulted in a divergence between countries as they pursue different policy measures and low-carbon transition pathways, leading to what some commentators have referred to as a ‘re-nationalisation of energy policy’ in Europe ( The paper has two main aims: Firstly, to develop an understanding of the historical origins of the tension between high-level visions of a single and seamless European system of electricity flows, and more pragmatic processes of system building primarily located at the national level. This is with a view to informing contemporary policy debates about market design, the integration of renewables, and the relationship between different levels and scales of electricity system governance in Europe. The dynamic between grand visions and pragmatic integration, we argue, provides a useful conceptual lens through which to analyse key continuities which have shaped a distinctive Our second aim is to develop and extend the socio-technical systems approach to the analysis of electricity integration and low carbon transition in a European policy context. Much of the current research on European electricity integration is based on techno-economic appraisals of the economic benefits of integration, which typically downplay the complex political and institutional challenges involved in large scale system change. We draw on the The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: In the next section we outline our analytical approach which, as mentioned above, is based on socio-technical systems theory, and in particular the analysis of regimes for coordinating cross-border flows of electrical energy in a European context and their transitions. We discuss how socio-technical regimes and their dynamics have been conceptualised in different strands of this literature. Following this, we outline how our approach to the analysis of the European electricity regime contributes to recent debates in this field, in particular about the role of actors embedded in established regimes in transition processes. Here we draw in particular from Van Der Vleuten and Högselius’ ‘symmetrical’ approach to transitions analysis which stresses the need for openness to both incumbent and niche-led innovation processes ( The basis of the socio-technical approach is that large technological systems, such as electricity supply, are composed of interactions and inter-relationships, both between different technical artefacts as part of complex systems, and between technical and non-technical components, such as laws, regulations, and economic frameworks ( The issue of continuity and system change has recently been addressed in work in the sustainability transitions field ( Many of the early contributions to the MLP literature focused on innovation processes at the niche level and on disruptive patterns of system change ( Historians of technology Erik Van Der Vleuten and Per Högselius have developed an empirical approach to regime analysis which is particularly relevant to both this debate and our study of European electricity ( Building a case for a transnational perspective on transitions, and studying the evolving European electricity and gas infrastructures, their work makes three key additions to existing transitions theory. Firstly, the incumbents at the European scale are not only resisting change. To various degrees, European energy producers, large consumers, and regulators also pushed for change, whether in environmental policies or market liberalisation. Secondly, the nature of the regime itself has never been a single unified entity, rather a geographically varied and loosely coordinated assemblage held together by a mix of top-down and bottom-up processes. Thirdly, incumbent energy regimes do not form closed systems, but they In this paper we seek to extend and develop Van Der Vleuten and Högselius’ work on European energy regime analysis. Their study looked across the European electricity and gas sectors and provided a number of case studies – environmental policies, security of supply concerns, liberalisation reforms – of how these regimes were largely resilient in the face of   Grand visions and pragmatic integration are different lenses and perspectives on electricity integration which, as ideal types, have radically different implications in terms of the technical and institutional organisation of the electricity system. However, as we outline below, a key characteristic of European electricity integration during different phases has been one of increasing co-existence and interdependency between them. The analysis of the European electricity regime through this lens helps to explain how the multi-level political alignment and balance of power and influence over system change between the national and the European levels emerged. This has become a key continuity and is shaping current responses to the low-carbon transition. As we outline in detail below, regime evolution through a process of pursuing grand visions through pragmatic integration processes unfolded gradually during the course of the 20th century. In the early decades of electricity integration many grand visions were proposed, but in the post-war era pragmatic integration around core national systems was established. Rather than the creation of an integrated European system, this period saw the emergence of an embryonic European market as a means of linking national systems. We outline how the rules for cross-border trading, which became established in the 2000s and 2010s, has been based on a new market-based grand vision, the design of which incorporated important features of the earlier pragmatic integration approach. We subsequently discuss how today we are seeing a fracturing of this regime alignment. Shortly after the First World War, during a period of combined energy, economic, and political crises, electricity gained the attention of policy-makers. As a consequence, the first substantive rules and regulations governing the sector were developed on a national as well as an international scale. Early systems for industrial demand were also developed close to resource bases where production sites in emerging industries - printing, metallurgy, engineering - were supplied, such as the High Rhine bordering Germany and Switzerland ( Within nation-states the 1910s and ‘20s saw an increasing politicisation of electricity systems and their evolution, resulting in a change from the dominant role of private companies (often alliances between manufacturers of electrical equipment and financial institutions), to a larger role for public authorities ( As technology and power systems engineering knowledge advanced, the idea of placing control over the system into the hands of a single national or regional operator gained prominence. The growing importance of electricity for industry and society made authorities more aware of security of supply issues and the idea of electricity as a key strategic good for society gained political traction. In response, several countries installed so-called The question of what remit these load dispatchers should have and the geographical scope of their operations became a key point of discussion and debate. One option concerned the construction of national grids, essentially interconnecting the existing local and increasingly regional networks. One of the first explicit visions of this kind came from Munich engineer Oskar von Miller who proposed the creation of a German national system with the grid of the Rheinisch-Westfälisch Elektrizitätswerk (RWE) as its backbone, shown in While the geographic composition of these European systems differed, the basic engineering-logics of both visions were quite similar; i.e., electricity generation, often distant from sites of consumption, combined with large-scale synchronised transmission lines based on the use of novel high-voltage technologies which had not yet been put into practice. In both instances the proponents of these grand visions saw themselves as technicians improving societies, pursuing an alternative and non-political pathway ( Many of the early visions proposed by individual engineers and companies also had an instrumental purpose; to position politics in a way which enabled a particular technical logic to be inscribed into the design and configuration of the electricity system. This led to specific geographies of a European system being proposed which, for example, included or excluded the Soviet Union or Great Britain, depending on the priorities and interests of the particular proponent. However, while engineers at least rhetorically tried to refrain from engaging in politics, energy and electricity systems increasingly become an issue in intergovernmental policy-making. This A key development during this period was the League of Nations deciding to take the notion of transnational electricity systems up for further study. The attention and resources that the Geneva institution devoted to electricity interconnection was a turning point in the development of the engineering grand vision from the early 1930s. Prior to this the League had tried to get countries to agree to ambitious legislation on the exploitation of international watercourses and the international transmission of electricity. This led to little ratification however, and from the early 1930s an approach which tried to merge the national and European trends in resource governance and design of large technical systems was pursued ( The inter-war period saw the emergence of a pragmatic national approach to integration which was shaped by an alignment of engineering logics and political processes. This shaped the expectations of engineers and planners which became largely focused on ways of making the existing systems more robust, secure, and efficient ( In many ways there was a significant level of continuity between the interwar and wartime periods. National public authorities continued to extend their influence and remit over system design and coordination decisions, resulting in a minimal level of foreign interference. In some countries, such as France and the UK, this led to full-blown nationalisation of the energy sectors, whereas in others alliances of regional governments and private utilities remained in control (e.g. Germany) ( Alongside this domestic governance layer, new international governance practices became increasingly institutionalised through a process of Such pooling arrangements would however required stronger technical and institutional integration, and in 1951 eight countries founded the Union for the Coordination of Production and Transmission of Electricity By the end of the 1950s, the systems of UCPTE members operated under common technical conditions, at the single frequency of 50 Hz. The technological system tightly coupled the national systems with a European logic of rationality and efficiency. The result was a high degree of interdependence between national systems, where temporary shortages or surpluses in one country triggered an automatic response in adjacent countries, resulting in a very reliable electricity supply system, with no large cross-border disturbances until 2003 ( The European system which evolved over the 20th century was tightly-coupled, hierarchical, and dominated by monopolists. While European in character, it was primarily based on bilateral electricity exchange, and not multilateral trade. Yet, around the turn of the century a new grand vision was emerging, one of a European market. As part of the negotiations leading up to the Treaty of Rome (1957), cumulating in a European Economic Community, electricity and gas were discussed within the framework of a common market. However, it was argued at the time that the network-bound nature of energy supply rendered the introduction of market principles impossible ( The re-launch of European cooperation in the 1980s came with a renewed grand vision, one which included ambitious rhetoric on further completion of an internal market, including the postal, communications, and energy sectors, in order not to “drop back into mediocrity” ( Although the initial target for implementation of a single market for electricity was 1992, it was not until 1996 with the First Energy Package This period of change led to the creation of a number of new industry organisations and bodies which took the place of the previously dominant UCPTE. UCPTE became UCTE in 1999, indicating the separation of production and transmission, and a broader coordination body, European Transmission System Operators (ETSO), was formed with the aim of linking a number of cross-border transmission bodies. However, throughout this period the reach of the Commission was limited. It was not until the Lisbon Treaty, signed in 2007, that the EU gained a significant energy policy remit in the areas of energy market functioning, security of supply, interconnection, and energy efficiency and renewables. However, reflecting the historically embedded balance of power and alignment of the national and European levels, it is made clear in the Treaty that this “shall not affect a Member State’s right to determine the conditions for exploiting its energy resources, its choice between different energy sources and the general structure of its energy supply” (quote from Article 194 of Lisbon Treaty) Much has been written about the overtly political aspects of implementing the IEM, focusing in particular on the contested liberalisation and unbundling process which was opposed by many Member States ( As has been outlined above, integration was initially on the basis of bilateral electricity exchange rather than a system of multilateral and coordinated trading, with fluctuating prices as oppose to negotiated agreements between TSOs determining power flows across borders. Since the 2000s, however, a process for developing and agreeing rules for cross-border trade was setup and at its centre was a new body; the Florence Forum of energy regulators. In the late 1990s the Commission established two such fora, Florence for the electricity sector and Madrid for gas, which meet bi-annually in order to “bring together national regulators and ministries with important market actors and stakeholders, in particular network operators as well as industry consumers and traders” ( A key task for the Florence Forum was to advise the Commission on rules for capacity allocation and congestion management (CACM) on cross-border interconnectors, an important prerequisite for a European market. The Electricity Cross-Border Regulation The initial strategy for developing the rules for cross-border trade was a process of regional level experimentation and learning, the Florence Forum would act as an aggregator of these lessons and filter and communicate key findings to the Commission. The Commission amended guidelines to legally underpin the regional approach ( However, despite a recognition of the benefits of regional collaboration as a pragmatic means of achieving integration, it was only ever seen by the Commission as an interim phase ( The subsequent 3rd Energy Package saw a formalisation of this regime with the creation of the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators (ACER), put in place by the Commission to ensure that the new rules regargding the use of cross-border interconnector capacity are enforced. Alongside ACER, the European Network for Transmission Systems Operators (ENTSO-E) was established, which, along with being an industry coordinating body, was given a statutory role to co-develop, with ACER, the rules for the IEM in the form of network codes. The new regulation on A key source of coherence and strength in the European electricity regime has been an arrangement where complex scale alignments between regions, nations and the transnational level were made possible through a synergistic relationship between a high-level grand vision of a market and the practical operation and integration of systems. We have shown how this came about in the 20th century as consensus was built amongst powerful system actors that transnational interconnection offers technical and economic efficiencies, and was later formalised in detailed regimes rules, methods, codes and governance structures for the IEM. As we outline below, a concern for proponents of the IEM is that the rapid deployment of renewable generation in some countries is undermining some of the basic principles and presumptions of the TM. A particular source of frustration for European market advocates has been the introduction of capacity mechanisms The EU’s recent Winter Package titled “Clean Energy for All Europeans” Another unresolved issue which the market reforms will need to address is the changing spatial scale of energy system integration. Given that renewables and other low carbon technologies are increasingly being integrated at the distribution system operator (DSO) level, the Winter Package sets out to provide clarity about how future TSO-DSO interactions might be formalised. Historically TSOs have been the key system integrators and their central role in shaping the European system has been a strong continuity, essentially based on the idea of economies of scale in the generation and bulk transmission of electricity, and that the economic mix of generators is best achieved by sharing different types of geographically dispersed resources. However, a shift towards decentralised technologies and a more customer-centric, services based, energy system may challenge this economic logic and see the emergence of new system integrators ( It remains unclear whether such structural issues can be resolved through pragmatic responses like the Winter Package, or whether a more discontinuous regime change involving the formulation of a new grand vision will be required. Most recently, the EU’s wider energy integration efforts came together in the strategy for a European “Energy Union” ( Whilst it is easy to skeptical about the boldest promises of a political energy union in the EU, history show us that grand visions of European energy integration should not be entirely dismissed on the count of them being bold or unrealistic. As we have shown, they have been an important guide and coordinating device for regulatory and market design processes in the past. However, in a policy area that is constantly evolving and subject to rapid changes, not least the potential impacts of the Brexit vote on energy markets, it is difficult to determine when and if energy union might become significant enough to be called an overhaul of existing policies and recognized as a new grand vision. In this paper we set out to analyse the historical development of Europe’s electricity system and to identify tensions between the current market-based regime and the low carbon transition. Regimes, as defined in the socio-technical systems literature, are the rules that coordinate large technological systems like electricity supply. We discussed recent trends in the literature on socio-technical transitions which analyses the long-term dynamics of such regimes, and how some in this field are moving away from ex-ante assumptions about regimes as static and resistant to change, towards a more We developed a regime analysis of Europe’s electricity system and examined the historical origins of European electricity integration. This became strongly embedded in the decades around the Second World War. Following a period when radically different visions of what a European system could be were proposed, nation states emerged at the core of the system configuration, but the idea that the pursuit of technical efficiencies should not be constrained by territorial borders remained strong and this led to the creation of transnational forms of industry coordination and collaboration. This took different forms over the decades, initially as a process of technocratic hidden integration, which, from the late-1990s, evolved into a process of market-led integration. Although the European system did not develop according to a grand vision, in the sense of a top-down blueprint, a wider framing of a European system and the notion that technical efficiencies should be pursued regardless of territorial borders has endured, and this has acted as a key guiding vision and coordinating device for a heterogeneous set of actors and institutions. The shift towards markets in recent decades has not seen a fundamental change in this dynamic, rather it formalised the rules and codes for the previously loosely coordinated regime. Historical evidence suggests that the collection of organisations and institutions which constitute the regime of cross-border electricity exchange and trading in Europe has shown a remarkable ability to adapt and reinvent itself during different periods of transition, most notably following the liberalisation reforms of the 1990s and 2000s which threatened to undermine and dismantle it. The question arises today as to whether this market-based approach to integration and its associated material and institutional configuration is compatible with contemporary processes of low-carbon transition. Uncertainties remain as to how low-carbon technologies can be integrated into this system and whether this regime can be adapted to deal with potential technological, political, and organisational disruptions and dis-continuities in the future. It is certainly possible that these potential discontinuities may culminate in a reversal of the momentum of the European electricity market and integration process. As it stands, even disregarding Brexit, the future of electricity in Europe is more likely to be characterised by multiple and differentiated energy transitions, with countries moving at different speeds and maintaining a national lens as they develop strategies and policies in line with their own industrial priorities and resource bases. The connection between market prices and costs for electricity generation are increasingly disconnected, thus de-coupling European price signals and investment decisions. As a result, the long-term viability of the current European electricity regime based on a wholesale market driving system change remains unclear. We propose that our approach to socio-technical regime analysis offers useful insights to those involved in contemporary European energy policy debates. Much of what has been written about the EU’s role in the decarbonisation of European energy systems examines the design and effectiveness of specific policy measures in isolation and typically does not analyse the low-carbon energy transition in the context of the longer-run trend of cross-border energy system integration, a process which has been taking place for almost a century. Whether interventions are aiming at disruptive or incremental changes to energy systems, their success will be based on an understanding of wider socio-technical regimes which underpin and provide stability to systems, otherwise the form of change will be marginal and superficial. Regimes are contextually embedded and have quite specific dynamics and features which can only be uncovered through empirical and historically informed analysis. In historical terms the current period of uncertainty and apparent openness about potential future system configurations may be similar to the early inter-war years when radically different visions of what a European system might be seemed possible. History shows us that such visions have been based on quite different ideas and logics in the past; including economic, political and technological utopianism. Successful policies and strategies aimed at enacting a low-carbon energy transition in a European context, we argue, are likely to be the ones that are based on an understanding of the dynamics between grand visions and pragmatic integration processes, and will seek to intervene and enact change at both of these levels. We suggest that what may be lacking today is a new grand vision which creates a stronger political consensus around a European energy transition and which acts as a coordinating device for future regulatory changes and market designs. Currently these appear to be addressing problems as they arise in a rather piecemeal fashion, as oppose to anticipating change and reshaping markets in a more strategic way. In the wider field of transition studies further work would be required to develop these insights about European energy policy and system change. This should focus on more in-depth studies of regimes; in particular, the nature, origins and evolution of the detailed technical rules, procedures and codes which enable such complex systems to operate. An adapted version of our framework of grand visions and pragmatic integration might serve as a basis for this as it links these internal technical features of regimes with wider political and social processes, without straying too far from the key unit of analysis. The continual broadening of transition studies as an academic field, we argue, risks diluting its original contribution; the understanding of socio-technical regimes and their long-term evolution. The symmetrical approach to the analysis of long-term regime evolution developed here seems to fit well with a transnational regime such as European electricity which is very heterogeneous and relatively loosely coordinated, but it may not be the case for those embedded at the national or sub-national scales which may in fact be more ridged and static. Whatever the case, any claims about the nature and dynamics of regimes in transition studies should be based on historically informed empirical analysis. The authors would like to acknowledge funding from two sources: 1) the