Yield stress is an important issue in the dewatering process of mineral waste tailings. However, very few studies focus on yield stress affected by the tailing properties of true solid density (T) and bulk density (B), which are the two most common properties used to evaluate a tailing. In the present study, an estimation model for yield stress of fresh uncemented thickened tailings (UTT) is proposed and verified based on rheological experimental results. As the model relates to the true solid density, bulk density, and solid concentration (C) of tailings, it is referred to as the TBC model. The change trend of yield stress with the variation of TBC properties is expressed by the first derivative of the TBC model. Results show that yield stress increases with true solid density and solid concentration, whereas the variation is reversed for bulk density. This study enhances our understanding of yield stress and helps predict the yield stress of thickened tailings according to their TBC properties.A growing number of underground mines currently use cemented paste backfill (CPB) in backfilling-excavated voids. Backfilled voids stabilize the ground to allow mining of adjacent voids and increase ore recovery while reducing surface waste disposal. CPB consists of mine tailings (MT), binder, and water; approximately 70 Yield stress is one of the rheological parameters that is of great importance in several suspensions, including food, pharmaceutical products, paintings, ceramics, and mineral suspensions ( The yield stress of mineral–water mixtures, including UTT, depends on the physical properties of the mixture (e.g., solid content, particle size distribution, and shape) and on the type and magnitude of interparticle forces (e.g., pH and ionic concentration of the pore fluid) ( However, only a few studies have explored the coupled TBC processes that occur in yield stress. As mentioned above, most studies are focused on the concentration of solids, solid size, solid shape, and pH of slurry at the laboratory scale. However, these factors are difficult to test and are too complex for field workers. Hence, additional knowledge about the effects of TBC on yield stress must be acquired. The purpose of this study is to establish an estimation model for yield stress of fresh UTTs affected by TBC properties. The model is called the TBC model. The study can help us understand the flow property of UTT as a major factor in knowing and predicting the thickening performance of tailings. The materials used in the experimental study were copper tailings from two different copper mines. These materials are referred to as 1# tailings and 2# tailings, which were respectively used to develop and validate the TBC model. Tap water was used as the mixing liquid.  The physical and chemical properties of the 1# tailings and 2# tailings are given in The bulk densities of two tailings were determined as per standard GB/T 14684-2001 (6.14.2.3). A measuring cylinder was filled with a known mass of dry tailings and covered with a rubber flat surface. The cylinder was tapped until no change of volume of the tailings. The bulk densities of the two tailings were referred to the ratio of the mass of the tailings to the volume that it occupied in the cylinder ( Three tailing samples were analyzed for the true solid density and bulk density determination to ensure the repeatability of the results. The data given in As shown in As shown in  Yield stress is obtained by the regression method based on the test results. The most widely used regression model for viscoelastic material flow are Bingham and Herschel–Bulkley (H–B) models ( The fitting curves and equations for the 1# and 2# tailings shear stress–shear rate data using the H–B model are illustrated in It can be seen that the obvious concavities as the shear rate is between 60–70 At a specific experiment (e.g., the present research), the critical Taylor number is ordered ( This study assumed that the extent of water-filled tailing voids decides yield stress. Saturation degree ( Saturation degree can be expressed by TBC properties, as shown in Eq. Based on Eqs. The regression of the yield stress and saturation degree is performed to verify the model assumption of Eq. The regression equation of the yield stress and saturation degree of the 1# tailings is obtained ( Substituting Eq. Eq. The true solid density, bulk density, and solid concentration (from 67% to 76%) of the 2# tailings are substituted into Eq. A rheological property study of laboratory-thickened zinc tailings (3# tailings) ( As previously discussed, the yield stress of thickened tailings is strongly related to the saturation degree but not to the solid mass concentration of the different types of tailings. The simultaneous effect of saturation degree and solid concentration on yield stress is presented in According to As indicated by the aforementioned results, the yield stress of UTT is related to its TBC properties. However, this knowledge is not enough to understand how yield stress changes (increases or decreases) with the variation of TBC properties. This section discusses the change trend of yield stress affected by TBC properties (Eq. The first derivative of Eq. Physical interpretation: If bulk density ( We take on two hypothetical tailings (not referring to the tailings in the experiment) for comparison. The bulk density, solid concentration, and true solid density of the two hypothetical tailings are given as  In general, bulk density is more than half of true solid density. Thus, Therefore, Eq. The yield stress generally increases as the true solid density increases provided that the bulk density of the tailings is more than half of the true solid density. The first derivative of Eq. According to Eq. Physical interpretation: If true solid density ( The first derivative of Eq. As shown in Eq. As previous discussions, both the saturation degree and TBC properties are significant impact on the yield stress of thickened tailings. Despite these important effect factors of yield stress, the porosity dependence is another interesting element that should be communicated with the proposed TBC model. Besides, according to the previous studies, the fact is that the volume fraction controls the yield stress but not the solids fraction ( The saturation degree can be expressed by porosity and other physical properties, as shown in Eq. Thus, Eq. Setting The solids volume concentration ( Based on Eqs. It also should be noted that as the thickened tailings is produced by a filter press, its solids volume fraction may reach to a relative high value, which refers to the maximum packing. However, the tailings limit packing cases usually can't occur when the tailings dewatering mission is employed by a deep cone thickener but not filter press. The reason is that the slump of underflow of deep cone thickener is generally higher than 9 This paper presented and discussed the effect of true solid density, bulk density, and solid concentration on the yield stress of thickened tailings. An estimation model for yield stress (TBC model), which is related to TBC properties, was proposed based on the 1# tailings experiment results. The TBC model was validated using the test results and the laboratory study of the 2# and 3# tailings. The validation results show that the TBC model fits well with the 2# and 3# tailings test results. Furthermore, the first derivative of the TBC model was solved for true solid density, bulk density, and solid concentration. The results show that yield stress increases as true solid density or solid concentration increases; the effect is reversed for bulk density. This information enhances our understanding of the effect of TBC properties on the yield stress of UTTs and facilitates the adjustment of the flow ability of different tailings during the thickening process. This work was financially supported by the