In mineral processing industries vibrating screens operate under high structural loading and continuous vibrations. In this regard, this may result in high strain rates, which may often lead to structural failure or damage to the screen. In order to lessen the possibility of failure occurring, theories and techniques for analyzing machine structures are investigated and applied to perform a sensitivity study of a newly developed vibrating screen. Structural strength and stability of a vibrating screen is essential to insure that failure doesn’t occur during production. In this paper a finite element analysis (FEA) on a reconfigurable vibrating screen (RVS) is carried out to determine whether the structure will perform as desired under extreme working conditions at the different configurations of 305mm×610mm, 305mm×1220mm and 610mm×1220mm. This process is aimed at eliminating unplanned shutdowns and minimizes maintenance cost of the equipment. Each component of a screen structure is analyzed separately, stress and displacement parameters are determined based on dynamic analysis. In addition, a modal analysis was carried out for the first three (3) modes at frequency f of 18.756Hz, 32.676Hz and 39.619Hz respectively. The results from the analysis showed weak points on the side plates of screen structure. Further improvements were incorporated to effectively optimize the RVS structure after undergoing an industrial investigation of similar machines.Ability to diminish the occurrence of a vibrating screen structural failure under various loading scenarios requires a great deal of attention during the analysis phase. Vibrating screen is known as mineral beneficiation equipment used in mineral processing industries mainly for separation of many precious export commodities. RVS is newly improved screening equipment aimed at increasing productivity while achieving high processing efficiency In this paper, a case study of company XYZ was used to investigate the failures associated with conventional vibrating screens. These machines are often used in this company for segregation of mineral concentrates acquired from runoff mine with that particular quarry. Unfortunately the machines suffered successive number of failures which resulted in high number of stoppages, resulting in huge economic losses. In addition to this, fluctuation in mineral concentrates demand forced the company to acquire new machines to supplement the existing machines in order to meet up with the demand, thus also influenced their annual operating cost negatively. To investigate this further, a heuristic approach was adopted and is discussed in the section of this paper.  Ultimate failure due to stress exceeding material strength, instability (buckling) due to load combination and time dependent failure modes such as cracks and wear were established as the major causes of failures in conventional vibrating screens. There were numerous root causes of failures on vibrating screens that were identified during the industrial investigation as outlined in the fish bone diagram depicted in The RVS design relates to a new improved vibrating screen for use in screening materials such as bulk granular and particulate materials. The RVS uses a simple theory of reconfigurability to increase its capacity therefore at the same time enhancing the productivity of the machine. Higher screening capacity is an important requirement which results into larger screening surface; hence, wider vibrating screens In general vibrating screens consists of one or more screen decks depending on how finer the final product. The acceptable screen performance is mainly obtained by adjusting the angle of inclination, the feed rate, frequency and amplitude of the drive system. Many researchers have worked around the factors affecting the performance of the screens, but yet little has been done on increasing the capacity of the screen. Tsakalakis Related works reviewed in this article focused their efforts mainly on using tools such as DEM, FEM and FEA in solving industry problems. Based on the wide range of application of FEA in solving structural problems in vibrating screen machineries, this paper adopts this approach to analyse and optimize the structure of the newly developed RVS machine in order to avoid failure occurrence. The knowledge and expertise in preventing possible failures in vibrating screen is a good motivation in the design of RVS. In literature it has been anticipated that damage to shafts and other major components of a vibrating screen may often drive repairs, downtime and costs within the mining industry. To address this, Zhi-shan and Bao-liang, In order to prevent some of the failures, there is a great need to conduct a finite element analysis of each component of the screen to verify if the structure will withstand the prescribed loads. Structural failure due to impact of material on the screen structure must be minimized for better screen performance and extended screen life. Thus predicting of the stresses before the actual application is essential for the overall analysis. According to Mular et al. There are four types of loading that can be applied in dynamic analysis which include; Harmonic loads Transient loads Periodic loads Random loads Harmonic loads relates to the vibration isolation of the vibrating screen, transient loads may arise subjected to impact and impulse, while the periodic loads and random loads often used to describe wave motions which occur at random intervals. For any type of vibrating screen to perform its functions, there is always a vibration motion that occurs during its operation. From the knowledge of vibration machines, it can be easily affirmed that the frequency of vibration of any vibrating equipment must not equal the natural frequency of the systems. According to Nianquin Finite element analysis is very essential in analyzing the structure of the screen, in order to determine failures caused due to uncertainty of loads applied. Like any other vibrating screens, the RVS is composed of many different components with different functions, however due to the complexity of the structure and too many components; it is very difficult to generate a finite model of the structure using normal Computer Aided Design (CAD) software Chuanguang et al.  Adding boundary conditions is the first step taken to analyze a design for stress distributions. Hence in order to obtain accurate results, it is vital to apply the boundary conditions to the screen structure In this section, dynamic loading are described and applied to the screen structure; however the ANSYS To be specific, the bed depth which represents the height of the distributed mineral particles along the screen length was multiplied by the length and breadth for each configuration in order to attain the volume of the product. Furthermore, the loads were estimated based on the various bulk densities of the specified mineral particle samples, which were then converted into uniformly distributed load (UDL), combined with the mass of the polyurethane screen panels. FEA always requires that a material is specified for each designed component. The material selection needs to align to the type of functions that the machine will perform during its operation. For components such as vibrating motor, screen panels and bolts, material specifications are already known, as such components are commercially available. However for the main screen structure was specified with mild steel with a density ρ of 7.85g/m In order to minimize the time taken to run the simulation, the extra features that are not relevant to the analysis were removed. During this process finite element analysis uses mesh prior to generating results as shown in According to Song et al., Based on the results of ANSYS On the other hand, for the 2nd RVS machine configuration, the maximum stress of 24 Lastly, for the 3rd RVS machine configuration, the maximum stress of 22 Test of major components of RVS predicted stresses of critical joints and showed that respective weld points are able to withstand any extreme forces exerted on them. After modeling the entire design, it revealed adequate results similar to those calculated. The model was refined so that each piece may be examined to identify possible areas for redesigning. Overall results from the FEA showed that the structure of the RVS would experience structural failure on centroids of the side plates, and therefore stiffeners were incorporated to minimize the deformation on the side plates. After the introduction of stiffeners the result showed that the screen structure is able to withstand structural failure effectively. The variations in these results is due to the fact that side plates are responsible for holding the screen decks and vibrating motor, thus operate are under remarkable strain at all times since they are throwing the combined weight of the screen and the mineral particle products in an elliptical motion during screening. The RVS machine operates at maximum speed of 750 After a critical analysis of the RVS machine subsystems, it was necessary to make improvements on the structure in order to avert failure occurrence. The following are some of the modifications implemented prior to the machine development and fabrication as shown The suspension bracket was modified from using three structural ribs to a single rib positioned in the middle of the suspension plate The beam plate, which experienced high stress during the FEA analysis, was modified by bending the top section at angle for more rigidity and stability The machine height was also reduced significantly to allow a shift in centre of gravity The beam plate was modified from being a single independent plate to being part of the beam structural unit. Regardless of the side plates showing the highest stress concentrations compared to other RVS machine subsystems, the drive beam assembly is still considered the core of the RVS machine systems, due to the fact that it holds the rest of the structure in a stable position and holds the drive excitation motors which ensure efficient movement of particles across the surface of the screen. The high level of stress concentrations on the RVS machine emphasizes the need for ongoing structural improvements and optimization to address failure occurrence. The need for such structural improvements is closely associated with the type of loads imposed to that particular area of interest as well as the application there of. In view of this, experiments are essential to validate the accuracy of the results as well as the reliability of the method used in the study. The results imply that stress concentration may arise on the interfaces of the side plates and may further spread to other area of the RVS machine structure if used continuously during screening. Thus, interventions are required to avert these issues from occurring. With the increasing development of mining machineries, vibrating screens are widely used in separating mineral particles into suitable sizes. Thus, the effective operation of these machines cannot be neglected. In this paper, failure analysis was conducted in order to avert frequent failures on vibrating screens, extend component fatigue life, as well as ascertain inspection intervals. Based on the outcome of the failure analysis, optimal operating conditions for the RVS were established. In addition, a FEA model of the RVS was generated at 305 The financial assistance of the National Research Foundation (NRF) and Tshwane University of Technology (TUT) towards this research is hereby acknowledged. Opinions expressed and conclusions arrived at, are those of the author and are not necessarily to be attributed to the NRF.