Magnesium alloys with the low specific density are becoming increasingly important light-weight structural materials for automobile and aircraft industry, but their application has been limited due to the high reactivity and the poor corrosion resistance. It’s known Recently, Sakamoto In the present study, therefore, the effect of Ca additions on the oxidation behavior and the structural change of oxide layer in Mg-based alloy ingots has been investigated in detail. Mg alloys were melted and cast in argon(Ar) gas using a mild steel crucible and mold respectively. The cast ingots were machined and polished for TGA(Thermogravimetric Analyzer) and oxidation test. TGA and oxidation tests were performed at 440∼500°C for up to 7 hrs in natural air. After the oxidation treatment, the surface was analyzed using X-ray diffractometer equipped with thin film detector, FE(Field Emission)-SEM and AES(Auger Electron Spectroscope). For the depth profiling of each composition, the sputtering rate of AES was maintained to 90 A/min (based on Ta  Surface oxide layers were also analyzed using AES, but there was no big difference in the component change of the oxide layers between pure magnesium and Mg-Ca alloys in as-cast state [ On the other hand, AES depth profiles sputtered from the surface [ The thickness of oxide layer was calculated and presented in  After oxidation, the porous and loose structure of oxide layer was observed at the free surface in pure magnesium, whereas the dense and compact of that could be seen in Ca-bearing magnesium alloys. Accordingly, the oxidation of magnesium at elevated temperature could be retarded by the Ca additions to Mg alloys. In Ca-bearing magnesium alloys oxidized at 500 °C for 1h, the protective oxide layers were composed of the mixed structure of MgO and CaO, and mostly CaO at the free surface. The thickness of oxide layer of Mg-Ca alloys was much thinner than that of pure magnesium, which is attributed to the MgO/CaO protective layer formed at elevated temperature.