Steel-concrete-steel (SCS) sandwich composite structure with corrugated-strip connectors (CSC) is the promising structure which is applied in offshore and building structures. The behavior prediction of shear connections is of major importance in SCS structures. The present study evaluated the existing shear strength correlations of SCS sandwich structures exploiting experimental data and Finite Element Analysis (FEA). The considered system is a double steel skin sandwich structure with CSC (DSCS). Due to the limitation of the literature regarding CSC development, some new correlations were proposed and studied relying on several FEA results through the Genetic Programming method. The accuracy of the estimated shear strength predicted by the existing and proposed equations was evaluated using the FEA data and push-out test results. The FE models were verified through experimental data. Moreover, the correlations were investigated based on reliability assessment due to the high importance of the reliability analysis of such structures. Given that high accuracy in estimating the shear strength fails to necessarily lead to acceptable results in structural reliability analysis, the reliability of the existing and proposed equations was evaluated using the Kriging model by considering experimental data. This meta-model could predict accurate values with a limited number of initial training samples.Steel-concrete-steel (SCS) sandwich structures include a concrete core and two steel faceplates that are bonded together using mechanical shear connectors. The SCS sandwich plates were an answer to the increasing need for the structures with higher load-carrying capacity and larger flexural stiffness. The magnificent mechanical characteristics of SCS structures extend their engineering application from high-rise buildings Considering that the thickness limitations could not be neglected, the double skin SCS with corrugated-strip connectors (DSCS) was proposed, in which the only one of their ends needs to be welded to steel plates and the other end is embedded in concrete The current design method of SCS sandwich structures is an application of the concrete code although only some experiments are available, especially for the shear resistance, which can support the design theory. Accordingly, a recent study evaluated the shear resistance of SCS structures with bi-directional steel webs and proposed a new method to predict the shear resistance of shear connectors Structural reliability analysis To tackle this difficulty, Monte Carlo simulation (MCS) and its advanced methods such as the subset simulation The other groups of structural reliability analysis methods include surrogate-based models or metamodels, which previous studies have extensively used to solve highly computational engineering simulations for various applications ranging from uncertainty quantification A GA is considered as a heuristic search technique, which is used in artificial intelligence and computing for finding optimized solutions based on the theory of evolutionary biology and natural selection. GAs are great for searching through complex and large data sets Considering that the limited body of research is available on the CSC connectors of DSCS sandwich systems, the present study investigated the accuracy of the shear strength relations of these connectors. By employing FEM analysis results and through the GP method, some new correlations were proposed for approximating the shear strength of DSCS sandwich systems. The accuracy of existing and proposed correlations was evaluated using FEA data and push-out test results. Furthermore, the reliability of this system was analyzed due to the importance of the reliability prediction of this structure. Then, the Kriging method was employed to study the reliability of both existing and new correlations by experimental data. The shear strength of shear connectors can be approximated by performing the push-out test with a hydraulic jack for loading The push-out test arrangement is illustrated in In the present study, the compressive strength and modulus of the elasticity of the concrete in these tests were 37 MPa and 29 GPa, respectively. The mechanical properties of the steel materials are listed in This section introduces each of the procedures used to investigate the shear strength correlations of double steel skin sandwich systems. The GP algorithm is an evolutionary systematic method for developing mathematical models and enabling the computers to solve the problems automatically, starting from a high-level statement. More precisely, it gives the computer program the prediction ability By using the analogs of naturally occurring genetic operations, GP transforms a population of computer programs into a new generation of programs iteratively However, the terminals are the input arguments of the model and can be expressed as numerical constants and inclusive variables A major issue in the structural reliability assessment is to determine an accurate approximation result of the failure probability based on a small number of model evaluations. The Kriging surrogate model is extremely more noteworthy due to its ability to integrate accurately compared to the other reliability methods. The present study adopted the Kriging model, originally introduced for predictions in geostatistics and mining engineering, in order to evaluate the performance function By considering an engineering system with the random input vector Based on n training points and the vector Y of true responses at the training points, the mean prediction The Kriging predictor variance is estimated by Eqs. The best linear estimation of the performance function value at point To generate the correlations by the means of GP, the explicit solver available in ABAQUS was utilized to produce data. All components in the push-out tests including steel faceplates, shear connectors, concrete core, and load cell were modeled using an eight-node 3D solid element with a reduced integral format (C3D8R). Given the structural and loading symmetry, only half of a sample was modeled in FE for a pair of CSC shear connectors, followed by studying the overall sizes of mesh 9, 10, 12, 15, and 20 mm. Additionally, finer mesh size was used for a better simulation in the bond between steel faceplates and the CSC connectors, as well as the contact surface between the CSC connector and concrete core. It should be noted that for quasi-static analysis, mass-scaling was employed in the explicit solver. Different control parameters are relevant to the convergence criterion in ABAQUS/Explicit and are normally predefined to optimize the effectiveness and precision of solutions for a wide range of nonlinear problems. The concrete core adopts the concrete damaged plasticity model in the ABAQUS material library which uses the isotropic plasticity concept with isotropic damage to simulate the concrete inelastic structural behavior. For steel material modeling, an elastic–plastic model with the von Mises yield criterion and isotropic strain hardening rule was considered using the ABAQUS material library. As shown in faceplates, as well as the concrete core and shear connectors, were defined as a surface-to-surface type. The contact type in normal and tangent directions was considered as the hard contact, which transfers the interface contact pressure and the Penalty friction which allows relative sliding.  To generate the correlations associated with estimating the shear strength of DSCS the main variables were defined in  The push-out test was conducted to obtain the shear strength of the specimens.  All components in the push-out tests were modeled according to the specifications in  As mentioned in  The ultimate shear resistance of the structural system was compared with the push-out test results as indicated in  By employing the GP approach on FE results in  Comparing the predicted shear strength based on relative errors related to existing and proposed correlations were performed.  Regarding the experimental data, the Kriging model was made.  Reliability assessment is performed of the existing and proposed correlations as mentioned in  Taking into account the reliability assessments and the relative errors in estimating the shear strength of the system, the best candidates were chosen in The loading rate in the performed push-out tests is similar to the static loading and is considered as the independent of acceleration. Thus, the FE models should demonstrate quasi-static behavior. Comparing kinetic and internal energies are regarded as suitable criteria for evaluating the solutions. The problem solution precision is high when the kinetic energy is low. In other words, a quasi-static problem solution is acceptable when the kinetic energy fails to exceed more than 5 to 10% of the internal energy. In addition, these two energies should be evaluated independently. Thus, the kinetic energy has no excessive fluctuations. Otherwise, the FE model has considerable plasticity, which makes the results unacceptable. Therefore, a suitable loading rate is required for the quasi-static analysis. The present study aimed to develop several new correlations for predicting the shear strength of CSC in the steel-concrete-steel (SCS) sandwich system. These equations were obtained by using the GP technique on 157 FEA data and were then compared to the existing correlations. For this purpose, after validating the FE models, the results of them were fed into the GP code. These 157 FE models were built on key variables mentioned in the selected model. The ultimate shear strength of corrugated-strip shear estimations from new correlations derived by using the GP technique was compared with the shear strengths which were obtained from FEA results. The comparison criteria are the predicted relative errors of the equations which are displayed in As shown, the presented equations demonstrate relative errors less than 20% in most of the intervals except for GP3 and GP4 Equations in the range of 113 to 115 KN, which indicate higher values between 20 and 33% in the mentioned range. All four new correlations have approximately the same relative error in other intervals. This section compares the shear strength of CSC estimated by the existing correlations. As mentioned earlier, the comparison criteria include the estimation relative errors of the equations compared to the FEA results. In In this section, the shear strength of DSCS systems evaluated by the existing relations and the new ones are compared to the push-out test results. As shown in In the case of new equations derived by GP employing FE data ( Corrugated-strip shear connectors in SCS sandwich systems play an impressive role in transferring the longitudinal shear force between steel and concrete, providing transverse shear strength through creating a shear crack connection in concrete core and preventing from local bucking. Accordingly, their structural reliability is great of importance. Among all methods, the Kriging metamodel, which has obtained significant popularity due to its advantages, is employed to evaluate the reliability of the shear strength CSC. This model provides accurate predictions without the need for numerous initial training samples. Therefore, the reliability evaluation of the existing and the new correlations for estimating the shear strength of the CSC was executed using the Kriging model As depicted in Based on the evaluation of the existing correlations, Eq. The present study discussed the accuracy of the shear strength correlations of double steel skin sandwich systems (DSCS) with corrugated-strip connectors (CSC) using the Finite Element Analysis (FEA) and experimental data. Limited data are available on the development of these connectors. By using Genetic Programming (GP) method, new relations were proposed for evaluating the shear strength of DSCS system connectors based on FE data. Comparing to the Finite Element Method which is a numerical approach, Genetic Programming estimates the desired answers in much less since it is generally defined as a supervised machine learning approach that searches a program space instead of a data space. A single run in the FE method needs a huge computational cost in comparison with the correlations obtained from GP. Thus in optimization problems that always are associated with modifying the decision parameters, the convergence and achieving the optimal objective functions are possible at a much higher speed. Besides, exploiting the GP approach, the shear strength can be estimated without carrying out time-consuming experimental tests. The principal advantage of this technique is the ability to generate prediction relations without considering the prior form of the existing equations and the random mutation partially guarantees a wide range of solutions, thus GP can find good solutions in extremely less time. For this purpose, 157 FE models were simulated and verified by push-out test specimens. The structural reliability of corrugated-strip shear connectors in DSCS sandwich structures is crucial for transferring the longitudinal shear force between steel and concrete and providing the transverse shear strength. Considering that high accuracy in the relative errors of correlations makes no obligation for having the same trend in reliability perspective, the reliability assessments of the proposed and existing relations for the shear strength of the DSCS connectors were performed in the present study. To this end, the Kriging model was employed to study the structural reliability analysis of the existing shear strength correlations and the new ones, due to its superiorities to the other surrogate models. This metamodel is an accurate interpolation strategy which can obtain the prediction answers by a limited number of initial training samples. In addition, push-out test results were used and the Kriging code was developed in MATLAB in order to evaluate the structural reliability of the DSCS shear strength correlations by the Kriging model. Based on the obtained results for predicting the shear strength of DSCS systems, Eq.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.