The current work investigates the effect of temperature on the mechanical characteristics such as breakage force, breakage energy, yield force and effective modulus of elasticity of individual particles. This is important for modeling particle attrition at different temperature conditions. The results were obtained by employing uniaxial compression tests at different temperatures between 210 and 465 K. Besides giving results and analysis, this paper provides in detail unique particle's heating and cooling chambers specially designed for this topic and allows keeping particle temperature constant through the entire experiment process. Seven various particulate materials tested during this study: dead-sea salt and potash, GNP, silica gel, zeolite 4A, alumina and novolen 1040n particles, with different fraction sizes ranging 0.71 ÷ 5 mm. The results showed that the strengths of salt and silica gel particles increase with the temperature. Therefore, more energy is required in order to break these particles at high temperatures. Effective modulus of elasticity for most of the materials reduced at high temperatures confirming the particles become softer. Consequently, empirical models were proposed describing the distribution of the breakage force, breakage energy, yield force and effective modulus of elasticity versus the particle size and temperature.Mechanical properties of particles such as strength and elastic modulus are necessary material properties for modeling comminution processes and particle-particle, particle-wall interactions using DEM simulations [ Investigation of an individual particle's mechanical properties at high and low temperatures is important for several reasons. Firstly, at low temperatures, many materials become brittle so that they can be grinded more effectively [ For any specific type of particle, it may have an optimum attrition temperature – at too low temperature the particles may become brittle and easy to break, whilst at too high temperature they may soften, agglomerate or melt and lose discrete particulate properties [ This paper investigates the effect of temperature on the breakage force, breakage energy, yield force and effective modulus of elasticity of individual particles by compression tests. A custom-built heating and cooling system is introduced to allow maintaining the particle temperature constant throughout the compression process. The results are analyzed by statistical distributions and eventually, empirical models for the measured mechanical characteristics are proposed as function of particle size and temperature. The mechanical characteristics of individual particles are measured using a custom-built compression tester [ In order to investigate the effect of high temperature, a unique heating system is developed and installed. The purpose of the particle heating system is to maintain the particle temperature constant throughout the test. For this reason, the heating chamber is integrated to existing compression tester and the particle is heated by heating the surrounding air inside the chamber ( Particle cooling is performed using miniature cryogenic system. The system was also developed and integrated to existing compression tester. It consists of cryogenic chamber and uses liquid nitrogen and ice to cool the particles to the desired temperature ( Once the tested particle is located on the lower contact plate, the punch descends quickly along with the heating or cooling chamber for a distance of about 125% of the approximate particle size. At this stage, there is no contact between the punch and the tested particle and the chamber is located properly on the lower contact surface as described in Seven different particulate materials were tested during this study ( Inability to measure the true temperature of the particle directly during the compression test is a shortcoming of current design of the chambers. This temperature is estimated by measuring the surrounding air inside the chambers. Some experiments were conducted with salt particles without applying any mechanical load in order to check the difference between these two temperatures. For this purpose, a thermocouple was attached inside a bore of 1 mm diameter in a 5 mm salt particle made earlier using adhesive nonconductive component (see It should be noted that while replacing the broken particle at the end of each experiment with a new particle, the difference between the particle and chamber temperatures are much higher than 5 K. For this reason, the chamber's set point temperature should be kept constant for a certain period of time to let the particle reach the same steady state condition. This period can be estimated using heat transfer models. As the particle sizes of all investigated materials are small (0.71 – 5 mm), it is reasonable to assume that the temperature is uniformly distributed inside the particle and the surface convection resistance is large compared to the internal conduction resistance of the particle. Based on this assumption, the particle temperature ( To verify the assumption for Eq. Subsequently, the time required for the particle to reach the steady state temperature of the chamber can be estimated for all the measured materials using Eqs. Based on Eq. Typical force-displacement experimental curves for individual particles of the tested materials at room temperature are presented in The effective modulus of elasticity is defined as: It is clear from The force-displacement characterization described above is relevant to compression of a single particle. However, it is inappropriate to characterize a material based only on the results of a single experiment. Therefore, a defined number of particles for each fraction size and temperature were compressed to represent the results by a statistical distribution. This number was defined using a method presented by Portnikov et al. [ According to Now it is possible to check quantitatively the dependence of different mechanical characteristics on particle temperature and size.  The theory of the temperature dependence of material elastic constants, such as Young's modulus, was first developed by Born and Huang [ The material's strength should also decrease with the temperature as the ideal strength, i.e. the stress at which the interatomic bonds rapture is proportional to the material's Young's modulus [  Eqs. Experimental results presented in The apparent breakage and yield stresses represent the ratio between the applied force and the particle cross-section area. In addition, it was shown in previous studies that the apparent breakage and yield stresses decrease as the particle size increases [    By substituting Eq. Each model has four material dependent empirical parameters: Based on the model of Rozenblat et al. [ By substituting Eq. The model has two material dependent empirical parameters: As salt particles have the highest number of measured sizes and temperatures, the model was checked and validated only for salt particles. Based on the model of Wachtman et al. [ This model was introduced originally for Young's modulus of solid materials and was shown to give very good results for Al In order to find the dependence of By merging Eqs. The model has six empirical parameters and they are summarized for salt particles in  In the current study, the effect of temperature on the mechanical characteristics' behavior of individual particles was investigated. The single particle compression tests were performed for seven different particulate materials with different fraction sizes in the range of 0.71–5 mm and with different temperatures in the range of 210 – 465 K. The measured mechanical characteristics were statistically analyzed for each temperature and particle size interval, which leads to the following conclusions: The breakage and yield apparent strengths of salt and silica gel particles increase with the temperature. However, the apparent breakage strength of GNP decreased and the apparent yield strength remained unchanged within the measured range of temperatures. The effective modulus of elasticity for most of the tested materials decreased with the temperature indicating that the material becomes softer. Taking power consumptions views, it was found that the breakage energy increases with the temperature for salt, silica gel, potash and GNP particles showing that it requires more energy in order to break these particles at high temperatures. Mechanical characteristics of alumina and zeolite 4A particles remain unchanged within the measured range of temperatures. In addition, different trends found for different materials need to be further investigated and analyzed. As a result of this study, empirical models were proposed to describe the distribution of the breakage force, breakage energy, yield force and effective modulus of elasticity depending on the particle size and temperature.  Empirical parameter [J/m Empirical parameters [Pa] Empirical parameter [Pa] Empirical parameter of the force-displacement relationship [Nm Specific heat capacity [J/kgK] Distribution wideness – Particle size [m] Empirical parameter [m] Young's modulus [Pa] Effective modulus of elasticity [Pa] Effective modulus of elasticity at room temperature [Pa] Loading force [N] Convection heat transfer coefficient [W/m Conduction heat transfer coefficient [W/mK] Cumulative distribution – Particle temperature [K] Empirical parameter [K] Energy [J] Empirical parameter [J/m  Empirical parameter – Empirical parameter [K Total displacement [m] Poisson's ratio – Density [kg/m Empirical parameters [Pa]  Breakage point Yield point Particle Median This Research was supported by