The influence of an estrogen-deficient state was evaluated in this study and also its treatments with estrogen (E2) or with raloxifene (RLX) on the expression of osteocalcin during the periods of the chronology of the alveolar bone healing process (7, 14, 21, 28 and 42 post-extraction days) by means of immunohistochemistry reactions and histomorphometric analysis. Rats (200–220 g) with oestrus cycles normal were either OVX or sham-operated and divided into four groups: sham, OVX control (OVX/O), estrogen (OVX/E2; 17 β-estradiol, 400 μg/mo) and raloxifene (OVX/RLX; 1 mg/kg bw/d) groups. Histomorphometric analysis showed the sham group presented the highest mean value of bone formation post-extraction. The reaction of immunohistochemistry for osteocalcin presented stronger expression of osteocalcin with predominance at 14 and 21 days on sham group. The OVX/RLX group presented better results than OVX/E2, considering the expression of osteocalcin in osteoblastic lineage cells, but still inferior than the sham group. It was concluded that ovariectomy decreases the mineralization process and the osteocalcin expression during the chronology of the alveolar healing process that is not totally recovered with estrogen replacement or raloxifene treatment.Estrogen is known to play an important role in regulating bone homeostasis and preventing postmenopausal bone loss Raloxifene (RLX), a benzothiophene analog, is the only FDA-approved selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM) for treatment and prevention of osteoporosis in the United States and many other countries, owing to its preventive effect on the incidence of vertebral fracture in women with postmenopausal osteoporosis An interesting model for the study of bone dynamics is the alveolar healing process. The initial step of this process occurs with alveolar healing with the absence of systemic or local interferences The mineralization process, characterizing the final step of alveolar bone repair, occurs as a result of calcium deposition on the organic matrix of bone tissue, mostly composed of collagen. The participation of non-collagenous bone matrix proteins, synthesized by osteoblasts during the calcium deposition process Whereas the better quality of bone tissue increases the chance of success in the use of osseointegrated implants, which represents an important alternative for the rehabilitation of edentulous areas, we study the bone mineralization process of rats in different hormonal situations. Osteocalcin is an important marker of the bone mineralization process, therefore, considering the peculiarities of the alveolar healing process, the need for better understanding of bone tissue formation until the end of the process, and the importance of knowing the state of osteoblast viability after the ovariectomy procedure, the purpose of the present study was to evaluate the influence of an estrogen-deficient state, and its treatments with estrogen or with raloxifene during specific periods in the chronology of the alveolar bone healing process. For this evaluation immunohistochemistry reactions for osteocalcin and histomorphometric analysis were performed. The principles of laboratory animal care One hundred and sixty female Wistar rats (70 days) were maintained at a temperature of 22 °C, in a 12-h light/12-h dark cycle, with free access to water and rat food. The rats were selected for the experiment after confirmation of their regular estrous cycle. Rats were OVX The OVX animals receiving pellets (1.2 cm silastic tubing; Dow Corning, Grand Rapids, MI, USA) containing 17 β-estradiol (400 μg; Sigma, Saint Louis, MO, USA)–group OVX/E Animals were anesthetized (Coopazine; xylazine), and after anti-sepsis (polyvinylpyrrolidone iodide; Indústria Química e Farmacêutica Rioquímica Ltda, Brazil), the right maxillary incisor was extracted with a special instrument After 60 days, the animals were anesthetized and the blood was collected from the external jugular vein by cannula The morphometric analysis of the bone mass and trabecular thickness in the middle thirds of the rat alveolus An anti-osteocalcin primary antibody was used (goat anti-osteocalcin polyclonal; Santa Cruz, CA, USA). As a secondary antibody, a biotinylated donkey anti-goat antibody (Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories, West Grove, PA, USA) was used. The immunohistochemistry reaction was amplified with an avidin biotin system (Kit ABC-Vectastain Elite ABC–peroxidase standard, reagent A and B only–PK6100; Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA) and diaminobenzidine (Sigma, Saint Louis, MO, USA) was used as chromogen. Immunohistochemical reactions were controlled to evaluate the specificity of the labels. Hematoxylin and eosin staining was performed and used as a reference of the cytoarchiteture of the tissue. Data analysis was performed in a semi-quantitative manner, with scores ranging from “−” for absence of marking and “+, ++, and +++” for little, medium, and a great deal of marking, respectively. The clinical appearance of the uterine horns, assessment of the estrous cycle and plasmatic concentrations of estradiol confirmed the success of OVX and estrogen replacement. The animals of groups OVX/O and OVX/RLX presented diestrus smear, atrophied uterine horns and lower plasmatic concentration of estradiol. In contrast, the animals submitted to sham surgery presented the four regular stages of the estrous cycle, and the animals of group OVX/E Analysis of the histological events of all the animals in the sham group showed greater bone mass in the middle third in all periods analyzed. Between groups of OVX animals treated with estradiol or raloxifene, the alveolar bone formation rate was gradual and slightly higher in animals treated with RLX than the animals treated with E At 7 days post-extraction in all of the groups, the presence of a blood clot being invaded by fibroblasts, endothelial cells and macrophages, characterizing the granulation tissue were observed, and in some areas with the presence of neoformed trabecular bone tissue (data not shown). At 14 days post-extraction, a larger quantity of trabecular bone and osteoblasts located around the neoformed bone trabeculae were observed ( At 7 days post-extraction was possible to visualize neoformed bone trabeculae at the beginning of the mineralization process, showing an osteocalcin positive label. Early in the alveolar healing process, the sham, OVX/E The OVX rat has become a useful animal model that mimics the bone loss observed in postmenopausal women and is recommended by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for research on human osteoporosis The OVX clearly resulted in a significant alteration in the osteocalcin expression in all studied periods. The results presented here in suggest that the decrease in estrogen may possibly contribute to the delayed alveolar healing process by interfering with the extracellular matrix turnover. A delay was noticed in the reparative osteogenesis occurring in the alveolar socket of ovariectomized rats, which also presented an enhanced resorptive activity suggested by a profusion of osteoclasts adhered to the surface of new bone trabeculae, evident by the H/E counterstain. These results support literature data showing that ovariectomy-induced estrogen depletion can affect bone healing/remodeling after extraction by increasing bone resorption and reducing bone formation The results of the present study associate the expression of osteocalcin with the formation of bone tissue during the healing process of alveolar. Most of the studies in literature evaluate the osteocalcin present in serum, but not that expressed in cells and bone tissue, as was the aim of the present study In the trial to evaluate the interference of estrogen in bone repair, the group with 17 β-estradiol reposition was introduced for the purpose of comparison with the raloxifene treatment in the present study. Histologically, these treatments produced a better bone formation in rats, otherwise, the results were inferior when compared with those of the sham group. It is important to note that the worst results were observed with the ovariectomy group with weaker bone mass associated with low levels of cellular labels for osteocalcin in osteoblastic lineage cells. The OVX induces decreased secretion of estrogen and progesterone. Perhaps the synergistic effect of the two hormones on bone metabolism is responsible for the better responses in sham animals, considering that the replacement was performed only with estrogen. Moreover, the proximal femur metaphyses of sham and ovariectomized rats treated for 35 days with estrogen, raloxifene and alendronate were subjected to molecular analysis of the effects of these anti-resorptive agents on gene expression. The results obtained by the group of Helvering When comparing the OVX/RLX and OVX/E During the periods evaluated, there was an intense expression of osteocalcin in the sham group, with predominance at 14 and 21 days. The OVX/O group presented weaker osteocalcin expression, perhaps resulting from the osteoblastic apoptosis that ovariectomy induces, with the consequence of a delay in the chronology of the alveolar healing process. The OVX/E The mechanism by which exogenous estrogen inhibits bone resorption is likely to be the same as the mechanism of endogenous estrogen; that is, by controlling the production and stimulation of cytokines Raloxifene reduces biochemical markers of bone turnover and has beneficial effects on tissues other than bone. These benefits have to be considered when a long-term treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis is initiated. Moreover, a very unique characteristic of anti-estrogen drugs is the stimulation of BMP-4 production, a protein that plays an important role in the onset of bone formation in humans A study conducted in postmenopausal women who did not have hormone replacement therapy, found the highest maxillary implant failure rate (13.6%), which was higher than that for premenopausal women (6.3%) and postmenopausal women who had hormone replacement therapy (8.1%) The results presented herein suggest that the decrease in estrogen contributes to the delayed alveolar healing process, possibly by interfering with the extracellular matrix turnover, and this is not completely recovered with estrogen replacement or raloxifene treatment. We thank FAPESP for the financial support that enabled the authors to develop this study (process number: 04/07562-5; 05/51367-5).