Extraction is a complex and also a key unit operation for separating and recovery of bitumen in oil sand industry. It has been reported that calcium and magnesium ions cause reduction in bitumen recovery. Experimental evidences showed that hardness ions in water act as a binder between montmorillonite clay particles and bitumen droplets (hetero-coagulation process), resulting in a coating layer of clay particles on the bitumen surface. This layer of clay particles on bitumen droplets causes a barrier for bitumen-air bubble attachment and results in poor bitumen recovery. Therefore, if it is possible to prevent Ca and Mg ions from taking part in hetero-coagulation process then recovery should increase. In this paper, the results of a theoretical and experimental approach to handle the hardness ions effect on bitumen extraction have been reported. For enhancing recovery of bitumen in oil sand extraction operation, for the first time magnetic treated process waters were used. The idea was checked firstly by using a novel technique for investigating the interaction among components of a suspension of bitumen, montmorillonite clay and hardness ions from the interaction measurement of zeta potential distributions. The idea was checked finally by running three sets of extraction experiments in batch scale using process waters. The experimental results show that the bitumen recovery in extraction operation can be enhanced by using magnetic treated process water.Although there are some reports that magnetic field has no significant effect on water treatment Higashitani et al. In this study, we employed magnetic field for the first time to enhance the recovery of bitumen during extraction operation in oil sand industry. The study was inspired by some recent articles Kasongo et al. pH of pulp must be maintained about 8–9 (less than 8, the recovery is low but more than 9, bitumen droplets are unstable); new impurities should not be introduced; it must be economically feasible. Based on literature survey, we anticipated that applying a magnetic field might be a successful candidate for handling the problem. The three reported effects of magnetic field on water are: Increase in water solubility Increase in level of activity of agents due to removing or at least depressing the obstacle ions Increase in mass transfer diffusivity At molecular level, one limiting factor that inhibits or diminishes chemical agent activity involves the interaction between the chemical agents and foreign molecules both in the water and in the ore, which reduces the ability of chemical molecules to perform completely. For example, bitumen with negative charge becomes attractively bonded to positively charged calcium and magnesium molecules commonly present in process water. This molecular association decreases the zeta potential of bitumen that finally results in depression of bitumen recovery in flotation process. Our new idea for handling the problem of hardness ions in oil sand extraction operation was investigated both electro-kinetically and also running oil sand extraction tests with process waters in batch scale. The idea was checked electro-kinetically by understanding a novel technique for investigating the interactions between bitumen, clay and hardness ions in an aqueous dispersion based on the measurement of zeta potential distributions The experimental works have been done in two stages. In the first stage, the idea was checked electro-kinetically by measuring the zeta potential distribution of bitumen emulsion and montmorillonite clay suspension individually and also mixtures of them in presence of hardness ions. We preferred to check the effect of hardness ions because the effect of calcium ion alone has already been checked easily by controlling the concentration of bicarbonate ion Ultrahigh purity KCl (>99.999%, Aldrich) was used as supporting electrolyte while deionized water had resistivity of 18.2  For measuring zeta potential distributions, the bitumen/water emulsion was prepared using a 550 Sonic dismembrator (Fisher). Coker feed bitumen was provided by Syncrude Canada Ltd. Water was magnetic treated as Oil sand flotation tests were carried out in a 1 Each extraction test consisted of: Flotation of poor grade feed (liberating and aerating of bitumen droplets to float and form a froth layer). Preparing three froth samples in each run. They were collected from the froth floating at the top of the slurry surface for 3, 2 Froth analysis. Each of three collected froth samples was transferred to the Watman filtration thimble (from Fisher Scientific) and separating into bitumen, solid and water contents. Froth analysis was done by refluxing with toluene in modified Dean Stark extractors. Co-distilled water and toluene were condensed into a trap whereby the water was collected in a graduated section while the toluene was allowed to reflux through the extraction thimble. The filtered solids were dried in the vacuum oven for an overnight. The resulting bitumen/solvent solution was centrifuged to separate non-filterable solids. For measuring the bitumen content, 5 The mass of the water, solids and bitumen were determined gravimetrically. It was reported that bitumen flotation kinetics obtained with this set up and analysis procedures are highly reproducible In each run, most desired findings in each stage are: total collected froth, total solids in the froth, water in froth, suspended solids, total bitumen in each step, cumulative recovery (%). Total collected froth was calculated by subtracting initial weight of (Thimble Total solids in the froth was calculated by subtracting initial weight of (Thimble Weight of suspended solids was calculated by weighing the centrifuge tubes. Weight of bitumen in each step was calculated by weighing the filter paper. Cumulative recovery (%) was calculated by the following equation: Concentrations of hardness ions were measured by atomic absorption after centrifugation and reported in  As we already discussed in theoretical section, the measured zeta potential shows either single or two distinct distributions curves, depending on the chemical interaction in the suspension. Zeta potential in  Magnesium ion concentration remained essentially constant during extraction operation in magnetic treated sample because of no tendency for it to take part in hetero-coagulation process. Calcium ion concentration in magnetic treated sample was decreased in tailing dispersion but not for taking part in hetero-coagulation process. The main reason for the decrease in calcium concentration in tailing is that it was consumed in calcium carbonate precipitation because in the operating pH 8.6 there is no chance for magnesium precipitation. Reduction in calcium ion concentration after magnetic treatment was also reported by other researchers The results show that hardness ions, after magnetic treatment, have no tendency to take part in binding of clay particles to bitumen droplets (hetero-coagulation process) and therefore, the bitumen recovery improves. This result was confirmed in tests March 9 and 10 as Different approaches can be made to evaluate the effect of using magnetic treated process water on performance of flotation process. It is known that higher recovery of bitumen and lower solid content in collected froth are both desirable in bitumen extraction.  Behavior of cumulative recovery for run March 9 and 10 (■) in  The performance of flotation process can also be evaluated When Bitumen recovery from poor oil sand is highly depending on the performance of extraction operation. Bitumen recovery is depressed when the concentrations of hardness ions are above 40 The applied permanent magnetic force was sufficient to overcome whatever attraction might exist among the bitumen droplets, montmorillonite clay and the hardness ions. Zeta potential distribution of a suspension of montmorillonite clay, bitumen and hardness ions is modified by using magnetic field. Ca and Mg ions have least tendency to take part in hetero-coagulation process after magnetic treatment. Magnetic treatment of process water is a promising physical technique to enhance recovery of bitumen during extraction operation. Experimental results showed that magnetic treatment of process water has a unique phenomenon that is reproducible. Magnetic treatment of process water always improves final performance of flotation process in bitumen extraction operation in every condition as Finally, it is important to note that this approach to oil sand industry should be followed by more detailed experimental and theoretical analysis by other independent investigators and also to extend it to include other aspects of possible applications such as water conservation, waste water minimization and more selective separation operations. The NSERC Chair Programme on Oil Sands Research, Profs. Masliyah and Xu are gratefully acknowledged for providing experimental facility during my sabbatical leave in Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering, University of Alberta, Canada.