Background
                  Failed internal fixation of intertrochanteric (IT) hip fractures presents a significant challenge in the elderly, osteoporotic population. Conversion total hip arthroplasty (cTHA) and hemiarthroplasty (cHA) are both accepted salvage operations for failed IT fracture fixation, though limited clinical data exist regarding the optimal treatment between these procedures.
               
                  Methods
                  A systematic review of 3 databases (PubMed, Cochrane, and Embase) was performed using the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. Inclusion criteria were English-language studies that compared clinical or functional outcomes after failed fixation of IT fractures with total hip arthroplasty and hemiarthroplasty in adult subjects (>18 years of age). Data regarding research design, surgical technique, and clinical or functional outcomes were obtained and analyzed from eligible studies using a Mantel-Haenszel random-effects analysis model.
               
                  Results
                  Six studies with 188 patients (100, total hip arthroplasty; 88, hemiarthroplasty) met inclusion and exclusion criteria. There was no significant difference between cTHA and cHA for postoperative dislocation, reoperation, infection, intraoperative fractures, postoperative fractures, or stem subsidence. The mean change in Harris Hip Scores was significantly higher (P < .001) in the cTHA group (47.5 ± 4.9) than that in the cHA (38.9 ± 7.2) group at minimum 14-month follow-up.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Despite potential advantages of cTHA or cHA for failed IT fractures, there were no differences in complications between either of the salvage procedures. Our analysis found a slight advantage in functional outcomes (Harris Hip Score) for cTHA at a minimum 14-month follow-up. Our study suggests that cTHA and cHA are both effective salvage procedures. Additional prospective studies are warranted to further delineate outcomes after salvage arthroplasty performed for failed IT fracture fixation.Internal fixation with a compression hip screw or cephalomedullary nail is considered the standard of care for most intertrochanteric (IT) proximal femur fractures Revision osteosynthesis and salvage treatment with hip arthroplasty are the 2 mainstays of treatment for failed internal fixation of IT fractures. Both conversion total hip arthroplasty (cTHA) and conversion hemiarthroplasty (cHA) are generally accepted salvage options for failure of these fixation devices in older patients A systematic literature search was performed in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines and Cochrane Handbook ( Eligible studies were included based on the following criteria: (1) level I to III evidence, (2) articles published in the English language, (3) human studies, (4) failed IT fractures, (5) studies reporting clinical outcomes, and (6) full-text availability. Exclusion criteria were as follows: (1) basic science articles, (2) studies on primary hip arthroplasty, and (3) potential overlap of patient populations when study was by same author or institutions. Two of the authors screened all titles, abstracts, and full text of retrieved studies to determine eligibility. Disagreements were resolved by discussion between the 2 authors, and if a consensus could not be reached, the senior reviewer resolved the discrepancy. The final decision on inclusion was made on the basis of the full text of the article. The Methodological Index for Non-Randomized Studies (MINORS) criteria were used for grading the methodological quality of selected studies. MINORS is a validated scoring tool to assess internal and external validity for nonrandomized studies Included studies were used to extract relevant data including author, year of publication, sample size, study design, level of evidence, and surgical procedure (ie, cHA vs cTHA). The primary outcome measures evaluated in our meta-analysis included postoperative dislocation, reoperation, and infection. Secondary outcomes evaluated included intraoperative fractures, postoperative fractures, stem subsidence, and Harris Hip Score (HHS). A statistical analysis was conducted using Review Manager 5.3 (Nordic Cochrane Center, Cochrane Collaboration 2009, Copenhagen, Denmark). The heterogeneity between studies was evaluated using the I The results of the electronic database search are outlined in All 6 studies represented level III evidence. The noncomparative studies had a mean MINORS score of 10.8—indicating a moderate quality of evidence ( All the included studies were retrospective in nature. The data pooled from the eligible studies yielded a total of 188 patients with an age range of 21 to 92 years. The youngest average age in any of the included studies was 64.1 years The cause of fixation failure was reported for all 188 cases; lag screw cut-out accounted for 45% of failures (84 cases), whereas nonunion accounted for nearly 32% (60 cases). The mean time to fixation failure was reported in only 3 studies as 2, 9.5, and 40 months Of the 188 cases, there were 100 cTHA and 88 cHA performed. One study did not record the surgical approach used for the salvage procedure The implants and method of fixation used in each study were reported in varying level of detail ( A variety of scoring systems were used in the assessment of functional outcomes among the included studies, and the most common of which was the HHS The 6 included studies (188 patients) compared cHA vs cTHA as salvage procedures after failed fixation IT fractures. Homogeneity in reported complications among 5 studies permitted meta-analysis for the incidence of postoperative dislocation, reoperation, infection, intraoperative fracture, postoperative fractures, and stem subsidence. There was no significant difference between cHA and cTHA for postoperative dislocation, reoperation, infection, intraoperative fractures, postoperative fractures, or stem subsidence. There was a 10.4% dislocation rate after cTHA (10 among 96 cases) compared with 5% after cHA (4 among 79 cases); however, this did not reach statistical significance in the meta-analysis (relative RR, 0.75; 95% CI, 0.24-2.32; Differences in the reported functional outcomes among the included studies precluded pooling of much of the data. Two studies reported mean changes in HHS after cHA and cTHA In the series by Feng et al. Three studies reported comparable improvements in HHS after salvage arthroplasty without directly comparing cTHA with cHA Although many surgeons generally accept THA as the most successful salvage procedure for failed internal fixation of IT fractures, our study demonstrates no difference in complication rates between cTHA and cHA (postoperative dislocation, reoperation, infection, intraoperative fractures, postoperative fractures, or stem subsidence). However, we did find a significant increase in HHS of 47.5 ± 4.9 for cTHA compared with an increase of 38.9 ± 7.2 for cHA as of a minimum 14-month follow-up To the best of our knowledge, very few studies have been published about this topic with varying results. The failure rate for these fractures has been reported to be between 4% and 17% in patients with preexisting osteoporosis Several technical challenges must be overcome when performing arthroplasty after failed treatment of IT fractures. First, failed retained hardware, which often involve broken plates, screws, and/or intramedullary devices, must be carefully removed from the femur. Although special instrumentation can be useful to limit bone loss or intraoperative fracture during hardware extraction, presence of nonunion and/or osteoporotic bone may still limit proximal femur implant fixation. Often times, calcar-replacement implants or longer distal fixation stems must be used to account for the bone deficiency and to properly restore limb length and achieve durable fixation In the present study, there was no significant difference in infection, reoperation, intraoperative fractures, postoperative fractures, stem subsidence, or postoperative dislocations between either form of salvage arthroplasty. Although cTHA may yield favorable functional outcomes in some patients, any salvage arthroplasty for failed internal fixation can be expected to have higher rates of complications than the equivalent procedure performed primarily Reviewing the outcomes of THA vs HA in the treatment of femoral neck fractures The main strength of this study was our ability to identify a high number of overall patients by using an extensive search strategy with broad inclusion criteria to capture most related literature. However, we acknowledge several limitations inherent to the literature available on presented topic. First, our analysis is limited by the heterogeneity in reporting of clinical and functional outcomes, which preclude further pooling of data beyond what are presented. Second, the studies included in our analysis were retrospective in nature, which further reduces the quality of evidence provided by our conclusions. In addition, there were numerous studies that had to be excluded due to the lack of a direct comparison group, insufficient detail of the included cases, or inclusion of multiple fracture types in the cohort (both femoral neck IT and subtrochanteric fractures). Data on these potential subjects could not be sufficiently extracted for analysis. Third, multiple surgeons were included in the analysis who used different surgical approaches and revision prostheses, and there was a significant variation among the included subjects in regard to the retained, failed hardware. Although this variation precluded conclusions unique to initial mode of fracture fixation, surgical approach, or specific revision implants, we believe our results are generalizable to all cases of failed IT fracture fixation. Finally, the choice between cTHA and cHA at the time of salvage is ultimately subjective in nature. Our study supports previous literature that cTHA and cHA are reliable salvage procedures for failed fixation of IT fractures. The present study found no difference in clinical outcomes but did show more favorable results in functional outcomes (HHS) after cTHA. Nonetheless, salvage arthroplasty procedures performed for failed internal fixation are associated with increased technical demands and risk of complications compared with routine primary hip arthroplasty. Use of tailored implants and careful consideration of fixation method become paramount. Surgeons must understand the increased risk of perioperative morbidities and individually counsel patients according to both health status and functional demand when deciding between cTHA and cHA. Despite these increased challenges, cTHA and cHA provide acceptable clinical outcomes and serve as effective treatment methods for failed femoral IT fracture fixation. Further study of long-term outcomes is necessary to delineate the incidence and causes of reoperation for cHA and cTHA performed for failed internal fixation of IT fractures. The investigation was performed at the New York University (NYU) Langone Orthopedic Hospital, New York, NY.  Supplementary data related to this article can be found at