Flotation is a selective separation process by attaching water-repelling of hydrophobic particles to rising air bubbles to form a particle-rich froth on the suspension surface, which flows over the lip of the cell. Water-attracting or hydrophilic particles do not attach to the bubbles and settle to the bottom to be discharged. Flotation has been the workhorse of the mineral industry for more than one hundred years and has significantly been developed into many other areas, such as deinking of wastepaper for recycling, water treatment, and separation of plastics, crude oils, effluents, and even microorganisms and proteins. This article reviews the physical, chemical and engineering aspects of flotation, and the interactions between them.Flotation is a process of separation and concentration of one kind of particulate particles from another by their selective attachment onto the fluid–liquid interfaces. Froth flotation and film (skin) flotation are the best examples of flotation taking place on the gas–liquid interface. Film flotation occurs on a free water surface. Particles are gently fed onto the free surface, allowing the separation of hydrophobic (water-repelling) particles, which attach to the free surface, from nonfloatable hydrophilic (water-attracting) particles, which sink into the liquid. In froth flotation, hydrophobic particles are separated by attaching themselves to rising air bubbles to form a particle-rich froth on the suspension surface as shown in Small bubbles used in froth flotation produce very high (specific) area (per unit volume of liquid) of the gas–liquid interface available for particle attachment and are the most efficient for separation. This is the main reason why, of the known flotation techniques, froth flotation is the only one technique that has significant industrial applications and is described in this encyclopedia. For simplicity, froth flotation will be referred to henceforth as flotation. Flotation has been used by mineral and chemical engineers for the separation and concentration of aqueous suspensions or solutions of a variety of minerals, coal, precipitates, inorganic waste constituents, effluents, and even microorganisms and proteins. It is estimated that more than two billion tons of various ores and coal are annually treated by flotation worldwide. This figure, which represents about 85% of ores mined annually, is likely to increase in the future with the depletion of high-grade ore deposits. Coal flotation has also significantly increased due to the increased mechanization of mining methods that produces large amounts of fine coal particles. The scope of flotation technology has been expanded into many other areas, such as deinking of wastepaper for recycling, water treatment, and separation of plastics. Today flotation deinking annually contributes about 130 millions tons of recovered paper to the worldwide paper production. This figure corresponds to about 50% of the annual papermaking capacity. Flotation is widely used to separate valuable minerals from the rock and fine coal particles from clay, silt, shale, and other ash-producing matter. It is usually preceded by crushing and finely grinding the ore to liberate valuable particles in a host rock, and may be followed by metallurgical processes. One of the earliest flotation applications was in the recovery of sphalerite (ZnS) minerals from finely ground ores at Broken Hill in Australia in 1905. The first flotation plant in the United States, the Timber Butte Mill at Basin, Montana, began operation in 1911. The volume to commemorate the 50th anniversary of froth flotation, edited by D. W. Fuerstenau (see Further Reading), shows very clearly how the vast national mineral development of the United States, Canada, Australia, Africa, and many other countries began with the introduction of flotation. At present metallic and industrial concentrates recovered by flotation continue to increase.  Fine coal particles (below 500 Flotation has been used to remove ink particles in wastepaper recycling and is similar to mineral flotation in many aspects. Air bubbles are used to collect and separate hydrophobic ink particles from the pulp of fibers comprising mostly cellulose. The nonfloated fibers form the deinked product of the operation. Selectivity is not critical to flotation deinking but ink recovery is important. The feature of the flotation chemistry is the dual role of the surfactants used as the liberation agent to remove ink from the surface and as the collector to render the librated ink particles strongly hydrophobic. The standard reagent regime includes soap (e.g., sodium stearate), sodium silicate to disperse the particles, hydrogen peroxide as the bleaching reagent, and diethylene triamine penta acetic acid as the complexing agent for heavy metals. The flotation deinking market has grown extremely rapidly since 1980. At present, there are more than 600 major deinking systems operating worldwide. The deinked pulp is used in the production of four main paper grades: newsprint, tissue, printing, and writing grade in North America (36%), Europe (33%), and Japan (16%). Today 100% of German newsprint paper is made from deinked wastepaper. In water treatment, two flotation techniques commonly used include electrolytic and dissolved air flotation. Electrolytic flotation involves the generation of hydrogen and oxygen bubbles between electrodes. Electric power is supplied at low potential (5–10 In dissolved air flotation, the bubbles are produced by controlling the pressure of water saturated with air. Three main processes of dissolved air flotation include vacuum flotation, microflotation, and pressurized flotation. In vacuum flotation, the wastewater is saturated with air at atmospheric pressure. A vacuum is then applied to the flotation tank to produce small bubbles. This process has been used in the paper industry to recover the process water. Because of the expensive equipment required to maintain the vacuum, the flotation process has been replaced by pressurized flotation. In microflotation, the entire volume of water is subjected to increased pressure by passing the water down and up a shaft approximately 10 Flocculation is often used in flotation applications. The collection and removal of fragile flocs by flotation presents the difficulty of dissolved air flotation. The bubble–floc agglomerates are created by a number of mechanisms, including entrapment of bubbles within a network of flocs, growth of bubbles from nuclei within the flocs, and particle and floc attachment onto bubbles by collision, which is very significant to the flotation process. Plastic components such as polyvinyl chloride (PVC) can be separated from solid wastes by flotation. Plastics flotation utilizes the differences in the surface energy of different plastics. A number of flotation methods and surface treatment have been examined, including selective hydrophobization or hydrophilization of plastic surfaces by chemical reagents and physical processing such as corona discharge or radiation, and gamma flotation carried out in a liquid with a specifically chosen surface tension. Some plastics do not float in the liquid with the chosen surface tension, while some other plastics float. The critical surface tension to wet plastics is between 25 and 40 Several commercialized flotation processes have been developed for separating plastic waste particles. The separation of polypropylene from polyethylene was successfully developed by Mitsui Mining and Smelting (Japan). Flotation separation of vinyl flakes from polyethylene terephthalate was commercialized by Recovery Processes International (USA). In Europe, pilot plant processes for separating the plastic wastes by flotation have also been carried out by Daimler-Benz (Germany). For a better understanding of how flotation works, many aspects of flotation have to be considered. The most important aspects can be grouped into the following:    Successful flotation separations also depend on the interactions between the physical, chemical, and mechanical engineering aspects. A triangular representation ( There are many other significant areas for research, notably the mineralogical, economic, and environmental aspects. However, these aspects are outside the scope of this chapter. In the following, the three major groups of flotation aspects will be described briefly. Surface properties of particles and air bubbles are central to flotation and can be described in terms of particle surface hydrophobicity and surface forces. The surface hydrophobicity is normally measured by the contact angle against water, surfactant solutions, or other liquids. Forces between surfaces will be described in the next section. The ability of mineral particles to displace water and to attach to air bubbles can be described by contact angle ( The bubble–particle interaction is often described in terms of the change in the free energy (the work of adhesion), Δγ, of the system due to the bubble–mineral contact as Δγ=energy after contact – energy before contact =γ The simplest but less accurate way to determine the contact angle involves direct measurement of the contact angle between the mineral surface and the meniscus of a sessile bubble or a sessile drop or a two-dimensional meniscus around a surface of the mineral Wilhelmy plate ( The mineral plate in the Wilhelmy plate technique can also be suspended from a balance for measuring the vertical component of the wetting force acting on the wetting perimeter, which is balanced by the vertical component of the surface tension force. Knowing the wetting perimeter and the surface tension, the cosine of contact angle can be calculated from the measured force. This method is also suitable for studying the dynamic contact angle versus wetting velocity. If the mineral in question is available as a powder, it may be compressed into a cake with a planar surface, which can be used to measure contact angle with one of the techniques described above. To obtain reliable results the cake should be consolidated and should not re-disperse upon contact with liquid, which is a problem for less hydrophobic particles. Another procedure used in coal and mineral flotation is based on the liquid penetration into the porous bed of particles ( Recently, contact angle on individual colloidal particles can be measured with atomic force microscopy (AFM). The particle can be glued to the AFM microfabricated cantilever. The particle is then pressed against an air bubble and the force recorded. The principle is show in The actual flotation of mineral particles depends on a large number of interacting variables. For better understanding many aspects of the unit operation of flotation, and in particular the surface chemistry that is so critical in obtaining selective separation, a laboratory flotation device is needed in which chemical and mechanical variables can be closely controlled. Such a device, known as the test tube or the Hallimond (and the modified Hallimond) tube, is shown in Since contact angle and work of adhesion are the thermodynamic variables, they only describe the overall free-energy change occurring before and after the bubble–particle contact. To examine the intermediate stages of the bubble–particle interaction with an intervening liquid film, we need to know the surface force interaction between a bubble and a particle in water and the dynamics of bubble–particle interactions. Wetting films between a bubble and a solid surface, and the associated molecular forces have been investigated since the 1930s. Briefly, summation of all the interactions among atoms, ions, and molecules constituting the particle, bubble, and intervening liquid film gives a force acting between the bubble and particle surfaces, known as the surface force, which is proportional to the particle and bubble surface area (radius), and inversely proportional to the (shortest) inter-surface separation distance. Surface force has a number of components with different molecular origins, which include van der Waals force due to the dipolar (electrodynamic) interactions among atoms and molecules, electrostatic double-layer force due to the interaction between diffuse layers of electrolytes concentrated at the electrically charged surfaces of particles and bubbles in water, and non-Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek (DLVO) forces. The van der Waals and double-layer forces are fairly well investigated, both theoretically and experimentally. They form the basis of the DLVO theory of colloidal stability and are referred to as DLVO forces. The hydrophobic attraction between hydrophobic surfaces in water, which is one of many other non-DLVO forces, is the most relevant to flotation. The van der Waals force, The particle and bubble surfaces are electrostatically charged in water, forming the electrical double layers (edl). The diffuse layers of the double layers on the particle and bubble surfaces overlap at close approach, giving a repulsive or attractive force. The determination of the edl force depends on the charging mechanism during the overlapping of the diffuse layers. The double-layer interactions at constant surface potential and constant surface charge are usually considered. The actual double-layer interaction occurs between the two limits. The edl interaction force is determined based on the Poisson–Boltzmann equation, which describes the electrostatic potential in an ionic solution as a function of position relative to the particle and bubble surfaces, and has been found to be accurate down to separations of a few nanometers. For low surface (zeta) potentials (≤50–60 The hydrophobic (non-DLVO) force is not predictable at present and the following empirical expression can be used: Summing the double layer, van der Waals and hydrophobic interaction forces give a good approximation of the total surface force, The collection of particles by rising air bubbles in flotation can be predicted by determining the motion of particles in the path of the bubble rise. The analysis is based on the dynamic equations of bubble–particle interaction. Specifically, the equation for particle motion around the bubble is solved for the trajectories of particles as shown in Volume forces such as particle weight, buoyancy, and inertial forces, which are proportional to the particle volume and mass but are independent of the inter-surface separation distance. Surface forces such as those described in the previous section. These forces depend on the inter-surface separation distance. Hydrodynamic forces due to the resistance of liquid films between the surfaces. These microhydrodynamic forces also depend on the inter-surface separation distance. It is difficult to solve eqn Alternatively, the particle collection can be determined by directly solving eqn The use of froth in flotation is twofold. First, froth is used to convey the mineral-laden bubbles from the froth–pulp interface to the concentrate launder. Second, froth is used to remove entrained hydrophilic particles by the gravity drainage of water back to the pulp ( The starting point of modern description of foam and froth drainage is the so-called drainage equation, which describes the balance among gravitational and capillary forces, and momentum of gas motion and liquid flow in the Plateau borders (the liquid channel) in the froth phase. The standard drainage theory considers the Poiseuille flow in the Plateau borders with zero velocity at the gas–liquid interface. If the liquid content does not significantly change over the froth height, the effect of capillary force can be neglected, giving rise to the following expression for the superficial liquid recovery rate The first term in eqn The effect of the water recovery and drainage on the recovery of gangue particles has been investigated experimentally. As the bubbles rise in the flotation cell they collect particles with a collection efficiency, The above theory is applied to transient flotation processes, including the batch-wise processes taking place in the laboratory flotation machines. For flotation processes operating under steady-state condition, the flotation time is determined by the particle residence time, τ. In the plug-flow regime, the flotation recovery under steady-state condition can be determined by eqn Only a few mineral surfaces, such as graphite, coal, sulfur, talc (Mg Similarly, graphite, which sometimes occurs as a gangue mineral in sulfide ores, can be removed by flotation with MIBC and hydrocarbon oils. Some auriferous ores contain a significant amount of carbonaceous materials, which can be floated with oil and frother, and burned to recover any combined gold. Bitumen in tar sands is one of the significant fuel minerals. This insoluble liquid oil is inherently hydrophobic and is presently recovered by a hot-water flotation process. The hydrophobicity and floatability of bitumen are reduced by clay minerals (e.g., montmorillonite in presence of Ca The vast majority of minerals have strong covalent or ionic surface bonding and exhibit high free energy at their polar surface. These surfaces react strongly with polar water molecules, rendering the minerals naturally hydrophilic in varying degrees. Chemical treatment with reagents is required to make them floatable. According to the properties of the mineral–water interfaces important to flotation, this polar group of minerals is subdivided into: Native metals (elemental minerals, e.g., copper, silver, gold, and platinum) Sulfide minerals (e.g., galena PbS, sphalerite ZnS, chalcopyrite CuFeS Insoluble minerals (e.g., oxides, silicates, chromates, and vanadates of many multivalent metals) Sparingly soluble minerals (e.g., carbonates, phosphates, and calcite CaF Soluble salt minerals (e.g., halite NaCl, sylvite KCl, trona Na The degree of polarity of these minerals generally increases from sulfides, through sulfates to carbonates, phosphates, halides, etc., then to oxides, hydroxides, and, finally to silicates and quartz. Many of these minerals such as sulfides, oxides, and carbonates contain the heavy metals (Cu, Pb, Zn, Sn, Mn, and Fe) and are usually concentrated for the recovery of the metals. Many other minerals such as Ca-phosphates (hydroxylapatite, fluorapatite, and chlorapatite, Ca The native metals with polar surface characteristics are occasionally associated with the sulfides of copper, lead, and iron. They have internally strongly covalently bonded atoms and are insoluble Sulfide minerals are predominantly covalently bounded and are of low solubility although each has theoretically a definite ionic solubility product in water. However, the surface of sulfide minerals is usually unstable in the presence of water and oxygen, catalyzing the sulfide surface oxidation. The oxidation is very slow in dry air. In water, the oxidation of sulfide minerals is very intensive, following electrochemical reactions similar to the corrosion of metals and semiconductors (a few sulfides are intrinsically semiconductors). Oxidation of sulfide minerals can proceed through successive steps producing various sulfur products, from elementary sulfur, through different intermediate sulfur oxides such as S Many sulfide minerals possess natural hydrophobicity and floatability to a varying extent. Molybdenite, stibnite, realgar (AsS), and orpiment (As Many simple and complex oxide minerals are ionic crystals, which are composed of close-packed O Silica presents an interesting oxide. Natural silica is strongly hydrophilic, due to the contribution of hydrogen bonding between water and silanol groups. Silica can become dehydrated, and consequently hydrophobic, if it is heated to about 450°C to remove the hydrated water. The hydrophobicity is due to the formation of Si–O–Si bond structure which does not readily react with water. Silicates and aluminosilicates (e.g., zircon (ZrSiO Sparingly soluble (salt-type or semi-soluble) minerals include carbonates (magnesite MgCO Soluble salt minerals have to be floated from their saturated brine solutions. Important aspects of the flotation chemistry of soluble salt minerals include solubility, surface charge, thermal stability of crystal hydrates, and interfacial water structure. Solubility and surface tension of some saturated salt solutions at room temperature are shown in Numerous inorganic and organic reagents (surfactants) are employed in flotation for controlling the characteristics of interfaces. According to their functionality, flotation reagents are classified into collectors, regulators, and frothers. These flotation reagents preferentially adsorb at the solid–liquid interface, making the surface of required minerals water-repellent and facilitating bubble–particle attachment. They are classified based on composition and whether they exist as cations, anions, or molecular species in water. Therefore, collector molecules may be ionizing compounds, which dissociate into ions in water, or nonionizing (nonpolar) compounds, which are practically insoluble, and render the minerals water-repellent by covering its surface with a thin film. Ionizing collectors have a complex asymmetric molecular structure, which comprises a functional polar head group and a nonpolar hydrocarbon chain ( These collectors do not contain polar functional groups and cannot chemically adsorb to the mineral surface. These compounds are hydrocarbon liquids of petroleum origin and their adsorption is due to the intermolecular van der Waals forces. The collectors are primarily used in the flotation of naturally hydrophobic minerals, such as coal, graphite, sulfur, and molybdenite, which have insufficient hydrophobicity for the strong and fast attachment to bubbles. They are also used in combination with heteropolar collectors for coarse particle flotation of copper sulfides and phosphate minerals (to reduce consumption of xanthate and fatty acid, and to strengthen the attachment). These collectors are widely used in flotation and can be conveniently divided into two classes: (1) Thio-collectors, represented by alkyl xanthates, dithiocarbonates, thionocarbamates, mercaptobenzothiozole, etc. The nonpolar tails of these collectors are relatively short alkyl hydrocarbon chains (ethyl to hexyl) or occasionally cyclic hydrocarbon rings such as phenyl or cyclohexyl are used. (2) Nonthio-collectors, represented by alkyl carboxylates, alkyl sulfates, amines, substitute amines, etc. The alkyl chains of these collectors usually change from lauryl to octadecyl or oleyl. The most important properties of the thio- and nonthio-collectors in aqueous solution include solubility, oxidation, and micellization ( Micelles form because the hydrocarbon chain is nonionic in nature, and a mutual incompatibility between polar water molecules and nonpolar hydrocarbon chains exists. When a certain concentration of surfactant ions is reached in solution, termed the critical micelle concentration (CMC), the hydrocarbon chains associate into aggregates or micelles and come out of solution. The CMC of flotation collectors is of the order of 1 A number of inorganic reagents are used to control flotation by regulating the solution chemistry. The regulators can be classified into activators, depressors, dispersants, and pH modifiers. Activators can alter the chemical species at the mineral surface, which increase collector adsorption. Activators are generally soluble salts. Examples of flotation activators include copper and lead sulfates used to increase the floatability of sphalerite, and sodium sulfide or hydrosulfide used to create a sulfide compound on the surface of oxidized minerals, which can be floated with xanthates. Depressors are used to increase the selectivity of flotation by rendering certain minerals hydrophilic, thus preventing their flotation. Cyanides and polymers are the best examples of depressants used in flotation. Cyanides can dissolve and remove stable xanthate salts from the surface of sulfide minerals. Polymers can adsorb to hydrophobic surfaces, making them hydrophilic. pH modifiers play an important, though very complex, role in flotation, specifically in selectivity of complex ore separation which is dependent on a delicate balance between reagent concentrations and pH. Flotation is often carried out in an alkaline medium since most collectors, including xanthates, are stable under these conditions and corrosion of cells, pipes, etc., is minimized. Alkalinity is controlled by lime and sodium carbonate (soda ash). Sulfuric or sulfurous acids are used when a decrease in pH is required. These reagents are water-soluble organic reagents that preferentially adsorb at the gas–liquid interface, helping the production of small bubbles and a transient stable froth. They are heteropolar molecules ( Frothers are similar to the ionic collectors in many aspects, to the extent that many collectors such as oleates are also powerful frothers. These powerful frothers produce very stable froths that cannot allow efficient transport of the flotation products to further processing. Froth builds up on the surfaces of thickeners and excessive frothing of flotation cells are problems at many mineral processing plants. A good frother should have negligible collecting power and should produce a transient stable froth required for transporting the floated minerals to the concentrate launder. The most effective polar groups of frothers include hydroxyl (–OH), carboxyl (–COOH), carbonyl ( Alcohols and related compounds such as glycol ethers are the most widely used frothers, largely because of their inability to adsorb on mineral particles, i.e., to act as collectors. Aromatic alcohols from natural sources, such as pine oil or cresylic acid, have been used extensively. Synthetic frothers are now widely used and have the controlled composition, which assists in maintaining the plant stability. MIBC and the polypropylene glycol ethers are in this category under various commercial names. Frothers based on polyglycols are also commonly used in various blends with alcohols and polyglycol ethers, which provide special frothers for flotation circuits. The alcohol groups provide a selective but often brittle froth, which allows good control and product transportation. The glycol ethers are stronger than the alcohol groups. The polyglycols are the strongest frothers used in flotation. Nonalcohol frothers include acids and amines. The carboxyl acids are also powerful collectors but the collecting and frothing properties in one reagent may reduce flotation selectivity. Frothers with amine or sulfur groups also have weak collector properties. Surface-inactive frothers include a few special reagents, such as diacetone alcohol and ethyl acetal, which behave like frothers in the solid–liquid–air systems but not in the two-phase liquid–air systems. Molecules of these reagents have two polar groups and are readily soluble in water. They adsorb on solid surfaces but do not significantly change their hydrophobicity. During the bubble–particle interaction in the froth phase the adsorbed molecules of the surface inactive frother can change their molecular orientation and produce a sufficiently stable three-phase froth. The surface-inactive reagents do not reduce surface tension and maintain the magnitude of the capillary forces needed for strong bubble–particle attachment in flotation. Sulfide minerals are floated using mostly xanthates, dithiophosphates, and other thio compounds as collectors. The mineral–collector interactions and the selectivity in separating individual sulfide minerals from each other and from the rest of the nonsulfide particles can be controlled by a careful adjustment of pH and oxidizing, reducing, and complexing additives. Interactions between sulfides and thio collectors have been explained by electrochemistry or ion exchange. Electrochemical reactions lead to chemisorption of xanthates and formation of dixanthogen, which is the most hydrophobic of xanthate species. Chemisorption occurs with most sulfide minerals when the surface has not been subject to oxidation by oxygen. The electron transfer from xanthate to the mineral surface takes place during chemisorption, which may catalyze further chemical reactions producing stable surface compounds of the metal xanthates with a varying degree of hydrophobicity, e.g., Hg  Ion exchange is dominant when the sulfide surface has been oxidized to produce a film of sulfoxyl ions such as sulfite or thiosulfate. The ionic species are then exchanged for xanthate or other collector anions. The critical pH curves in Insoluble oxide and silicate minerals are floatable with both anionic and cationic collectors. The mineral–collector interaction and flotation determined by electrical properties of the mineral surface, electrical charge of the collector, molecular weight of the collector, solubility of the minerals, and stability of metal–collector salts. Depending on the properties, the collector may adsorb either by electrostatic interaction with the surface (physical adsorption) or by specific chemical interaction with surface species (chemical adsorption). Physical adsorption of many collectors occurs by electrostatic interaction with oxide and silicate surfaces. When these collectors are used, knowledge of the PZC of the minerals in question must be known as discussed earlier. Flotation by physical adsorption has been studied with hematite, alumina, corundum, quartz, etc. However, if the PZCs are very low, such as in the case of quartz with the PZC being at pH 1.8, anionic collectors are not adsorbed in sufficient amount below the PZC to result in flotation since these species must compete with anions present (from pH adjustment) in concentrations greater than 1×10 Chemisorption of high-molecular-weight collectors on oxides and silicates involve the hydrolysis of cations comprising these minerals. The hydroxy complexes thus formed are very surface-active; they adsorb strongly on mineral surfaces and reverse the sign of the zeta potential if their concentration is sufficiently high. Therefore, flotation by chemisorption may have one peak with anionic collectors or two peaks with cationic collectors as shown in These minerals can readily be separated from oxides and silicates, but they are extremely difficult to separate from each other because of the great similarity in their surface chemical and physical properties. Both anionic and cationic collectors as used for oxide and silicate flotation are used with the semi-soluble minerals. The mechanism of adsorption is complex and not well understood; however, it has been shown that chemisorption as well as physical adsorption can occur. Improved selectivity can be obtained by the controlled application of both inorganic and organic modifiers. Polyvalent cations and inorganic anions affect the physical adsorption of collector on semi-soluble minerals in the same way as oxides and silicates. The selectivity, however, is not significantly changed. Sodium silicate (water glass) is commonly used as a depressant for calcite; it has the added advantage that it also acts as a depressant for silica if present. However, sodium silicate will depress all calcium minerals to some extent. The addition of aluminum ions improves selectivity by reducing the depressant action of sodium silicate on calcium salts other than calcite (e.g., fluorite or scheelite). Other anions are also used to improve selectivity, but to a lesser extent. Macromolecules have been used for many years to improve selectivity between the semi-soluble minerals, but understanding of the mechanisms involved is limited. Starch, tannin, and quebracho are all used for calcite depression, but different mechanisms are believed to be involved. Flotation of these minerals differ from other nonmetallic flotation systems, in that ionic strengths of the order of 5 Under the conditions of ionic strengths, the edl interactions between particles and between a bubble and a particle do not control the flotation process. However, the surface charge can be important in the mineral–collector interaction and adsorption in the flotation process, which can be identified in the flotation systems of negatively charged KCl and positively charged NaCl with positively charged dodecyl ammonium hydrochloride (DAH) and negatively charged caprylic acid ( Nonionizing collectors are not soluble in water and have to be emulsified into fine droplets for adsorption onto the mineral surfaces ( Optimum droplet size of nonpolar collectors for flotation is between 1 and 10 Important physical and physicochemical properties of nonpolar collectors include: (1) Viscosity, which influences the collector spreading on the mineral surface and emulsification. The viscosity of nonpolar collectors is between 10 and 400 Experiments show that the viscosity of oily collectors increases the flotation recovery and size of floatable particles. Highly viscous oils (200 Nonpolar commercial oils usually decrease the stability of the flotation froths by a bridging mechanism. For each class of frothing agent there is a suitable nonpolar collector, which exerts the most favorable influence. This influence depends on the composition of the oil, the presence of surface-active compounds, and the fact that the collector can interact with the frothing agent on the surface of the bubbles and in the bulk of the pulp liquid. Small bubbles with high specific surface area are needed for efficient bubble–particle attachment. Solid particles have also to be well suspended and dispersed for efficient collection by air bubbles. The production of small air bubbles and particle dispersion are usually carried out by turbulence generated by intensive mixing. The particle suspension is controlled by macroturbulence, while the production of air bubbles and bubble–particle aggregates are governed by microturbulence. The reagent preconditioning can also be achieved by turbulence. The high-intensity conditioning (HIC) generated by turbulent shear is used to improve flotation of fine particles by the mechanisms of shear coagulation and surface cleaning. The dispersion of solid particles into the state of suspension requires a minimum turbulent velocity to counterbalance the particle settling. The so-called 1-s criterion (1 Experiments show that the air dispersion into small bubbles in flotation machines occurs in the regions on the downstream side of the impeller elements (blades, bars, fingers, etc.). The peripheral speeds of the impellers in the industrial scale are typically about 6–9 In general, air bubbles and particles can suppress turbulence. Therefore, only a fraction of the power input is available for generating turbulence in the pulp. The relative motion between the particles and the liquid phase consumes the other portion of the power input. This phenomenon depends on both the volume fraction and the size of particles: the finer the particle and the higher the particle concentration, the more the turbulence is suppressed. In the case of particles with the same size as the smallest eddies, the dissipation rate of the two-phase turbulence is equal to the dissipation rate of the pure liquid plus the dissipation rate due to the relative particle motion. This rule, however, does not apply to fine particles smaller than the smallest eddies. These fine particles can follow the liquid fluctuation instantly, but the surface force interaction between particles occurring in the turbulent flow may result in the particles aggregating or dispersing, which changes the rheological properties of the liquid phase. As fine particles have strong influence on the turbulence, they may reduce the efficiency of the air dispersion into bubbles and the bubble–particle interaction. These negative effects can be limited in different ways, such as by increasing the specific power input, reducing the particle concentration, and desliming the feed or dispersing the fine particle fraction using surfactants. In addition to turbulent pressure fluctuation, air can also be split into bubbles by applying shear. The gas–liquid interface in flotation cells are subjected to external forces, which act in such a way that causes the bubble deformation and splitting. Balancing the splitting pressure and capillary pressure gives the critical Weber number, In the plants, flotation takes place in circuits in which the flotation cells are arranged into banks of cells to obtain the desired final recovery and grade. If the recovery of minerals in individual cells is The improvements in flotation cells have been developed with both mechanical and pneumatic cells. Features of new mechanical cells include the giant volume designed to process high tonnage of low-grade ores that has been driven by the economic benefits. The volume of single mechanical cells now can be as large as 300 Typical dependence of the flotation recovery on particle size is shown in It appears that flotation kinetics depends on a balance among the collision, attachment, and detachment processes, which are strong functions of the particle size, density and hydrophobicity, the bubble size, and the turbulent kinetic energy. The particle physical properties are the input into the flotation system and are, therefore, difficult to manipulate, but the latter are the manipulated variables, which define the best flotation cell design and operating conditions for a given particle size distribution. The existence of an optimum field of operation for various particle sizes has been appreciated. For fine particles, an increased rotational speed of rotor above the minimum (1 The requirements of the different particle sizes are schematically shown in With flotation feeds containing a wide range of particle sizes, it is unlikely that a single flotation cell can be devised to give optimum recovery over the whole particle size range. The feed should be split into fine and coarse particles so that they can be handled separately in the flotation circuits. Fine particles should be floated with moderate to high agitation, whereas the coarse fraction would respond best to a stirring speed just above the minimum speed for complete suspension. Alternatively, a wide bubble size distribution can be generated to float particles of a size distribution at high rates of recovery. There is also a very pronounced chemical effect on the relationship between particle size and floatability. Both the reagent regime and the hydrodynamic conditions are equally important in flotation and should be optimized in parallel. In the past, the hydrodynamic conditions were often neglected in the flotation research. Regarding the reagent regime, the chemical conditions for fine and coarse particle flotation are different. It is not easy to optimize the reagent regime for both fine and coarse particles in the one flotation cell.  Previous Version of this Article () can be found online at 