Xanthate ions sorption on copper ore (chalcopyrite) is studied as a function of temperature (273–293 K) in the pH range (8–11). The sorption of xanthate ions at all the pH values is observed to increase with the increase in temperature. The changes in pH, dissolution studies of the ore, SO2−
                     4 concentration determinations, and FTIR studies were employed to probe the mechanism of the process of adsorption. The results are found to fit successfully to the linear form of the Freundlich equation. The isosteric heats of adsorption (ΔH
                     
                        i
                     ) are also calculated and show that the adsorption of xanthate on copper ore under the given experimental condition is endothermic in nature. The values of ΔH
                     
                        i
                      found are in conformity with the ion exchange sorption of xanthate by the chalcopyrite.Copper is the most abundant element in the earth's crust. Due to its uses in electrical appliances, pipes, industrial machinery, and coinage and its dominant role in alloys, its mining is increasing day by day. It generally occurs in nature as oxides or sulfides. The most common oxide ores are cuprite (Cu Thus, one of the current major problems in mineral processing is the separation of components in complex ores, which can be achieved with the help of magnetism, gravity, solubility, etc. One of the dominant mineral processing methods which revolutionized the mineral industry is flotation, which utilizes the differences in surface properties of various minerals by using selective adsorption of organic reagents known as collectors. Adsorption of collectors on minerals is an important phenomenon in mineral flotation. Research studies on collector adsorption in various systems have been discussed in a number of publications A number of experimental techniques have been used to assess the extent of adsorption and identification of surface formed products as a result of xanthate adsorption by the ores. In particular important are the spectroscopic techniques like IR While a number of studies have been reported in the literature on the effect of concentration and pH, to our knowledge no report has yet been published about the effect of temperature on the adsorption of xanthate by chalcopyrite. The present work was thus carried out to study in detail the temperature effect on the uptake of xanthate by the chalcopyrite copper ore and to determine the mechanism of the process. Fresh ore samples from Shinkai, North Waziristan Agency, Pakistan, were collected, crushed, and grounded to different mesh sizes. A chalcopyrite sample of −200 mesh size was used during the experiments as it has the maximum concentration of copper. The ore analyses showed that it consisted mainly of 0.8% Cu, 8.7% Fe, 11.94% Al, 7.5% Mg, 19.68% Si, and 3.25% S, and Ni, Co, Zn, and Ag contents were less than 0.0001%. All the reagents used in this study were of the analytical grade and were used without further purification. All the solutions and mixtures were prepared in double distilled water. Potassium ethyl xanthate was synthesized by the usual method given by Rao The molar ratio used during the synthesis of potassium ethyl xanthate was CS Potassium ethyl xanthate of 1×10 Adsorption experiments were performed by taking 30 ml of different aqueous potassium ethyl xanthate solutions (5×10 Air-dried samples of adsorbent before and after adsorption were mixed with KBr crystals and ground into fine powder using an agate mortar. The resulting powder was pressed into a disk under vacuum. Spectra of the disks were then recorded on a Perkin–Elmer 16PC FTIR spectrophotometer. The effect of time and temperature on potassium ethyl xanthate stability having a concentration of 1×10 By plotting percentage decomposition vs days ( The temperature effect on xanthate adsorption by copper ore in the range 278–293 K is shown in The sorption of xanthate was observed to be accompanied by a decrease in the pH of the system indicating a release of H The following mechanism is proposed for the adsorption of xanthate ion on chalcopyrite.   This mechanism is also supported by the amount of SO The dissolution results of the copper ore sample in the presence and absence of xanthate as a function of temperature, pH, and xanthate concentration are presented in The effect of temperature on xanthate uptake can also be seen from the data given in Both Freundlich and Langmuir adsorption isotherms were applied to the sorption data This table shows that the values of both the constants The isosteric heat of adsorption (Δ The following conclusions can be drawn from the above discussion. The sorption of xanthate ions increases with the increase in temperature in the pH range 8–10. The negligible release of Cu The changes in pH and SO