Fabrication of porous and biologically inspired biomaterials that mimic the formation of microstructural structures of nacre in the form of calcite (CaCO3) and evaluation of the biocompatibility of such organic-inorganic composite scaffold for bone tissue engineering, are focus of this paper. Nacre's self-assembly characteristics are concerned about the development of calcite filled biomineralized scaffold following the nature based biomineralization process and biomimetic applications. The PVP-CMC hydrogel film, comprised of PVP:0.2, CMC:0.8, PEG:1.0, Agar:2.0, Glycerene:1.0 and water:95.0 w/v%; acts as catalyst and template for the nucleation and growth of the inorganic CaCO3 within the scaffold. The PVP-CMC hydrogel (in the dry state) was immersed in ionic solutions (g/100 ml) of Na2CO3 and CaCl2·H2O in different concentrations sets i.e. Set-1: 10.50/14.70; Set-2: 5.25/7.35; Set-3: 4.20/5.88; Set-4: 2.10/2.94; Set-5: 1.05/1.47, Set-6: 0.55/0.55 for 90 min. As a result, “PVP-CMC-CaCO3” hydrogel scaffold was fabricated having bio-inspired structural and functional properties. Cell proliferation and cell viability were examined until 7 days in the presence of “PVP-CMC-CaCO3” scaffolds using permanent cell lines MG63 (human osteosarcoma), L929 (murine fibroblasts) as well as cultures from mouse bone explants (CC-MBE), confirmed that the said hydrogel scaffolds are biocompatible. But, from mechanical strength as well as biocompatibility point of view, scaffolds prepared in Set-1 to 3 ionic solutions were superior. In conclusion, these three calcite filled hydrogel scaffolds are recommended and can be used for osseointegration.Osseointegration or osteointegration means a “ Porous scaffolds that mimic bone are considered ideal for tissue engineering applications. Researchers already reported about many different biomaterials that can compete with the trabecular architecture of cancellous bone. Such cancellous bones are not hard as compact bone but spongy and protect the bone marrow [ Materials that are synthesized to mimic the ultrastructure of the composite, composed of bio-mineral, have not reproduced the accuracy of crystal formation accomplished by the organism under the mild conditions of environmental temperature, pressure, and pH, due to inadequate knowledge of the specific roles of the molecules involved in controlling CaCO The biocompatibility of the material is of ample importance and a predictor of osseointegration, as it is essential to establish stable fixation with direct bone-implant contact and no fibrous tissue at the interface [ Research team of Biocomposite System, Centre of Polymer System, Tomas Bata University in Zlin, already reported about general properties of mineralized PVP-CMC-CaCO PVP K30 (PVP: molecular weight 40,000), polyethylene glycol 3000 (PEG: average molecular weight 2700–3300) and agar were supplied by Fluka, Switzerland; carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) was purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co-Ltd (SCRC), China; glycerin was obtained from Lachema, Czech Republic; calcium chloride (CaCl The matrix of PVP-CMC hydrogel was prepared following solution casting technique [ The dry PVP-CMC hydrogel was utilized to undergo the mineralization process using a simple liquid diffusion technique [ Samples were frozen by immersion in liquid nitrogen and then finely ground into a powder using mechanical mill pulverisette 7 (Fritsch, Germany). The physical-chemical characterization of samples was performed by Fourier transformation infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) assay. The FTIR assay of the nonmineralized PVP-CMC hydrogel and six (1–6) sets of calcite filled biomineralized (CaCO The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the nonmineralized PVP-CMC hydrogel and six (1–6) sets of calcite filled biomineralized (CaCO The morphology of nonmineralized PVP-CMC hydrogel and calcite filled biomineralized (CaCO Compressive tests of hydrogel scaffold were implemented in wet state to evaluate the mechanical strength properties of the nonmineralized PVP-CMC hydrogel and six (1–6) sets of calcite filled biomineralized (CaCO Compressive strength was obtained from the load-displacement curve at the break. The test samples were measured in triplets and the obtained data were presented as an average value. The extract from PVP-CMC-CaCO Three kinds of cells (Permanent murine cell line L 929, Cell cultures from mouse bone explants (CC-MBE) and MG 63 human osteosarcoma cells) were used to evaluate the biocompatibility ( Permanent murine cell line L 929 was obtained from Bulgarian National Collection for Microorganisms and Cell Cultures. The cell culture from bone explant (CC-MBE) was obtained from femur of ICR mouse as described (Andonova-Lilova et al., 2012) [ The cells (L929 and CC-MBE) were grown as monolayer cultures in DMEM medium (Gibco-Invitrogen, UK), completed by 5–10% FBS (Gibco-Invitrogen, UK), 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 g/mL streptomycin. The cultures were kept at 37 °C in a humidified CO The MG 63 human osteosarcoma cell was cultured in DMEM (Gibco, USA) supplemented with 10% FBS (Gibco, USA), 2 mM glutamine (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), 100 units/mL penicillin and 100 g/mL streptomycin (Himedia, India). Cells were maintained in a humidified incubator at 37 °C, 5% CO Cell compatibility and cytotoxicity of hydrogels were analyzed by culturing the cells in the presence of hydrogel leachant. Punched circular discs ((ϕ = 6 mm) of nonbiomineralized (PVP-CMC) and mineralized (PVP-CMC-CaCO Viability of MG 63 cells and their attachment on to biomineralized PVP-CMC hydrogel scaffold surfaces was monitored by staining the cells with Live/Dead staining solution. Equal numbers of cells (10 Response of biomineralized PVP-CMC hydrogels toward functionality of MG 63 cells was studied by measuring the ALP activity using alkaline phosphatase assay kit (Colorimetric, abcam) following manufacturers' protocol and described previously [ Measurement of ALP activity was based on conversion of colorless All experiments were made for at least n = 3. Data was reported as mean ± standard deviation (SD). One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted to determine the significant difference among different test groups using Origin Pro 8.0 software. The p value was calculated at both 95% and 99% confidence level. p < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant whereas p < 0.01 as highly significant. The optical image of PVP-CMC hydrogel scaffold (before and after biomineralization) is given in The FE-SEM micrographs/images were taken from both the surface and cross section of the non-mineralized and mineralized PVP-CMC-CaCO FTIR spectra of obtained hydrogel scaffolds i.e. nonmineralized PVP-CMC hydrogel and mineralized PVP-CMC hydrogels (Set 1–Set 6) are shown on Powder XRD patterns confirmed FTIR results ( The compressive strength values of all the biomineralized hydrogel composites (Set 1–Set 6) were determined ( Cytotoxicity assay was conducted in the presence of L929 embryonic murine fibroblasts, cell culture from mouse bone explant and MG 63 human osteosarcoma cells. The results are shown in Minimal cytotoxic levels observed in the presence of L 929, CC-MBE and MG 63 cells, therefore, biomineralized hydrogels can be recommended as a suitable candidate for osseointegration/bone tissue engineering applications ( Suitability of mineralized PVP-CMC hydrogels was further assessed by culturing MG 63 cells onto hydrogel surface. Cells were evaluated after 7 days' culture under a fluorescent microscope to evaluate cell viability, morphology and distribution. Cells were considered to fluoresce green on each hydrogel set, a clear indication of presence of viable cells. Native like spread morphology was observed on mineralized hydrogel scaffolds (Set 1, 2, 3 and 4) whereas cell clusters with round morphology were found onto hydrogels with least or no mineralization (Set 5, 6 and control) ( In order to assess the osteoinductive capability of mineralized PVP-CMC hydrogels, alkaline phosphatase activity was measured. ALP is a differentiation marker for bone cells and initiates matrix mineralization [ Total DNA content was measured at different time points ( The novel biomineralized (CaCO Six different concentrations of ionic solutions (Sodium carbonate (Na All structural, mechanical and biocompatibility assay were investigated using 90 min mineralized hydrogel scaffolds which are pale white and moderately soft as before dry state/in wet state, whereas, the non-mineralized PVP-CMC hydrogel scaffolds are quite white and soft (see All Six Sets of biomineralized PVP-CMC-CaCO Biocompatibility assessment with In addition, it can be mentioned that the calcium carbonate (CaCO Hence, considering the mechanical strength properties as well as biocompatibility/efficiency in proliferation of cells, the scaffolds/implants prepared in the following three concentrations/sets (Set-1: 10.50/14.70; Set-2: 5.25/7.35; Set-3: 5.20/5.88 g/100 ml) of ionic solution are recommended for biomedical applications. In conclusion, it can be mentioned that all six biomineralized hydrogel scaffolds, exhibited quite a good biocompatibility in presence of above mentioned cell lines; all the scaffolds could be used as an Implant for bone tissue regeneration/drug delivery purposes (as per requirement) but the hydrogel scaffolds (Set 1–3) will be more suitable for osseointegration and recommended considering their linear mechanical strength and biocompatibility. This work is supported by an internal grant from