Frictional grinding was evaluated to improve the selectivity of two magnetite samples A and B in the magnetic separation process. Sample A containing 64.42% Fe was a magnetite concentrate upgraded from a low grade magnetite Ore, Sample B, containing 46.63% Fe, through an upgrading process involving 1-stage ball milling and 3-stage wet magnetic separation in a beneficiation plant. Frictional grinding was found extremely efficient in dispersing the grains in the agglomerates and on the surface, consequently improving the selectivity of the sample. A magnetite concentrate containing 66.22% Fe was produced from Sample A at an iron recovery of 96.86% by introducing a simple dry frictional grinding step prior to the magnetic separation process. The results have demonstrated that Sample A can be further upgraded even though it was processed through 3-stage magnetic separation. Given its beneficial effects, frictional grinding was further adopted in a multiple-stage flowsheet to upgrade both Samples A and B. A magnetite concentrate containing 68.75% Fe was produced from Sample A at an iron recovery of 97.23% through the multiple-stage wet frictional grinding-magnetic separation flowsheet. When the same flowsheet was applied to process Sample B, a concentrate of 69.97% Fe, higher than Sample A obtained by ball milling, was produced at an iron recovery of 86.44%.Magnetic separators exploit the difference in magnetic properties between materials to separate valuable minerals from gangue minerals ( In this paper, a new flowsheet of frictional grind-magnetic separation was developed. Different from conventional grinding operation which is the last stage in the comminution process where the size of the mineral particles is reduced by a combination of impact and abrasion, either dry, or more commonly, in suspension in water ( Two magnetite samples A and B sourced from Anshan, China, were tested. Sample A was a concentrate product upgraded from Sample B through an upgrading process involving 1-stage ball milling and 3-stage wet magnetic separation in a beneficiation plant. Therefore compared with Sample B (46.63% Fe), Sample A contained a much higher Fe grade of 64.42%. The crystalline mineral phases of the ores were identified by powder XRD technique using Cu Kα radiation. The size distribution of the ores before and after frictional grinding was determined by mechanical sieving method and is shown in The morphologies of the ores were examined in a scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with an X-MAX50 energy spectrum detector. Frictional grinding was carried out using a mortar and pestle for 2 min, either under the dry condition or in a slurry. Preliminary tests have found no obvious effect of the grinding forces applied on pestle and the movement of pestle. Different grinding time of 0.5–5 min was trialed, 2 min grinding was found to be sufficient for the purpose of particle dispersion. The ground samples were then subjected to single- or multiple-stage magnetic separation. The magnetic separation was conducted in an in-house built magnetite separator, which was composed of a nonmagnetic sorting chamber and a permanent magnet rod of a size of 38 × 10 × 10 mm. The sorting chamber consisted of a tailings receiver and a clapboard located above. The working distance between the clapboard and the tailings receiver was about 18 mm. With a contact area of 38 × 10 mm on the top surface of the clapboard, the magnet rod was capable of producing a non-uniform magnetic field with its intensities varying between 2100 and 3200 Gauss in the sorting chamber below the clapboard. Before magnetic separation, a dry sample of about 3 g or a slurry containing 5 g ore was loaded into the sorting chamber. During the magnetic separation procedure, while the magnet was moved to and fro on the clapboard above the sorting chamber, it attracted magnetic particles which clustered underneath the clapboard and moved with the magnet. The movement of the particles in the cluster allows the nonmagnetic particles to be thrown away and drop into the tailings receiver, leading to better separation efficiency. At the end of 2 min separation, the magnet and clapboard with the magnetic particles attracted underneath were moved away from the tailings receiver. The magnetite concentrate was discharged from the clapboard and collected for further characterization when the magnet was moved away from the clapboard. The size distributions of Samples A and B before and after 10 min dry frictional grinding are compared in  From SEM observation, some liberated silica grains were observed in Sample A. These grains either had fine magnetite particles adhered on their surface or formed agglomerates with magnetite particles, consequently reported to the product concentrate. As frictional grinding is able to disperse the grains in the agglomerates and on the surface, it was evaluated for the potential in improving the selectivity of Sample A. After a single stage of the dry frictional grinding-magnetic separation, a concentrate containing 66.22% Fe, as shown in  This is somehow not expected as Sample A used here had already been upgraded by a flowsheet including multiple stages of conventional wet magnetic separation processes, indicating the lower than expected separation efficiency of the conventional wet magnetic separation process likely due to the presence of agglomerates and attachments in Sample A which entrained gangue mineral particles. Once Sample A was lightly ground, the mineral particles in the agglomerates and on the surface were dispersed and liberated by the friction between the mineral particles and between the mineral particles and mortar wall/pestle. Under the influence of the magnetic field from the permanent magnet rod, the liberated magnetic particles were attracted to form a strong magnetic cluster underneath the clapboard where the magnetic field was the strongest in the sorting chamber. The movement of the magnet rod led to constant reorientation of mineral particles in the cluster under the clapboard, which helped to throw out the non-magnetic particles due to their gravity. As a consequence, the sample was further upgraded. Due to the favorable effect of water, it is not difficult to conclude that frictional grinding should work better in water. Water is believed to play two roles in this process: one is its wetting action, facilitating the dispersion of the agglomerated and adhered particles while the other is its drag force, hindering the entrainment of nonmagnetic particles in the agglomerates of magnetic particles to some extent. Therefore, the selectivity of the subsequent magnetic separation process is improved considerably. Given the beneficial effects of frictional grinding, wet frictional grinding was further adopted to upgrade Samples A and B.  For Sample A, the final concentrate achieved an Fe grade of 68.75% at an iron recovery of 97.23%, as shown in In the typical magnetic separation process, it is often difficult to throw and wash out the fine nonmagnetic particles trapped tightly in the inner layer of the cluster of magnetite particles, which inevitably limited the Fe grade of the concentrate product and the iron recovery of the process. However, the frictional grinding can solve this issue. In the grinding process, the friction between the mineral particles and between the mineral particles and mortar wall/pestle has not only made the agglomerated and adhered mineral particles dispersed before magnetic separation, but also effectively demagnetized the concentrate particles resulting from the preceding magnetic separation. Therefore, the selectivity of the subsequent magnetic separation process was considerably improved after frictional grinding was introduced. Clearly the efficiency of magnetic separation has been significantly enhanced for Sample A after the introduction of frictional grinding. The same flowsheet was applied to a lower grade magnetite ore, Sample B, to further validate the efficiency of frictional grinding. The sample was tested as received. As shown in The present results demonstrated the benefit of frictional grinding prior to magnetic separation. By frictional grinding-magnetic separation, the gangue particles can be removed from the concentrates and the valuable mineral particles can be recovered from the tails more efficiently. Therefore, both Fe grade and recovery were increased. It is worthwhile emphasizing that while fractional grinding was achieved manually using pestle and mortar in the paper, any commercial equipment that can lead to gentle fraction between the sample particles and between the particles and sample holder wall can be adapted to achieve fractional grinding. While it has a negligible or little impact on the size distribution of the samples, a short time grinding using the friction force, was demonstrated to be an efficient procedure to disperse the agglomerated particles, liberate some composite particles with the inner cracks formed in the comminution process and demagnetize the agglomerated particles produced in the previous magnetic separation, and therefore improve the selectivity of the subsequent magnetite separation process. A magnetite concentrate containing 66.22% Fe was produced from Sample A containing 64.42% Fe at an iron recovery of 96.86% by introducing a simple dry frictional grinding step prior to the magnetic separation process. The results have demonstrated that Sample A can be further upgraded even though it was processed through 3-stage magnetic separation. Frictional grinding was further demonstrated in a multiple-stage flowsheet developed to upgrade both Samples A and B. A magnetite concentrate containing 68.75% Fe was produced from Sample A at an iron recovery of 97.23% through the multiple-stage wet frictional grinding-magnetic separation flowsheet. When the same flowsheet was applied to process Sample B, a concentrate of 69.97% Fe was produced at an iron recovery of 86.44%.