In the present work desorption tests of an artificially contaminated soil by naphatelene sulphonated compounds have been carried out by soil washing realised by water at different pH: Naphtalene-1,5-disulfonic acid (1–5 NDS), 2-naphthol-6,8 disulphonic acid (G-acid) and sodium β-naphtalene–sulphonate (β-salt) have been selected as more representative organic compounds present in the ex industrial site of ACNA (Cengio, SV, Italy) in which very serious contamination levels of several pollutants are present both in the soils and surface waters. Equilibrium batch tests have been carried out in order to find the best operative condition in column washing tests. The obtained results can be considered very preliminary but useful to arrange a next experimental work that will be realised on real contaminated soils.Soil remediation and bioremediation technologies are extensively used in the world to treat contaminated land, in general related to the industrial human activities. The literature contains a number of books, articles, patents and federal documents on various remediation techniques available for environmental restoration activities because this subject has gained a very important role in the ambit of the environmental protection. The majority of techniques are categorised as physical treatments with only one process, biodegradation, falling under the biological treatment category. Chemical treatments involve the application of agents to promote extraction of the hazardous substance and physical treatments involve removal of the hazard through physical means. Among the soil remediation processes and, in particular, among the physical treatments, soil washing assumes a great relevance specially when the soil is contaminated by heavy metals and non biodegradable organic substances. In the well known project “Superfund Program” about 60% of contaminated sites in the United States are polluted by heavy metals and biorecalcitrant organic substances so subjected to be treated by soil washing. The soil washing (ex situ treatments) or soil flushing (in situ treatments) are technologies barrowed from minerals processing industry and are generally employable with advantages and disadvantages well reported and known in the literature. Knowledge of the distribution among the various particle size fractions, concentration, kind of the contaminants etc. are in general key factors to predicting the effectiveness of the volume reaction process. The costs of the soil washing system with a typical rate of 18 Mt/h has been estimated by the US Environmental Protection Agency in $3–6 million as capital cost and $80–170/Mg (1988 USD) operation fees excluding costs for the disposal of sludge or washing water ( There is evidence how the pollutant contamination is mainly concentrated on the clay and lime fraction of the soils due to their large superficial area of these fine particles ( Sometimes soil surfactants washing/flushing technologies can be applied ( The present paper has the goal to evaluate the effect of some process conditions on the removal of naphtalen–sulphonate compounds by soil washing/flushing in a lime–clay soil artificially contaminated. These compounds are hydrophilic: water can therefore be employed as solvent. In particular three different naphtalen–sulphonate compounds have been considered in this study because they are largely diffuse in the ACNA industrial site located in Cengio (Savona): this is a closed organic chemical industrial factory in Italy, active since the first years of 1900 with serious levels of contamination of soils and surface waters. An experimental preliminary analysis has been then conducted to test the effect of various operating parameters (pH, initial concentration of contaminants, soil structure and composition) on the desorption liquid/solid equilibrium of the selected contaminants from the fraction (lime–clay) selected for all the experiments. Furthermore desorption tests in column, operating continuously, established the minimum amount of aqueous solution the remove the selected contaminants in the investigated experimental conditions. This paper, representing just a preliminary approach to the study of decontamination of the ACNA industrial site, had also the goal to study more deeply the naphtalen–sulphonate compounds removal from industrial contaminated soils. In fact, the literature on soil remediation from compounds as PCB, PCDD, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, organic aromatic or chlorinated compounds, heavy metals, is very wide ( To establish practical considerations to remove naphtalene sulphonate compounds from ACNA contaminated site, the soil used in the experimental tests was collected near Cengio (SV) in order to have physical–chemical characteristic similar to those of ACNA soils (for a rough soil characterisation see Two different soil fractions were used in the experimental plane: in the batch trials the soil fractions below 50 μm (silt and clay fractions) have been utilised because the major part quantities of naphtalene sulphonate compounds are accumulated in these fractions in the ACNA soils. In the column experiments a specific quantity of sand has been added to clay and silt in order to obtain the same permeability characteristic of ACNA soils and clearly to avoid possible packaging problems. The clay and silt/sand weight ratio used was 1:4 respectively (in particular 100 g of clay and silt were mixed with 400 g of sand). Three naphtalene sulphonate compounds were taken in consideration in this work: naphtalene-1,5-disulphonic acid (noted in the follow as 1–5 NDS), 2-naphthol-6,8 disulphonic acid (noted in the follow as G-acid) and sodium β naphthalene—sulphonate (noted in the follow as β-salt)—see Different compounds solution were prepared at specific concentration mixing a know amount of pure naphtalene sulphonate pure salt with deionised water, then stored in dark glass bottles. Before being used the naphtalene sulphonate concentrations were determined by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC Hewlett Packard 1090) using the procedure 5.7.3.8. 108/88 (Istituto Donegani methodology). The soils used in this work have been artificially contaminated with addition of a know amount of naphtalene sulphonate at specific concentration. After a period necessary to reach equilibrium (calculated by batch tests) the solution was filtered and measured, the contaminated soil was dried for about 1 h and then re-weighted. The naphtalene sulphonate quantity adsorbed was calculated by a simple mass balance between two phases. The batch experiments has been carried out in order to define the most suitable desorbent solution to remove naphtalene sulphonate compound from soil contaminated. For this goal a know amount (50 g) artificially contaminated soil is placed on shaken flask bottle in contact with 25 ml of an aqueous solution at a selected pH: the obtained suspension was mixed by magnetic stirrer; the different pH solution considered (in this work 4, 6, 8, 10) has been kept constant during the test by addition of NaOH 0.1 N or H Column experiments has been carried out on a Plexiglas column (internal diameter: 2.5 cm, height: 20 cm) in which the contaminated soil has been placed and packed. The main column characteristics are reported in The column was filled with 50 g of soil previous artificially contaminated. The washing solution was fed at the top of the column and the flow rate was adequately adjusted using a peristaltic pump. The void degree of the column was about 40% and the soil specific density was 2.72 g/cm The washing solution was an aqueous solution at pH 10: this value has been selected considering the results obtained during the equilibrium batch tests. In the column outlet the solution was collected and analysed in order to measure the naphtalene sulphonate quantity desorbed in the liquid phase, then their concentration in the solid phase was calculated by a mass balance between the two phases. The preliminary tests were focused to establish the kinetic of the de-sorption of previously contaminated soil in batch tests. These ones were conducted in a shaken flask placed in a Dubnoff shaker at 25 °C.  The analysis of these results permit to underline the strong pH effect on the NS de-sorption: in particular as a general aspect the increasing of pH increase the dissolution in the aqueous phase of the three NS compounds. These experimental evidence has been interpreted by the presence in the soil of organic and inorganic nitrogen or similar compounds, considering the following schematic reaction pathway: To find a mathematical description of the adsorption–desorption phenomena usual empirical models have been employed to fit these experimental data: Langmuir, Frendlich and Redlich–Peterson models were considered in this work without consider any interference in the de-sorption data due to the presence of more adsorbed compounds. In fact, these empirical models are in general used to describe equilibrium data in single compounds systems as reported elsewhere (   In The analysis of this behaviour respect the experimental results reported in From these equilibrium data the best dissolution pH of the water solvent has been selected. The next experimental work has been realised studying the soil washing in column. A selected amount of soil has been artificially contaminated by G-acid, β-salt and 1–5 NDS (initial concentrations of about 200 mg/kg for each compound have been selected) was placed and packed in a column as reported in the Materials and Methods section. The experimental results have been reported in The washing process is almost completely obtained in 3–4 elution volume per pore volume (V/Vp). The residual concentration of the three selected compounds in the soil reach final concentrations of 50–75 mg/kg. These final concentrations does not seem to be reduced increasing the washing procedure indicating that a no-reversible desorption can be present in the process. Further work is in progress to understand how these residual concentrations are linked to the soil components: in any case these results were considered useful to start a next study on the real contaminated soil considering the very low number of papers related to these organic pollutants. A preliminary study of soil washing has been undertaken to remove naftalene–sulphonate compounds from artificially contaminated soils. The adsorption–desoprtion equilibrium has been studied in function of pH in batch tests. Some consideration have been performed considering the desorption properties and the chemical structure of the selected compounds. These results were used to arrange and to analyse the washing procedure in column. The obtained results can be considered very preliminary but useful to arrange a next experimental work that will be realised on real contaminated soil coming from an important ex-industrial site of Italy (ACNA—Cengio—Italy) that present very serious levels of contamination and pollution. The authors are grateful to Marco Massabo' and Gianluca Cassullo for their helpful and precious assistance during the experimental work, the personal of ACNA—Cengio (Savona) for the HPLC analysis and Professor Marco Del Borghi for his important coordination activity between University and ACNA in the ambit of this project.