Recovery of metal values from waste printed circuit boards using physical beneficiation techniques was studied. A novel flowsheet using a combination of wet and dry unit operations was developed to achieve the separation of metals from non-metallic constituents. The wet concentration circuit consisted of flowing film concentration in tabling, flotation of plastics and enhanced gravity separation in multi-gravity separator. The dry purification circuit consisted of electrodynamic and electrostatic separation. Substantial enrichment of the ground powder with good recovery of metals was achieved using the flowsheet. The starting PCB powder, ground to −0.5mm size, had about 23% total metal. Complete liberation of metals from plastics was achieved below 100μm size. Metal values were found to be more abundant in the coarser sizes.
                  A concentrate grade of over 93% total metal at a recovery of over 54% or a grade of 66% total metal at 95% recovery could be achieved using this flowsheet. Recovery of small and flat metal pieces was problematic in conventional gravity separation. Using gravity separation as a pre-concentration operation followed by flotation and enhanced gravity separation, these problems could be solved to a great extent and good recoveries could be achieved. The circuit has great potential to recover metal values from waste printed circuit boards in an industrial scale.Recycle and reuse of obsolete electronics has now been recognised as a big challenge. These e-wastes contain a number of metallic elements such as Cu, Pb, Sn, Ni, Fe, Al, Cd, Be, Pd, etc. including the precious metals such as Ag, Au, etc. Many of these, such as Be, Pb, Cd, etc., and the acrylic and phenolic resins and epoxides in the waste are harmful and add to environmental pollution. Also, the shear volume of such waste generated today, poses a great problem in terms of storage/disposal space and handling. Computer waste forms the major portion of the total e-waste generated. The circuit boards constitute about 6% of the total weight of e-waste. The circuit boards are rich in metal content and may be considered a high value waste. The need for processing these wastes to extract the metal values and remove the non-metallic constituents has been felt all over the world. Substantial work has been done and reported in literature. Most of the works are based on dry processing for separation of metal and non-metal. An excellent review was presented by In spite of having several technological options it appears that a quest for a cost-effective technology for processing electronic scrap is still on. It is evident that the problem of electronic waste is far from solved. In developing countries the problem is far more acute. For example, in India, the problem has attained an alarming dimension today because of a rudimentary disposal, classification and collection system of e-waste as well as lack of cost-effective technology for processing them. It has been reported that 900–1000 computers are dismantled everyday in New Delhi alone. 5000 The present work is aimed at providing cost-effective technology for the recovery of metal values from waste printed circuit boards (PCBs). PCBs are ubiquitous in this electronic age and about 6% of the total e-waste is PCB. They are very rich in metal content, especially copper. The waste PCBs are powdered and metallic constituents are separated from the plastics and resins using only physical beneficiation techniques. A beneficiation flowsheet is developed incorporating dry and wet methods of separation. In the present work a novel process flowsheet for separation of metals from non-metallic constituents of powdered PCB involving a combination of wet and dry mineral beneficiation techniques is proposed. In the absence of a proper disposal, collection and sorting system of wastes in India, identifying a source for the availability of waste printed circuit boards for carrying out research was difficult. 100 The ground powder is analysed for size by dry sieving. Microscopic liberation analysis is also performed to know the degree of liberation and the concentration of metal in each size class using optical microscope. The size analysis and liberation data of the ground powder are shown in For the finest size (−44 The composite sample and each of the size classes are analysed for chemical composition in terms of significant metal values. The chemical analysis data are shown in A portion of the PCB containing no metal value is cut off and pulverised. The specific gravity of this powder is measured in picnometers using kerosene. The specific gravity of this powder is found to be 1.49. The specific gravity of the head sample is also measured and is found to be 3.32. The difference in the specific gravity values suggested a gravity based separation of the metals from the non-metals. Sink float tests were carried out using pure bromoform (specific gravity 2.81). All the plastics floated and metal bearing particles sank. This indicated the applicability of gravity based separation techniques. After close investigation of the characterisation data a flowsheet is designed for the beneficiation of the ground PCB powder. Effective utilization of various properties calls for such a seemingly complex flowsheet. Density difference between the metals and plastics is quite large. Therefore, conventional gravity separation is an essential step. However, the plastics have a low specific gravity. So, for such small size particles the settling kinetics are very poor. This necessitates the use of an enhanced gravity separation step. Plastics are naturally hydrophobic. This is conveniently exploited in flotation. Finally, the huge difference in electrical conductivity is also made use of to achieve good purification. Closer investigation of the microscopic modal analysis as shown in The hydrocyclone underflow from classification stage is subjected to tabling. As noted in The three streams from tabling stage are subjected to flotation separately. Flotation is known to work well with a pre-sized feed. Good concentration is achieved in flotation with the middling fraction as the grade could be improved from 25% to 36%. The tailings also responded well to flotation as a concentrate grade of 18.3% is obtained from a poor 8.6% feed grade. The flotation response of the tabling concentrate having relatively larger particle size is not very favourable as a feed grade of 38.4% is enriched to 42.2% only. However, it may be noted that a high yield of the concentrate is targeted at this stage compromising the grade to some extent. It may be noted that plastics are naturally hydrophobic. Therefore, release analysis is not carried out to establish the applicability of flotation in this case. The flotation step is an obvious choice as it does not really add to any substantial cost while conveniently exploiting the differences in hydrophobicity between the metals and the plastics. The concentrate streams of the first two flotation stages are further purified using multi-gravity separator. At relatively coarser size range, purification in subsequent electrodynamic and electrostatic separation stages is relatively easier. Therefore, in this stage too, a concentration with low enrichment but high yield is targeted. It may be seen from Multi-gravity separation marked the end of the wet circuit. While the wet portion of the flowsheet is used for concentration and generation of rejectable tailings, the dry portion of the flowsheet is used for purification in electrodynamic and electrostatic separation. The two concentrates from the multi-gravity separation stages are dried and treated in a drum type high-tension (electrodynamic) separator. These two streams are richer in metal content and are of relatively coarser particle size. The large difference in the electrical conductivity of the metals and the plastics is made use of and very good enrichment is achieved. A concentrate of 69% total metal is produced from a feed grade of about 47% as seen in The tailings from the previous high tension separation stage is mixed with the dried tailings stream from the first MGS operation and treated in a second electrodynamic separation stage. In this stage a rejectable tailings with 2% total metal is generated along with a concentrate of 28% grade from a feed grade of about 14%. Purification of the concentrate of the first stage of electrodynamic separation in a plate type electrostatic separator resulted in a concentrate grade of over 93%. This is the final concentrate (C1). However, as seen from In electrodynamic separation the requirement of monolayer on the drum surface is a point of concern. Since, flowability of fine plastics is not so good, in spite of low feed rate the monolayer criteria is not fully satisfied. However, considering the effectiveness of electrodynamic separation due to the large difference in electrical conductivity between the metal and the plastics, it is included in the flowsheet. The relatively pure concentrate is certainly more effectively purified using electrostatic separation. This is why electrostatic separation is used in the last stage to generate the final concentrate. It may be seen from The above problems, however, may be tackled in a large scale operation without much difficulty. A closed circuit grinding with proper control on product size and residence time would significantly minimize the problem of fines generation. In addition, metal particles may be prevented from becoming too flat by repeated impact from the grinding media due to shorter residence time. Other enhanced gravity separation equipment such as Kelsey Jig or Knelson concentrator may be used to attain higher ‘ The combination of wet and dry methods, naturally, calls for a drying stage. However, this does not pose a serious problem since the dry operations are carried out only at the final stages of concentration process. Thus, the volume of material to be dried is low since the beneficiation process in this case is a relatively low-yield process itself where target grades are high. Thus the additional energy requirement for drying should be low. Also, the cake formation and other fines-related problems such as agglomeration, etc. do not occur due to the composition of the concentrate which is predominantly metallic. The unit operations used in the proposed flowsheet are all physical in nature. Hence, no chemical contamination is involved. The water can be re-circulated after solid-liquid separation. Flotation is reagent free. So, no effluent treatment is required. Wet operations mean that no air pollution related issues are involved. The metallic concentrate and plastics are also relatively purer and both can be reused or recycled. Hence, the current research is more environmentally sound. The proposed methods also have the following advantages: The process does not require specialized and sophisticated equipment for processing the waste printed circuit boards. The natural and strong hydrophobicity of non-metallic constituents is effectively exploited using wet flotation process at practically no cost. A continuous operation with recycling of streams at plant level will be able to minimize/eliminate the loss of metal values to a negligible level. The wet steps remove most plastics in the beginning and eliminate air pollution. Dry operations are carried out only at the purification stage. Hence, loading on dry separation steps is much less. Therefore, separation efficiency at this stage is high. This flowsheet can handle a large tonnage of material per hour due to the initial wet operations. Dry separations are known to be less effective when high throughput is required. A combination of dry and wet processes produces a rich concentrate with significantly high recoveries of metals from ground −0.5 Only about 35% of the starting materials are treated in the dry portion of the circuit. Moreover, the materials to be treated in the dry circuit are predominantly metallic. Hence, drying process is likely to be less cumbersome and would not warrant prohibitive expenditure. Gravity separation is cheap and spiral operation (which will actually be the substitute of Tabling in a plant scale) is nearly maintenance free. Flotation step requires no reagent at all. The load on the dry separation unit requiring high voltage is indeed very low since nearly pure metallic concentrate is treated there. And it is well known that conventional mineral processing unit operations working on physical methods are cheaper than most other unit operations. Since, these are the ones used in the proposed flowsheet, the authors believe that economically it will be more attractive, particularly for processing large tonnage of the waste material.