A two-phase fermentation process for the treatment of waste, intended for the recovery of hydrogen for energy use, was investigated in its initial fermentation phase. Hydrogen production was obtained from a mixed culture based on an active mesophilic inoculum without any selective treatment being applied. The liquid stream generated by the hydrogen fermentation process was stabilized in the following, methanogenic, phase for the recovery of methane and further breaking down of the waste stream. The whole process was carried out at a temperature in the mesophilic range (34°C). The substrate used was an unsterilized mixture of the organic fraction of municipal solid wastes (OFMSW) and slaughterhouse waste from a poultry-processing plant. The hydrogen-producing phase was capable of stable performance under the hydraulic retention times (HRTs) evaluated (3 and 5 days). No methane was detected in the first phase at any point during the whole period of the experiment and the hydrogen yield showed no symptoms of declining as time elapsed. The amount of hydrogen obtained from the fermentation process was in the range of 52.5–71.3NLkg−1
                     VSrem.The problems associated with the burning of fossil fuels have drawn attention to more sustainable sources for the production of energy. Hydrogen is a clean fuel with a high energy yield (142.35 The production of hydrogen from wastes by dark fermentation is a relatively new process that has been studied by several authors The traditional anaerobic digestion process is a well-known technique for the stabilization of wastes and recovery of methane as a fuel gas. Two-phase anaerobic digestion (2PAD) includes a first stage for hydrolysis and acidogenesis of the residue and a second stage for stabilization of the residue through methanogenesis. In two-stage systems, in addition to proper control of acidification and optimization of hydraulic retention time (HRT), biomass concentration can be adjusted independently for each stage The work being reported here was intended to study the fermentation process in a two-phase system, producing hydrogen in an initial phase and methane in the following phase. As substrate, it used the organic fraction of municipal solid wastes (OFMSW) admixed with slaughterhouse waste (SW) from a poultry-processing plant. Mesophilic anaerobic sludge from a laboratory-scale reactor treating slaughterhouse waste from a poultry-processing plant was used as an inoculum. No previous treatment was applied to the inoculum because this would be impractical if the processes were to be scaled up with a view to applying it to the stabilization of wastes. The total solid and volatile solid concentrations of the inoculum were 19.52 A simulated OFMSW was used as substrate, this being composed of the following components: 10% banana, 10% apple, 10% orange, 35% cabbage, 25% potatoes, 8% bread and 2% paper. This mixture was ground to obtain a particle size of less than 3 The reactors used for the hydrogen-production phase were Erlenmeyer flasks with a working volume of 100 The methanogenic phase was made up of reactors of 600 To check that the hydrogen fermentation process was sustainable on a larger scale, a reactor of 1 During the digestion process the following parameters were monitored: pH, alkalinity, total solids (TS), volatile solids (VS), daily gas production, gas composition and the concentration of volatile fatty acids (VFA). The element and immediate analyses for the substrates and the samples obtained from the fermentation process were carried out according to standard ASTM procedures. The values for pH, TS and VS were determined in accordance with standard methods After the systems started up, gas production reached maximum values over the first 3 days and then the production of biogas decreased. This decrease coincided with an increase in the hydrogen content of the biogas. Concentrations of methane as high as 45% were detected in the systems in the early part of the experiments, but once a period of time approximately equal to one HRT had elapsed, no further methane was detected. The hydrogen concentration of the biogas stabilized 7 days after the start of the experiment. The hydrogen content of the biogas from all the systems was in the range 25–27%, as an example, The initial pH of the inoculum used for the seed microflora was 7.9. Once the feeding process started, the pH steadily decreased. Alkaline solution was added once the pH reached the value 5.5. From this point on, the pH of the systems was controlled by adding enough alkaline solution to restore the pH value to 6.0 after each feeding process. The pH then fell naturally, reaching values around 5.2, and no further corrections were undertaken until the next feeding procedure. The alkaline solution was sufficiently concentrated to ensure that the volume added was insignificant relative to the amount of substrate fed into the system.   A reactor 1-L in capacity was used to evaluate the behaviour of hydrogen production when systems are increased in scale. This system was monitored only for gas production, gas composition and the destruction of VS. Under static conditions, the system reached a steady state 6 days after the beginning of the experiment. The hydrogen content of the biogas was once again similar to those of the systems described previously, with a mean value of 27 A methanogenic phase was coupled to the hydrogen-production systems working at −250 Representative samples taken from the substrate, together with solids obtained from the hydrogen-producing phase and the methanogenic phase were subjected to immediate and element analysis. The results are shown in The mixed culture obtained from an active anaerobic inoculum was able to maintain stable production of hydrogen in a semi-continuous process with no deterioration in the microflora. Once the process was stable, the average hydrogen concentration in the gas was in the range of 25–27.5%, balanced to CO The Tuckey test was applied to data on biogas production collected from the hydrogen-fermentation systems. The data were analyzed in two groups, each containing four fermentation systems, one group with a 5-day HRT and the other with a 3-day HRT. The outcome was that system OF:S-5 at −350 A decrease in the HRT of the systems caused an increase in the average daily gas production. No relevant changes were observed in the hydrogen content of the biogas and the hydrogen yield was not affected to any great extent, this indicating that a sufficient population of micro-organisms remained in the system and was able to handle this new organic load. A decrease in the concentration of caproic acid was observed when the redox potential was increased. However, no clear tendency could be seen in the behaviour of the concentrations of acetic and butyric acid, other than the fact that the concentration of these acids was slightly lower in systems with shorter HRTs. Theoretically, sucrose can be converted directly to hydrogen by anaerobic bacteria through a fermentative butyrate/acetate metabolism (Eqs. The efficiency of the process can be calculated using the assumption proposed by Valdez-Vazquez et al. The hydrogen rate in terms of the reactor volume was in average 0.7 The results obtained from the methanogenic phase coupled to the hydrogen-fermentation systems showed that the addition of slaughterhouse waste to the systems considerably increased the amount of biogas produced in this second phase, although no effect was noted during the first stage. The GPR increased from 1.5 to 2.2–2.54 From the results of immediate and element analysis, it may be observed that in each stage of treatment the ash content of the samples increases, with a parallel decrease in the content of volatiles, indicating that a biological mineralization process is taking place Use of the data obtained from the element analysis allows the efficiency of the fermentation process in producing hydrogen to be evaluated in terms of the hydrogen produced and the atomic hydrogen used by the process. This latter value was calculated as the difference between the atomic hydrogen present in the original substrate and what was left in the remaining biosolids. From this, it became clear that the addition of slaughterhouse waste to the feed improved the utilization of hydrogen intended for the production of hydrogen gas when the HRT was reduced to 3 days. However, no effect was seen when the HRT is 5 days. Further, a decrease in the HRT caused a slight drop in efficiency at −250 The incorporation of a hydrogen-recovery unit into the traditional anaerobic process for the treatment of waste seems appropriate, since stable hydrogen production was attained by using active mesophilic anaerobic microflora as inoculum, without applying any type of pre-treatment. No prior sterilization of the wastes used as feed was necessary. These two features make the process attractive for large-scale application, thanks to the existence of two-phase systems which could produce hydrogen to be used in fuel-cell systems. The methanogenic phase coupled to the hydrogen-producing systems allows stabilization of the wastes in a reasonable time. The hydrogen yield from the fermentation process was in the range 52.5–71.3