Coarse particle gangue rejection is highly topical due to the potential benefit in removing a significant fraction of gangue prior to fine grinding, thereby creating significant potential savings in energy, water, reagents (and consumables) and significantly reducing fine tailings deposition requirements. The research presented here focusses on characterising and evaluating liberation and separation of gangue from a gold bearing sulfide ore in the −2 mm +0.3 mm size range (associated with post tertiary crushing). This particle size range was chosen from a materials handling perspective, focussing on material that can be transported by pumping an ore slurry. This paper will review the procedure and results of an in-depth assessment of the amenability of a gold ore to gangue rejection in the pumpable size range. The liberation of the non-sulfide gangue of crushed gold ore is evaluated by proxy using sequential sink-float analysis for various size fractions. SPT (sodium polytungstate) and LST Fastfloat® (comprising of lithium heteropolytungstates) were used as heavy liquids. The results establish the deportment of gold to the sink and float products yielding a recovery versus mass pull relationship. Liberation patterns were investigated as produced by various crushing technologies such as vertical shaft impact (VSI) crushing, cone crushing, SelFrag®-based comminution, and high pressure grinding roll (HPGR) crushing. The gangue liberation behaviour, using a sink-float proxy, was dependent upon the mode of crushing and varied for different size intervals. The results of the Gangue Rejection Amenability Test allow for the determination of the grade and mass splits that are achievable for a given crushed product. The method is applicable to a wide range ores with varying mineralogies. Significant variation in the amount of barren rejectable gangue for a given gold ore and a given gold loss to rejects was observed for the various crushing technologies at the same 100% pass size, even though the particle size distributions were fairly similar.Continuous coarse particle gangue rejection holds much potential to significantly reduce the costs and improve upon sustainability measures if a large proportion of suitably barren material can be liberated and separated from the metal/mineral values, without significant value loss. This aim of this research is an attempt to quantify the potential for coarse particle gangue rejection (or preconcentration) for a free milling gold ore. The particle size range investigated has been restricted to the pumpable size fraction of 0.3–2.0 mm from the perspective of keeping the streams suited for hydraulic transport and classification, though the range in investigation is now being extended to particles as coarse as 4.75 mm. This size range offers particular process benefits related to slurry based materials transport and low cost separation methods, including screening (for mineral differentiation rather than size classification only) and gravity separation (using jigs, classifiers, coarse particle flotation, dense media separation, etc.), can then be employed. Preconcentration has been defined as unit operations prior to the main recovery process targeting removal of waste by exploiting the physical properties of the material ( Comminution in general, and comminution by grinding in tumbling mills in particular, is an energy intensive and, therefore an expensive step in liberation of the targeted metal from the host rock. For example, the relative cost to liberate to P Data collected from the AMIRA P420E Industry Practices Survey on mine production, gold production and cyanide consumption can also be used to demonstrate the potential of preconcentration and coarse gangue rejection for gold ores ( The energy cost savings realised by opting to use a fine crush and rejecting gangue material prior to milling is not the only benefit of a gangue rejection strategy. Other than reduced reagent costs as well as decreased energy requirements during grinding and leaching, a significant savings in water demand and grinding media consumption may be achieved and the generation of fine tailings (with commensurate environmental risk and water loss) may be minimised. One example of the potential for gangue rejection is given in recently published Grade Engineering ® work by CRC ORE at Newcrest’s Telfer mine in Western Australia. Grade Engineering is the term defined by CRC ORE to refer to the operational techniques to exploit intrinsic grade variability to remove low grade uneconomic ore prior to energy intensive and inefficient grinding ( However, one of the main challenges of any research program on gangue rejection, as was the case in the Telfer example previously mentioned, is to understand the cost saving by rejecting the discard fraction (i.e., the liberated barren gangue) versus the potential loss in value. In other words, is the discard fraction truly barren (or sufficiently barren in economic cut-off grade terms), will the stream be stockpiled and treated at a later time (end of mine life or when mill feed is low) or will the ore undergo a different extraction process (heap leach)? This research has aimed to understand the deportment of valuable material into each stream as a function of size, crush type and efficiency of gravity recovery, recognising that the quantification of liberation at the crusher product level is very difficult however and may vary with different crushing modes.  Density-based sink/float tests allow for the most accurate separation of particles irrespective of size, yielding fractions that can then be assayed to determine grade and, by inference, liberation of the particles. For the last few years research has been aimed at optimising a densimetric procedure and analysis method resulting in the Gangue Rejection Amenability Test (GRAT) work flowsheet, given in The GRAT has been modified in several ways since its inception, namely in the number of SGs, point of sample introduction, initial sample mass, top size and screening after sink/float as opposed to before, all in order to reduce the length and cost of the test while still delivering an in-depth data set for each feed material. Initial method development was performed using sodium polytungstate (SPT) as the heavy liquid medium; however, a solution containing lithium heteropolytungstates (LST) was ultimately utilised because of its lower viscosity at higher SG, despite its higher cost. The GRAT was used to investigate the influence of the crushing mode on liberation of the resulting products. The results presented in this section represent the initial ore studied, plant feed to the Castlemaine Goldfields Ballarat Gold Mine in Victoria, Australia. In 2014, the Ballarat Goldfields ore body was being processed by a gravity only circuit, using a VSI for fine crushing to 5 mm followed with recovery by six Inline Pressure Jigs (IPJs) and a batch centrifugal concentrator (BCC) to target a recovery of >85% of the gold in 5% of the mass. The Continuous Gravity Recovery (CGR) test, results for the Ballarat ore are given in Samples of the minus 30 mm feed to the plant were crushed in the laboratory using a cone crusher, SelFrag®, a vertical shaft impactor (VSI) and a high pressure-grinding roll (HPGR) with a resulting product of P In first comparing the particle size distribution (PSD) of the crushed products in However, it is not just the mass of the size fractions that is important, but also the grade of each size fraction that gives information about liberation and likely recovery in a gravity separation device. To understand the variability and extent of gold deportment for the different ore crushing mechanisms examined (via the heavy liquid density splits into both sink and float product fractions), preferential gold grade by mass by recovery responses were examined. Crusher products, with a 2 mm particle top size was screened into the four size fractions, as shown in The To support the direct comparison between mass and grade linked responses, resulting from cone crush, SelFrag®, HPGR and VSI particle breakage mechanisms, a weighted feed grade average was used in calculating a normalised overall mass balance for crushing mechanism sink-float and minus 0.3 mm screen undersize product fractions. Individual crushing mechanism normalised mass balanced calculations were used in comparing the variability and the extent of gold deportment in the sink and float fractions, shown in  The shape and the extent of the different crushing mechanism generated curves shown in Gold loss to HLS floats versus cumulative weight% (mass pull) rejected to floats is shown for each crushing mechanism as response curves in The VSI crushing mechanism response curve in  In  The data demonstrates that he cone and SelFrag® crushing mechanisms produced either no or limited gold upgrade ratio into the fines fraction, respectively. The HPGR and VSI crushing mechanisms indicated a preferential gold deportment gold into the plus 0.3 mm material (coarse fraction) following coarse particle separation, via screening, after breakage as demonstrated by the calculated upgrade ratio of less than one in each case. Comparison of variability in preferential gold grade by size deportment responses, via the gold upgrade trend curve, and crushing mechanism product mass yields between coarse fraction and the fine fractions, shown in The aim of research in this area is to gain an understanding of the factors that attribute to an ore’s amenability to coarse particle gangue rejection whereby a significant component of the feed mass can be sent to tailings at a coarse liberation size. Testwork focused on the application of continuous gangue rejection in the pumpable size range as this remains one of the key opportunities to reduce processing costs through a combination of techniques including screening (for mineral differentiation rather than size classification only) and gravity separation (using jigs and other density based separation devices). A Gangue Rejection Amenability Test and analysis method to characterise a variety of ores has been developed and is now being used to create a database of ore rejection responses to better understand the factors that make an ore a suitable candidate for coarse particle gangue rejection. It was shown that the mode of crushing has a significant influence on the extent of liberation of gangue and the achievable upgrade at coarse particle sizes for the orogenic ore sample investigated in this paper. The current work presents a novel understanding of how crushing mechanism may impact preferential grade by mineral density separation responses for an ore type within an operational context and provides new implications for economic resource evaluation. The authors wish to the AMIRA P420F sponsors (AngloGold Ashanti, Australian Gold Reagents, Barrick Gold, Evolution, FLSmidth, Gekko Systems, Gold Fields, Kemix, Lhoist, Newcrest Mining, Newmont Mining, Northern Star Resources, Orica, Pionera, and Vega industries) as well as CRC ORE for financial and technical support and Castlemaine Goldfields Ballarat Gold Mine for the samples and site support. Coarse particle gangue rejection is a research objective of the AMIRA P420F Gold Processing Technology project, some of the work in this paper has been taken from project update reports by Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 