Using renewable energy as wood chip or improving wood chip heating process are different usual ways to reduce carbon dioxide emission. The more uncharted path to reduce it is to limit energy consumed to produce wood-based fuel as wood chips or pellets. Wood chipping is the first step of each wood fuel production process. Chipping wood knowledge is also important for improving wood chipper efficiency. This paper compares two methods for determining cutting energy of a disc chipper and evaluates influence of anvil position on chipper efficiency.
                  Cutting force is measured by the anvil bending during chipping and disc chipper energy supply is calculated by multiply the torque applied by the Power Take Off (PTO) to the shaft of the chipper by the shaft speed. In our study, a large set of chipping conditions are tested on a disc chipper with different species, log diameters, infeed volume rates and anvil vertical position.
                  Cutting force measured from anvil's strain represents one impact for each half disc turn because the disc has two knives, whereas chipper energy supply is similar to a sinus curve. Cutting force depends of wood specie, diameter, infeed volume rates and anvil vertical position. Higher the wood infeed volume rate and diameter are, higher the cutting forces are. A disc chipper efficiency is estimated as the ratio of the cutting energy and the chipper energy supply.The use of wood biomass becomes an important renewable energy to achieve the environmental European Union target of the year 2020. In France, wood biomass is almost the whole of the renewable energies which are burn in wood boiler Even if disc and drum chippers have been known for a long time, chipper performance is still difficult to evaluate during chipping. Few researches are focused on cutting power measurement due to the dynamic behavior of the system. In 1987, Stockes et al. In order to measure cutting forces, Abdallah et al. Hellström et al. The last way to evaluate chipper performance is to multiply PTO's torque by rotational speed of the chipper shaft. Spinelli et al. In this study, influence of vertical gap between the anvil and the infeed table is evaluated by measuring chipper energy supply and cutting energy for two species of wood: beech and spruce. Wood and chipper characteristics are gathered in The disc chipper is driven in rotation by a 45 kW electric motor. A low and a high infeed volume rate per tooth respectively of 46 and 92 cm Effect of vertical gap between the anvil and the log is studied in 90°–90° wood cutting mode. Three different vertical gaps ( An in-feed table is developed to choose and keep the fed direction of the log during chipping. Two wedges are manufactured to reduce the gap between the anvil and the log. The three anvils are instrumented to determine the cutting force during chipping. For each vertical position of the anvil, the influence of infeed volume, species and diameter of wood are tested on chipper energy consumption. Chipper energy efficiency is evaluated by measuring both cutting force normal to the anvil and chipper energy supply as show sensors location on Data acquisition system records simultaneously rotational speed of the disc and torque applied to the Universal Join Shaft (UJS) that rotary drive the disc chipper shaft. The strain of the anvil due to chipping forces is also measured with a sampling frequency of 10 kHz. This sampling frequency is choose in the aim of recording more than 20 values during one cut of the knife through one section of the log. Cutting force is measured using an indirect force measurement system implemented on the chipping test bench improved by Abdallah During the chipping process, the signal emitted by the strain transmitters are recorded and have to be corrected using the FRFs functions ( Cutting energy calculated from anvil's bending is compared to the chipper's energy supply. During chipping, electric motor of our test bench applies a torque to the disc chipper's shaft using the PTO. As the universal joint shaft is directly connected to the chipper's shaft, we can consider that they transmit the same torque. The tractor's universal Joint shaft could be instrumented by strain gauges to determine the torque transmitted to the disc chipper's shaft as described by Labbé et al. Disc chipping is a discontinuous cutting process. Then, in order to increase accuracy of experimental measurements of chipping force and chipper energy supply, each measurement is considered as consecutives cuts of one chipping knife during an half disc turn. Chipping force and energy supply diagrams are the average of each isolated knife cut after having eliminated aberrant ones. On With at least fifty cuts for a set of cutting conditions, the statistical analysis is accurate. During chipping, two impacts on the anvil are measured with an angular offset of 180° ( Maximal cutting force depends on infeed volume, diameter and vertical gap between the anvil and the infeed table ( The cutting force during chipping is between 3500 and 6000 N. For the same vertical gap between the anvil and the infeed table, when the infeed volume per tooth increases of 50%, the maximum force raises by 45%. But it is unexpected that increasing of 30% the log diameter consumes 30% less of chipping power. Normally, chipping high wood diameters generates more cutting force than low wood diameter. It could also be observed that the number of measured wood cuts depends of wood density and is higher for beech than spruce. We suppose that high diameter or density logs are more difficult to bend due to increase of their stiffness. Then, higher stiffness logs apply less on the anvil when the vertical gap between the anvil and the infeed table increase. On As show on From this observation, we decide to totally remove the anvil to evaluate its influence on chips size ( A size analysis is performed for chipping with and without anvil ( According to our tests, using an anvil allows to avoid oversized wood chips. These chips are often responsible for blocking feeding of wood fuel in automated boiler. Moreover, when the anvil is removed, the chipper produce hog fuel and log seems to be shredded more than cut. In addition, reducing gap between the anvil and the infeed table increases risks of log infeed stopping due to locking of log against the anvil ( Torque transmitted by the universal joint shaft ( The vertical gap between the anvil and the infeed table has no influence on torque measure, contrary to log diameter and infeed volume rate ( Average torque varies from 100 to 350 Nm. Increase of 30% of log diameter raises from 10 to 20% of PTO's torque. Increase of 50% of the infeed volume of wood raises by 40% of torque transmitted by the universal joint shaft. A disc chipper efficiency is estimated as the ratio of the cutting energy and the chipper energy supply. The average and standard deviation of cutting energy efficiency are calculated for each set of parameters. Results for beech and spruce are gathered on The results show that all parameters tested impact the cutting energy efficiency. The gap between the anvil and the log modifies the measure of the force applied on the anvil and a low gap tends to improve accuracy of cutting force measurements. As the PTO's torque during chipping is fairly constant, the energy efficiency of the chipper increases during chipping. The best efficiency of 80% is reached for low diameter logs of spruce chipped with low infeed volume and for a small gap between the anvil and the infeed table. The difference between the both energies can be explained by the measure of only cutting force normal to the anvil, without measuring tangential and radial cutting force. In this paper, the energy consumption of a disc chipper is measured on the one hand very near from the cutting area and in the other hand from the chipper energy supply. Cutting force is obtained from the bending of the anvil during chipping. Chipper energy supply is calculated by measuring the torque transmitted to the disc chipper by the universal joint shaft. Three different gaps between the anvil and the infeed table are studied for various log and cutting characteristics. An increase of 30% of log diameter raises from 10 to 20% the chipper energy supply while it increases of 40% when the infeed volume is doubled. The chipper efficiency estimated as the ratio of the cutting energy and the chipper energy supply varies from 40 to 80%. Reducing the gap between the anvil and the infeed table increase the efficiency because log is more in contact with the anvil, and the cutting force which is measured using anvil bending is more accurate. Accuracy of cutting forces will be improved by measuring tangential cutting force during chipping closer to the chipping area. A chip particle size when the anvil is removed is analyzed in our study. We ensure that the anvil helps to reduce oversize chips and avoid producing hog fuel. But, reducing the gap between the anvil and the infeed table increases risks of log infeed blocking. The choice of the gap between the infeed table and the anvil is an outcome from the compromise between these two phenomena. This work is supported by a grant overseen by the