Electric Pulse Fragmentation (EPF) is an innovative technology that uses High-Voltage Pulsed Power (HVPP) for the selective comminution of a material. This paper aims to compare a beneficiation flowsheet including an EPF treatment in the comminution circuit to a conventional pathway where the EPF step was replaced by a series of jaw crushers. Tests were performed on a skarn ore containing scheelite as the main mineral of interest. This ore is characterized by a fine-grained mineralogy and represents a challenge to conventional comminution processing, requiring fine grinding to liberate the valuable minerals. Fine grinding has high energy requirements and generates large amounts of fines which can result in losses of the target mineral due to their removal before the concentration processes, especially in this case since scheelite is a brittle material.
                  Comparison of EPF treatment to mechanical crushing with a similar product size P80 (i.e. 80% passing size) showed that the EPF treatment led to a significant increase in WO3 content and distribution in the 0/250 µm size fraction suggesting a pre-concentration aspect to EPF treatment. Moreover, a marked improvement of the grindability of the ore treated at a discharged energy of 9.1 kWh/t was observed with values of 10.6 kWh/t compared to 14.5 kWh/t when conventional treatment was used. Subsequent grinding and concentration steps confirmed the positive impacts of the fragmentation selectivity and pre-weakening effect of the EPF treatment. In particular, a reduction in fines production was observed after ball milling and a better concentrate grade was achieved for a similar recovery rate when an EPF treatment was included in the comminution pathway compared to the conventional one. These results confirm the potential of the EPF treatment for improving the performances of the beneficiation processes of this scheelite-bearing skarn ore.Tungsten (W) is a metal that is widely used in industrial, aerospace, and military applications. This is due to its unique properties including a high density, wear resistance and tensile strength, as well as a low reactivity, and the highest melting point of all metals. These properties make it irreplaceable in a wide range of applications such as in cemented carbide; super alloys; high-speed steels and mill products. Its high economic importance from its wide range of applications, a lack of viable substitutes and the EU’s dependence on imports ( Scheelite (CaWO An alternative approach for improving scheelite recovery could be to implement a selective comminution technology, which has the advantage of reducing fines production by generating cracks specifically at the boundaries between mineral grains rather than randomly as in a conventional mechanical comminution system. This allows the liberation of valuable components from the feed material without overgrinding. Liberation at coarser size ranges is not only beneficial for the separation techniques but can also lead to significant economic benefits for mineral processing operations, such as a reduction in the grinding energy as the material does not need to be ground as finely as in conventional comminution systems ( Selective comminution methods are usually based on anisotropic properties of the ore, usually related to varying properties of constituent minerals (e.g. mechanical, electrical or acoustic properties, thermal expansion). Electric Pulse Fragmentation (EPF) is one such method, and exploits differences in electrical and acoustic properties of component phases in a rock to selectively fragment them. EPF works by applying highly energetic electrical pulses (150–750 J/pulse) with a very fast pulse rise time (<500 ns) to materials immersed in a dielectric process liquid (usually water). At this pulse rise time, dielectric liquids are more resistive than solids and act as an insulator, forcing discharges through the immersed material. Upon discharge, a plasma channel forms between the electrodes and through the material that causes explosive expansion along its pathway through the material, and the collapse of the plasma channel produces a shock-wave that propagates through the material (electrodynamic fragmentation). The high selectivity of the process arises from the way the plasma channel and shockwaves interact with physico-chemical properties of the material: discontinuities in electrical permittivity and conductivity at phase boundaries locally enhance the electric field, forcing the discharge channels to these boundaries, while differences in acoustic impedance and elasticity of adjacent phases causes local shearing when subjected to shockwaves. Both of which serve to concentrate tensile stress at phase interfaces ( This work aims to study the influence of EPF technology on the selective fragmentation and on the concentration of a skarn ore containing scheelite. Since this technology has been shown to work better on coarse particle sizes ( The ore used in this study comes from the Tabuaço deposit which is a stratabound skarn-type deposit, situated in the Central Iberian Zone, of the Iberian Variscan Belt in Portugal ( The tests were conducted using the ‘Lab’, a laboratory scale EPF device for the batch processing of material, manufactured by SELFRAG AG, Switzerland ( the energy consumed by the machine, called generator energy (in J or kWh) or specific energy for a given sample mass (in kWh/t): this is the set energy delivered to the sample calculated using the set voltage, capacitance, number of pulses, and sample mass. the energy discharged into the material, called spark energy (in J or kWh) or discharged energy for a given sample mass (in kWh/t): this is the net electrical energy delivered to the samples measured by the batch device and displayed on the control panel after each test. This is the energy considered in this work. The tests were carried out on a single-particle mode (after Tests were performed on samples of about 40 mm diameter. Investigation of the influence of the discharged energy can be performed either by varying the number of pulses or the voltage. To study the influence of EPF treatment on comminution and concentration circuit performance, a specific methodology was implemented that allowed comparison of EPF and conventional pathways i.e. mechanical crushers, in parallel ( Fine grinding was performed in a batch wet ball mill. Milling was carried out for 7 min on a sample of about 2 kg and prepared at a solid ratio of about 66%. The ball charge was fixed at 20.1 kg. After each batch, the product was sieved at 160 µm (the mean grain size of scheelite) to remove the undersize and circulating load was calculated. The undersize was then replaced by an equal weight of fresh feed to bring the weight back to that of the original charge. This sample is returned to the ball mill and this procedure was repeated 3 times in order to produce enough material for the concentration tests. Exploratory concentration tests were performed with a Falcon SB40 concentrator. Falcon concentrator is an enhanced gravity separator (EGS) consisting of a spinning bowl which can be operated at high rotation speed (up to 300 G), allowing to separate fine particles of different density. Tests were performed on samples of about 150 g with a fluidization counter-pressure fixed at 12 psi and a centrifugal force of 39 G. The objective of these preliminary tests was to check if the EPF treatment can have an influence on the performances of the concentration steps. Textural and surface properties of the samples were studied by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) on a Tescan Mira 3 XMU, equipped with a Secondary Electron (SE) Everhart-Thornley detector ( The particle size distribution (PSD) was measured by manual sieving at twelve sizes (40 mm, 20 mm, 16 mm, 8 mm, 5 mm, 3.36 mm, 2 mm, 1 mm, 500 µm, 250 µm, 125 µm and 63 µm), which allowed to estimate the product size P80. The WO For determining the effect of EPF treatment in comparison with the conventional crushing of the samples, a small scale grindability test has been applied. The test is part of the Geometallurgical Comminution Test (GCT) and uses only 220 g of pre-crushed material and much less processing time for getting a measure for ore grindability and an estimate of the Bond ball mill work index ( Particle size distributions from dry sieving are numerically evaluated for the 80% passing size for a sequence of 2, 5, 10, 17 and 25 min. Using the 80% passing size together with a recording of the gross electrical power draw of the ball mill, a GCT work index is determined from applying the Bond law of comminution. For many ores, the work index received from the GCT test is linearly correlated with the Bond work index ( The influence of the discharged energy on the product size P80 after EPF is shown in SEM investigation was performed on feed samples before the EPF treatment and on fragments obtained after the EPF treatment performed at a discharged energy of 1.5 kWh/t and of 9.1 kWh/t ( A discharged energy of 9.1 kWh/t was chosen for performing the comparison with the conventional pathway as this represented the optimal EPF energy/breakage before the flattening of the P80 curve with higher levels of discharged energy ( The WO  The potential of the EPF pre-concentration effect to remove barren rocks in the coarse size fractions was investigated through the calculation of the WO Interestingly, it can be observed in Since the EPF treatment is performed in place of some crushing steps (regarding only size reduction), additional comminution steps are required for the mineral processing of this skarn ore. It is then crucial to check that the benefits of the EPF treatment for the selective recovery of scheelite are not lost subsequently. As mentioned before, the comparison of the EPF technology to the conventional pathway was done considering an EPF treatment performed at a discharged energy of 9.1 kWh/t and the conventionally treated sample was specifically prepared for reaching a similar P80. Both samples were crushed down to 1 mm before the ball milling step using a jaw crusher and a roll mill. The PSD of the samples is given in In order to avoid overgrinding of the size fraction lower than 160 µm (mean grain size of scheelite), the samples were sieved before ball milling and the undersize was removed. Similar ball milling steps were then performed on the EPF and on the conventionally treated samples. All fractions <160 µm (obtained before and after ball milling) were then combined before performing the concentration tests. For this combination, the ratio of the sieving at 160 µm before ball milling was taken into account to make representative samples. Different circulating loads were obtained during ball milling, with the circulating load of the EPF treated sample being 145% while a circulating load of 170% was measured for the conventionally treated sample. These results confirm the weakening effect of the EPF treatment as described in other publications ( During ball milling, the PSD of the sample coming from the conventional comminution circuit was slightly coarser than the one coming from the comminution circuit with an EPF treatment ( The influence of the EPF treatment performed at a discharged energy of 9.1 kWh/t on the grindability of the ore was analyzed using the small scale grindability test that allows determining the energy needed to grind the material down to 100 µm, as described above. Estimates for the work index of the skarn ore are given in Considering the energy consumption of the whole comminution circuit studied here, i.e. taking into account the energy used for the first fragmentation step (either conventional and with the electric pulse fragmentation), The exploratory separation tests were performed with a Falcon concentrator on samples ball milled to 160 µm. Results are given in These results suggest that including an EPF treatment in the comminution pathway allows improving the quality of the concentrate after gravity concentration for a given set of operating conditions. However, additional tests need to be performed to optimize the scheelite recovery, in the perspective of a flowsheet design. This positive effect of EPF treatment on the recovery of the target metal in a concentration process was already reported by several authors ( A detailed study was undertaken to investigate the influence of Electric Pulse Fragmentation (EPF) technology on the selectivity of fragmentation and on the performances of subsequent comminution and concentration processes of a scheelite bearing skarn ore. A specific methodology was implemented to compare the pathway including an EPF treatment to the conventional pathway. SEM observation of EPF treated fragments showed fractures at the surface of all fragments, even when size reduction was relatively low as observed after EPF treatment performed at a discharged energy of 1.5 kWh/t. These fractures were not observed in the initial material. These cracks can lead to a reduction in particle strength and then in the energy required to grind the ore. In particular, an improvement in the grindability of the ore was observed after EPF treatment performed at a discharged energy of 9.1 kWh/t, with values going from 14.5 kWh/t when conventional treatment was applied to 10.6 kWh/t when the EPF treatment was used, underlining the weakening effect of the EPF treatment. While a slight increase of the WO The selectivity and the ‘pre-weakening’ effect of this technology were also highlighted during ball milling where a decrease in the circulating load and a reduction of the WO  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study was performed under the project FAME (‘Flexible And Mobile Economic processing technologies) which has received funding from the