The influence of reaction time, temperature, zinc dust quantity and concentration of copper and antimony activators has been studied on the process of activated cementation of Co and Ni from industrial zinc sulfate solutions. Copper sulfate and potassium antimony tartrate were used as activators. The results obtained will be used to establish optimal conditions for activated cementation of cobalt and nickel in the Zinc Production Plant in KCM, Plovdiv.In hydrometallurgical zinc production, the purity of incoming solution subject to electrolysis is of great importance. The purity of electrolyte guarantees both obtaining high-grade cathode zinc deposit and reducing the amount of energy consumed for its procurement which considerably decreases the cost of zinc Cobalt leads to an intensive re-dissolution of zinc accompanied by destruction of both the oxide layer of the aluminium cathode and the zinc deposited upon it. As a result of this, black spots, pores and then cone-shaped holes are formed on the inner side of the deposit at the contact surface with the electrode. Nickel and zinc form active micro-electrode couples spreading across the whole surface of the cathode zinc and causing zinc dissolution Increasing attention is paid to the purification of solutions from admixtures in modern zinc producing plants Practically, different schemes for activated cementation The study of activated cementation was carried out with neutral zinc sulfate solutions after the copper cementation and partial cadmium cementation. The industrial purification of Cu, Cd and Co in KCM is carried out periodically. The content of the main components was within the following limits: Zn 145–169 g/L, Cu 0.117–0.600 mg/L, Cd 4–24.0 mg/L, Co 2.6–10.0 mg/L, Ni 0.60–1.4 mg/L, Sb 0.009–0.050 mg/L, Ge 0.025–0.060 mg/L, pH 4.8–5.2. Zinc dust (average size of particles 31 μm: +0.06 mm—2.2%; −0.06 mm—98.2%), CuSO The equipment used for conducting the experiments consisted of a laboratory stirrer EUROSTAR digital produced by IKA LABORTECHNIK allowing change of the revolutions per second and a thermostat for heating the solution and keeping the set temperature. Each experiment used 1 dm At fixed intervals of time, a sample of the solution was taken, filtered and the filtrate was analysed for Cu, Cd, Co, Ni, Sb, Ge content. The analysis was made by means of a Metrohm polarograph. The following measuring regime was used: DP-MODE-differential pulse voltametry with high sensitivity (up to 10 Data in scientific sources point that antimony has a weaker effect on activated cementation compared to arsenic According to some researchers, activated cementation of cobalt and nickel should take 45 min; others state that it should be completed in 3 h. Some of the results of our study concerning the influence of the duration upon the activated cementation are presented at When the duration of the process is increased, the concentration of Cu, Sb and Ge decreases continuously whilst Cd initially cements to a great degree, after which it partially dissolves. It has been found out that the newly precipitated cemented Cd oxidises easily by air/oxygen and re-dissolves. Cementation of cadmium is obstructed when the temperature is above 45 °C and the solution is in contact with air The experiments for determining the influence of zinc dust quantity on the cementation of cobalt and nickel were carried out at temperatures of 75, 80 and 85 °C. In the whole series of experiments, the concentration of copper was 200 mg/L and the ratio between the quantity of antimony and cobalt was G From the obtained results, it can be inferred that with the increase of zinc dust quantity, the degree of cementation of cobalt increases at all three temperatures. Very good results were obtained at 1500% quantity of zinc dust. In some plants, PbSO Most data in scientific literature show that activated cementation of cobalt and nickel is done within the temperature interval of 65–95 °C The presence of copper in the solution is necessary for the cementation of nickel. It is also known that the cementation of Cd goes faster in the presence of copper. According to some researchers, cobalt gets cemented as a result of the action of the micro-couple Zn–Cu. Therefore, copper as an activator is necessary for the cementation of cobalt as well In order to find the influence of copper on the degree of cementation of cobalt and nickel, a series of experiments were conducted under the following conditions: temperature 80 °C, zinc dust quantity—1500%, G We conclude from the results that adding copper to the solution activates, to a greater extent, the cementation of nickel and, to a smaller extent, the cementation of cobalt. The concentration of copper is recommended to be within 150–200 mg/L. Antimony has a more positive separating potential than cobalt and this is the reason why it separates in the process of cementation on the zinc dust. Here it forms cathode areas and assists the cementation of cobalt ( In order to verify the results obtained from the laboratory, activated cementation of cobalt and nickel were carried out with a stirrer at a capacity of 100 L. After heating of the solution to the required temperature of 80 °C, the following were added consecutively: CuSO As far as the duration of the process is concerned, it was proved that best results are achieved with a duration of 60–75 min. The degree of precipitation of cobalt reaches 98% or a concentration of Co of 0.1 mg/L in the purified solution under the following conditions: C With regard to activated cementation of nickel, a certain exception was detected. In the larger-scale experiment, the degree of purification of nickel reached a value of 67–69%, which is lower than the 90–95% value obtained under laboratory conditions.  During the process of activated cementation of Co and Ni, copper (as CuSO After adding Cu to the solution, mainly the cementation of Ni is activated, whilst that of Co is activated to a lower degree. It was proved that Co and Ni precipitation is optimum at Cu concentration of 150–200 mg/L. The influence of Sb in solution within the range of 0.5–10 times Co was studied. It was found that when the G The results obtained will be used to establish optimal conditions for the carrying out of activated cementation in the Zinc Production Plant in KCM, Plovdiv.