Nickel hydroxide prepared by a complexation–precipitation route yields a very fine particle material. The physicochemical properties and electrochemical charge–discharge capacities are compared with electrochemically prepared nickel hydroxide. In the present study, an attempt is made to prepare nickel hydroxide using nickel nitrate and complexing agents such as sodium succinate (SS), ethylene-diamine-tetra acetic acid (EDTA), sodium potassium tartrate (SPT) and tri-ethanol amine (TEA). The DTA analysis of the nickel hydroxide revealed the presence of a broad endothermic peak at ∼120 °C and a sharp endothermic one at ∼435 °C. The order of water association in the lattice of nickel hydroxide produced follows the order TEA>EDTA>SS. The electrochemical property resulted in higher discharge capacity (208 mA h/g) for TEA as complexing agent and lowest (107 mA h/g) for SS.The demand for nickel hydroxide which is used as a cathode material in rechargeable nickel metal hydroxide and nickel cadmium batteries has increased due to the emergence of laptop computers, cellular phones, and other personal electronic devices. For such batteries, two types of nickel hydroxides are generally used, an anhydrous form with a brucite structure called β-Ni(OH) The materials with high specific area, high degree of porosity and low particle size are known to have better charge/discharge capacities However, information on the preparation of nickel hydroxide using complexing agent is scarce. In the present study, an attempt is made to prepare battery grade Ni(OH) The Ni(OH) Similar procedures were used to prepare samples of precipitated nickel hydroxide in the presence of the other complexing reagents. The following pH conditions and concentrations of the complexing reagent solutions EDTA 46.5 g/L (pH 7.1), sodium potassium tartrate of 28.2 g/L (pH 11.5) and 67.54 g/L of sodium succinate (pH of 6.4) were used. Electrolytically Ni(OH) A Philips (PW 1050) X-ray diffractometer using CuKα radiation was used to carry out XRD analysis of the nickel hydroxide material. Physical properties such as tap density and apparent density were measured by the standard method using measuring cylinder and tapping technique. Particle size was measured by Malvern particle analyser. Themogravimetric and differential themogravimetric (TG and DTG) analyses were carried out in air, nitrogen and vacuum (10 The Ni(OH) The galvanostatic charge and discharge characteristics of the nickel hydroxide samples were studied in 30% KOH solution. For this purpose Ni(OH) The presence of a suitable complexing agent influences the characteristics of the products of precipitation reactions. The complexing agent essentially controls the kinetics of precipitation that involves slow combination of anions and cations homogeneously to yield the product in the form of a thin film or a fine particle material. This method was first applied to the preparation of PbO The X-ray diffraction data of the nickel hydroxide produced using the various complexing agents: sodium succinate (SS), ethylene-diamine-tetra acetic acid (EDTA), and tri-ethanol amine (TEA) are shown in According to the literature reports The XRD pattern of nickel hydroxide produced using tri-ethanol amine has peaks at 33.5°, 38.5° and 59.2 °C which shows that both α-Ni(OH) The Full Width Half Maximum (FWHM) intensity values of the nickel hydroxide samples prepared by using the three complexing reagents in (101) plane are shown in  The TG Nickel hydroxide produced using sodium succinate The charge/discharge curves of the various samples of nickel hydroxide are shown in Specific surface area is an important factor in determining the electrode performance as changes in morphology arising due to the agglomeration of particles are responsible for reducing the electrode capacity and utilization of electrode material on charging and discharging Specific surface area is an excellent indicator for the conditions under which a reaction is initiated, also for the rate of reaction. It correlates in general with the average particle size. The apparent density depends upon the packing amount of the particles, which again depends upon the particle size but mainly on particle size distribution and shape of the particles. The characteristics of a powder that determine its apparent density are complex. The tap density values differ from one another and this may be due to the nature of the nickel complex formed by the complexing agent and the rate at which OH displaces the complexing agent to form Ni(OH) The particle size distribution, individual and cumulative, for nickel hydroxide samples produced using two complexing agents, namely sodium succinate and sodium potassium tartrate are shown in  The precipitation of Ni(OH) DTA analysis shows that the Ni(OH) The nickel hydroxide produced using EDTA is associated with ∼79% water. In comparative terms, the order of water association with Ni(OH) The discharge capacity of nickel hydroxide produced using TEA as complexing agent is the highest (208 mA h/g) and with sodium succinate the lowest (107 mA h/g). The tap density of precipitated Ni(OH) The authors are indebted to Dr. V. N. Misra, Director, Regional Research Laboratory, Bhubaneswar, Orissa, India, for his kind permission to publish this work. The authors are also thankful to Dr. R. K. Paramguru, H.O.D, Electrometallurgy for his encouragement during this work.