Prediction of the drilling penetration rate is one of the important parameters in mining operations. This parameter has a direct impact on the mine planning and cost of mining operations. Generally, effective parameters on the penetration rate is divided into two classes: rock mass properties and specifications of the machine. The chemical components of intact rock have a direct effect in determining rock mechanical properties. Theses parameters usually have not been investigated in any research on the rock drillability. In this study, physical and mechanical properties of iron ore were studied based on the amount of magnetite percent. According to the results of the tests, the effective parameters on the penetration rate of the rotary drilling machines were divided into three classes: specifications of the machines, rock mass properties and chemical component of intact rock. Then, the rock drillability was studied using rock engineering systems. The results showed that feed, rotation, rock mass index and iron oxide percent have important effect on penetration rate. Then a quadratic equation with 0.896 determination coefficient has been obtained. Also, the results showed that chemical components can be described as new parameters in rotary drill penetration rate.The ability to predict the performance and efficiency of drilling machines is very important in mining operations. The rock drillability is one of the most important parameters for mine planning, development and economics of mine operations. Also knowledge of drillability of rocks in engineering projects has key role to determine drilling costs. Drillability is a term used in construction to describe the influence of a number of parameters on the drilling rate and the tool wear of the drilling too. In this evaluation, the drillability term was defined as a penetration rate. The rough estimations of the rock drillability may cause a great risk in terms of mining operations, selection of mining machineries and equipment and final price of the product. Also the total drilling cost can be estimated by the drilling rate equations. These equations can be used to select the type of machine. Rock drillability depends on many parameters such as rock properties and specifications of drilling equipment. Although drilling equipment parameters are controllable, rock characteristics and geological conditions are uncontrollable and cannot be changed Rock drillability studies, mostly based on empirical methods and different parameters such as uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), tensile strength, quartz content, apparent porosity, p-wave rate and porosity, can be used also to predict the drillability. Also, a wide range of empirical tests, such as Schmidt rebound hardness, point load strength, shore scleroscope hardness, Taber abrasion, cone indenter number, drilling rate index (DRI), coefficient of rock strength (CRS), rock brittleness, impact strength index (ISI), Cerchar abrasivity index (CAI), specific energy (SE), and texture coefficient (TC), have been used to predict the drilling performance Some of effective parameters on rock drillability are investigated in the models as well as some of them have been modified. These models may be inferred from either one or more than one production sites, or from small experimental in laboratory. The models may not work in all situations and cannot be able to recognize and consider effective parameters on rock drillability. Rock engineering systems (RES) paradigm is a powerful approach to tackle this problem. This approach has been widely applied to various engineering problems such as slope stability of open pit mines, underground excavations, rock blasting and environmental studies such as regarding the disposal of spent fuel, river catchment pollution, forest ecosystems, radioactive waste management, traffic-induced air pollution risk of reservoir pollution The RES approach was first introduced by Hudson for solving the complex engineering problems. This approach can be used for the analysis of coupled mechanisms in rock engineering problems In the interaction matrix for a given rock engineering system, all parameters influencing the system (for example, a rock drillability system) are arranged along the leading diagonal of the matrix, called the diagonal terms. Otherwise, the influence of each individual parameter on any other parameter (interaction) is included at the corresponding off-diagonal position of the matrix. The off-diagonal terms are assigned numerical values which describe the influence degree of one parameter on the other parameters. Assigning these values is usually referred to as “coding the matrix”. Several methods have been developed for this purpose, such as the 0–1 binary, expert semi-quantitative (ESQ) method and the continuous quantitative coding (CQC) method After coding the interaction matrix by inserting the appropriate values for each off-diagonal cell of the matrix, the influence of each parameter on the system is named “cause” ( Chadormalu Iron Ore Mine is located 165 km west of Yazd city in the center of Iran. From geological and tectonics point of view, this mine is one of the most complicated areas of Iran. The Chadormalu iron oxide-apatite system (Bafq District, Central Iran) contains the largest known iron ore deposit in Iran (pre-mining reserve of 400 million tons with average grade of iron 55%), and comprises the magmatic northern and the southern orebodies of predominantly massive ore, and a sodic-calcic alteration envelope. More than 90% of Chadormalu deposit is located in the northern orebody. The ore minerals consist predominantly of magnetite and hematite. Subordinate amounts of apatite, pyrite, quartz and feldspar may also be observed. Country rocks of the orebodies are Precambrian metamorphic rocks, and Cambrian subvolcanic intrusive “syenite”, gabbro-diorite, volcanic rocks (predominantly rhyolite) with intercalations of siliceous dolomite, and pyroclastic breccias. Due to contact metamorphism by the resurgent Sorkh granite (Chadormalu granite), portions of the country rocks have been converted to hornfels In this paper the rock drillability of rotary drilling machines that are widely used in the iron ore open pit mines is studied. These machines due to large diameter is very important in the increasing the mines production. The effective parameters on the rock drillability are variable in different domains of mines. These parameters can be classified into two classes: rock properties and specifications of drilling equipment. Unfortunately, the chemical components of intact rocks that has a direct effect on the geomechanical, seismic and breakage properties have not been suitably studied. For this propose, the cores of iron ore were collected with different percentages of magnetite and hematite. The collected samples were without gangue. Then, the geomechanical and seismic tests based on the percentage of magnetite were conducted on samples in the rock mechanic laboratory. These tests included uniaxial compressive strength, tensile strength, elastic modulus (  Morales et al. determined the LPO (Lattice preferred orientations)-derived seismic properties of iron ores in samples with contrasting mineralogy (hematite, magnetite and quartz) and deformed under different conditions With respect to obtained results from geomechanical tests, the effective parameters on rock drillability can be classified into three classes: rock mass properties, specifications of drilling equipment and chemical components. In this research, feed and rotation of rotary drilling machine with 251 mm diameter were collected as specifications of drilling machine. Also, rock mass index (RMi) parameter was considered as rock mass properties due to detonate uniaxial compressive strength of the rock mass. Palmstrom has proposed a RMi to characterize rock mass strength as a construction material Silica, phosphorus and iron oxide of percentages are considered as new class and effective parameter in penetration rate of iron ore. In The 6 principal parameters affecting on the rock drillability and potential of penetration rate (PPR) are located along the leading diagonal of the matrix and the effects of each individual parameter on any other parameter (inter-actions) are placed on the off-diagonal cells. In this research, the assigning values to off-diagonal cells, coding the matrix, were carried out, using the ESQ coding method. The values of each parameter have been considered based on the viewpoint of a group of 6 experts from the Faculty of Mining Engineering of Shahrood University of Technology (Iran) and Chadormalu Iron Ore Mine Company, who specializes in the field of rock drillability. The experts summarized their judgments of the weights of all contributing parameters and developed the interaction matrix. When the interaction matrix is coded, the influence of each parameter on the system and the influence of the system on each parameter, can be computed as the sum of codes in the parameter’s row and column within the interaction matrix. The interaction matrix for the parameters affecting rock drillability and the PPR of the rotary drilling is established as presented in The interaction matrix shows importance and relative intensity of parameters. It is necessary to study the actual values of parameters in detail. For this purpose 22 data sets involving six dependent parameters and independent parameter were collected. With respect all parameters quantitatively, since their real values of the parameters directly were used to calculate the potential of penetration rate. It can be seen from histogram of interactive intensity that there is no possibility to remove any of the parameters affecting the potential of penetration rate. On the other hand, the six parameters are effective on calculation of potential of penetration rate, it can be computed according to the following equations To compare the RES and regression predictive models, regression models correlate the relationship between quantitative independent variables and dependent variables and therefore for creating regression predictive models merely quantitative variables can be considered. For this reason, various regression equations were developed between measured penetration rate and independent variables. Accuracy of developed predictive models were assessed by some statistical methods such as root mean square error (RMSE) and the accuracy factor ( From the past geotechnical studies, Chadormalu Iron Ore Mine is divided into five geotechnical domains ( With respect to importance of rock drillability in mine production, selection of drilling machines and economics of mine operations, classification of a mine based on rock drillability like geotechnical domains is very necessary. Based on the obtained results from the RES approach, Chadormalu Iron Ore Mine can be divided into three rock drillability domains in the iron ore oxides. Rock mass properties which are based on geotechnical parameters and chemical properties are considered in this classification as effective parameter on iron ore physical and mechanical properties. In other hand the advantage of the classification comparing to geotechnical classification is considering the chemical components. This advantage could be useful in rock mechanics and mining studies in iron ore mines as new theory. In this research prediction of rotary drilling penetration rate in Chadormalu Iron Ore was studied. At first geomechanical parameters of iron oxides such as uniaxial compressive strength, tensile strength, elastic modulus, Poisson’s ratio, porosity, water absorption, The magnetite percentage has a direct relationship with uniaxial compressive strength, tensile strength and P and S wave’s velocities. The magnetite percentage has an inverse relationship with Poisson’s ratio and porosity. The results showed the feed, rotation, rock mass index and iron oxide percent have important effect on penetration rate. Then a quadratic equation with 0.896 determination coefficient has been obtained. Also, the results showed that chemical components can be described as new parameters in rotary drill penetration rate.