The effect of age-hardening on the microstructure and mechanical properties of SiCp/Al–Si–Fe particulate composites have been studied. 5 and 15% SiC additions were used for the production of two grades of composites. The composite samples were solution heat-treated at 500°C for 3h and quenched in warm water at 65°C. The samples were then aged at 100, 200 and 300°C for various ageing times between 1 and 11h. The microstructure obtained reveals a dark ceramic and white metal phases, which resulted into increase in the dislocation density at the particles–matrix interfaces. The mechanical properties measured included: tensile strength, yield strength, hardness values and impact energy. The composites produced exhibited maximum mechanical properties at peak ageing at various ageing temperatures. These increases in mechanical properties during ageing are attributed to the formation of a coherent and uniform precipitation of the second phase in the matrix of the metal. This result shows that a substantial improvement in mechanical properties has been achieved in the reinforced metal matrices produced after age-hardening.The age-hardening characteristics of an alloy are generally modified by the introduction of reinforcement. These modifications are due to the manufacturing process, the reactivity between the reinforcement and the matrix, the size, the morphology and volume fraction of the reinforcement Donne et al. On the other hand, Skibo et al. With extensive data available on the heat-treatment of Al–Si–Fe alloys with conventional alloying elements The materials used in this study are: high purity aluminium electrical wire obtained from Northern Cable Company NOCACO (Kaduna), ferrosilicon, silicon carbide with average particle size of 10 The equipment used in this study included: Pyrometer, mechanical stirrer, crucible, electrical resistance furnace, Rockwell hardness tester, Avery Denison impact machine, Tinus–Olsen tensile machine and Metallurgical microscope. The synthesis of the metal matrix composite that was use in this study was produced using double stir-casting method at the Foundry Shop of the National Metallurgical Development Center, Jos, Nigeria. The samples were produced by keeping the percentage of iron and silicon constant and varying the reinforcing material (silicon carbide) particles in the range 5–15% SiC. High purity aluminium electrical wires free from dust and contamination was charged in a graphite crucible kept in an electric resistance furnace and 0.01% NaCl–KCl powder was used as a cover for melting the alloy. The NaCl–KCl powder aids in minimizing oxidation of aluminium by excluding oxygen and creating a protective atmosphere inside the furnace. Upon initiation of melting of pure aluminium the temperature of the furnace was raised to 720 The alloy was then cooled down to just below the liquidus to keep the slurry in a semi-solid state. At this stage the preheated SiC particles were added and mixed manually. Manual mixing was used because it was very difficult to achieve mixing using automatic device when the alloy was in a semi-solid state. After proper manual mixing was done, the composite slurry was re-heated to full liquid state and then automatic mechanical mixing was carried out for about 20 Ageing of the test samples were carried out at temperatures of 100, 200 and 300 Hardness was determined using the Rockwell hardness test machine. The indenter used was a 1.56 Impact tests were conducted using a fully instrumented Avery Denison test machine. With impact energies ranging from 0 to 300 The tensile properties were conducted on Tinus–Olsen test machine. The test pieces were machined to the standard shape and dimensions as specified by the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) Metallographic specimens were cut from the as-cast and age-hardened samples of the SiCp/Al–Si–Fe particulate composite. The cut samples were mounted in Bakelite, and mechanically ground progressively on grades of SiC impregnated emery paper (80–600 The various microstructures developed of both grades of composites show distribution of the SiCp in the metal matrix, but the 15SiCp/Al–Si–Fe grade has more SiC uniformly distributed in the metal matrix than 5SiCp/Al–Si–Fe. There was precipitation of the second phase in age-hardened conditions (  The 5SiCp/Al–Si–Fe exhibited a maximum hardness value of 72.0HRB at 100 The tensile properties, hardness values and impact energy of the samples increases in the age-hardened than the as-cast condition (see These results show that 5SiCp/Al–Si–Fe has 8.38, 12.56 and 17.65% increases in yield strength, tensile strength and impact energy, respectively, as compared to the as-cast samples at peak ageing temperature of 200 From the The age-hardening behavior of the SiCp/Al–Si–Fe composites are similar to 5SiCp/Al–Si–Mg as reported by Cottu et al. The higher values of both ultimate tensile strength and yield strength obtained at age-hardened condition as compared with the as-cast condition are attributed to uniform distribution and precipitation of the SiC particles in the microstructure of the age-hardened condition (see The smaller the values of From the results obtained from this study, the following conclusions can be made: The mechanical properties of the two grades of composites produced are higher in the age-hardened samples than that of the as-cast samples, due to the precipitates of the second phase during ageing which cover the surface at the particles–matrix interfaces. It was found that hardness increases with increasing weight fraction of silicon carbide in the alloy and decreases with increasing ageing time after the peak ageing time have been exceeded. This study therefore, has established that these grade of composites response very well to precipitation hardening heat-treatment. The Authors acknowledge with thanks the management of the National Metallurgical Development Centre, Jos, Nigeria for allowing us use their equipment. We also acknowledge the assistance given by Dr. S.A. Yaro, M.U. Suleiman and A.W. Usman for their assistance during the production of the research material.