The real-time detection of hydrofracture growth is crucial to the successful operation of water, CO2 or steam injection wells in low-permeability reservoirs and to the prevention of subsidence and well failure. In this paper, we describe propagation of very low frequency (1–10 to 100 Hz) Stoneley waves in a fluid-filled wellbore and their interactions with the fundamental wave mode in a vertical hydrofracture. We demonstrate that Stoneley-wave loses energy to the fracture and the energy transfer from the wellbore to the fracture opening is most efficient in soft rocks. We conclude that placing the wave source and receivers beneath the injection packer provides the most efficient means of hydrofracture monitoring. We then present the lossy transmission line model of wellbore and fracture for the detection and characterization of fracture state and volume. We show that this model captures the wellbore and fracture geometry, the physical properties of injected fluid and the wellbore-fracture system dynamics. The model is then compared with experimentally measured well responses. The simulated responses are in good agreement with published experimental data from several water injection wells with depths ranging from 1000 ft to 9000 ft. Hence, we conclude that the transmission line model of water injectors adequately captures wellbore and fracture dynamics. Using an extensive data set for the South Belridge Diatomite waterfloods, we demonstrate that even for very shallow wells the fracture size and state can be adequately recognized at wellhead. Finally, we simulate the effects of hydrofracture extension on the transient response to a pulse signal generated at wellhead. We show that hydrofracture extensions can indeed be detected by monitoring the wellhead pressure at sufficiently low frequencies.Optimal performance of injection wells requires maximization of fluid injection and wellbore lifetime, subject to minimization of reservoir damage. Maximization of fluid injection results in, albeit inadvertent, extension of existing hydrofractures and naturally occurring fractures in the reservoir (e.g., In order to control reservoir damage effectively, we need a real-time “observer” of state of injection fractures. Since direct observation of such fractures is impossible, we need an indirect method. Active and passive seismic analysis can lead to an accurate characterization of fractured reservoirs In contrast to classical well-testing techniques, hydraulic impedance is truly “transient.” It is a study of wave propagation and reflection. Inertial forces are accounted for by invoking the principle of momentum conservation. This principle, along with that of mass conservation, forms the basis of the study of oscillatory pressure and flow in wells and other conduits Hydraulic impedance testing involves the following. A short-duration pressure pulse is generated at wellhead in a fluid injector. Thus created pressure wave travels below the speed of sound in the wellbore fluid. Some of it enters the fracture through perforations; the remainder travels down to the bottom of the well. The pressure wave reaching the fracture mouth is partially reflected from an open fracture, depending on the fracture impedance, and the rest is transmitted through the fracture to the fracture tip, where it is again reflected. The fracture impedance is a function of its dimensions and the fluid and rock properties. In addition, the wave reflected from the well bottom travels to the fracture and to the wellhead. Because of energy leaks to the fluid-filled earth, the wellbore pressure waves are continually attenuated. The transient pressure measured at wellhead as a function of time results from the interference of all pressure waves reaching the wellhead at any instant of time. The key to successful estimation of fracture characteristics from the transient response data is a model that captures the wellbore-fracture dynamics. In their analyses of transient responses, Holzhauzen and coworkers assumed no energy losses in the wellbore. While this greatly simplifies the analysis, it may also result in unacceptable errors in interpretation of experimental data. In addition, Holzhausen et al. modeled fracture as lumped capacitance and resistance in series, estimated by trial-and-error. Fracture capacitance was defined as the derivative of the fracture volume with respect to the hydraulic head. The fracture geometry was estimated from its capacitance using Sneddon's relationship between internal pressure and opening of an oblate-ellipsoidal fracture in an infinite elastic medium. The goal of our research is to develop a model-based “observer” of hydrofracture growth and to use it to optimize water, CO Consider a cased and cemented fluid injection well with a vertical hydrofracture. Fluid is injected through central tubing, which ends with a packer just above the perforated and hydrofractured interval (cf. Periodically, fluid injection is stopped and a low-frequency (1–10 to 100 Hz) pulse is generated at the wellhead. This pulse is transmitted as a Stoneley-wave down the tubing and casing. Only a small fraction of wave energy on the tubing side of the packer is transmitted to the casing, the rest is reflected back by the impedance contrast from the sudden change of flow cross-section. The wellhead pulse amplitude is first attenuated by energy losses from the tubing. Coupling is provided by the tubing centralizers, casing and cement. Note that cement may cause the formation to be effectively hard around casing, thus limiting energy leakage from conversion of wellbore waves into conical waves in soft earth. More interestingly, however, the amplitude of the transmitted portion of the wellhead pulse is further attenuated by energy leakage from the casing across the perforated and fractured interval. Since the leakage occurs through perforations open to the fracture, the problem does not have axial symmetry and one needs to consider azimuthal distribution of wellbore wave motion. In addition, a large portion of the incident wave energy is reflected back at the perforations and the rest is transmitted to the fracture opening. Because of multiple reflections in the cased wellbore and fracture, the useful part of Stoneley-wave is very Here, we summarize only a simplified model of Stoneley-wave propagation down a fluid-filled wellbore, without azimuthal dependence. We consider a vertical unpropped fluid injection fracture In a viscous fluid, a small-amplitude wave motion is governed by the usual equations of conservation of mass and momentum, linearized around the equilibrium fluid density The linearized equation of continuity is A more accurate dispersion relationship for a wave in the fracture excited by a wellbore wave, was derived by The wave modes in the fracture are then determined by the following dispersion equation We now can illustrate the interaction between the fundamental fracture mode and the wellbore wave. With respect to the vertical wellbore wave, the wave front in the fracture has an angle Pulse generated at wellhead for the impedance analysis, travels through the wellbore as a Stoneley-wave. If the wellbore radius and the fracture width are small relative to the pulse wavelength, they can be treated as analogs of electrical transmission lines. Therefore, tools for the analysis of transients in electrical transmission lines can be used to analyze the pressure transient response at the wellhead. The flow of fluids in injection wells under applied pressure is analogous to the flow of electricity through transmission lines, with the pressure and volumetric flow rate being analogous to the voltage and electric current, respectively. Fluid inertia, energy leaks to the formation and viscous dissipation in the fracture, and energy storage due to the compressibility of fluids can be represented by their electrical counterparts, inductance, resistance and capacitance, respectively. In a lossy transmission line model, the resistance, capacitance and inductance are distributed over the line length.  To validate our approach, we have analyzed several hydraulic impedance tests, both published and proprietary. Transmission line networks were constructed for the tested wellbore-hydrofracture systems, and their transient responses were simulated. The results are presented in the order of increasing system complexity. The first example is an impedance test in a shallow well at Mounds, Oklahoma, as reported by A small hydrofracture was created and free oscillations were subsequently initiated above the fracture closure pressure after 207, 2385 and 47700 l were injected into the fracture. The transmission line model parameters for the casing were calculated from the casing geometry and the fluid properties. The lumped capacitance of the fracture was assumed proportional to the volume of water injected. When the fracture was modeled as a transmission line, the fracture dimensions were chosen to match the simulated responses, subject to the constraints imposed by the mechanical properties of the formation and the injected volumes. The measured and the simulated transient responses are shown in In the next example, we examine the natural response of a deep well in the presence and absence of fractures. Oscillatory wellbore pressure measurements were acquired from wellhead and downhole transducers during four in situ stress tests in a deep gas well in the Travis Peak formation of East Texas The third impulse, which is detailed in The next three examples are from a waterflood in the South Belridge Diatomite, Kern County, CA In the previous example, owing to the depth of the well and its geometry, the successive reflections of the pressure pulse were temporally resolved at the wellhead. In the case of diatomite wells, unfortunately, because of the shallow well depths and closeness of reflectors, such temporal resolution of the reflected waves is not possible. The time-domain response of these wells to a pressure pulse, measured at the wellhead, is a superposition of successive reflections of a traveling wave. These reflections occur at the tubing tail, the well bottom, the fracture mouths for an open fracture and, possibly, from the fracture tip. Consequently, the time-domain response is rather complicated. Nevertheless, the important features, namely, the fracture location, size and state, are observable from the transient response. In all examples, the simulation results are in good agreement with the experimental data. The first example is a shallow well (567G-33) with a 231 m tubing, one perforated interval of 95 m, followed by 58 m of unperforated casing cemented at the bottom. Step-tests were done at 123 psi (1.79 MPa) and 241 psi (3.5 MPa). In both cases, the fracture was presumably open.   The final example is from well 534L-33, where impedance tests were carried out after step testing at pressures of 93 (1.35 MPa) and 100 psi (1.45 MPa). The transient responses for these two cases are shown in If fractures are modeled as lumped capacitance, and the decay envelope is exponential, the slope of the logarithm the relative peak amplitude as a function of time is inversely proportional to the fracture size. For a transmission line model of a fracture, its length is obtained directly from the model. We illustrate this for several diatomite wells. For clarity of presentation, these wells are grouped according to the number of perforated intervals. The attenuation plots for one-, two-, three-, and five-interval wells are shown in As can be seen from these figures, at short times the pressure peaks do decay approximately exponentially. The observed nonlinearity at longer times is presumably caused by wave energy confinement in the tubing. Because of the stronger coupling between the casing and the rock than between the tubing and the rock, energy loss through the cased portion of the wellbore is higher than that through the tubing. Closed fractures are characterized by relatively low rate of attenuation, since no energy is dissipated in the fracture. In general, for wells of comparable depths the higher initial pressures result in lower rates of attenuation. Since higher injection pressure usually leads to larger fractures, this implies that even a simple analysis of the decay envelope may provide a relative measure of change in fracture size over time. The higher rate of energy loss through the perforated portion of casing is clearly demonstrated in The detection of fracture size from wellhead measurement of transient pressure response becomes more difficult as the perforated interval length increases. Therefore, a downhole tool may lead to improved resolution. Two simulations were performed. In one, the pulse source and the receiver were placed at wellhead, while in the other the transmitter-receiver pair was placed downhole. The well and the fracture geometry were identical. The normalized Fourier power spectra of the transient responses are shown in Fracturing events can be detected actively, by a periodic wellhead pulsing, or passively, by listening to a pressure response. Three simulations were performed. In the first case, a pulse coincided with a fracture extension. In the second case, fracture extension occurred after the pulse was significantly attenuated. In the third, the wellhead pressure was continuously monitored to detect any pressure fluctuation from a sudden opening of a fracture.  A real-time “observer” of injection fracture state and volume is viable. The observer can be placed at wellhead or, better, below packers. Very low frequency (1–100 Hz), Stoneley-waves in a fluid-filled cased wellbore interact with the fundamental wave mode in vertical hydrofracture. In soft rock, the fundamental fracture wave is extremely slow: its phase velocity is about 10–100 m/s for frequencies 1–100 Hz and fracture widths of 0.2–2 cm. Stoneley-wave loses energy to the fracture and energy transfer from the wellbore to the fracture opening is most efficient in soft rocks. Placing the wave source and receivers beneath the injection packer provides the most efficient means of hydrofracture monitoring. The wellbore-fracture systems can be modeled as a lossy transmission line network. The model parameters are completely defined by the system geometry and the fluid properties. The model captures the wellbore-fracture dynamics quite accurately for a variety of well geometries. A hydrofracture can be modeled either as a lumped capacitance or as a transmission line without affecting the accuracy of the simulation. However, the lossy transmission line model is superior because it allows us to account explicitly for energy leaks from the wellbore and viscous dissipation in the fracture. A fracturing event can be detected by either passive or active pressure monitoring at wellhead. Detection of such events will allow proper control of injection pressure during sudden fracturing and prevent uncontrolled growth of injection fractures. Having validated the lossy transmission line model, we now can develop and deploy in the field a model-based observer of injection fractures. For computational efficiency, we need to develop a model-based inversion of the transient response data to determine fracture characteristics. Since wellbore geometry is likely to be time-invariant, the identification problem, therefore, will be reduced to the determination of fracture size only. Conversely, it is conceivable that when fracture geometry is constant, a change in well geometry and, hence, casing and tubing failure can be detected.  The financial support was provided by the Assistant Secretary for Fossil Energy under the DOE Advanced Computational Technology Initiative (ACTI) contract DE-AC03-76FS00098 to the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory of the University of California. Partial support was provided by CalResources and Chevron Petroleum Technology Company, as gifts to U.C. Oil Consortium. We thank Aera Energy, LLC., for releasing the hydraulic impedance test data for the South Belridge Diatomite. Finally, we thank Prof. J.W. Rector for reviewing the manuscript and valuable comments.