TiCN layers were deposited on an aluminum alloy (Si 0.5%, Fe 0.5%, Cu 4.3%, Mn 0.6%, Mg 1.5%, Cr 0.1%, Zn 0.25%, bal. Al) by using diethylaminotitanium, hydrogen and nitrogen with the pulsed d.c. PACVD process. The effect of process parameters such as precursor evaporation temperature, duty ratio, frequency, voltage, H2/N2 gas ratio on the properties of the TiCN layer was investigated. The layer thus obtained had high hardness and a low friction coefficient. Detailed results on the hardness, surface morphology, WDS analysis, wear test and scratch test of these layers are presented.The use of aluminum alloys in industry such as automotive and aerospace is increasing due to their low density. However, the low surface hardness restricts their application. A wear resistant coating on aluminum alloys would overcome these restrictions. The coating should be performed at low temperatures due to the low hardening temperature of these alloys. Wear-resistant TiCN coatings are currently produced by plasma assisted chemical vapor deposition method at a temperature of approximately 450°C. The titanium precursor is usually TiCl In this paper, the effect of precursor evaporation temperature, duty ratio, pulse frequency, plasma power, H The process was carried out in a standard PACVD apparatus equipped with a pulsed d.c. power supply. The gaseous atmosphere was electrically excited because the process was enhanced by a glow discharge. The metal-organic compound was evaporated in an evaporator and fed into the chamber by the carrier gas (90 sccm of H The aluminum alloy used as substrate material was Al 2024 (Si 0.5%, Fe 0.5%, Cu 4.3%, Mn 0.6%, Mg 1.5%, Cr 0.1%, Zn 0.25%, bal. Al). The coated layer composition was determined by wavelength-dispersive spectroscope analysis (WDS). The microstructure was investigated by X-ray diffraction and scanning electron microscope. The hardness of the coatings was measured using a Vickers microhardness tester with a load of 25 g. The adhesion was measured by the scratch test and the friction coefficient by a pin-on-disc type wear tester. Below an evaporator temperature of 72°C, the samples were only partially coated. Above 82°C, the coatings spalled. Good layers were obtained at temperature range of 74–78°C. The effect of the duty on the hardness of the coatings is shown in  The effect of the voltage on the hardness of the coatings is shown in Each TiCN layer obtained after varying duty, frequency, voltage was analyzed by WDS to see whether it was possible to correlate observed hardness with chemical composition such as carbon and nitrogen content. The composition was nearly constant for all layers. So, a correlation was not possible. A typical analysis of the TiCN layers was: Ti 55%, C 20%, N 20%, O 5%. Oxygen was incorporated as an impurity The effect of the hydrogen to nitrogen gas ratio in the chamber on the hardness of the coatings is shown in The activation energy of the TiCN deposition reaction was calculated from the measured rate data ( SEM micrographs of wear tracks on the TiCN coating and aluminum alloy are shown in  TiCN coatings were grown on an aluminum alloy with d.c. pulsed PACVD using diethylaminotitanium, hydrogen, nitrogen and argon in the temperature range of 150–250°C. The evaporator temperature should be in the range of 74–78°C. High hardness of coatings was obtained at 54% duty, 14.2 kHz frequency, and 450 V. Coarse dome structures were obtained at increased duty, high frequency, and high voltage. An activation energy of 40.67 kJ/mol was obtained within the temperature range of present experiment. TiCN coatings showed a good wear resistance. A critical load of TiCN coating was approximately 18 N and adhesion was not dependent on duty, frequency, voltage within the range investigated in this study. This work was supported by Korea Science and Engineering Foundation under the Korean-German Cooperative Research Program.