Fe-Al-Ta eutectic composites have been paid more attentions for high temperature application. Nevertheless, still there is a lack of research on microstructural characteristics and crystal growth mechanism of this eutectic obtained by high temperature gradient directional solidification technique. As such, Fe-Al-Ta eutectic composites were prepared by high temperature gradient electron beam floating zone melting technique in the present paper. Microstructures, solid/liquid interface morphologies and preferential orientations of the Fe-Al-Ta eutectic composites at different solidification rates were studied. Moreover, effect of interface perturbation wavelength on stability of the solid/liquid interface was calculated according to M-S theory and Kurz-Fisher model, respectively. These are consistent with the experimental results well.Fe-Al intermetallic compound is regarded as one of the promising high temperature structural materials, because it possesses many characteristics, e.g. low price, low density (5.56–6.72 g/cm According to the Fe-Al-Ta phase diagram [ Steady transverse and longitudinal section microstructures of Fe-Al-Ta eutectic composites at different Solidification rates are shown in Lamellar (inter-rod) spacing is an important parameter of eutectic structure. Lamellar spacing of each sample is defined as the distance between the center of one lamella to the center of the nearest adjacent lamella of the same type. In the present paper, lamellar (inter-rod) spacing of Fe-Al-Ta eutectic of each sample was obtained by measuring at least 10–30 different regions on the transverse section of the sample ( The regression analysis gives the proportionality equation as following [ Lamellar or inter-rod spacing can be predicted by Kurz-Fisher model [ Volume fraction of Fe Moreover, diffusion of solute is sufficient at the lower solidification rate, regular lamellar structure is formed as shown in Solid/liquid interface morphologies of the Fe-Al-Ta eutectic composites at different solidification rates are shown in According to the theories of Mollard and Flemings [ According to Therefore, Two groups of disturbance wavelength λ were selected, and relationships between The interface disturbance theory proposed by Kurz and Fisher [ During eutectic solidification process, coupled growth along certain orientations could decrease the total energy and then lead to a high stability of the eutectic. The enhanced phase and the matrix phase present different geometric distributions, and there is often a fixed orientation relationship between the phase interface. Zone melting is also of technological importance to establish the mechanisms for orientation selection [ During the coupled eutectic growth of Fe(Al,Ta) matrix and Fe Eutectic growth is ruled by minimization of interfacial energy, which, for the compositions studied in this paper, results in the formation of a self-organized broken lamellar (rod-like) microstructure with low-energy interfaces. These low-energy interfaces may contribute to the exceptional microstructural stability of the Fe-Al-Ta eutectic. Phase interface morphology by high-resolution TEM is shown in  Microstructure of the Fe-Al-Ta eutectic are eutectic colonies at the different solidification rates and in the same colony the Fe Solid/liquid interface morphologies are cellular interfaces at the different solidification rates. The calculated data are consistent with the experimental results well. Preferential orientations between Fe(Al,Ta) matrix and Fe Two-phase lattice mismatch at the phase interface is 5.8%, and the phase interface is a semi-coherent interface with low interface energy. The authors would like to thank the