End-of-Life (EOL) products can be considered to be industrial ores, since the minerals (materials can be considered as minerals) contained are recovered, processed and reintroduced in the material production systems as industrial ores. Therefore, the principles used in classical minerals processing can be applied to describe the comminution and liberation of EOL products during recycling. Similarly as for natural ores, particle size reduction and liberation have an important role in the quality of the recycling streams and on the possibilities for their further processing and reintroduction in the resource cycles. A simulation model is presented that describes the relationships between product design and the liberation level attained by shredding. The model simulates the comminution and liberation phenomena as a function of the product design variables. From the analysis of experimental samples, sensitivity analysis and simulations, relationships are illustrated and discussed. The breakage behaviour of End-of-Life (EOL) products differs largely from these natural minerals. Therefore, although many definitions can be adapted from classical minerals processing, a different approach is required in the modelling of the comminution–liberation of EOL products. This is the first step in the development of these type of models, and much experimental work is required for further development. The simulation results using a passenger vehicle as example show that during product design, the materials and joints among them can be chosen to obtain the best possible liberation and the lowest possible contamination. Therefore, industrial ores can be ‘designed’ for recycling, to reduce recycling losses and optimise resource efficiency. The aim is to implement this knowledge in the product design stage of defining materials and connections.The recovery and recycling of industrial End-of-Life (EOL) products have become a growing concern in industrialised countries. In Europe, EOL legislation establishes recycling targets for several types of consumer products ( End-of-Life (EOL) products can be considered as industrial ores, as the minerals (materials, and especially metals, can be considered as minerals) contained are recovered, processed and reintroduced in the material production systems as industrial ores. Therefore, the principles used in classical minerals processing can be applied to describe the comminution and liberation of EOL products during recycling. Among these principles are the characterisation of shredded streams and the calculation of the liberation ratios. In classical minerals processing, liberation is calculated by linear intercept analysis of the sections taken of mineral samples. This method has been largely in use in the last years for the analysis of the liberation of natural minerals ( The automobile is a metal-dominated complex product, with many different materials, being a good study case for modelling the comminution–liberation of recycling streams by using the classical minerals processing approach. In the Netherlands, End-of-Life Vehicles (ELVs) are collected and partly dismantled. The remaining wreck is shredded. By shredding, the wreck is broken into smaller particles, and thereby its materials are liberated to some extent. After shredding, the particles are fed to a series of automatic physic separation processes. This results in several recovered material streams: ferrous materials, aluminium, copper, zinc, stainless steel and Automotive Shredder Residue (ASR, which is mainly constituted by non-metallic materials). Each stream has some degree of contamination by foreign materials due to both not perfect separation processes and incomplete liberation. A major hindrance for further improvement of the recovery rates is the contamination of the secondary material streams by non-liberated material particles. Wrecks, and industrial products in general, are constituted by a large variety of connected materials. The comminution processes used for recycling are not able to destroy completely all the joints existing between the different materials, resulting in a number of non-liberated material particles. These non-liberated material particles enter the several material streams, carrying foreign materials along into the subsequent recycling steps. After shredding and separation, the recovered materials are reintroduced in the resource systems through the metallurgic recycling processes. The comminution of industrial EOL products produces recycling streams with a high liberation level, comparatively to that obtained by the comminution of natural ores. However, these few contaminants are often extremely difficult to eliminate by the subsequent metallurgic processing. The physical properties of materials and the way they interact in diluted solutions (activities) limit the efficiency of refining (with a reasonable effort), as discussed in The foreign materials introduced into the recovered material streams due to incomplete liberation might become therefore irreversible contaminants of the recycled streams. Thus, the mineralogy of the recovered streams may not be sufficiently pure for the production of recycled materials with acceptable quality. Two well-known examples are copper contamination in recycled steel and iron contamination in recycled aluminium. High-purity raw materials must be added to dilute these contaminants, leading to a low resource efficiency of the recycling processes, high processing costs and further to the accumulation of irreversible contaminants in the resource cycles on time. A higher liberation level can be generally obtained by more extensive comminution, in minerals processing as well as in recycling. However, the intensive shredding of recycling streams has some disadvantages: intensive shredding is very costly, and some types of joints cannot be destroyed by shredding (discussed in detail in the next chapter). Additionally, the liberation level of metal particles might partly decrease during shredding due to the intensive plastic deformation these particles undergo in the shredder ( Intensive shredding is an end-of-pipe solution in the processing of recycling streams. The mineralogy of industrial products is designed during product design and produced by industrial production processes. Therefore, the choice of materials and jointing technology made during product design will have a large influence in the liberation level attained by shredding—and subsequently on the in purity of the shredded streams. By understanding these relationships between product design and recycling it should be possible to develop consumer products for optimal liberation, i.e., adapted to the constraints of the comminution and separation processes. By making design choices that avoid and/or minimise undesirable material combinations, as proposed by While there is extensive research on the liberation modelling of minerals processing systems, much of which is mentioned in The breakage processes in minerals have been investigated thoroughly by Therefore, a statistic approach was applied for modelling the breakage and liberation in the current model, using distribution functions. The liberation has been modelled as a function of the design parameters (“mineralogy” of the product) and shredding conditions. Due to the lack of appropriate experimental data, a sensitivity analysis was performed, to determine the relative importance of the parameters and the requirements for further experimental work. Some simulations were performed to illustrate the relationships between product design and liberation level. The characterisation of the liberation of recycling streams has been performed on the basis of specimens obtained from a real life shredding experiment. Automotive wrecks were shredded and subsequently separated into ferrous, non-ferrous and rest fractions. The shredding equipment used was a hammer mill with an output rate of 30 ton/h, a power of 746 kW and rotation speed of 600 rpm. Typical examples of non-liberated particles found are depicted in The ferrous stream in the samples show a distribution profile similar to that obtained in other shredding experiments (  The variation in liberation degree that can be observed in the figures shows that the liberation is also influenced by other variables than the comminution degree. These are possibly the characteristics and amount of joints used, as well as the physical properties of the materials and the geometry of the product. The not destroyed joints present in the non-liberated particles could be grouped into two types, according to the jointing principle used and the interaction between the various materials: physical joints and chemical joints. In physical joints, the components are fixed together due to the geometry of the joining elements. Examples are a bolt, rivet or click fittings. Chemical joints are produced by processes such as adhesive joining, welding, chroming or anodising, and thus the two materials are joined chemically by inter-atomic or inter-molecular forces between the two materials. In the samples taken, it was observed that chemical joints tend to be more significant in the smaller size classes and have oscillating values through the size classes, while physical joints tend to be more significant in the larger size classes, as can be observed in  The observations made from the analysis of the samples from the ELV shredding were used in the modelling. Products are modelled as a set of materials and a set of joints. The amount of materials, “minerals”, is limited to five: Aluminium cast (Al All joints are modelled as binary combinations. It was observed in the samples analysed that non-liberated particles may contain more than two materials, but because often only two of the materials are conflicting materials for recycling, the joints were modelled as being constituted by two materials only for simplicity. When this simpler model is validated, a more detailed model can be developed using liberation classes containing 3, 4 and 5 minerals, similarly to what is proposed by During shredding, comminution and liberation occur simultaneously and are coupled phenomena. In the present model, they are therefore modelled as coupled phenomena, by using algorithms that describe the evolution on the liberation of particles as they are further comminuted. The modelling is divided in two stages, as shown in Five particle size classes (sc) were defined to classify the particles according to size: sc5≤10 mm; 10<sc4≤20 mm; 20<sc3≤35 mm; 35<sc2≤50 mm; sc1>50 mm. This number of size classes is approximately the same used in the industrial screening of recycling streams. Liberation classes (LC) were defined to describe the liberation of the EOL product before shredding and of the particles originating from shredding. To describe all possible non-liberated binary material combinations, 10 liberation classes were defined (Al A minimum of 10 ratio composition subclasses were required to cover all possible liberation ratios of shredded particles belonging to five size classes within each composition class. An example of the liberation class ratios for Al Particles produced by shredding of metals can be classified into six shape classes, from cubic compact to rod-shaped strongly deformed, being the dimensions and compaction state very different in each class ( These geometric variations in the particles and shredding equipment are not included in the present model, for simplification of the model. Instead, the particle geometry chosen is an average geometry between the extreme geometries: a circular disk of varying thickness, illustrated by From analysis of the shredding samples, the authors have learned that the liberation evolved differently during comminution, depending on the type and geometry of the joint present. Thus, joint classes were defined to describe these variations in the liberation phenomena. There are a large number of different joint types and geometries present in products. To approach this variability while limiting the complexity of the model, four distinct joint classes were defined, according to the geometry and extent of contact surface between the two materials in the joint area. These joint classes are schematised in     The definition of these particle joint classes allowed the modelling of the most commonly occurring joints present in metal-dominated industrial products, such as the vehicle (see Similarly to the size classification of particles, the joints also need to be classified according to some adequate dimension, so that the liberation level of the particles containing a joint can be calculated, establishing therefore a link between the physical properties of the joint and the liberation level attained. The joint dimension is here defined as a typical sieving dimension, similar to the size classification of particles. If the three dimensions of a particle are The size classification of the P joints is determined placing the joint in the size class to which its nominal diameter belongs. Chemical joints are of the types L or S, being the characteristic dimension of those joints the inter-atomic/inter-molecular distances in the joint area. Therefore, L and S joints will invariably belong to the smallest size class, for modelling purposes. For these last joints, information on the thickness ratio of the two materials in the joint is also required for a correct translation of the joint area into a determined liberation level of the particles produced. These classification principles need to be adjusted and validated by future experimental work. The product to shred is a large bulk product, always much larger than the particles produced by shredding. We propose to describe the EOL product as a mineral, after which the liberation is calculated. The EOL product is a bulk mineral particle belonging to the largest size class (sc1). To calculate the liberation level of the wreck, it is partitioned in cubes with a side dimension L corresponding to the largest mesh size of the sieve used to process the shredded particles, Transformation matrices were defined to relate the design parameters of the product and the liberation level of the product's mineral description. A transformation matrix establishes a relationship between a joint of determined joint class and dimensions and an amount of material (corresponding to the volume L The amount on non-liberated material in the mineral description of the wreck, The liberated material, i.e., the mass of volume partitions that do not contain a joint (this is obviously an abstraction, as mentioned above, as the EOL product does not contain liberated material; it is a bulk non-liberated particle. The amount of liberated material can be understood as the material far from any joint) is calculated by making the mass balance of each material from the original mass of that material in the EOL product. The final matrix The model was based in a set of hypotheses regarding the liberation phenomena during shredding. However, in the absence of experimental evidence, these will be at this point called working hypotheses. They are based in observations made on the sampled particles, on reported results of other investigators and on basic principles of fracture mechanics. Comminution in the shredder is attained by complex three-dimensional dynamic loads that induce crack formation and growth until fracture occurs, creating new smaller particles. During shredding, fracture progresses extremely fast due to the dynamic loads and high energy supplied by the rotating hammers. The microprocesses taking place in the comminution of sheet ductile materials during shredding were investigated by Many EOL products are not platy, but have complex geometries, limiting the applicability of the results of this study to the shredding of EOL products; but it is so far the most detailed study performed with recycling streams. In this situation, Fracture Mechanics is not applicable, as the load condition and coordinates of each particle are not known ( Joints are usually designed to be stronger than the surrounding materials, for the loading conditions the product must withstand during its use. Thus, according to the weakest link theory ( The probability of fracture of a joint is lower than that of the rest of the material around it; Joint destruction is complete only if the particle size formed is smaller than the joint size. Finally, Materials joined by chemical joints cannot be liberated by shredding. The liberation The modelling of the coupled comminution–liberation phenomena is based on the three proposed hypotheses mentioned above. The schemes of The coupled comminution–liberation phenomena are described in the model by the use of two coupled matrices, a size distribution matrix and a survival matrix. The size distribution matrix describes the comminution process, in terms of the mass fraction of initial material in the EOL product that transits to a determined size class. For simplicity, only one size distribution matrix is used for all liberated minerals and another for the binary minerals in the present model. In reality, each joint class and each material combination should have distinct size distributions, but on the absence of experimental results in this area, the authors considered one matrix sufficient to illustrate the modelling methodology. The concept of size distribution is already commonly used in minerals processing. The joint survival concept is described next in more detail. The survival of joints, understood as the probability of a determined joint to survive a determined comminution degree, is described using survival matrices. Each element of the survival matrix is a statistic distribution describing the probability of survival of a joint-containing particle in the progeny size class. There is no experimental data regarding the survival of joints after shredding, but the authors think that the survival of joints after shredding has a probability distribution of some kind, related to the parent particle size and mechanical properties of the materials and joint used. The concept of joint survival is similar to the concept of particle survival in the population balance methods ( In the current model, one survival matrix is used for each joint class, but in reality there should be one matrix per joint dimension and materials combined, to translate the Hypotheses 1 and 2 conveniently. On the absence of experimental results regarding this matrix, the authors considered one matrix only to be sufficient to illustrate the modelling methodology. Shredding of an EOL product will produce a set of particles constituted by the defined minerals, distributed over composition subclasses and size classes. The comminution is calculated using the following equations: Non-comminuted P, L, S and Z particles and comminuted Z and S particles Liberated material from comminuted P and L particles Comminuted P and L particles Particles that did not survive The amount of liberated material after shredding is calculated, per material, using the mass balance equation: In Eq. The following example illustrates the calculation procedure. The product in the example contains three components,  The model presented in this article cannot be validated, since suitable experiments have not been performed yet. The output of shredding can be characterized by sampling and analysis, but the input is extremely difficult to characterize properly. Controlled experiments with an exactly known input are required to further understand and model the comminution–liberation phenomena of recycling streams. In order to understand the importance of the accuracy of the variables, a sensitivity analysis is performed. The effect of the values assumed for the geometry of the particles, the survival matrices and the size distribution matrices was investigated. For the sensitivity analysis, a more realistic product description is chosen. The product components and mass description are the same as used in the calculation example (see As base case for the sensitivity analysis and simulations, a wreck was defined, having the same components and material content as the example used above ( To study the effect of the geometry parameters, the thickness of the particles was increased by 10%. The results of the simulation with thicker particles are shown in The values of the survival matrix for the P joints were varied by 10% in relation to the base case. The new matrices are presented in The values of the size distribution matrix were varied to produce a smaller size class distribution, according to those shown in Some simulations were performed to illustrate the relationships between product design and liberation level. The amount, size, and type of joints were varied, and the results are presented next. These are not accurate results, as the model must be first validated and calibrated. However, they indicate the liberation variation tendencies as a function of the design changes. With this simulation, the effect of the amount of joints in the liberation level of the shredded streams is simulated. As a preventive design measure, the minimum amount of joints possible should be used, to obtain the maximum liberation. This is illustrated by the results of this simulation. In this simulation, the effect of avoiding/substituting chemical joints by physical joints is investigated. The L joint Al In this simulation, the Al In simulation 4, the same joints are used as in simulation 3 ( The results are shown in From the results of From From the analysis of From the results of the simulations, it can be seen that the presented model is able to describe the influence of the type, amount and dimensions of the joints chosen during product design on the liberation level attained after comminution, and further on the contamination levels of the recovered material streams. Several design guidelines for optimal liberation arise from the results of the simulations performed. This model has been developed primarily for metal dominated automotive-like products that are shredded during their EOL processing, as the experimental data gathered was from shredding samples from ELVs. However, the authors speculate that with the current set of product data, joint survival data and shredding data, this model could be adapted to other product types that undergo comminution operations as well. The simulations indicate that design has a large influence in the composition of the streams produced by shredding. When fewer joints are present, the liberation level obtained will be higher. In addition, the replacement of chemical joints by physical joints can be beneficial, because the last are destroyed during shredding, and chemical joints are not. Therefore, when using chemical joints in a product, designers should avoid material combinations that are incompatible for metallurgic recycling. Another observation is that the best contamination result was obtained in the simulations when the joint size distribution was out of phase with the particle size distribution. It seems that the total mass of joining elements should be kept to a minimum, and concentrated far from the particle size distribution peaks. In order to be validated and calibrated, this model requires further experimental work, but the sensitivity analysis indicates that the variations in the results due to variations in the product design parameters are small. Therefore, the model seems to be reasonably stable and it should show a similar behaviour when more accurate parameters are used. From the results of the sensitivity analysis, it seems that the shredding parameters and the geometric particle parameters are of the most important to the accuracy of the results. This model is a first step in the modelling of the liberation of recycling streams as a function of to the design parameters and comminution degree. The effect of type of material and part geometry should be included in a next version for a more accurate description of the mechanical properties and configuration of parts and joints on the liberation of the particles produced. However, the value the value of such a model for the minimisation of resource losses due to contaminations during recycling becomes visible from the results of the simulations. From the results of the simulations, the following preliminary design guidelines for optimal liberation can be derived: Substitute incompatible material combinations for recycling when possible; Avoid chemical joints between materials that are incompatible for recycling Minimise use of chemical-type joints (L and S type), when these cannot be substituted by a physical joint of incompatible material combinations; Prefer the use few larger P joints instead of many small P joints Minimise amount of joints used, in terms of join mass Choose joints and shredding parameters that produce a joint size distribution out of phase with the particle size distribution The last guideline is not so much a design guideline, but a recycling guideline. From the last guideline it is clear that a cooperation between product designers and recyclers is required for obtaining an optimal resource efficiency of product systems.  minerals used in the model i Joint vector Liberation class, as mass ratio Liberation class, as volume ratio Liberated material from P and L particles Mass of material mineral, from A to O Non-survival matrix Amount of joints that did not survive p joint classes s size distribution matrix survival matrix Transformation matrix Volume vector liberated material after shredding mineral description of the stream originating from comminution of the EOL product mineral description of the EOL product components in product description, described in terms of material content in kg Specific mass vector matrix multiplication element-wise multiplication