Hot metal desulfurization slag is a high-metallic iron content slag produced at a typical steelmaking facility and is currently considered waste. Each year, 50,000 tons of this slag is produced at one particular steelmaking plant. This material can be beneficiated so that it can be utilized as blast furnace feed, but it is necessary to first develop a process for agglomerating it into pellets. A beneficiated slag concentrate was both conventional bentonite binder and a new fly ash-based binder (FBB) that was formulated by the investigators. The FBB used a high-carbon fly ash that is currently landfilled as waste. In addition to fly ash, FBB contained calcium hydroxide as an activator that also acts as flux known to improve the pellet's reducibility characteristics. The desulfurization slag concentrate pellets bonded with the FBB had superior dry compressive strengths compared to the bentonite-bonded pellets.Steel mills produce two types of slags called ironmaking slag and steelmaking slag. Slags operate as an efficient medium for metallurgical reactions and are then subjected to a suitable treatment for end use, such as cooling or quenching. Initially, at a steel mill, iron ore, flux, and fuel (coke) are added into an oxygen blast furnace. The materials combine and react to form liquid hot metal, gasses, and blast furnace (ironmaking) slag. Blast furnace slags typically contain 0.1–1.5% iron The iron in steelmaking slag has the advantage of either being partially reduced to iron oxides such as magnetite (Fe If the ferrous material can be recovered from slag and pelletized, it can be recycled into blast furnace feed. Pelletization is the most common method used in North America today for preparing finely ground iron ores to be used as blast furnace feed. Iron ore pelletization usually requires a binder, most commonly bentonite clay. However, a fly ash-based binder (FBB) has been used to pelletize magnetite concentrate, and this binder has particular benefits In contrast to this research, metallized pellets have been produced for direct reduction, from a different type of slag An excellent study of BOF and EAF steelmaking slags is available from the American Iron and Steel Institute's (AISI) “Steel Industry Technology Roadmap” Steel mill slags are currently processed by standard methods common to the sand and gravel industry such as crushing and screening. Typically, the slag material that is larger than 1 in. in diameter is very highly metallic and is recycled as scrap. Processing of the remaining finer material results in marketable slag products. Additional processing could be integrated that would allow the recovery of iron units. Gravity, size, and magnetic separation techniques, could be designed into flow sheets for recovering the iron units. The resulting fine scrap concentrate could then be pelletized and recycled into the blast furnace. The binding mechanisms associated with fly ashes have been explained by Accelerators such as calcium chloride have been studied in cement and concrete reactions for over 100 years. Cement reactions are essentially the same as fly-ash pozzolanic reactions, and so accelerators have similar effects on both conventional cement and on fly-ash pozzolans. The normal hardening of cement is the result of continuous calcium silicate dissolution, resulting in precipitation of the gluing agent dicalcium silicate hydrate. As calcium chloride exothermically dissolves, hydration reactions are accelerated both because of the increased temperature, and because of the presence of lime that has a higher solubility in the lower pH calcium chloride solutions than in water alone The purpose of the work described in this paper was to determine the conditions necessary for pelletizing iron units recovered from desulfurization slag, and to evaluate FBB as an alternative to bentonite for this application. The hot metal desulfurization slag was beneficiated using a conventional process. The particle size was 80% passing 550 μm. The steelmaker produces 50,000 tons of the slag annually at their facilities. Two concentrates were produced from the beneficiation process, a high-grade product that could be used directly, and a relatively low-grade product that the source requested to have pelletized. The low-grade product accounted for 27% of the head weight. Elemental analysis was performed with inductively coupled plasma (ICP) spectrophotometry, as shown in Fly ash with a high carbon content (according to The sample of bentonite clay was obtained from American Colloid. It was a western bentonite, classified as SPV 200. This was a high-performance bentonite with a particle size of 80% passing 75 μm (200 mesh). Quantitative elemental analysis was performed with X-ray fluorescence (XRF) on the bentonite and fly ash by a commercial testing firm specializing in fly-ash analysis. Chemical analyses of the Edwards plant fly ash and bentonite are compared in Binder components were mixed together with a Spex mixer/mill (Spex Industries, New Jersey, USA). The binder was mixed into the concentrate with a Readco Type-A kneader–mixer. Pellets were formed with a laboratory-scale balling drum, shown schematically in To prepare the balling drum feed, a dry sample of the slag concentrate weighing 36 kg (86 lb) was split into 16 samples with a riffle. Dosages of 1.0% binder by weight of slag concentrate were added of either the bentonite or the fly ash (as FBB) and mixed with the concentrate by rolling 100 times with a mixing cloth. Moist concentrate, created from dry concentrate moistened by mixing with about 50% water and pressure filtered to 13% moisture, was also used. In this case, the binder was mixed with moist concentrate with a kneader–mixer for 5 min at 350 rpm with 150 rpm orbital motion. A small amount of the balling drum feed was added to a 40.7-cm (16 in.)-diameter, 17.8-cm (7 in.)-wide pelletizing drum For each individual experiment, the mean and standard deviation was reported for a sample of 20 pellets. The 95% confidence interval (P95) is the range within which it is 95% certain that the true mean for the entire batch of pellets lies. P95 is based on the mean, standard deviation, and sample size of 20 pellets tested. This value is calculated using the standard Two sets of experiments used as-received concentrate mixed with 0.66% bentonite binder. The first used a dry concentrate and the second used a moist concentrate. As was expected from prior experience, pellets could not be produced from either test because the material was too coarse. Additional experiments used concentrate that was rod milled for 5, 15, 30, and 45 min. A rod mill with dimensions of 20.3 cm (8 in.) diameter×25.4 cm (10 in.) length, that had four evenly spaced 0.19-cm (3/4 in.) lifters and contained stainless steel rods, was used to comminute the slag concentrate. Microtrac size analyses were performed for the resulting products, in distilled water. Particle size is represented by the cumulative distribution curve shown in Since grinding the slag was necessary to produce pellets, a standard The material became marginally pelletizable after grinding from 80% passing 500 μm to 80% passing 450 μm. ⋅ The desulfurization slag concentrate could be used to produce pellets having acceptable strength after it was rod milled to 80% passing 290 μm, using 1.0% bentonite as the binder. These pellets have acceptable mechanical properties for use as blast furnace feed for producing iron and steel. Finer grinding of the hot metal desulfurization slag concentrate gave higher quality pellets. ⋅ FBB was used to produce pellets with dry compressive strengths superior to pellets bonded with bentonite. The superiority of the FBB was due to the different binding mechanism involved. Since fly ash is more readily available and costs less than the bentonite, it is recommended as the preferred binder for pelletization of this material. ⋅ Further research is warranted to optimize the sintering profile and procedures and to determine the reducibility characteristics of these hot metal desulfurization slag pellets. We thank the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant BES-9802198 and Dr. Tim Eisele of Michigan Tech for his invaluable technical advice. We also thank the following undergraduate students: Kari Buckmaster, Karla Andrade, Gabriella Ramirez, Toby Lee, Frank Perras, Elise Anderson, and Jaime Krull.