Using first-principles calculations combined with Boltzmann transport theory, we investigate the effects of topological edge states on the thermoelectric properties of Bi nanoribbons. It is found that there is a competition between the edge and bulk contributions to the Seebeck coefficients. However, the electronic transport of the system is dominated by the edge states because of its much larger electrical conductivity. As a consequence, a room temperature ZT value exceeding 3.0 might be achieved for both p- and n-type systems by fine tuning the relaxation time ratio between the edge and the bulk states.Searching for thermoelectric materials with high performance is one of the most important topics in the community of materials science. The efficiency of a thermoelectric material is quantified by the so-called figure of merit, defined as Recently, both theoretical predictions Our first-principles calculations are performed by adopting the projector-augmented-wave method The Bi nanoribbon can be obtained by cutting the Bi (111) monolayer along a particular direction. In the present work, we only consider nanoribbons with armchair edges. Similar to the notation for graphene nanoribbons  We now discuss the electronic transport coefficients of ABNRs, which can be derived from the energy band structures by using the Boltzmann theory However, for systems with topologically protected edge states ( It has been found that for the 2D quantum spin Hall (QSH) systems, the relaxation time ratio In summary, the electronic, transport and thermoelectric properties of Bi nanoribbons with armchair edges are examined by combining first-principles pseudopotential method and semi-classical Boltzmann transport theory. It is demonstrated that the system undergoes a topological transition from trivial to non-trivial edge states at a critical width of ∼6.5 nm. Due to the unique energy dependence of the edge relaxation time and its immunity to nonmagnetic impurities or disorder, the Bi nanoribbons with topologically protected edge states exhibit much better thermoelectric performance than the trivial counterparts. It should be mentioned that such conclusion is generic in nature, and does not depend on the exact value of edge relaxation time. Our theoretical study suggests that the utilization of topological edge states might be a promising approach to cross the threshold of the industrial application of thermoelectricity. We thank financial support from the Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at The following is the Supplementary material related to this article.