The authors report dualplate fixation technique for providing stable fixation in comminuted proximal humerus fractures. This technique has been used for proximal humerus fractures with metaphyseal comminution and provides excellent anatomical reduction and neck shaft angle (NSA).
                  The recently locking plate is clinically more widely used due to its small size, low rigidity, high elasticity, and biomechanical properties such as fixed initial angle and rotational stability. However, in severely comminuted complex type proximal metaphyseal humerus fractures, the use of locking plate alone does not provide stable fixation, leading to complications such as varus collapse, anterior–posterior angulation, screw cutout, nonunion, malunion, and metal failure.
                  Therefore, a more robust and enhanced fixation method, the dual plating technique using the locking compression plate (Proximal Humeral Internal Locking System and Variable Angle Locking Compression Plate) was developed.In severely comminuted metaphyseal fractures of proximal humerus, the use of conventional single locking plate does not provide stable fixation, leading to complications such as varus collapse of neck-shaft portion and nonunion A delto-pectoral exposure is used to expose the proximal humerus, as described previously by Badman and Mighell Both direct and indirect reduction under image amplifiers is performed to minimise soft tissue damage and to conserve maximum blood supply to the fragment. The proximal humerus locking compression plate (PHILOS, Synthes, Switzerland) is positioned lateral to the bicipital groove and additional locking compression plate (VA-LCP Distal Radius System, Synthes, Switzerland) is positioned posterior to the greater tubercle ( The proximal humerus locking compression plate (PHILOS, Synthes, Switzerland) is initially secured to the humeral shaft with a nonlocked, bicortical screw through the diaphyseal portion of the plate. Proximal humerus locking compression plate was fixated in order to acquire proper reduction. Then upper arm was rotated internally with 90° abduction for maximum exposure of posterior aspect of humerus afterwards. After exposing posterior aspect of humerus as described above. Distal radius locking plate (Variable Angle LCP Distal Radius System, Synthes, Switzerland) is secured to the posterior of proximal humeral neck-shaft area with cortical screw through the non-threaded section of the plate, too. Due to the compressive force produced by cortical screw, additional fixation can be achieved by introducing locking screws into variable angle locking screw hole of head portion and fixed angle locking screw hole of body portion after placing distal radius locking plate on posterior contour of proximal humerus. Locking proximal humerus plate (PHILOS, Synthes, Switzerland) specially designed for both a 3.5 More detailed description of the operative technique can be found in the report by Namdari et al. Proximal humerus fractures account for 45% of all humerus fractures VA-LCP distal radius plate functions not only as bridge plate to prevent nonunion and varus collapse of neck-shaft portion which are caused by severe comminution but also as buttress plate to prevent anterior–posterior angulation of humeral head. Dualplate technique with PHILOS plate and VA-LCP distal radius plate was not the primarily advocated method of fixation, at first. We have tried various combinations of PHILOS and many other additional conventional plates such as semitubular plate and one third small plate. However, they did not fit with the posterior contour of proximal humerus. Even with the manual manipulation, semitubular plate and one third small plate did not fit with the posterior contour of proximal humerus. VA-LCP is chosen to be the most optimal plate for dualplate technique despite its contour based on volar side of distal radius, it merges perfectly with posterior contour of proximal humerus without manual contouring. Our first attempt at using the dual plate technique with internal fixation in patients with metaphyseal comminuted complex proximal humerus fractures is the important point of this paper. In the future, we will provide more cases in which the dual plate technique has been used and compare its advantages and disadvantages with those of the single plate technique. There are no inappropriately financial and personal relationships with us or our organisations that could inappropriately influence (bias) our work.