This paper studied the effects of graphene oxide (GO) on the slime coatings of serpentine in the flotation of pentlandite. The flotation results showed that the flotation recovery of pentlandite was improved with the addition of GO, compared with carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC). The possible mechanisms of the improved flotation recovery were investigated by electrokinetic study, FTIR study, sedimentation tests and scanning electronic microscopy (SEM) analysis. The experimental results demonstrated that both of the two depressants dispersed the hydrophilic serpentine particles from the pentlandite surface. For GO, however, the flocculation of serpentine was a further reason responsible for the enhanced recovery of pentlandite.Serpentine is a typical alteration product of pyroxenes or olivines during hydrothermal metamorphosis Depressants play an important role in efficient flotation separation of pentlandite from serpentine Nanomaterials have been widely used in various fields and attracted increasing attention since the beginning of the 21st century. In 2013, Pelton and co-workers reported that hydrophobic polystyrene nanoparticles could be used as replacement collectors for pentlandite flotation to improve the processing of ultramafic ores Graphene oxide (GO), produced by the exfoliation of graphite, is emerging as a versatile material employed in synthetic transformation The pure mineral samples of serpentine and pentlandite for microflotation flotation tests and other experiments were obtained from Donghai, Jinchuan in China. X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) data confirmed that serpentine was 99% pure and pentlandite was 96.8% pure. Optical microscope images showed that both of the samples were almost free of impurities The copper–nickel sulfide ore for batch flotation was obtained from the Jinchuan copper–nickel sulfide mine. The multi-elemental chemical analysis of the ore was conducted by Atomic Adsorption Spectroscopy (AAS), and the analysis results are shown in Sodium Butyl Xanthate (NaBX) was used as the collector and Methyl Isobutyl Carbinol (MIBC) acted as the frother. Potassium nitrate (KNO GO was prepared according to the method described with a little modification The structures of pristine graphite and the product GO were confirmed by FTIR spectrum ( The SEM photographs reflected the differences between graphite and GO ( Mineral flotation tests were carried out in an inflatable hanging slot flotation machine (XFGC The flotation flowsheet of the open circuit is described in For the experimental operation, after the slurry was poured into the rougher flotation cell, the slurry was adjusted to the appropriate volume and conditioned for 2 Zeta potential was measured by a Malvern Zetasizer nano ZS zeta potential meter in 10 The infrared spectra of mineral samples were recorded with a NEXUS 670 Spectrometer. Approximately 1 For each sedimentation test, 0.1 A HITACHI S–4800 scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used to record physical changes. Powdered samples were deposited on conductive tapes and coated with gold. Addition of GO was expected to improve pentlandite recovery in the flotation of serpentine/pentlandite system. Therefore, microflotation tests using pure minerals were first performed to compare the depression effects of the depressants on serpentine flotation. The flotation behavior of the flotation system as a function of depressant concentration using CMC or GO are presented in Based on the microflotation tests using two pure minerals, batch flotation tests using copper–nickel sulfide ore were carried out to further confirm the selective depression effect of GO in a more complex flotation system. The reagent dosage was adjusted reasonably according to the reagent regime of the microflotation tests, and the results were listed in The detrimental effects of serpentine on the flotation of pentlandite were responsible for the reduced pentlandite recovery The electro-kinetic study is a method which investigates the surface chemistry of different minerals directly In order to further support the point that GO dispersed serpentine particles from pentlandite surface effectively, floated pentlandite particles in flotation tests ( Flocculation is a versatile method for solid–solid separation processes, which is widely applied in the flotation of valuable mineral embedded in the ore with complex composition In order to confirm the dispersion and flocculation effect of GO, unfloated samples obtained from microflotation tests were collected for direct surface observation. SEM image revealed the unconstrained long serpentine fibers in the CMC–treated unfloated sample ( A model was proposed comparing the floatation behaviors of two pentlandite/serpentine systems in deionized water or in GO solution ( This work has compared GO with CMC as a depressant to conduct microflotation and batch flotation tests. The flotation results show that GO improved pentlandite recovery more efficiently, compared with CMC. The possible mechanism is that GO can act as both a dispersant and a flocculant for hydrophilic serpentine in the flotation process. Therefore, GO may have a good application prospect in mineral froth flotation field. This work was supported by the International S&T Cooperation Program of China (2013DFR70580).