Heap leaching is a promising, economically viable processing pathway for extracting nickel (Ni) and cobalt (Co) from complex, low grade laterite ores. Producing a stable heap with high permeability and sustainable lixiviant percolation rate is a key requirement to ensure efficient leaching operation for maximum value metal recovery. Agglomeration of fine ore particles to produce robust granules with desirable attributes (e.g., size distribution and strength and porosity) is a critically important precursor to the heap leaching process. In this study, the effect of binder type/composition and dosage, drum speed, temperature and batch time on drum agglomeration behavior of siliceous goethite (SG) Ni laterite ore was investigated. Isothermal, batch agglomeration performed with tap water and 30, 44 and 98%w/w H2SO4 solutions as binders revealed the key role of binder dosage and acidity in controlling ore particle wettability, granule nucleation and growth behavior. Increasing the binder acidity from zero (tap water) to 30, 44 and 98%w/w H2SO4 led to a higher binder dosage to initiate and maintain a moderate rate of agglomeration. This accordingly reflected decreasing growth rates with increasing binder acidity where 98%w/w H2SO4 resulted in complete suppression of granule growth. At a fixed binder acidity and dosage, both higher temperature and drum speeds led to faster agglomeration rates. The impact of binder acidity and dosage on agglomerates' wet strength appeared to be insignificant. Acid-bound, wet agglomerates' integrity/stability in solution was, however, greater at lower binder dosage and/or binder acidity. The findings foster our understanding of how various, primary process variables may be prudently controlled to produce Ni laterite agglomerates with desirable properties and behavior, as a key step to enhance heap leaching.Heap leaching is a hydrometallurgical process used in the mining industry to recover valuable metals such as copper, nickel, gold and uranium from their low grade ores ( Fundamentally, inter-particle bonding during agglomeration may be achieved via a combination of different mechanisms such as: solid bridges, adhesion and cohesion forces, surface tension and capillary pressure, electrostatic attraction between particles and interlocking bonds ( The amount and properties of liquid binder added to an ore powder have a striking impact on powder saturation level (pendular, funicular or capillary state) and hence, the extent/strength of inter-particle liquid bridging and the capillary/viscous forces which arise within wet agglomerates ( To date, only a very limited number of studies dedicated to understanding the fundamentals of Ni laterite ore agglomeration behavior have been reported ( In the present work, the influence of binder solution composition/H Well-characterized, polydispersed, − Isothermal agglomeration tests were conducted at ~ To investigate the dynamic behavior of the H Evolution of agglomerate size distribution with time was characterized by product sieving and cumulative mass fractions under size against mean granules' size plots. To ensure good reproducibility of the agglomeration tests and accuracy of size analyses, at least three replicate runs were performed at each test condition. As exemplified by The effect of drum speed on SG ore agglomeration behavior was investigated at 40, 60 and 80 The effect of tap water and 98%w/w H In contrast, with 98%w/w H As shown here, although water may be successfully used as a binder to produce SG agglomerates of desirable size, the strength and structure of water-bound granules which are mainly held by weak liquid bridges of trapped free or capillary water, may not be acceptably high overall ( For agglomeration with 44%w/w H For agglomeration at 30  Overall, the results in The effect of temperature on SG ore agglomeration behavior was investigated by conducting agglomeration tests at similar binder composition/dosage and drum speed, but at 15 and 30 The effect of binder composition and content on wet agglomerate compressive strength and re-wetting integrity or stability upon soaking is shown in For improved industrial scale agglomeration methodologies, the above findings based on laboratory-scale agglomeration study indicate that the selection of H In the present, the influence of liquid binder acidity and dosage, drum speed and temperature on drum agglomeration behavior of siliceous goethite Ni laterite ore was studied fundamentally. The results revealed that: 5–40 Acidity of H Lower binder dosage and higher binder acidity lead to slower wetting, nucleation and granule size growth rates. Higher binder dosage and lower binder acidity dramatically reduce required batch time due to enhanced nucleation and granule growth processes. At fixed binder dosage/acidity and batch time, increasing drum speed leads to production of larger granules. At selected binder dosage and acidity, higher agglomeration temperature enhances the agglomeration rate. Wet agglomerate strength appears to be independent of binder acidity and dosage under the conditions studied in this work; however, its stability in acidic solution strongly depends upon binder formulation and dosage. Financial support provided under