In this research, we investigated the influence of rock mass properties, blast design parameters and explosive properties on blast fragmentation. Rock mass properties were evaluated in 51 blasting blocks using engineering geological mapping of 1961meters of the scanline, experiments on intact rock samples and measuring P-wave velocity (Vp) for 1771meters of seismic profiles. The results indicate that increasing spacing, persistence, opening, roughness, waviness of discontinuities, and Vp and uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of intact rock as well as the increase of discontinuities angle with the bench face of blasting block will increase the size distribution of blasted rocks. In addition, evaluation of the influence of connector type, specific drilling and specific charge has shown that using the Nonel system will decrease the mean size of fragmentation. It is also demonstrated that increasing specific drilling and specific charge quantities will result in the increase of mean size of fragmentation.Blasting is one of the main operations in opencast mining. Blasting operation is influenced by various factors that can be classified into three categories: rock mass properties, blast design parameters and explosive properties. Burden, spacing between drillholes, stem height, drillhole inclination, diameter and length, drilling pattern, blasting direction, subdrilling and blasting sequence are blast design parameters that are controllable. Explosive materials parameters include explosive type, density, strength, resistance to moisture and heat, and specific charge, all of which are also controllable. The third group consists of the parameters related to the nature of the rock mass. These uncontrollable parameters are among the most important influencing variables in the blasting results When two different rock masses are subjected to identical blast geometry and energy input from explosives, they will produce quite different degrees of fragmentation. This is because the rock masses have inherently different resistance to fragmentation by blasting which is referred to as the blastability of a rock mass Parameters related to the nature of rock mass consist of physical and mechanical properties of intact rock and discontinuities. Intact rock properties include strength, hardness, elasticity, deformability, density, etc. They are dependent on rock texture, internal bonds, and composition and distribution of rock forming minerals. Discontinuity properties include orientation, spacing, persistence, opening, roughness, waviness and infilling materials created by a range of long-term geological processes. There are several different researches on the influence of rock mass and intact rock properties on blasting operations, all of which clearly indicate that the properties of blasted rock mass has a significant impact on blasting results The aim of this research is to evaluate and measure all influential parameters in blast fragmentation. For this purpose, 51 blasting blocks were selected and their rock mass properties were evaluated by measuring the characteristics of discontinuities in 1961 meters of scanline, experimenting upon intact rock samples and measuring P-wave velocity ( The studied areas consist of Choghart, Chadormalu and Sechahun iron ore mines. These mines are located in Bafgh block in ferriferous zone of Anarak–Bafgh–Kerman. The geographical location of the study area is shown in From the geological point of view, Choghart ore deposit is located in Precambrian formations of central Iran (Morad series). This series had undergone different changes such as metamorphism and metasomatism. The enclosing rocks of this ore deposit are mainly granite, quartz albitophyre and metasomatits. From the tectonic point of view, in Choghart ore deposit, three main categories of structural factors and faulting can indicate the effect of significant Panafrican, Cimmerian and Alpine events. The Panafrican structures are considered as the main factors of ore concentration and regional changes. These structures are deep faults with N–S and E–W strikes. Sechahun ore rocks consist of Morad series rocks. In Sechahun ore deposit domain, intrusive rocks are mainly composed of diorite, granite, granophyre and syenite. In addition, the different combinations of dikes are approximately E–W strikes and high dips of 75–80°. Chadormalu ore deposit consists of two north and south anomalies. Due to metasomatic and magmatic conditions and high tectonic activities, this ore deposit has a complex geological condition. Discontinuities in ore deposits mostly have NW–SE strikes and 70–80°NW dip angles. Mineral mass was fractured by granitic and dioritic-dikes which have 15–45° dip angle and 1–20 Extraction operation of iron ore in the studied mines are done by opencast mining. Extraction stages include drilling operations, blasting, loading and hauling Rock mass is composed of two parts of intact rock and discontinuities. Discontinuities include structures in rock mass such as joints, faults, fractures, bedding and other weakness surfaces that significantly influence the engineering and mechanical properties of rock mass Line mapping method was used to measure engineering geology properties of rock mass in rock outcrops. In this method, desirable engineering properties are surveyed along the scanline on the rock outcrop. In line mapping, the length of scanline was variable from 10–100 In this study, discontinuities properties of 51 blasting blocks were measured in a length of 1961 Statistical study of other discontinuities properties showed that 95.6% of discontinuities are of joint type in Choghart mine. 46% of discontinuities had low persistence (1–3 To measure intact rock properties, derived cores of rock samples of blasting blocks with no plane of weakness were studied in the laboratory and parameters such as uniaxial tensional strength (UTS), uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) and density of the samples were measured. In this research, seismic refraction method was used to obtain seismic wave velocity in the rock mass. Equipment used for seismic data acquisition included the source for creating seismic waves, geophones, battery, connector cables and recorder. Seismic waves were created by the energy applied to the ground. In field seismic surveys, seismic waves can be created manually by heavy machinery or explosive materials. In this study, a sledge (approximately 18 Geophones used in the survey were electromagnetic PE-3 geophones made by a Dutch sensor company with a normal frequency of 10 Based on the length and conditions of blasting blocks, appropriate arrangement of two geophones, 3 or 5 Seismic properties of rock mass were surveyed along 71 seismic profiles. Based on different spacing between geophones, the length of all surveyed profiles is 1771 To determine the size distribution of blasted rocks, the method of digital image processing was done by using Split-Desktop software. This image processing software was first developed by Arizona University and works with gray scale images of fragmented rocks (Split Engineering). These images can be acquired from muck piles, haul trucks, waste dumps, stockpiles and conveyor belts The angle of the slope relative to the axis of the camera lens is an important factor in acquiring images of muck piles. If it is not perpendicular, apparent scale of the image varies continuously from the bottom to the top of the slope. There are several ways to correct the scale in muck pile images To find all effective parameters on blasting results, rock mass properties, blasting design parameters and explosive properties for all blasted blocks were studied. To study rock mass properties, these features were measured along 1961 Studying the effects of discontinuities openings on blasting fragmentation of rock mass also indicates an increasing trend of size distribution of blasted rocks with the increased discontinuities opening of the rock mass ( To investigate the relations between rock mass properties and obtained fragmentation, different models were fitted to the data. The best fitted model between each rock mass property and percent passing sizes P30, P50 and P80, and their determination coefficients ( To study the effects of blasting design parameters, effects of specific drilling and blasting system types on the size of blasted rocks were investigated. Specific charge parameter was used to evaluate the effects of explosive properties on final fragmentation. Explosives such as ANFO, Emulite and Azar powder were used in blasting blocks. Due to the widespread use of ANFO explosives, equivalent weight for each explosive was calculated when using the energy of each explosive. Then the specific charge for each blasting block was calculated based on the ANFO explosive (see Two blasting systems are used in the studied mines. The main difference of these blasting systems is the type of connector. The connector is used in one system detonating cord and the other Nonel system. In the detonating cord, detonation starts from the top of the hole and detonation delay occurs on the surface. However, in Nonel, explosion starts from the bottom of the hole and delay is placed in detonators with higher accuracy. These two differences lead to different results in the size distribution of blasted rocks and geometric shape of blasting blocks (surface after explosion). Based on the mentioned advantages, the application of Nonel is increasing. Among the studied blocks, 16 blocks were blasted by detonating cord method and 35 blocks by Nonel. Influences of application of each blasting method on fragmentation were evaluated. As shown in On the other hand, Nonel system applications increased the maximum amount of percent passing sizes P30 and reduced the maximum amount of percent passing sizes P80 and the top size ( Moreover, influence of blasting system on specific charge was investigated for the same fragmentation intervals. As demonstrated in The research done on the effects of specific drilling on size distribution of blasted rocks showed that by increasing specific drilling, the mean size of blasted rocks increases as well ( To quantitatively analyze the relation between the amount of P30, P50 and P80, blasting design parameters and explosive properties, different models were fitted to data. Additionally, with linear regression, different linear models were fitted to data for all parameters affecting fragmentation and percentile amounts of the passing sizes. Finally, the best linear relation between these parameters and the amount of P30, P50 and P80 were obtained, as shown in Eqs. Based on the importance of optimization in blast fragmentation in mining activities, this paper tried to study all effective parameters on blast fragmentation. For this purpose, rock mass properties, blasting design parameters and explosive properties were evaluated in 51 blasting blocks. Results of statistical analysis indicate that in Choghart, Chadormalu and Sechahun mines, the mean dip angles of discontinuities are 61.5°, 63.8°, 59° and mean dip directions are 183°, 174.8° and 169°, respectively. Mainly in all mines, discontinuities have low persistence (1–3