Operators often make different control decisions for different operating modes to meet the production requirement of the iron ore sintering process. Recognizing the operating modes is important to improve the quality and quantity of the sinter ore. An operating mode recognition method based on the clustering of time series data for the iron ore sintering process is presented in this paper. First, the Spearman rank correlation analysis and the information entropy analysis are combined to select parameters. Next, the operating mode recognition submodel is built by the fuzzy C-Means clustering method based on dynamic time warping distance and the naive Bayesian classifier method. Then, the outputs of the submodels are fused to obtain the final recognized operating mode. Finally, the productivity and combustion efficiency are regarded as the classification criteria, and the raw data collected from an iron and steel plant are used for the experiment. The experimental results show that the proposed method can effectively recognize the operating mode of the sintering process.Sintering is the main means to make the high-quality synthetic iron ore (synthetic iron ore is iron that has been sintered to produce a product that can be used similarly to real iron ore, which has more suitable drum strength, alkalinity, iron grade, and granulometry than normal standard iron ore). The iron ore sintering process increases the content of certain substances in the synthetic iron ore by mixing other materials and reduces the content of impurities through the combustion reaction. Thereby improving the quality of the synthetic iron ore. The produced sinter ore is the main raw material for blast furnace ironmaking ( Sintering is a thermal agglomeration process, and its main raw materials are iron ore, returning sinter ore, fluxes, and coke ( Currently, the research on the iron ore sintering process is mainly focused on energy saving and environmental protection. Many researchers have contributed to the modeling and optimization for the carbon efficiency of the sintering process. A multimodel ensemble prediction model for carbon efficiency is built by The above methods have achieved good results, but they are mostly based on data points and a small amount of research on time series. This is an opportunity to study the characteristics of time series data in the iron ore sintering process. The sintering process has strong nonlinearity, strong coupling and large time delay, which makes it difficult to establish its precise mathematical model. Furthermore, the sintering process takes a long time, and there are complicated solid phase and liquid phase reactions during the process, which makes it difficult for the operators to control the progress and to judge the operating mode by the operators’ experience. Most of the research on the operating mode recognition for the industrial process is based on the judgment concerning numeric data, the reliability of the recognition results becomes low. Such methods rarely consider the time series characteristics of the process data. Many researchers studied the operating mode recognition, which enables the operating mode recognition method to be applied to many types of industrial processes ( The current operating mode recognition methods can be divided into two categories. One is the operating mode recognition methods based on data clustering. For example, an operating mode recognition method for wastewater treatment process was based on K-Means clustering ( Due to the limited ability of manual monitoring ( Although the study of operating mode recognition has been applied to some industrial processes, the one for the sintering process is still of low quality. The operating mode recognition methods based on data point clustering hardly consider the temporal correlation between data, resulting in low reliability of the recognition result. The operating mode recognition methods based on the extraction of image feature is hard to apply to the sintering process because the process images are difficult to acquire. Therefore, it is necessary to study an operating mode recognition method for the sintering process by considering the temporal correlation of data. As a data mining method, time series clustering has received more attention, and it has been shown that it can effectively provide useful information in various fields ( There are several reasons why different operating modes need to be determined for the iron ore sintering process. Different operating modes do exist during the iron ore sintering process, and different operating modes will result in different combustion efficiencies, qualities, and yields. The operating mode is often judged by the operator, but whether the operating mode is judged correctly or not can only be determined by the detection of the sinter ore after the sintering process is completed. Operators make different control decisions for different operating modes to meet the production requirements. Therefore, the recognition of the operating mode has important application value to the sintering process, and the successfully recognized operation mode has guiding significance for the entire sintering process. Although there are already some methods for recognizing operating modes, they are all achieved based on data points and a lack of consideration for time series characteristics. However, sintering is a time-continuous process with time series characteristics. This also leads to poor recognition effects of the sintering process by the existing methods. Most of the existing operation mode recognition methods divide the data set as the operation mode, and do not involve the physical meaning of the data set. That is to say, the operation mode (data set) recognized by this method has no corresponding explanation, and it is difficult to find a corresponding situation at the industrial plant. Therefore, the objective is to accomplish an operating mode recognition method by considering the time series characteristics of the sintering process. The operating mode recognized by this method can provide guidance for the operators at the industrial plant. In this paper, considering the temporal correlation of the sintering process data, an operating mode recognition method based on the clustering of time series data for the sintering process is presented. First, the combination of the Spearman rank correlation analysis and the information entropy analysis is used to select parameters. Then, the operating mode recognition submodel is established by the Fuzzy C-Means (FCM) clustering method based on DTW distance and the naive Bayesian classification method. Finally, based on the frequency of occurrence of the operating mode, the recognition results of the submodels are fused to obtain the final recognized operating mode. In addition, the proposed method is validated using raw data collected from an iron and steel plant. The experimental results show that the proposed method has higher accuracy than the single submodel and has broad application prospects.  In this section, the iron ore sintering process is described in detail, and the recognition method for the sintering process is designed based on the analysis of production requirements. In this paper, the Dwight-Lloyd sintering machine with an area of 360 m After the portioning, mixing and granulating phases, the mixture is made and stored in a mixture bunker. The feeding process firstly lays the hearth layer material on the bottom of the sinter strand, which is to prevent the high-temperature zone from approaching the grate and prevent the powder from being taken away by the grate gap; and then the mixture is fed above the hearth layer material by the round roller. The sintering material layer reaches the ignition furnace with the movement of the sinter strand, and the surface of the sintering material layer is ignited by a negative pressure ignition technique. Meantime, the exhaust gas flows from top to bottom along the flue under the operation of the fan, and after a series of anti-pollution treatments, it is finally discharged by the chimney. The sintering material layer burns from top to bottom under the operation of the fan. When the front of the burning zone reaches the grate, the sintering material layer thoroughly burns and reaches the BTP. The sintering material layer is discharged when it reaches the discharge end with the movement of the sinter strand. After the crushing, cooling and sieving phases, the sinter ore is produced. Sintering process is a complex physicochemical reaction with multiple parameters, strong coupling, and large time delay. Therefore, it is difficult to establish an accurate mathematical model of the sintering process, which brings great trouble to the operators for judging the operating mode of the sintering process. The detection parameters directly measured by the sensors during the sintering process are shown in Sintering process is a time-continuous process, which leads to the temporal correlation of the process parameters. That is, the process parameters at the current time are affected by that at the previous moment. This characteristic is more pronounced in the thermal reaction process. The temperature at a certain position is affected by the residual heat effect, and it is close to the temperature at the previous moment.  The operating modes of the sintering process are divided from the point of productivity and combustion efficiency. The input parameters of the recognition model are selected by the Spearman rank correlation analysis method and the information entropy analysis method. (1) Sintering is a time-consuming process: takes about 2 h from the end of the combustion of the mixture to get the finished sinter ore, which means that the operators cannot judge the production efficiency of the sintering process in real time. The rate of finished sinter ore used to measure production efficiency at the industrial plant, is defined as, In addition, operators judge whether the current production is stable by monitoring the BTP. The BTP is the most important parameter of the thermal states of the sintering process, and it is the first position on the sinter strand where the mixed materials thoroughly burn, which is expressed as, Based on the above analysis, the operating modes of the sintering process are shown in (2) At the industrial plant, the data collected by the sensors often are affected by errors. Meantime, due to the sudden events occurring in the production process, abnormal data exist in the collected data. Therefore, it is necessary to perform data preprocessing to obtain sound and reliable data. The sampling interval of the data is 5 s. Considering the random error of detection, the average value filtering is used to reduce the influence of this error. In addition, the parameters of the sintering process change slowly in a short period of time. To reduce data redundancy, the sampling interval of the data is increased to 30 s.  For the two variables Information entropy is a measure of information content in a system, which is further used as a criterion for parameter selection. The more uniform the distribution of the values of the variable, the larger the information entropy, the higher the uncertainty measure and the larger the amount of information (that is, when the probability of occurrence of all values is equal, the information entropy is the largest). The information entropy is expressed as, The information entropy calculation method of the continuous variable is similar to the one used for the discrete variable, and it is realized based on the idea of segmentation. Each interval can be treated as a discrete value, the probability of occurrence of the interval can be calculated by the number of occurrences of the data in the interval. Suppose that By calculating the SRCCs of all detection parameters, it can be found that there is a strong correlation between the temperatures of exhaust gas in the bellows, as shown in  Due to the temporal correlation of the process parameters, the traditional operating mode recognition methods based on the data point are not suitable for the sintering process. Therefore, an operating mode recognition method based on the clustering of time series data is presented, and its structure is shown in This method uses the time series data of the sintering process to find out which operating mode the current production situation belongs to. First, data preprocessing and parameter selection are performed for the detection parameters, and the input parameters for the operating mode recognition model are obtained. Then, the operating mode recognition submodel outputs the recognized result. Finally, the outputs of the submodels are fused to obtain the final recognized operating mode. In this paper, each operating mode recognition submodel is built by the FCM clustering algorithm based on the DTW distance and naive Bayesian classification method. Finally, based on the frequency of occurrence of the operating mode, the recognition results of the submodels are fused. These three methods are presented step-by-step. In the first step, the FCM clustering algorithm based on the DTW distance converts time series data into label data, which is to correspond to the object to be recognized. In the second step, the naive Bayesian classifier finds a mapping between the label converted from the time series data and the label of the object. Next, the recognition submodel is built. In the last step, the fusion method combines the recognition results of different submodels to obtain an integrated model with higher recognition accuracy, which improves the accuracy of a single recognition submodel.  In this section, the operating mode recognition model is established. Firstly, the FCM clustering algorithm based on the DTW distance to realize the clustering of input parameters, and the operating mode recognition submodel is established using the naive Bayesian classification method. Finally, based on those submodels, a fusion method for recognition results is designed. At first, the reason for choosing the DTW distance is introduced and the calculation method of the DTW distance is expressed. Next, the FCM clustering algorithm based on the DTW distance is designed. (1) Although the Euclidean distance is simple and efficient, the “one-to-one” time series alignment cannot flexibly capture the similarities of two similar tracks. As shown in Euclidean distance is the most common distance between time series. For two time series,  The cumulative distance,  (2) The objective of the FCM clustering is to maximize the similarity between objects in the same cluster and to minimize that for different clusters. The FCM clustering algorithm is an improvement of the standard C-Means clustering algorithm. The standard C-Means clustering algorithm divides the data in a Boolean fashion, and the FCM clustering algorithm generates fuzzy partition admitting membership grades located in [0, 1]. The FCM clustering uses membership degrees to determine the extent to which each time series belongs to a cluster. Using the FCM clustering to divide The FCM clustering algorithm produces the partition matrix and the prototypes in an iterative way by applying The naive Bayesian classifier is selected to achieve the operating mode recognition. Despite their simple design and apparently oversimplified assumptions, the naive Bayesian classifiers have worked quite well in many complex real-world situations. A comprehensive comparison with other classification algorithms showed that the naive Bayesian classification is outperformed by other approaches, such as boosted trees or random forests ( The naive Bayesian is based on conditional probabilities. The theoretical basis of the naive Bayesian classifier is that for a given item to be classified, one category has the largest probability of occurrence under this item, which is considered as the category that this item belongs to. The naive Bayesian classifier is based on a class conditional independence hypothesis. That is, given a class, the value of a particular feature is independent of the value of any other feature. Let The naive Bayesian classification is carried out as follows.     If the naive Bayesian classifier produces a good classification outcome, then the items that need to be classified should satisfy the class conditional independence hypothesis, that is, the feature values are independent of each other. However, the detection parameters used in the sintering process are not completely independent of each other, and there is some nonzero correlation between them. To improve the classification effect of the naive Bayesian classifier, it is necessary to make the input parameters of the classifier as independent as possible.  Although in some cases the data in the same operating mode is very similar, there are cases where the data differ from each other in the same operating mode. For example, when the mixed material burns too fast, the usage coefficient of the sintering machine decreases, and the current operating mode is low productivity; when the mixed material burns too slowly, the amount of returning sinter ore increases, and the current operating mode is also low productivity. However, in both cases, the data during the sintering process is very different. This is not a data error but this is caused by production technology. So with all the detection parameters as the inputs of the clustering, the recognition method only gets very low recognition accuracy. Referring to Section Through the analysis completed in Section For example, Submodel(2, 2, 2, 2, 2) means that it uses the outcome of 2 clusters for each combined input parameter to recognize the operating mode; Submodel(5, 5, 5, 5, 5) will utilize 5 clusters per combined input parameter to recognize the operating mode. In addition, Submodel(2, 3, 4, 5, 5) will use the outcome of 2, 3, 4, 5, and 5 clusters respectively for the five combined input parameters to recognize the operating mode. In this case, the operating mode recognition submodels output both the productivity-based and the combustion-efficiency-based operating modes. However, these operating mode recognition submodels may have different outputs. Then it is necessary to fuse the recognition results of the submodels to get an integrated model. A fusion method based on the frequency of occurrence of operating mode is presented. The recognition results of the respective submodels are counted, and the recognition result with the largest frequency of occurrence is used as the final recognized operating mode. It is assumed that there are If If In this section, based on the raw data collected from an iron and steel plant, experiments are designed to verify the effectiveness of the proposed operating mode recognition method, and the experimental results are analyzed. Finally, the significance test is completed to discuss the difference in statistical results. A month’s raw data was collected continuously from an iron and steel plant, with a sampling interval of 5 s and about 520,000 groups of data were collected. After data preprocessing, about 50,000 groups of data are obtained, and each group of data has 20 data points. The time interval between data groups is 30 s. Considering that a complete sintering process takes about 45 min, the length of the smaller time series is chosen to be 5 min in order to better judge the operating mode. A total of 40,000 groups of data were selected for the experiment. The length of the smaller time series is set as 5 min, then each smaller time series has 10 groups of data, and 4000 smaller time series are obtained. Through the investigation at the industrial plant and the analysis of the raw data, the parameters in the operating mode division are set to This experiment uses a ten-fold cross-validation method, which makes the test results more convincing than the traditional single verification and excludes the randomness of the test results. The implementation steps of the ten-fold cross-validation method are listed below.    ......   To compare the experimental results, they are statistically analyzed. The experimental results are represented in the form of a confusion matrix, as shown in  Although there are only five operating modes (two operating modes for productivity and three operating modes for combustion efficiency) that needed to recognize, it is not superfluous to build a number of submodels. The main reasons are listed below. There are two main reasons. (i) Clusters and operating modes are not a one-to-one correspondence. One operating mode may correspond to a plurality of the clusters of the combined input parameter. (ii) It is difficult to predict which number of clusters is the best using current approach. Therefore, the enumeration method is used to enumerate all possible realizations of the combined input parameters to prove the rigor of the research.  The productivity-based and the combustion-efficiency-based operating modes are taken as the recognition targets. Through the ten-fold cross-validation, the average accuracy of each submodel is obtained as shown in  Comparing From Although the average recognition accuracy of the proposed method is only about 2% higher than the data-point-based method, the improvement in the number of successful recognition cases for the operating mode cannot be ignored. Every successful recognition case is very important to the operator, who can make the right decisions based on it, thereby increasing the combustion efficiency of the sintering process and the yield and quality of the sinter ore. In addition, on the one hand, the average recognition accuracy of the data-point-based method has reached about 80%, and it is very difficult to continue to improve on this basis. On the other hand, how to successfully recognize the operating mode case which is unsuccessful recognition by the data-point-based method is very difficult. The reason is that these operating mode cases certainly have more complex data relationships, which leads to unsuccessful recognition. Therefore, the proposed method is effective and it is also significant from the engineering point of view.  The purpose of the designed recognition model is to provide a reference for the operators to control the sintering process. Although the highest average recognition accuracy of the designed recognition model has reached 85.20%, there is still some miss-classification. When a miss-classification occurs, it means that the obtained operation mode is different from other current production conditions, then the operators should make control decisions according to his own operation experience, thereby reducing the impact of the miss-classification on decision-making. Furthermore, an effective recognition result will guide the sintering process toward high productivity and high combustion efficiency. To determine whether there is a significant difference in the recognition effect of the time-series-based method and the data-point-based method,   The recognition effect of the time-series-based method is the same as that of the data-point-based method. The recognition effect of the time-series-based method is better than that of the data-point-based method.   Therefore, the difference between the results produced by the two methods is statistically significant. According to the standard, confidence level Considering the temporal correlation of the sintering process data, an operating mode recognition method based on the clustering of time series data for the sintering process was presented. The proposed method is good at recognizing the operating mode of the sintering process and has higher average accuracy than the data-point-based method. In addition, the proposed method exhibits the following characteristics.  Compared with the traditional operating mode recognition method based on the data point, the proposed method is based on time series. The FCM clustering based on the DTW distance is used as the clustering method to further consider the temporal correlation in the sintering process. The naive Bayesian classification method is used to identify the operating mode. This probability-based method is positioned in line with the actual production process. Although the proposed method has achieved significant recognition effect in the operating mode of the sintering process, there are also shortcomings of the current research. There is room for improvement in the current recognition accuracy of operating mode. In addition, the method of selecting the submodel in the manuscript is to take the submodel with the largest average recognition accuracy from different regions. In spite of this selection method improves the recognition accuracy of the integrated model, the selection method is not optimal and effective. Therefore, in future research work, we will expand our research from the following two aspects: (i) how to further improve the recognition accuracy of operating mode, and (ii) how to effectively select the operating mode recognition submodel to optimize the recognition effect of the integrated model. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported in part by the