The addition of disreputable ingredients (e.g., fat) can cause foods to take on perceived negative qualities (e.g., as promoters of obesity and disease) and according to recent findings, these foods can also be perceived to lack positive components (e.g., vitamins and minerals). In the present study, middle-aged and older adults were asked to rate the vitamin and mineral levels of a group of primary foods (e.g., strawberries) as well as their counterparts, i.e., a second group of similar foods (e.g., strawberries with sugar on top) that contained disreputable ingredients. The results indicate that many Americans (regardless of whether or not they have tendencies toward eating restraint) believe that fat, sugar, and salt deplete foods of vitamins and minerals. Apparently, the vilification of certain nutrients in foods (e.g., fat) by health media and the food industry influences our perceptions of the amounts of other nutrients in those same foods. These results suggest that more care and caution should be used when disseminating nutritional information.sour cream takes value away creaming lowers the content breading takes away value apple value negated by caramel low because of chocolate sugar takes away cream/choc. makes it low fat reduces value of spinach sugar compromises food value butter has some detraction vitamins overpowered by choc. choc. ruins vitamin content the sugar/butter makes it worse sugar takes away vit/min sugar takes peanut value away sugar/sour cream/butter ruins it butter takes away a little bit cream adds vitamins sour cream has calcium choc. has milk & other nutrients choc. has some vit/min sour cream not good for you anything breaded not good for you butter makes the meal unhealthy fat in choc. is bad butter too much fat bad sucrose empty calories too fattening grease too many calories great w/o butter choc. is candy too much sugar sugar is not good sour cream adds fat sugar/cream part is bad high in sugar, fat, cholesterol caramel strictly sugar sour cream is good for you choc. has enzymes that are good some benefits from choc. some protein (ref. to cream) cream is dairy choc. in moderation is good natural (ref. to choc. peanuts) sour cream is dairy antioxidants in choc. protein in sour cream some cheese is good good fatty acids some protein Modern-day media frequently warns Americans of potential health hazards. Much of the information we receive concerning health issues involve concerns about our food supply and the supposed dangers of eating certain foods or food nutrients. Although many volumes have been devoted to the dangers of sugar and salt consumption, it might be argued that no other nutrition message in American history has influenced our views of food to the extent of the anti-fat campaign of the past few decades. For instance, dietary fat content is the primary nutrient characteristic used by men when determining the healthfulness of foods and often the only characteristic used by women ( The warnings regarding dietary fat have been intense and often without qualification (e.g., all varieties of dietary fat have been lumped together). This nutrient is considered by many commentators to be a leading contributor to disease and death in our society. Dietary fat has long been considered a contributing factor in a variety of diseases of the heart and vascular system and nutrition information often directed at a lay audience frequently warns that, “There is no question that a high-fat diet increases the risk of many cancers” ( On the other hand, some of the most respected and often-quoted nutritional researchers in the world now acknowledge that the indiscriminate vilification of dietary fat over the years by the US government, food industry, and other health experts was wrong and probably has done more harm than good. For example, Harvard's Walter Willett recently conveyed in the January 2003 issue of It is well established that both food names and the information on their labels carry weight with individuals that go well beyond the actual ingredients in the product. Food names/labels have been shown to influence our appreciation of foods and to produce expectations concerning taste ( Interestingly, the addition of sugar and fat to foods not only influences perceived negative characteristics (e.g., a heightened ability to promote obesity and disease) but also impacts the perceived vitamin and mineral content of foods. Recently college students were asked to rate the vitamin and mineral levels of a group of primary foods (e.g., apple) as well as their counterparts, i.e., a second group of similar foods (e.g., caramel apple) that contained added fat, sugar, or salt. With few exceptions when disreputable ingredients were added to foods the perceived vitamin and mineral content of the food dropped drastically. The results strongly suggest that college students may believe that fat, sugar, and salt deplete foods of vitamins and minerals or at least that vitamins and minerals cannot coexist in high levels with sugar, fat, or salt in the same food. Thus, the vilification of specific nutrients in foods by health media and the food industry likely influence our perceptions of the amounts of other nutrients in those same foods ( In the present study a list of primary foods as well as their counterpart foods (which were similar except that they contained disreputable nutrients) was assembled. For example, the list included the primary food “steamed carrots” and their counterpart food “steamed carrots with butter.” The respondents were asked to evaluate the vitamin and mineral content of the primary and counterpart foods. The current study differed from the previous work (i.e., As found previously, it was expected that since Americans use stereotypes when evaluating foods and categorize foods perceived as sugary or fatty as “bad,” the presence of infamous ingredients in foods would be perceived to compromise positive characteristics (i.e., vitamin and mineral content) of the food. For example, it was expected that the newly introduced strawberries with sugar on top (a counterpart food) would be judged to have fewer vitamins and minerals than strawberries (a primary food). Further, it was expected that the older sample examined would have smaller discrepancies between primary and counterpart foods than what was observed in the younger sample studied previously. Gender differences were considered plausible, with the expectation that men might show smaller discrepancies between primary and counterpart foods. A food-restraint effect was considered less likely but certainly conceivable. Participants were 160 men ( Students who were engaged in course work were offered extra-credit for having relatives and acquaintances over the age of 30 complete the survey. All the students who were interested in this extra-credit project were familiarized with the survey before it was distributed to them. There was limited extra-credit permitted and other options were available for the students to earn the available extra-credit. A group of 17 primary foods along with their 17 counterpart foods were found with the help of a trip to the local grocery store and by perusing A between-subjects design was used. Approximately half of the participants rated the vitamin and mineral contents of foods on Form A, and the other half assessed the vitamin and mineral levels of foods on Form B. Thus, no single participant rated the vitamin and mineral content of a specific primary food (strawberries) and that same food's counterpart (strawberries with sugar on top). This approach was taken in order to diminish the likelihood of demand characteristics. The food-restraint scale was assessed and the median score was found to be 16. The participants who scored above the median ( A two (primary vs. counterpart foods) by two (male vs. female) by two (restrained eating vs. no restrained eating) ANOVA was used to determine the influence of the experimental condition, gender, and food restriction on perceptions of vitamin and mineral levels for each food. As can be observed in No main effects for gender or food restraint were found. However, a three-way interaction was found for mushrooms, Although portion sizes were not included in the survey an attempt was made to determine how well the respondents' ratings of vitamins and minerals predicted actual amounts of nutrients in the foods. Thus, regressions were performed using the respondents' average ratings for each primary food and counterpart food as the dependent variable and each food's actual vitamin and mineral tally (counting only those vitamins or minerals that reached or exceeded 10% of the daily value), grams of total fat, grams of saturated fat, and grams of sugars as independent variables. Fat and sugar were included in the analyses to examine whether these nutrients also accounted for any of the variance in respondents' ratings of the foods. Commonly used portion sizes were the basis for the analyses ( Approximately 70% of the respondents took the time to explain their ratings. A few respondents (less than 30% of those who made comments) indicated the types of vitamins and minerals they believed each food to have (e.g., one respondent indicated that chocolate covered peanuts contain “protein–vitamin E–niacin”). In the case of strawberries with sugar on top, many of the respondents (at least half of those who made comments) expressed concerns about sugar content and some suggested that sugar removes or cannot coexist with vitamins and minerals in strawberries, e.g., “too much sugar,” “sugar not good,” “sugar ruins it,” “sugar high,” “high in calories,” “sugar takes away the vitamins/minerals,” and “sugar compromises food value.” For foods that had been covered in chocolate (e.g., peanuts and raisins) approximately 50% of the participants who provided explanations related that chocolate is a bad food or indicated that chocolate or sugar removes or cannot coexist with vitamins and minerals in foods, e.g., “chocolate takes away nutritional value of the nut,” “sugar takes peanut value away,” “chocolate ruins it,” “chocolate no,” “value cancelled by chocolate,” “low because of chocolate,” “chocolate makes it low,” “vitamins overpowered by chocolate,” and “high sugar.” For caramel apples many of the respondents (approximately 50%) commented on the health value of the apple by for example indicating that apples are a “fruit” or that they contain “high vitamins.” However, at least 50% of the respondents also related that sugar or caramel are bad or cannot coexist with vitamins and minerals in apples, e.g., “high in sugar and not much else,” “too much sugar,” and “apple value negated by caramel,” “sugar takes away,” “sugar ruins it,” and “too much sugar.” A few respondents expressed both of these sentiments, e.g., “apple is good but caramel is sugar.” For the counterpart foods containing additional fat only (e.g., baked potato with sour cream, steamed carrots with butter, and creamed spinach) the following comments were often observed. The respondents sometimes commented on the health value of the base vegetable and this was particularly true for spinach and carrots, e.g., for creamed spinach the following comments were observed “a lot of iron and b-vitamins,” “spinach is a vegetable,” and “great, Popeye ate those.” However, many of the participants (approximately 50%) considered the sour cream in baked potatoes to be bad or that vitamins and minerals cannot coexist with sour cream in potatoes, e.g., “sour cream is not good for you,” “sour cream is not healthy,” “sour cream takes some of the value away,” “sour cream lowers nutritional value,” “low because of sour cream,” and “sour cream too fattening.” Similar sentiments were expressed about butter when evaluating steamed carrots with butter, e.g., “butter makes it unhealthy,” “butter is not good,” “butter takes away a little bit,” “butter bad,” “butter fatty,” “butter ruins it,” and “butter has some detraction.” Similarly, the fat or cream in creamed spinach was considered a hazard or to lower vitamin and mineral content, e.g., “the cream is not good for you,” “cream makes it low,” “anything creamed not good,” and “too much fat lowers the benefits of spinach.” Many of the participants commented that skim milk is comparable to whole milk in terms of vitamins and minerals, e.g., “it has all of the vitamins of milk,” “fat content does not effect the nutritional value,” and “only fat is removed.” However, just as often the respondents expressed the belief that skim milk is inferior to whole milk in terms of vitamin and mineral content, e.g., “not as good as whole milk,” “watered down,” “its mostly water,” and “they have been taken out.” As for salted mixed nuts, many of the participants (about 50%) commented on the perceived protein content, e.g., “protein,” “nuts are a good source of protein,” and “high in protein.” However, just as often the respondents commented on the salt or fat content, e.g., “salty,” “salt is not good,” “salt bad for cholesterol and blood pressure,” and “fatty content.” As was previously found for younger adults, the present findings provide supporting evidence for the notion that stereotypes are used when evaluating the health value of foods. Many Americans perceive foods to be “good” or “bad” for health. Foods can become “bad” by adding infamous ingredients and as a consequence the perceived levels of vitamins and minerals often drop. It appears that some Americans perceive foods not only to acquire negative characteristics but also to lose positive components when disreputable nutrients are added. As was demonstrated for the first time in the present study, this is true even when a portion of sugar is sprinkled on a food. Thus, when we have a negative stereotype of a food it is difficult for many of us to recognize any positive characteristics in the food. For some of us when we consider the value of a caramel apple we no longer recognize it as an apple. It appears that in order to be pigeonholed as “bad” or “junk” a food must be perceived as lacking essential nutrients. However, as was found previously, it appears that when foods are perceived to have few vitamins and minerals to begin with (e.g., rice cakes, popcorn, French fries, and pretzels) the addition of a perceived unwholesome ingredient often has little, if any, impact on perceived levels of vitamins and minerals. These findings likely indicate “floor effects,” i.e., the primary foods were perceived to be bereft of vitamin and minerals such that there is very little room for downward adjustments in ratings. For example, French fries were considered to be so “bad” that the addition of more fat (i.e., cheese) could have no impact on perceived vitamin and mineral content. It was somewhat surprising that no gender differences were observed in this study: previously it was found that women, to some degree, judge the general health value of food names differently than men ( Previously for the college sample, skim milk was perceived to be inferior in terms of vitamin and mineral content to whole milk ( For the current study, an attempt was made to find primary and counterpart foods that were as similar as possible except for the added infamous ingredient(s). For example, none of the food pairs used in this study included a raw food being compared to a cooked food. For instance, a pair including “raw carrots” vs. “cooked carrots with butter” would clearly have been inappropriate because two variables would have been manipulated (i.e., cooking and added fat). However, there is little doubt, that in some cases the counterpart foods would actually contain more vitamins and minerals than the primary foods. In other cases the primary foods likely contained more vitamins and minerals than the counterpart, e.g., breaded foods, and creamed vegetables can have lower levels of vitamins and minerals than non-breaded foods and non-creamed vegetables respectively (depending on method of preparation and ingredients). However, as shown previously, in most cases the primary foods were perceived by the respondents to have significantly more vitamins and minerals than their counterparts and in no cases was a counterpart food perceived to have more vitamins and minerals than the corresponding primary food. Perhaps it could be argued that in several cases the ingredients added to the counterpart foods (e.g., caramel) were perceived as diluting the vitamin and mineral content. However, this concern was anticipated, it was for this reason that serving sizes (e.g., 1 cup of strawberries/1 cup of strawberries with sugar on top) were not included in the lists of foods. If serving sizes had been presented a dilution effect may have been apparent to the respondents (i.e., one might consider there to be fewer strawberries in 1 cup when sugar is included). Additionally, as with the previous study, there is no clear indication that the respondents assessed the foods based on concentrations rather than absolute amounts of vitamins/minerals. For example, strawberries and strawberries with sugar have about the same amount of vitamins and minerals (the sugar would add trace amounts) but the vitamins/minerals would be slightly more concentrated in the strawberries rather than the strawberries with sugar. Alternatively, some of the respondents appear to no longer recognize any “good” components of the food: the food has gone “bad” and no longer possesses healthful characteristics (diluted or otherwise). Although the regression analyses revealed a relationship between the perceived levels of vitamins and minerals in foods and their actual levels, in several instances the primary foods that were perceived to have the highest levels of vitamins and minerals actually do not. For the primary foods examined, spinach was considered to have the highest levels of vitamins and minerals (mean rating was 5.64), carrots were close behind (mean rating was 5.50), the highly regarded apple came in third (mean rating was 5.24), and the lowly potato was seventh (mean rating was 4.70). However, according to vitamin and mineral tables, spinach (1/2 cup) and a baked potato (medium size with skin included) would have the highest levels of vitamins and minerals (according to the main nutrient table in Pennington both have 11 different vitamins and minerals that reach or exceed 10% or more of the recommended daily value). However, in contrast to the beliefs of most of the respondents, carrots and apples would be near the bottom of the foods examined in terms of actual vitamin and mineral content (neither have more than two vitamins and minerals that reach or exceed 10% of the daily value). Apparently, a food's reputation for vitamin and mineral content is often not congruent with the actual levels of these nutrients. The current findings along with those found previously strongly suggest that the perception of a food's value in terms of vitamins and minerals can be influenced by the presence of sugar, fat, or salt. However, given that some fruits/vegetables with low levels of vitamins and minerals (e.g., the apple) were perceived to contain an abundance of these nutrients while the potato, which contains many in high amounts, was not considered particularly impressive in terms of vitamin and mineral content, suggests the importance of factors in addition to fat, salt, and sugar in determining a food's reputation for vitamin and mineral content. Historically and even in American folklore, the apple has routinely received high marks in terms of its health value. For instance one proverb dating back at least to the 19th century and possibly of Welsh origin quipped “eat an apple going to bed, make the doctor beg his bread” ( One might argue that the current findings might be attributed to the participants' negative views of food processing. However the participants' comments never conveyed the sentiment that the counterpart foods were believed to have vitamins and minerals processed out (on the other hand, this belief was expressed fairly often for the primary food skim milk). Additionally, excessive processing clearly does not explain why “steamed carrots with butter,” “strawberries with sugar on top,” “caramel apple,” and “salted nuts” were considered to have lower levels of vitamins and minerals than their corresponding primary foods. Due to a concern over demand characteristics, a between-subjects design was used in this study, i.e., no participant rated a primary food and that same food's counterpart. It was feared that a within-subjects design (where all of the respondent rated all primary and counterpart foods) being a particularly obvious and unconcealed approach, may have caught the participants' attention and might have influenced the results (i.e., reduced the perceived discrepancy in vitamin and mineral content between primary and counterpart foods). This concern was apparently justified because very recently I asked a different group of older respondents to rate a primary food (e.g., apple) followed immediately by a request to rate that same food's counterpart (caramel apple). As predicted when using this within-subjects approach discrepancies in vitamin and mineral content between primary and counterpart foods were generally much smaller but most (i.e., more than half) still reached statistical significance. When confronted with a primary food followed immediately by its counterpart it appeared that many respondents were more likely to consider the primary and counterpart foods to have similar levels of vitamins and minerals and surprisingly some respondents (as many as 25% in some cases) even considered the counterparts to contain more vitamins and minerals than the corresponding primary food. These findings support the view that stereotypical thinking about foods (more than dilution of vitamins and minerals) explains the results from the present study. If a dilution effect primarily accounted for the perceived differences between primary and counterpart foods one would expect this dilution effect to be most pronounced when using a within-subjects design (e.g., where it is most obvious that sugar is diluting vitamins and minerals from a particular food). On the other hand, stereotypical thinking likely occurs outside of our awareness and would be reduced if the respondents were aware of the manipulation (i.e., smaller discrepancies would be expected), and this is what was found using the within-subjects design. Additionally, a concern with any survey is the possibility that the respondents ignored the instructions and in this case rather than rating vitamin and mineral content instead rated the foods' perceived general health value. However, results from the regression analyses suggest otherwise and without a doubt, many of the respondents' comments conveyed a belief that the presence of sugar, salt, and fat lowers the vitamin and mineral content of foods or that reputable and disreputable ingredients cannot exist together in high levels in the same food. It cannot be determined from this study if respondents believe that certain vitamins or minerals are completely eliminated and others survive (although the plural, i.e., “vitamins and minerals” was used) or whether these disreputable ingredients diminish levels of all vitamins and minerals equally. However, either way the take-home message is basically the same, i.e., fat, sugar, and salt are perceived to deplete foods of vitamins and/or minerals. Finally, the fact that restrained-eating status had no impact on the results may suggest that the respondents did what was instructed. If the foods had been evaluated according to their perceived general health value or reputation for inducing weight gain one might expect individuals who were restraining their eating to rate certain foods particularly low (e.g., those with butter or ones that have been creamed). One important concept coming from this line of research in general is the notion that disseminating the potential dangers of particular food nutrients (e.g., fat) can have possible drawbacks and negative consequences in terms of the way it is assimilated by the public. Similarly, nutritional advice concerning vitamins and minerals can be influenced by a food's reputation and sometimes these reputations are not in harmony with nutritional facts. Further, the vilification of certain nutrients in foods (e.g., fat) by health media and the food industry likely influence our perceptions of the amounts of other nutrients in those same foods. With the help of our modern media, well-intended nutritional information often takes on characteristics of gossip in that it explodes into much more than it was originally intended to be. For example, few knowledgeable and conscientious individuals have reported that fried chicken has low levels of vitamins and minerals, however, the extreme emphasis on disreputable ingredients in fried chicken (e.g., fat mostly) has caused the average American to assimilate the belief that fried chicken is “junk” or “empty calories” and has no positive nutritional value. Further, some fat researchers might argue that, depending on the type of oil used in frying, fried chicken should not necessarily be considered a health hazard. It would be an extremely interesting and worthwhile project to compare the responses of Americans with those from other (perhaps less fat obsessed) cultures on a task such as this. Finally, one might argue that allowing Americans to possess these sorts of myths concerning vitamin and mineral content may have positive effects in that it may provide extra incentive to avoid “bad foods.” However, given that this line of research challenges the appropriateness of our beliefs about good and bad foods this may well be problematic. Should we not be provided the most accurate information available, and if myths are not debunked when encountered do not we not encourage outright huckstering by less scrupulous people? Perhaps, if possible, more care and caution should be used when disseminating nutritional information. 