We assess the stability of the wage structure in an economy experiencing substantial economic changes. We find that the structure of inter-industry wage differentials remained remarkably stable in Brazil in the face of major shocks.An intriguing finding in labor economics is the remarkable regularity that has been found in the pattern of inter-industry wage differentials. In this paper we investigate whether inter-industry wage stability also holds for a developing economy experiencing substantial economic change over a relatively short period of just two decades. Specifically, we examine the case of Brazil, which in the 1980s and 1990s experienced major and rapid trade liberalization, together with radical market-oriented policy reforms, and also high and variable inflation. These three shocks to the economy might be expected to affect both relative prices and wages and hence disturb traditional inter-industry wage differentials. The assessment of the Brazilian case, therefore, constitutes a new and strong test for the stability of the wage structure. Brazil's trade liberalization took place over a relatively short period of time, roughly from 1990 to 1994. The reductions in trade protection were widespread and substantial. Nevertheless, the reforms affected industries differentially—for example, the textile industry was strongly affected by new competition, and many firms went bankrupt. Liberalization followed a century-long era of import substitution strategies that left Brazil an especially closed economy by the end of the 1980s. With the incoming Collor government in 1990, serious liberalization began with the abolition of ‘Anexo C’, a list of about half of all industrial products which previously could not be imported. For the next 3 years, a tariff reform program and other liberalizing measures ensued. The impact was seen in the rapid rise in exports and even more so in imports. By 1996, the import penetration ratio had reached 11.5%—more than twice the figure for 1990—and the quantum of imports had increased almost 3-fold. Second, the restrictive rules and laws which prevented internal and external competition in many sectors for a considerable period of time began to be removed in 1990. From the middle of the 1990s, the government granted concessions for ports, railways, motorways, power distribution, mining, banking, telecommunications among other sectors to national and multinational companies, stimulating competition. The privatization of state companies also became one of the central reforms of the period. The privatization program really accelerated in 1996, when it started to be used as a key policy aiming at stabilizing inflation and reducing fiscal deficits Third, throughout the 1980s and early 1990s Brazil experienced high and variable inflation, ranging up to 3000%. Between 1986 and 1994, six stabilization plans based on freezing or controlling prices and wages and four currency changes were put forward in attempting to halt the accelerating rate of inflation observed since the beginning of the 1980s, but only the 1994 plan—the These three major sets of shocks, on their own and even more so together, might be expected to have altered the structure of inter-industry wage differentials, as a result of adjustments caused by inter-sectoral shifts in labor demand or simply by disturbance of inertial wage relativities. In the next section, we investigate the sensitivity of the wage distribution to these changes. As well as the occurrence of these major economic shocks, the case of Brazil is also suitable for the study of wage structure stability because it has available a reliable and rich series of individual-level data. The Pesquisa Nacional por Amostras de Domicı&#x0301;lios (PNAD) is a series of nationally representative cross-section household surveys which have been carried out every year since 1976, excepting 1980, 1991 and 1994. They are conducted using a consistent methodology by the government's statistical agency, Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatı&#x0301;stica (IBGE). We use data from 1981 until 1999, thus giving a series of nearly a decade each side of the initiation of trade reform and a total of 17 years of data. We restricted our analysis to employed individuals earning a positive wage, aged between 18 and 65. This yields an average of almost 125,000 individuals per annum. We estimate the inter-industry differentials from a consistently specified Mincerian wage equations using the procedure proposed by Our Mincerian earnings functions are able to account for a high proportion of the dispersion in wages between individuals. Indeed, the average However, our primary concern in this paper is with the correlations across years of the estimates of the conditional industry wage premia. These differentials are all highly statistically significant indicating important inter-industry wage differences.  These findings on the stability over time and the overall dispersion in conditional wage premia are in line with those in the papers cited in This paper has examined the stability of the inter-industry wage structure in a rapidly changing developing economy—Brazil in the 1980s and 1990s. Despite significant economic turbulence and substantial industrial and trade reforms during sample period, the inter-industry wage structure changed very little. The stability of the wage differentials over time implies that most of the variation in wages between industries is cross-sectional, and hence the various shocks and reforms—which are predominantly time-series macroeconomic phenomena—can explain little of the variation between industries. Thus our results indicate that these macro phenomena had little or no impact on the industrial wage structure (at the 2- or 3-digit level) since there was little or no change in this structure during the period when all of these changes were taking place. Within developed countries, a number of plausible hypotheses for the persistence of inter-industry wage differentials have been suggested and subsequently investigated. These range from competitive theories based on unmeasured differences in individuals' ability, or non-pecuniary differences in jobs, through to ‘non-competitive’ theories centered on rent sharing and/or efficiency wages. Competitive explanations in which higher ‘quality’ workers are selected from the queue for the higher paying jobs in a matching process have received some support from longitudinal evidence In the case of Brazil, some limited investigation of the determinants of inter-industry differentials in manufacturing has taken place, with a particular focus on the role of trades unions We would like to thank an anonymous referee for a number of helpful comments and suggestions. Funding for this paper was provided by the UK Economic and Social Research Council, Grant Number R000223184.