Nowadays, our dependence on electricity is strong because power consumption has increased considerably in the last years. For that reason, an efficient use of electricity is necessary, especially in public buildings. In order to manage the power consumption, it is vital to measure and monitor the electrical systems. Monitoring can provide advanced visualization and data analysis tools which can help us to achieve energy savings and peak power optimization. In this work, we present a power monitoring system developed for the campus buildings at the University of León (ULE) in Spain. This system is based on a three-layer structure. In the server layer, data are acquired from meters installed in the campus buildings. In the middle layer, data are stored and processed. In the client layer, monitoring interfaces, accessible remotely through the Internet, provide both traditional and advanced monitoring tools, based on statistical and data mining techniques. These techniques exploit data in order to find electrical patterns, detect faults and deviations, predict future power consumption, optimize peak power, etc. The data acquired by the monitoring system during 2010 are analyzed. The results from the visualization and data analysis tools, implemented in the monitoring system, are presented. The application of the proposed tools led to economic savings of around 15% and deeper knowledge about the electrical system.In the last years, power consumption has experienced a significant increase. This trend is bound to continue in the future, so it is necessary to carry out actions that promote energy savings and efficiency to reach a more sustainable development However, optimization and fault detection can only be possible if information about the relevant variables is available for analysis and monitoring. A detailed understanding of the electricity use allows us to find where it is wasted or to forecast power demand. This feedback has proven to be effective as a self-teaching tool for saving electricity and, consequently, money To overcome these drawbacks, modern power monitoring systems should be based on open, non-proprietary and modular architectures, cutting edge technologies and standard communication protocols to facilitate the integration, expansions and maintenance. Besides providing traditional monitoring tools, such as visualization of instantaneous, minimum and maximum values, trends, alarms and warnings, modern systems should include advanced monitoring tools that allow us to exploit the large amount of stored data. These tools could be based on statistical and data mining techniques In this work, an advanced monitoring system of electrical power for the campus buildings of the University of León (ULE) has been developed. The system has been designed using standard technologies and avoiding proprietary software as much as possible, in order to ensure its scalability, integrability and reliability. Several traditional and advanced monitoring tools have been added. These tools are used to know the power profiles, find voltage peaks or sags, determine the distribution of power consumption in different time periods, detect faults and electrical drops, predict future power consumption, verify bills and compare behaviors of different buildings. This paper is organized as follows: Section The campus of the University of León is composed of a group of buildings used for teaching, research or miscellaneous support services (cafés, data centers, administrative tasks, etc.). The power consumption in these buildings, framed in the tertiary sector, corresponds basically to lighting systems, heating, ventilating and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems A measurement system has been designed to capture electrical variables from each university building (see Nexus 1252 meters (Electro Industries/GaugeTech CM 4000 meters (Schneider Electric Shark 100 meters (Electro Industries/GaugeTech): This model only performs electrical measurement. Its main applications are invoicing and measurement in the secondary distribution level. One advantage is its low cost. As a communication interface, it has a RS-485 serial port. PM 800 meters (Schneider Electric): This model is useful to monitor an electrical installation at a low cost. It uses a RS-485 serial port. Nexus 1252 and CM 4000 models are categorized as high-performance measurement devices, whereas Shark 100 and PM 800 models are included in the middle class. In any case, the captured variables are the basic ones, i.e., voltage and current, and other complementary ones, such as power, power factor, energy, total harmonic distortion (THD), harmonics in voltages and currents which are computed from the voltage and current sampled waves. The total number of captured variables is 53. The geographic dispersion of the campus buildings, and therefore of the electrical meters, requires to establish a communication network to link all of them. This meter network comprises multiple network segments, which differ in the physical layer used to transmit the information. There are two types of network segments: Ethernet and serial RS-485. The serial RS-485 segments link close meters, i.e., buildings, while Ethernet segments connect widely separated buildings. The Shark 100 and PM 800 meters conform the serial RS-485 segments whereas Nexus 1252 and CM 4000 constitute the Ethernet ones. The last two meters are also used as a gateway between both types of segments. In this network architecture, which combines serial RS-485 and Ethernet segments, undesired bottlenecks can appear due to the simultaneous communication of several meters connected in the same serial RS-485 segment. However, this architecture leads to a significant cost saving, because it avoids the use of measurement devices of the high-performance class, which are quite more expensive. The meter network uses the local area network (LAN) already available in the buildings of the University of León to minimize the network wiring. An independent virtual local area network (VLAN) has been created to communicate the electrical meters. The VLAN defines a logical segment, avoiding information exchange with other segments dedicated to different purposes such as administration and faculty. VLANs work on the third layer or network layer of the OSI (Open System Interconnection) model The architecture adopted for the monitoring system of electrical power in the buildings of the University of León is based on a three-layer structure The The The    The tables are structured according to a relational model. Thus, it is possible to query the electrical data, model and parameters of a specific building separately or jointly. The DBMS controls each access to the database, i.e., the data insertions and selections. It also runs scheduled automatic tasks, e.g., security backups, calls to the statistical and data mining module, etc. The   These services have been programmed in Matlab, a tool widely used for data processing. The statistical and data mining module can be defined as a scheduled task, running each a determined time period. After the data mining process, the obtained results are stored in the database. They can be used for on-line power monitoring or carrying out an off-line analysis in the client layer. The The In this section, the monitoring tools developed to manage and optimize the power consumption at the University of León are presented. These tools can be classified into two groups: traditional and advanced monitoring. Besides, another classification can be made, depending on whether the tool is used to on-line or off-line monitoring. These tools allow the visualization of the electrical variables captured by each meter. This information is commonly displayed as time charts. Using these tools, the analyst can monitor the instantaneous values of the variables and receive alarms or warnings in on-line mode. Additionally, in off-line mode, these tools can retrieve historical data to visualize and analyze maximum and minimum values, trends of electrical variables, etc., with respect to time. These tools allow us to analyze data using statistical and data mining techniques in order to obtain electrical models These tools aim to facilitate an intuitive visualization of electrical variables and compare buildings with respect to their power profiles. They are based on projection techniques for dimensionality reduction The On the other hand, comparison tools combine dimensionality reduction and clustering techniques, i.e., the Additionally, the k-means algorithm, one of the best-known clustering algorithm, seeks an optimal partition of the data by minimizing the sum-of-squared-error criterion (see Eq. Section The generation of electrical models from real past data makes it possible to forecast future electrical behavior. These data-based tools are used to predict power consumption in buildings in the short (hours) and medium (days–weeks) terms The prediction models are generated by means of non-linear regression using SOM The system also incorporates a tool to determine the optimum power to be contracted, considering three billing periods: Peak, Flat and Off-Peak. The electric companies distribute the demanded power in these three periods, taking into account the hour of the day, day of the week and month of the year. The power demand and energy consumed in each period have a different cost. This tool determines the optimum power to be contracted using the method of cost function minimization. According to data from the demanded power in the previous year, the function which relates the contracted power with the total cost (including penalties) is estimated for each period. The minimums of these cost functions, subject to the constraints established by law, are the optimum contracted powers. The power optimization tool is shown in Section The monitoring system presented in this paper was introduced in the University of León during 2009. Data acquired and stored during 2010 have been used for the data analysis. In this section, some results are presented. We explain three different analysis: determination of optimum peak power, weekly visual analysis of electrical variables in the buildings and comparison of buildings with regard to their daily power profiles. As a first result from data analysis, it was discovered that the power supplier penalizes the University of León due to the difference between the contracted and demanded power. In The aim of this analysis is to monitor the electrical variables of the buildings by means of component planes from SOM. Real past data acquired and stored by the monitoring system are used to train a SOM. The selected data for this example are from building B6 and correspond to 1 month (March, 2010) sampled every 2 Before training, data were preprocessed to ignore erroneous samples and normalized to 0–1 range. A SOM, whose dimensions were 20 As a result, component planes of the SOM are shown in There exists a strong correlation between average current and active power, as expected. Most of the active power demand happens from Monday to Thursday. These days contain small areas where the active power is very low, corresponding to evenings and nights. On Saturday and Sunday, only a little residual power is demanded all day. The plane of the reactive power seems similar to the planes of the average current and active power. However, the plane of the power factor reveals that the relationship between active and reactive power is not linear. When active power is high, the power factor is low and vice versa. The highest values of power factor correspond to the weekends and the nights of the working days. It suggests that the equipment for power factor correction should be checked to avoid penalties in billing. The plane of neutral current suggests that most of the electrical loads in the building are 1-phase, provoking a current unbalance when active power increases. The frequency has no dependence on the weekday since this variable, likewise average voltage, is determined by power supplier. Regarding the average THD of currents, it can be pointed out that, surprisingly, high values of this variable take place on the weekend and nights, i.e., periods with a little active power demand. This situation might happen due to some constant power electronic systems, such as an uninterruptible power supplies (UPS), which distort the current wave. The visualization of the component planes helps us to understand the distribution of power consumption according to the electrical tariff. It is worth mentioning that component planes can be used for making a visual comparison among buildings. However, this kind of comparison can be laborious since the number of electrical variables and buildings is too high. The aim of this analysis is to compare and group buildings according to their daily power profiles. As mentioned in the previous section, when there are many buildings, it is difficult to compare power demand among all of them for a certain time. Projection methods can facilitate this task, by reducing the dimensionality of data and representing each building as a point on a 2D graph. On the other hand, clustering methods help us to discover the number of building groups with a similar power profile to complement the data analysis. In this case, active power data, acquired and stored by the monitoring system, are projected using ISOMAP mapping and clustered by means of k-means algorithm. For the sake of clarity of the projections, only half of the buildings are used in this analysis. The selected buildings were B1, B6, B7, B9, B10, B11, B12, B13, B16, B18, B19, B23, B24, B25 and B30. The size of data set is 22,320 samples, i.e., 1 month (October, 2010) sampled at 2 In a previous step, power data were filtered by means of a moving average with 15 samples in order to delete the signal noise. Next, power data were downsampled with a factor of 15, retaining 1488 samples, to speed up the mapping and clustering. Finally, before projecting power data, a linear interpolation was applied to substitute the missing values. To take into account the weekly periodicity in the power demand, an individual mapping and clustering for each weekday is carried out. Therefore, 7 different 2D graphs are obtained. ISOMAP mapping is applied to the preprocessed data set using The results corresponding to two of 7 weekdays (Thursday and Saturday) are shown in Buildings B6, B7, B9, B12 and B25 are located close together in the graphs, indicating that they have similar power profiles. The projection of the buildings B10, B11, B13, B16, B23 and B24 reveals that they share a common profile. In fact, all of these buildings are characterized by a large area, sophisticated research-oriented machinery and high activity. It can be pointed out that B1 is not very far from the second building set and therefore, we can consider that they have a similar profile, although the residual power in B1 is higher, probably due to many servers in the data center. B30 is located closer to the first building set on Saturday, but it is closer to the second building set on Thursday, revealing its changing nature. The clustering confirms the expected building groups mentioned above. Using the Davies and Bouldin index, the optimal number of groups obtained were 3 on Thursday and 4 on Saturday. Although, the two weekdays have distinct number of groups, in general, there are 3 main groups since B18 and B19 constitute a cluster of themselves on Saturday. The results from this comparative analysis should be taken into account for actions regarding reorganization of the billing points, which should group buildings within the same cluster to take advantage of their similar electrical behavior. The power monitoring systems for buildings should avoid closed, hardly scalable and proprietary architectures and rather adopt flexible designs based on standard technologies that facilitate the integration of new systems for measurement, storage, management, etc. In this work, we have proposed an open power monitoring system for the campus buildings of the University of León. From the point of view of architecture, the system is based on a three layer pattern. The server layer contains the electrical meters. They are geographically dispersed, so a communication network links all of them and lets them exchange data using the Modbus protocol. The middle layer does not only store the acquired data, but it also exploits them extracting knowledge about the electrical system with the aim to improve the energy efficiency in buildings. The client layer provides traditional and advanced monitoring tools through the Internet. The use of advanced tools for electrical monitoring which rationalizes power consumption is still a pending issue. Traditional monitoring tools provide limited displays of current and historical values captured by the meters and focus mainly on the variables involved in billing. Moreover, data are usually sampled at low frequency. In this work, we have developed advanced analysis tools for the power monitoring system which are not only limited to display stored data. They use statistical and data mining techniques to visualize easily electrical variables, compare buildings according to their power profiles, predict power consumption and optimize the power to be contracted. These tools provide a higher level of insight that is useful to efficiently monitor a set of buildings. The power monitoring system was introduced in the University of León (Spain) and tested using real data acquired during a whole year. The results led to a deeper knowledge of the power consumption in the campus and to some corrective actions. This work was supported in part by the