Amelogenin is the major enamel protein produced by ameloblasts. Its expression has been shown to be down-regulated in ameloblasts of vitamin-D-deficient (−D) rats. The potential expression and localization of amelogenin in odontoblasts and its regulation by vitamin D were investigated in this study. RT-PCR and semi-quantitative Northern blot analyses were performed using the odontoblast cell line MO6-G3 and microdissected dental pulp mesenchyme. Both in vitro and in vivo odontoblasts expressed various alternatively spliced amelogenin transcripts. In situ hybridization studies showed that amelogenin expression was restricted to young odontoblasts during mantle dentin deposition. Electron microscopy studies localized the amelogenin protein in the odontoblast cell process cytoplasm and mantle dentin. Amelogenin immunolabeling was stronger in −D rats, suggesting an inverse regulation by vitamin D in odontoblasts. Furthermore, amelogenin mRNA steady-state levels were significantly increased in −D dental pulp mesenchyme. In addition, a temporal–spatial lengthening of the mantle dentin stage was observed in −D animals, suggesting that developmental perturbations occur in relation to the vitamin D status and/or amelogenin expression. These data show that amelogenin is expressed by odontoblasts selectively during mantle dentin deposition. This developmental regulated expression pattern is enhanced under vitamin-D-deficiency status and in a broader context may play an important role during ameloblast and odontoblast differentiation and function.During tooth formation, instructive epithelial–mesenchymal interactions result in the cytodifferentiation of epithelial cells into ameloblasts and ectomesenchymal cells into odontoblasts Both amelogenesis and dentinogenesis result in the coordinated expression of several extracellular matrix proteins that originally were reported to be tissue-specific but are now recognized as being tooth-specific. Among these proteins amelogenin (Amel) and enamelin have been considered exclusively expressed by the ameloblasts Amel, the major enamel ECM protein, is produced by ameloblasts and then secreted in the forming enamel Recently, several authors have proposed and showed evidence that amelogenin also acts as a signal molecule during mineralized tissue formation Based on the emerging pattern of reciprocal expression of other tooth proteins in epithelial and mesenchymal cells and recent RT-PCR data, the purpose of the present study was to investigate the developmental expression pattern of Amel by odontoblasts through various in vitro and in vivo approaches at both the mRNA and the protein level. In addition, since dentin defects were evident in vitamin-D-deficient animals, the potential regulation of Amel by 1,25(OH) Dental papilla mesenchymal cells have been isolated from Swiss Webster E-18 first mandibular molars and placed in monolayer culture, as previously described Cells were plated at low density in α-MEM supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 100 U/ml penicillin/ streptomycin, and 50 μg/ml ascorbic acid and incubated at 33°C in a humidified atmosphere of 95% air and 5% CO Terminal cultures were rinsed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) solution, and mRNA was isolated using the Micro-Fast Track mRNA isolation kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Invitrogen, San Diego, CA, USA). The isolated RNA was resuspended in 10 μl of sterile water and the concentration determined directly by absorbance spectrophotometry at 260 nm. An aliquot (1 μg) of mRNA was converted using reverse transcriptase (MML V-RT) and the resulting cDNA was amplified, using specific Amel primers (exon2F: 5′-AACCATCAAGAAATGGGGACC-3′ and exon5R: 5′-TACCACTTCAAAGGGGTAAGC-3′; GenBank Accession No. D31768). The resulting products were separated by 2% agarose gel electrophoresis and gels were stained with ethidium bromide for 15 min, destained in water, and photographed. For tissue distribution studies, 56-day-old Sprague–Dawley rats ( For vitamin D studies 3-week-old Sprague–Dawley rats ( For developmental studies in vitamin-D-deficient rats, Sprague–Dawley rats ( Amel sense and antisense RNA probes were prepared from full-length cDNA subcloned into Bluescript plasmid For in situ hybridization experiments, animals ( For Northern blot analysis mandibles were removed and incisors were isolated and microdissected to separate dental epithelium and mesenchyme as previously described Animals for electron microscopy ( Tissue sections were first incubated at room temperature with 0.01 M PBS at pH 7.3 containing 1% ovalbumin (oval; Sigma) for 5 min, followed by antiserum for 1 h. Immunolocalizations on serial sections were performed using antibodies directed against rat amelogenin (generous gift of Pr. S. Sasaki, Dental School, Tokyo, Japan), diluted at 1:1000. Normal rabbit serum (Sigma) diluted 1:200 was used for negative control replacing the primary antibody. Following incubation the sections were washed with PBS, floated for 5 min on PBS–oval, and reacted for 30 min with protein A complexed to colloidal gold particles. The sections were then washed with PBS followed by distilled water, stained with aqueous uranyl acetate and lead citrate, and examined with a Philips CM12 (80 kV) transmission electron microscope. The expression of Amel by odontoblasts was initially investigated using three mouse immortalized cell lines representative of the odontoblasts lineage: dental pulp, odontoblasts, and mature odontoblast. Amel transcripts were detected by RT-PCR only in the cell line MO6-G3, representative of an odontoblast The Amel mRNA expression pattern was confirmed in vivo using in situ hybridization ( In addition, Northern blots revealed Amel transcripts present in both dental enamel organ epithelium (EOE) as previously described To investigate the localization and distribution of Amel protein within the odontoblasts and dentin matrix, and to confirm the up-regulation of Amel expression in this cell population associated with vitamin-D-deficiency status, electron microscopy immunocytochemistry was performed in both +D and −D animals. Amel immunoreactivity in the +D animals was found not only in ameloblasts and enamel matrix ( Finally, the high Amel expression levels in the vitamin-D-deficiency status appeared to be related to a particular stage of dentinogenesis in the −D rachitic rats. In control rats (+D), the progression of dentinogenesis includes a phase of transient mantle dentin deposition and biomineralization followed by the formation of the more abundant circumpulpal dentin containing dentin tubules. This transition from mantle dentin to circumpulpal dentin formation and mineralization corresponds to the initial deposition of enamel matrix by the ameloblasts and is evident at the ultrastructural level. The most striking feature of rachitic rat molars was a significant lengthening of the mantle dentin transition stage: circumpulpal dentin formation started at 2 postnatal days in +D rats in contrast to a minimal deposition observed not until 6 postnatal days in −D rats. At 9 days in −D rat molars, the majority of lateral aspects of cusps were still at the mantle dentin deposition developmental stage while in +D rat molars only a restricted zone at the cervical loop was still at this same stage ( This study provides data at both the mRNA and the protein level that the major enamel matrix protein Amel is expressed by the mesenchymal-derived odontoblasts and is a component of the dentin matrix. Amel expression was observed within a limited developmental period associated with the formation of mantle dentin by young odontoblasts. The present data support and extend previous studies demonstrating that, during epithelial–mesenchymal interactions leading to the terminal cytodifferentiation of odontogenic cells, transient expression of several tooth matrix proteins by the opposing cell type occurs. These tooth matrix proteins include DMP-1, DSPP, and Ambn, and now we have added Amel to this group. Interestingly, a reverse regulation of Amel expression by vitamin D was found in the mesenchymal odontoblasts compared to the epithelial ameloblasts, suggesting tissue-specific mechanisms of hormonal regulation related to tooth matrix formation. Finally, a prolonging of the mantle dentin stage was observed in the −D rats and this was correlated with the pronounced expression of Amel during this discrete stage of dentinogenesis. These data suggest a possible functional correlation between Amel and early matrix deposition by both odontoblasts and ameloblasts at and near the DEJ. Previous biochemical and immunohistochemical studies have shown that dentin contains small amounts of Amel This study provides the first in vivo and in vitro data that correlate Amel expression by odontoblasts to a particular stage of their lineage, young odontoblasts associated with mantle dentin formation. Two major Amel transcripts were detectable by RT-PCR expressed by odontoblasts in the cell line MO6-G3. DNA sequence analysis showed no differences between the odontoblast isolated Amel transcripts and those previously described for ameloblasts. Numerous amelogenin transcripts are produced through alternative splicing at the mRNA level During embryonic tooth development, inductive signals from both the dental epithelium and the mesenchyme determine the number, form, and position of developing teeth Interestingly, Amel was transiently expressed by coronal odontoblasts during the mantle dentin deposition stage, but not in root odontoblasts, suggesting a site-specific role of Amel during dentinogenesis. Substantial differences in odontoblasts and dentin structure In this study we took advantage of a well-characterized experimental animal model of nutritional rickets Very recently, Amel immunoreactivity was found in odontoblasts of molars and incisors in biglycan (BGN) knockout mice displaying an osteoporosis-like phenotype A prolongation of the initial steps of dentinogenesis, namely mantle dentin formation, was observed in −D rats. This prolonged stage represents the same developmental stage when Amel up-regulation was observed in −D odontoblasts. In fact, circumpulpal dentin formation, which follows mantle dentin deposition, was delayed several days later in −D rats compared to the control animals (day 6 versus day 2). Thus, the observed altered Amel expression in rickets was associated with perturbations of the initiation of dentin formation, suggesting a potential role for amelogenin in odontoblast cytodifferentiation and subsequent dentin matrix formation. More in-depth studies on the role of Amel in dentin matrix formation are necessary. In conclusion, we have provided new insights into the developmental dynamics of Amel expression during tooth development. Our studies provide clear evidence that Amel is expressed in relatively small amounts and in a temporal-dependent pattern by rodent odontoblasts at both the transcriptional and the translational level. Amel expression is associated with the early mantle dentin deposition and mineralization produced by young odontoblasts. Thus, Amel has been characterized as a useful marker for distinct stages of odontoblast cell lineage. In addition, Amel mRNA was differentially regulated by vitamin D in odontoblasts versus the ameloblasts. Amel mRNA up-regulation in −D animals was observed in correlation with a lengthening of mantle dentin deposition, suggesting that the vitamin D regulation of Amel expression in odontoblasts is important in normal epithelial–mesenchymal interactions leading to the functional differentiation of not only ameloblasts but also odontoblasts. We thank Dr. W. Bonass (Division of Oral Biology, Dental Institute, Leeds, UK) for the amelogenin cDNA probe. The technical support of Jennifer Schulze in performing the dental cell line cultures is also acknowledged.