A highly efficient method, using ultrafine aluminum powder as heterogeneous reducing media as well as sacrificial template, has been developed to prepare various metallic or oxide nanoparticles including Au, Ag, Pt, RuO2 and Cu2O with good monodispersity. With the aid of ultrasonication-induced physical effects such as acoustic cavitation and microstreaming, zerovalent metallic atoms or clusters, when generated, are immediately dislodged from the surface of aluminum powder and are driven into bulk solution phase, avoiding the surface deposition and reaction termination. Ultrasonication also plays a critical role in promoting the mass transport through the channels in the amorphous and porous Al2O3 passivation layer around aluminum particles. The method opens a general and potent avenue for preparation of high-quality nanoparticles in large quantity and in a way that is environmentally friendly.Metallic and oxide nanoparticles have received persistent attention due to potential applications in many fields such as photography, photocatalysis, biological labeling, photonics, optoelectronics, information storage, surface-enhanced Raman scattering, magnetic ferrofluids We have invented a new approach based simply on the galvanic replacement reduction of the active metal aluminum. Metal galvanic replacement reduction refers to the spontaneous electroless deposition in which a metal ion is reduced to the corresponding zerovalent atom state with the concurrent oxidation of another metal species possessing lower reduction potential. The governing mechanism is essentially the same as the general homogeneous redox reaction from the viewpoint of electron gain and loss. Each metal ion/metal (M Spontaneous metal galvanic replacement, a heterogeneous reaction in nature, has been widely applied in hydrometallurgy In our method, the galvanic replacement induced surface deposition is not desired as it can cause a complete surface coverage, and isolate the reacting species. We employ commercially available submicron aluminum powder as the sacrificial reducing medium and ultrasonication as a strong deplating tool. The novel combination allows stable and sustaining fabrication of various nanoparticles in a very straightforward manner. Silver nitrate (AgNO The synthetic procedure is simple and straightforward. A 20 ml deionized aqueous solution of 0.02 M Ag, Au, Pt, Ru or Cu precursor salt and 0.1 M PVP was first prepared. For each species, according to the specific chemical reaction, only a half of the stoichiometric quantity of aluminum powder was added to avoid the labor of isolating the residual aluminum from the products. The conical flask containing the solution and reactants was immediately put into the ultrasonic bath filled with tap water, operating at 42 kHz in a continuous mode. All the nanoparticles syntheses were performed at room temperature without heating except for Cu. The water bath was maintained at around 60 °C during the ultrasonication process for Cu preparation. After 45 min, ultrasonic vibration was terminated and the produced nanoparticle colloids were allowed to stay at room temperature for a few more hours before isolation. The eventual colors of the colloids are grey–yellow, ruby-red, black, grey–black and orange–yellow for Ag, Au, Pt, RuO Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) imaging was performed using a Philips CM12, 100 kV-accelerating voltage. TEM samples were prepared by pipetting a few drops of ethanol solution of colloidal nanoparticles onto copper grids (400 mesh) coated with amorphous formvar-carbon film (SPI Supplies). X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra were recorded on a Rigaku D/Max-B X-ray diffractometer (nickel filtered Cu Kα radiation ( Unlike sonochemical reduction, in which a high-intensity ultrasound titanium horn is immersed in the reaction solution for several hours to stimulate reducing radicals For this specific system, ultrasonication also plays a critical role in promoting mass transport and exchange. It is known that aluminum particles are usually covered with a thin passivation layer consisting of amorphous and porous alumina (Al Additionally, ultrasonication provides two more benefits: First, aluminum powder is better dispersed in solution to form relatively uniform suspension with the aid of ultrasonication, leading to a maximum exposure of each particle within the reactant solution and an overall pseudo-homogeneous reduction and nucleation. This is crucial for instantaneous nucleation and narrow size distribution. It should be noted that larger-size, i.e. micro scale powders are not desired in this method, since they settle on the bottom of the solution even with ultrasonic agitation and could not be well dispersed. Second, under ultrasonic vibration, unconsolidated or irregular aggregates of produced nanoparticles could be broken up and restructure to form consolidated particle suspension, which is an advantage over traditional hydrothermal method with only magnetic stirring.   As the diffraction peaks of Au (2 In this work, an innovative technique based on the heterogeneous metal displacement reduction and ultrasonication-assisted deplating was developed and successfully applied in preparing representative metal and oxide nanoparticles including gold, silver, platinum, ruthenium and copper (I) oxide with good size uniformity. This ultrafine aluminum-based powder reduction technique opens up a new horizon for simple, economic and green synthesis of nanomaterials. The work was supported by NSF (CTS-0500402) and DoE (DE-FG02-05ER46241).