Purpose:
                  The comminution of kidney stones in shock wave lithotripsy (SWL) is a dose dependent process caused primarily by the combination of 2 fundamental mechanisms, namely stress waves and cavitation. The effect of treatment strategy with emphasis on enhancing the effect of stress waves or cavitation on stone comminution in SWL was investigated. Because vascular injury in SWL is also dose dependent, optimization of the treatment strategy may produce improved stone comminution with decreased tissue injury in SWL.
               
                  Materials and Methods:
                  Using an in vitro experiment system that mimics stone fragmentation in the renal pelvis spherical BegoStone (Bego USA, Smithfield, Rhode Island) phantoms (diameter 10 mm) were exposed to 1,500 shocks at a pulse repetition rate of 1 Hz in an unmodified HM-3 lithotripter (Dornier Medical Systems, Kennesaw, Georgia). The 3 treatment strategies used were increasing output voltage from 18 to 20 and then to 22 kV every 500 shocks with emphasis on enhancing the effect of cavitation on medium fragments (2 to 4 mm) at the final treatment stage, decreasing output voltage from 22 to 20 and then to 18 kV every 500 shocks with emphasis on enhancing the effect of stress waves on large fragments (greater than 4 mm) at the initial treatment stage and maintaining a constant output voltage at 20 kV, as typically used in SWL procedures. Following shock wave exposure the size distribution of fragments was determined by the sequential sieving method. In addition, pressure waveforms at lithotripter focus (F
                     2) produced at different output settings were measured using a fiber optic probe hydrophone.
               
                  Results:
                  The rate of stone comminution in SWL varied significantly in a dose dependent manner depending on the treatment strategies used. Specifically the comminution efficiencies produced by the 3 strategies after the initial 500 shocks were 30.7%, 59% and 41.9%, respectively. After 1,000 shocks the corresponding comminution efficiencies became similar (60.2%, 68.1% and 66.4%, respectively) with no statistically significant differences (p = 0.08). After 1,500 shocks the final comminution efficiency produced by the first strategy was 88.7%, which was better than the corresponding values of 81.2% and 83.5%, respectively, for the other 2 strategies. The difference between the final comminution efficiency of the first and second strategies was statistically significant (p = 0.005).
               
                  Conclusions:
                  Progressive increase in lithotripter output voltage can produce the best overall stone comminution in vitro.Although shock wave lithotripsy (SWL) has been used routinely for the treatment of symptomatic renal calculi for almost 2 decades, the treatment procedure is still largely empirical. Besides some anecdotal opinions, no well-defined protocols of SWL have been developed to ensure an effective treatment outcome with minimal adverse tissue injury. On the other hand, clinical and animal studies have shown that tissue injury in SWL, such as hematuria, the formation of diffuse hemorrhage and hematomas, Disintegration of renal calculi in a lithotripter field is the consequence of dynamic fracture of the stone materials caused by 2 fundamental mechanisms, namely stress wave induced tensile and shear failure (spalling, shear and tear) near the surface and at internal crystalline-matrix interfaces of a kidney stone, In clinical SWL a kidney stone may be fragmented into a group of small pieces in a few hundred shocks, which can be observed by fluoroscopic or ultrasound imaging when the edge of the calculus becomes blurred. At this stage how to proceed with SWL treatment thereafter to ensure successful stone comminution with minimal tissue injury is in dispute. Anecdotally there are 2 common but opposite opinions in clinical practice. The first opinion suggests that the output voltage of the lithotripter should be lowered. This is based on the consideration that the original kidney stone has already been broken into small fragments and, therefore, less acoustic energy is needed to reduce them to less than 2 mm for spontaneous discharge. In addition, by decreasing the output voltage of the lithotripter the propensity of tissue injury is decreased. The second opinion is that the output voltage of the lithotripter should be increased. The rationale is that by increasing to a high energy level the total number of shock waves needed for the complete stone comminution is less, thus, possibly decreasing the propensity for tissue injury. To our knowledge these opinions have not been evaluated systematically in In this study we evaluated the effects of 3 treatment strategies on the progressive and overall stone comminution efficiency of SWL using a phantom system that mimics stone disintegration in the renal pelvis. All experiments were performed with a Dornier HM-3 lithotripter. For the first strategy the output voltage of the lithotripter was increased in steps from 18 to 20 to 22 kV after every 500 shocks, aiming to enhance SWL induced cavitation effects in the final stage of treatment. For the second strategy an opposite approach was used with lithotripter output voltage decreasing in steps from 22 to 20 to 18 kV after every 500 shocks. In comparison, for the third strategy a constant output voltage of 20 kV was used to mimic the conventional use of the HM-3 lithotripter in clinic. It was found that, although the total acoustic output energies of the 3 strategies were the same or similar, the first strategy could produce better overall comminution efficiency The experiments in this study were done with an unmodified Dornier HM-3 electrohydraulic shock wave lithotripter, which uses a truncated ellipsoidal reflector with semi-major axis a = 138 mm, semi-minor axis b = 77.5 mm and half focal length c = 114 mm. The lithotripter was operated at an output voltage of 18 kV to 22 kV with a 1 Hz pulse repetition rate. The pressure waveform at the lithotripter focus ( Spherical stone phantoms (diameter 10 mm) were made of BegoStone material with a powder-to-water ratio of 5:1. The acoustic and mechanical properties of BegoStone have been characterized and found to be similar to those of calcium oxalate monohydrate stones. The fragmentation test was performed using a phantom system that mimics stone comminution in the renal pelvis ( Before the experiment each stone phantom was immersed in degassed water for at least 20 minutes until no visible bubbles could be seen coming from it. According to our experience prolonged immersion of stone samples does not change the comminution results significantly. During the experiment the position of the fragments was assessed every 50 shocks using the bipla-nar fluoroscopic imaging system of the HM-3 lithotripter. If necessary, re-positioning was done to align the largest fragment with Three treatment strategies with a total exposure of 1,500 shocks using different combinations of output settings were tested. Stone phantoms were divided into 3 groups with each group subdivided into 4 treatment units to document and quantify the pattern of stone comminution after 300, 500, 1,000 and 1,500 shocks, respectively. The first group was treated with a progressive increase in steps of lithotripter output voltage from 18 to 20 and then to 22 kV after every 500 shocks. In the second group the opposite strategy was used with lithotripter output voltage started at 22 kV and decreased progressively to 20 and then to 18 kV after every 500 shocks. In the third group a constant output voltage of 20 kV was used to mimic the conventional use of the HM-3 lithotripter in clinic.  All 3 strategies produced a progressive comminution of BegoStone phantoms ( In clinical SWL about 2,000 shocks are usually required for the successful comminution of renal calculi. The 2 fundamental mechanisms known to contribute to stone comminution in SWL are stress waves and cavitation. The results of previous studies show that stress waves have an important and often dominant role in initial stone fragmentation when the size of the stone or its residual fragments is larger than half of the compressive wavelength in the stone material. The progressive stone comminution pattern produced by different treatment strategies is also intriguing. Several factors may attribute to this observation. 1) The fracture strength of most renal calculi is not high. Therefore, relatively low pressure (about 30 MPa) is sufficient to initiate stone fragmentation, which is supported by a recent clinical study using a wide focus and low pressure electromagnetic shock wave generator. In comparison, if SWL treatment is started at a higher output voltage, as in the second strategy, the initial fragmentation rate is high but treatment is incomplete. As a result of the high initial fragmentation rate, small fragments accumulate more rapidly and increase the attenuation on ensuing LSWs. In addition, when the size of residual fragments becomes smaller than half of the compressive wavelength in the stone material (about 4.4 mm for BegoStone phantoms), the effectiveness of stress waves is hindered. These factors, compounded by the fact that lithotripter output voltage was gradually decreased in the latter part of treatment, led to dramatically decreased fragmentation efficiency toward the end of treatment with a low overall stone comminution rate. Finally, when evaluating strategies for improving SWL treatment, not only stone comminution, but also the adverse effects of SWL should be considered. Preliminary evidence in animal studies suggests that staged SWL treatment combining low energy shock waves followed by high energy shock waves could decrease the potential for vascular injury. Stone comminution in SWL is dose dependent and the rate of fragmentation varies significantly during the course of treatment depending on the strategies used. Based on