In this study, a magnetic organic liquid called ferrofluid was used to improve the speed and efficiency of the phase disengagement of solvent extraction processes applied to hydrometallurgical systems. The ferrofluid consisted of magnetic nanoparticles (mean diameter of 10.2nm), comprised of magnetite (Fe3O4) and maghemite (γ-Fe2O3), which were coated by oleic acid and dispersed in an organic diluent. The nanoparticles were characterized by applying various methods: transmission electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction, Raman spectroscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, and thermogravimetric and magnetic analysis. The effect of the nanoparticles on the solvent extraction of cobalt sulfate with Cyanex 272 was investigated using ferrofluids at different concentrations (0, 10, 20, and 30g/l of magnetic nanoparticles in commercial aliphatic kerosene Exxsol D80). It was observed that, under the conditions studied, the presence of nanoparticles does not interfere in the efficiency of metal extraction and stripping, and that the time necessary for phase disengagement can be up to five times faster. However, the ferrofluid containing nanoparticles coated solely by oleic acid is not stable when in contact with aqueous solutions at pH⩽2.0. Limited stability restricts the application of the magnetic fluid used in the present study in solvent extraction processes that operate at a pH level beyond 2.Solvent extraction, also known as liquid-liquid extraction, has become an important step in hydrometallurgy for the separation, purification, and concentration of metal ions from an aqueous solution. The method involves a specific chemical reaction between the metal species and a given extractant dissolved in an organic solvent. Different types of extractants exist for the selective purification of industrial liquors and the concentration of non-ferrous metals, such as zinc, nickel, cobalt, copper, uranium, and rare earth metals In general, a solvent extraction process consists of three steps: extraction, scrubbing, and stripping. In the extraction step, the aqueous phase, containing the metal of interest (feed phase), is mixed with the organic phase, containing the extractant dissolved in an organic diluent. The contact between both phases is produced by stirring in order to promote the dispersion of one phase into the other, consequently causing the selective transfer of the metal from the aqueous to the organic phase. The separation of the two liquids normally occurs by gravitational settling. After phase disengagement, the aqueous phase, or raffinate, is treated to recover the remaining metals, either recycled to some point of the process or discarded as waste, while the metal loaded organic phase proceeds to the next step of the solvent extraction circuit. If the selectivity in the extraction step is low, the loaded organic solvent is forwarded to the scrubbing step in order to remove co-extracted impurities. Finally, in the stripping step, the metal is transferred from the loaded organic phase to another aqueous phase, which is free of contaminants and with an aqueous/organic volume ratio so as to obtain a concentrated solution. The organic phase is regenerated and reused in the same solvent extraction circuit, enabling greater economy and less environmental impact, while the aqueous phase proceeds to subsequent operations, such as crystallization or electrowinning, in order to recover the metal of interest with high purity These steps, industrially speaking, normally occur in mixer-settler units. Each mixer-settler consists of two compartments, thus corresponding to a single stage: the first compartment, in which mixing of the aqueous and organic phases takes places, and the second compartment, where phase disengagement occurs To accelerate and increase efficiency between the separation of liquid phases during the process of sedimentation, the use of a magnetic organic solution was proposed A few studies have been published regarding the use of nanoparticles in the solvent extraction process on hydrometallurgical systems. Palyska and Chmielewski Although the few studies published on the subject have asserted that the use of magnetic nanoparticles in solvent extraction processes applied to hydrometallurgical systems promotes higher disengagement speed, the data on the efficiency of extraction processes are still insufficient. In addition, no study has shown the relationship between nanoparticle concentrations in the fluid with process efficiency. Furthermore, the chemical stability of such a fluid, when in contact with aqueous solutions of different acidities, has still not been evaluated in the literature. In this context, the present work aimed to present a detailed characterization of nanoparticles coated by oleic acid and evaluate whether or not different concentrations of such nanoparticles dispersed in the organic liquid influence the extraction and stripping of the metal, and whether or not these have any impact on the separation speed of the two phases. Moreover, this study sought to assess the chemical stability of the magnetic fluid when in contact with varying acidic aqueous solutions by monitoring the contamination of the aqueous phase by iron. Except for the diluent and the extractant, which were of commercial grade, all remaining reagents used in this work were of analytical grade: ferric chloride hexahydrate (FeCl The magnetic nanoparticles were synthesized using the alkaline co-precipitation method The hydrophobic character of the nanoparticles was obtained by coating the magnetic nanoparticles with oleic acid The particles coated by oleic acid were mixed with Exxsol D80 in order to obtain ferrofluids with different concentrations (10, 20, and 30 The magnetic nanoparticles (bare and coated) were characterized using the following methods: Transmission electron microscopy, to analyze the morphology and particle size. The analyses were performed using a Tecnai G2-20 equipment - SuperTwin FEI - 200 X-ray diffraction, to determine the crystalline phases of the materials. The diffractograms were obtained on a Shimadzu 7000 X-ray diffractometer, using a copper anode (CuKα radiation) and graphite crystal monochromator. Analyses were run with scan range 2 theta from 10 to 80, with increments of 0.02 theta and a scanning speed of 2° Raman spectroscopy, to differentiate iron oxide phases, such as magnetite and maghemite. The technique was performed with a Jobin Yvon Horiba LABRAM - HR800 spectrometer, equipped with an He Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), to identify chemical groups of the bare nanoparticles and the functional groups of the coating agent and to confirm the adsorption process. For this analysis, each sample was macerated with potassium bromide and then pressed to obtain a thin and transparent tablet. These tablets were analyzed in a Perkin Elmer infrared spectrophotometer, Spectrum Frontier model, with a transmittance reading of between 4000 and 450 Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), to evaluate the thermal stability of the magnetic particles before and after coating. These analyses were done using a Perkin Elmer STA 6000 machine; the procedure was performed in a nitrogen atmosphere, under the temperatures of 30 Magnetic analysis, to obtain the magnetization saturation value of each material and to confirm the characteristic of superparamagnetism of the particles. The hysteresis curves were obtained using a Vibrating Sample Magnetometer equipment (VSM), Lakeshore model 7404 series, under a magnetic field strength of 11,500 Gauss, at room temperature. The aqueous phase was a cobalt solution ([Co] In a solvent extraction test, 100 Stripping tests were carried out by mechanically stirring the cobalt loaded solvent phase obtained in the extraction tests with 1.0 In a beaker, 20 To evaluate the chemical stability of the ferrofluid compound of nanoparticles coated with oleic acid, 25 The analysis of the micrographs obtained via transmission electron microscopy (TEM) revealed that the synthesized bare nanoparticles have an almost spherical shape, with a distribution size of between 6 and 16 The crystalline structure of the nanoparticles was characterized by X-ray diffraction ( The analysis of the nanoparticles by Raman spectroscopy was performed in order to differentiate the iron oxide phases present in the nanoparticles (magnetite and maghemite). Analyzing the samples under a microscope attached to the equipment, both bare and coated nanoparticles showed areas with distinct colors (brown or black). The black area is most likely related to the predominance of the magnetite phase, while the brown area corresponds to the predominance of the maghemite phase. Raman analyses were performed on each distinct area and in both samples, the results of which are shown in The surface functionalization of the magnetic nanoparticles was confirmed via FTIR ( The thermograms of bare and coated magnetic nanoparticles are shown in The magnetic properties of the nanoparticles were analyzed using a magnetometer at room temperature. The obtained hysteresis curves (see As shown in According to the results reported in The progress of phase disengagement with time for different concentrations of magnetic nanoparticles is shown in A comparison of the evolution of the phase disengagement of a system without nanoparticles and with a concentration of 30 The principle of magnetic separation reported in previous studies claim that the presence of an external magnetic field created by the permanent magnet generates an influence in the magnetic droplets and hence the migration of them towards the magnet; and this leads to a coalescence process, initially drop-drop, and at the end, drop-interface coalescence. As the droplets coalesce, they become bigger and moving faster toward the magnet. Thus, resulting in a rapid phase separation Based on the literature, the presence of the nanoparticles increases the viscosity of the fluid and results in a higher surface tension. Consequently, the immiscibility of the fluids is increased, and thus resulting in an easier and faster separation, even in the absence of a magnetic field The chemical stability of the ferrofluid shown in It is noted that the amount of dissolved iron ( Therefore, it was concluded that the application of this ferrofluid is restricted due to limited pH-stability of oleic acid coating. In fact, the application of nanoparticles coated by oleic acid in the solvent extraction technique is limited to hydrometallurgical systems that operate at a pH beyond 2. Some examples include the extraction and stripping of vanadium with Aliquat 336 Magnetic nanoparticles in the organic phase do not affect efficiency of cobalt extraction and stripping with Cyanex 272, at least in the operating conditions investigated in this study (2 The authors wish to acknowledge the funding agencies of