In China, there are a large number of coal mine gobs have been formed as a result of longwall mining processes. These mine gobs contain an enormous amount of methane storage spaces within the gob formations. The methane storage spaces as well as guide methane drainage via vertical boreholes require quantitative measurements. In this study, physical simulation experiments were conducted for the purpose of obtaining digital images of gobs at various working face advance distances. Then, a Matlab-based digital image processing and analysis program was developed to process the obtained high-definition images, extract the geometrical parameters, and calculate the areas of methane storage spaces within the gobs. The results showed that the heights of the methane storage spaces first increased, and then stabilized as the gob lengths increased. The area sizes of the gobs increased gradually with the lengths, while the methane storage space areas were observed to first increase steadily to a maximum, and then decrease sharply. The main methane storage spaces exhibited a decreasing trend stage as the gob lengths increased. Whereas, the secondary methane storage spaces showed the characteristics of increasing trends. These research findings provide a theoretical foundation for the accurate predictions of both the methane storage capacities and methane drainage efficiency of longwall mining gobs.Coal remains an important global energy resource. For thousands of years coal has been used as a fuel for heat production, and is still a major resource for power generation ( Scholars have conducted many studies on distribution characteristics of the overlying strata in longwall mining. In this study, physical simulation experiments were conducted on a variety of gobs with different advancing distances in order to obtain the necessary digital images. Then, a digital image processing and analysis program was developed using Matlab software for the purpose of processing the obtained images with high-definition, and to extract and calculate the areas of methane storage within the gobs. Once this was achieved, the results were quantitatively analyzed. It is believed that the results of this study will potentially provide specialized guidance for future methane drainage processes in longwall gobs. Recently, methane extraction from gobs have been given much attention. Commercial applications of the methane extracted from gobs have been achieved in both the U.K. and Germany ( Physical simulation experiments have been widely conducted ( In this study, the prototype for the physical simulation experiments was the Jinsheng Coal Mine located in China's Shanxi Province. The main mined coal seam was the Coal Seam Number 3, and the mining depth of the Coal Seam Number 3 was approximately 388 m, with an average dip of zero. Its average mining height was 6.0 m. With consideration give to the experimental device, the simulation length of the model built in the physical simulation experiment was set as 150 cm. Whereas, the actual mining strike length was 108 m. Then, by assuming that the sizes of the three mutually perpendicular directions of the prototype were Based on Eq. In accordance with the similarity principle and dimensional analysis, the constants of the geometric similarity   Following the completion of this study's physical model ( In order to study the quantitative characteristics of the methane storage spaces in a more efficient and accurate way, computerized digital image processing technology and Matlab software were used to process and analyze the gob images with different advancing distances. The procedure used in this study for the extraction of the methane storage space characteristics is illustrated in Images of gobs with different advancing distances were collected from the physical simulation experiments; The collected images were uploaded into the Matlab software and high-definition images were obtained using the enhancement, restoration, and median filtering techniques of the software's digital image processing program; The Matlab software was used to write a program using an OTSU method, and to binarize the high-definition images, which were then converted into grayscale images containing only the luminance information. The luminance value of the methane storage area was set as 255 (all white), and the area outside of it set as 137 (gray); The Matlab software was used to write a program which only retained the methane storage spaces of the binarization images; A corresponding Matlab program was then written to extract the characteristics of the methane storage spaces by combining a loop statement and area calculation. The characteristics which were extracted during this process mainly included the heights of the methane storage spaces; areas of the gobs; areas of the methane storage spaces; and areas of the main and secondary methane storage spaces; The characteristics of the methane storage spaces within the gobs with different lengths were extracted as shown in the collected images by repeating the above procedure.  Based on the distributions of the methane storage spaces in the gobs with different advancing distances (  When a gob is formed in a mining area, the space between the footwall and caved border of the overlying rock strata constitutes the area of a gob. The areas of the methane storage spaces within a gob can be calculated by subtracting the areas which are occupied by rock from the total area of the gob. The methane storage spaces contained both the main methane storage space and the secondary methane storage space.  As the gob lengths increased, the rock strata gradually caved, resulting in the heights of the methane storage spaces displaying increasing trends. However, when the rock strata had caved to a certain extent, only curved spaces existed, and the heights of the methane storage spaces remained stable. The areas of the gobs displayed linear increasing trends as the gob lengths increased. However, it should be noted that the areas of the methane storage spaces within the gobs were observed to first gradually increase to a maximum level, and then the areas of the effective methane storage spaces within the gobs decreased due to the compaction and consolidation of the caved rock. As the gob lengths increased, the staged caving of rock strata compressed the methane storage spaces, resulting in the main methane storage spaces displayed a staged increasing trend. Prior to the caving of the rock strata, the secondary methane storage spaces were the spaces between the mine's working face and caved rock in the gobs near the advancing direction of the working face. Also, the areas of the secondary methane storage spaces displayed linear increasing trends. Then, when the rock strata caved, the areas of the secondary methane storage spaces were observed to remain in a stable state. This research was supported by the