The results of Bond Work index (BWi) tests of five materials with five closing screen size (P1) of 63o 500 µm are documented. These are normalized to eliminate the effect of material present finer than the closing screen sizes and test sample apparent densities. Analysis of normalized test results show, with a correlation factor R2 of 0.9956, that the revolutions required in all the Bond Work index mill tests conducted (29–419 revolutions) corresponds to a specific grinding energy per Bond Mill revolution of 0.0823 kWh/ton for a material corrected to a tapped apparent density of 1 t/m3 and for material present finer than the closing screen size. Conversion of this value to operation of the mill for the Bond Work index test results in a value of 194 ∗ 10−7 kWh/mill revolution.
                  It is demonstrated that the indicated specific grinding energy of the Bond Mill revolution is not a precise value. An exponential function with a perfect correlation is presented relating the final required number of Bond Work index test mill revolutions required with the P1 values for sample materials tested.
                  A perfect correlation with an exponential relation to the evolution of the specific grinding energy with change in closing screen size is presented. This relation is interpreted as a measure of the reduction in grinding efficiency with increase in fineness of grinding.
                  It also shown that there is an exponential relation with a R2 correlation factor of 0.9900 between experimental specific grinding energy of a mono-mineralogical material normalized for <P1 content and apparent density to the root of its VH at a given P1. Most if not all the deviations between the calculated specific grinding energy based on P1 values and the sample Vickers Hardness correlates with the differences between the experimental and corrected mill revolutions applied to compensate for the <P1 fines contents of the test samples.Grinding is one of the largest industrial consumers of energy. Some 4% of the total world’s electrical energy consumption is consumed in the crushing and grinding of mineral ores ( To date the theories of The procedure to apply Bond’s law requires the laboratory determination of a Bond Work index (BWi). This laboratory procedure has been extensively described in detail by The BWi test is a lengthy process and a certain degree of variation in results always occurs due to equipment wear as well as operator and operational errors or variations between operator and operational procedures. Results for a given sample may vary due to errors or fluctuations in: sampling; particle size analysis; determination of the test sample weight; inefficiency of screening of the mill product (especially for grinding <250 µm); losses of mill product fines and recirculated load; effects of mill charge and liner wear; mill liner roughness; etcetera. The test grinding efficiency is also affected by variations in mill charge weight and thus the total grinding surface area available. Variations in degree of sample tapping to determine the weight of sample to be used in the BWi test has a direct proportional influence on the grams per revolution obtained. The weights of mill product fines produced for abrasive materials are also influenced as a result of contamination by iron from the mill charge and liner. To date no rapid method has been developed to predict the energy–size reduction relation of a given material without laboratory testing. A number of different alternative theories of grinding energy to particle size relations have been proposed. Despite the complexity of Bond’s test procedure, most of these are based on the use of his specified test mill and its feed specifications. Simplified or alternative methods proposed to determine a comminution work index have been proposed by a number of investigators. Examples of the diverse nature of some of the recent investigations are those of This investigation reports the results of BWi tests of five materials of diverse physical characteristics conducted with the objective of determining if the use of corrections for variations in sample characteristics could be applied to determine the equivalent energy consumed per Bond Mill revolution. Vickers hardness tests of the samples were also conducted to determine the extent to which the grams of fines produced at a given closing screen size as a function of the materials hardness values. The determination of the specific grinding energy of the Bond Mill in tests where a complete Bond Work index test may not be practical has potential applications in some instance. This is especially so in the cases of tests where fineness of the grinding to be achieved does not permit effective preparation of recirculated material, the presence of materials extremely resistant to grinding such as metals in slags, time requirements, open circuit grinding, etcetera. Comparative grinding testing methods such as proposed by Grinding energy requirements for a given material decrease with abundance of fissures, stress planes or inclusions. As breakage tends to occur at the interface between crystals when particle sizes are greater than the size of crystals composing them and the adherent energy is usually lower than the coherent energy required when the crystal themselves are broken, less energy is required to separate crystals than to break them ( Attempts to determine a unifying relation between energy consumption and particle size reduction for ball mill grinding to any particle size has had limited results. It is proposed that this has been due in part to the fact that many investigations were based on the analysis of BWi test results did not generally included corrections for physical differences in samples tested. The Bond Work index (BWi  Either the effects due to the presence of fissures, stress planes, inter-grain bonding does not significantly affect the G produced, or The rocks tested were not ground to a fineness at which these defects were absent or diminish in abundance. The differences in correlations observed between the three materials tested in his study could be interpreted as to being due to differences in: Abundances in fissures, stress planes, inter-grain bonding, and/or Grain size distribution of minerals present in samples, and/or Physical characteristics of the grains constituting the samples tested. It is interpreted that these differences in correlations of different materials might be attributed to variations between their physical characteristics, of which it was anticipated that the materials elasticity as indicated by its hardness is a potential factor. To negate effects in BWi tests due to fissures, stress planes and grain bonding effects in samples, five samples locally available were selected as being relatively free of these mechanical weaknesses. They consisted of large, individual crystals of calcite, labradorite, magnesite and quartz. These provided a range of compositions, differences in crystallographic cleavages, and hardness’s. A sample of plate glass was also selected as being an example of a homogenous material free of inclusions. The samples were prepared by an initial washing to remove any adhering particles, dried and then crushed to <25 mm. They were then hand sorted to remove any contaminants, and crushed to meet Bond’s mill feed specifications. The samples were subsequently divided into representative fractions using a Jones riffle splitter with 10 mm channels to minimize any sampling error. Tests were conducted as per the procedure described by Blanks for the determination of the sample materials Vickers hardness were prepared with 2.5 to 3.15 mm particles mounted in epoxy by casting in 30 mm wide, 30 mm thick, plastic cups. To prepare the samples for polishing the castings were mounted in a Buehler Isomet low speed diamond and saw cut into 20 mm thick disks with the top parallel to the bottom. This procedure ensured that no sample heating occurred and that the test surface had a minimum of irregularities. The cut surfaces were polished using progressively fine grits finishing with a 0.1 µm diamond grinding media. The VH values of the sample materials were determined from the average of 50 measurements per test material according to the ASTM E384 procedure. The physical characteristics determined for the test sample materials based on their sieve analysis ( Initial BWi test results and calculated values are presented in The grinding actions within a ball mill consist of crushing due to the impact of the mill charge balls on sample grains and their shearing due to their attrition by the mill balls and other mineral particles. The VH of these samples is indicative of their elasticity and as such, resistance to crushing, chipping and abrasion while the presence of cleavage planes represents planes of weakness along which shearing or chipping and abrasion may be especially effective. As such, it was anticipated that the quartz and glass samples should have higher resistances to crushing and shearing, magnesite and calcite samples should have lower resistances to these two forces and that the labradorite sample intermediate characteristics. The results of the corrections of G to G The relation between the specific grinding energy (W The correction of the 0.088944 kWh/t revolution value for the average bulk density of the samples tested (1.62 g/cm The variation in results reported by Analysis of the data found that the variations of W As reported by Eq. The variation between experimental specific grinding energy required and calculated values ( The results indicated in this investigation are based on BWi tests of samples consisting of only one component and composed of totally liberated grains. The use of VH values for determining the specific grinding energy of a material composed of more than one component with distinct VH values requires investigations. Investigations such as those of Although it has been shown that the VH of mono-mineralogical, liberated particles is a major factor determining their BWi, there are significant differences between the G  Line 548 Other established tests for measuring the strength and elastic properties of ores such as unconfined compression testing, single impact load tests, etc. have been developed and attempts made to relate values obtained to their specific grinding energy. To date the relation between unconfined compression testing and ores BWi has had mixed results with studies such as that of Results of BWi tests for five mono-mineralogical samples of diverse crystallographic nature and VH for P A lineal equation is obtained relating specific grinding energy and required corrected Bond Mill revolutions (Rev It is also shown that the VH of a sample material is a major factor in controlling the grams/revolution produced at a given P