The high intensity of the electric field of a plate-type electrostatic separator depends on the shape, size and relative position of the electrodes. An extended zone of quasi-uniform intense electric field may contribute to a significant improvement of the eletrostatic separation efficiency. In this paper, the analysis of the electric field was carried out using Prof. Levin's “Charge Simulation Program”, which is based on the boundary element method and is provided with advanced pre- and post-processing capabilites. Several electric field configurations were studied. The circular profile tubular high-voltage (“active”) electrode was shown to generate an intense electric field on only 2/3 of the grounded (“passive”) electrode. Two cylindrical “active” electrodes might improve the situation. By using an ellipse profile tubular “active” electrode the resulted electric field was more uniform and the separation efficiency could be expected to increase. A good agreement was found between the theoretical predictions and the results of a simple experiment. A laboratory plate-type electrostatic separator was built in conformity with the design suggested by the results of this work.Mineral beneficiation and seed conditioning are the two main fields of industry application of plate-type electrostatic separators The aim of the paper is to show that the boundary element method (BEM) of field analysis can be successfully employed for the optimization of the electrode configuration. The results of the numerical computations were confirmed by a simple experiment and served as the basis for the design of a laboratory plate-type electrostatic separator. These separators typically consist of an inclined metallic plate, connected to the ground, and a high-voltage electrode ( The granular material to be separated is fed onto the surface of the inclined plate. The insulating particles slide down the plate electrode without being affected by the electric field, as the amount of charge acquired by triboelectric effect is negligible. The behavior of the non-insulating particles is different: they charge by conductive induction in contact with the ground plate and are attracted to the high-voltage electrode. For such a spherical particle, the amount of charge is proportional to the local field strength As the field at the surface of the plate is non-uniform, the charge The force Of the various numerical methods available for integrating the Laplace equation that describes the electric field in a plate-type electrostatic separator The S-shaped plate electrode was approximated by segments of line and arcs of circle ( The computations were carried out for two types of high-voltage electrodes: circular-profile and ellipse-profile cylinders. The radius of the circular was upper: median: lower: The ellipse profile of the second type of electrode was characterized by the semi axes upper: median: lower: In a second group of computations, the center of the ellipse was located at The equipotential and flux lines were plotted for different positions of the electrode axis ( The aspect of the equipotential and flux lines for various positions of the electrode can be examined in The plots in The association of two circular cylinders would improve the electric field distribution, but positioning several high-voltage electrodes within a quite limited volume is very cumbersome. This is why manufacturers of industrial separators prefer to use only one non-circular cylinder as high-voltage electrode. Its shape is chosen more-or-less empirically and its position is often decided by the “flair” of the operator. The kind of equipotential and flux line plots shown in By rotating the electrode at an angle The design principles derived from the analysis of the electric field in the various electrode configurations were employed for manufacturing the prototype of a laboratory plate-type electrostatic separator A simple experiment, thoroughly described in Ref. The voltage applied to the electrode system was progressively increased at a pace of 1 The boundary element method was successfully employed for the analysis of the electric field of a plate-type electrostatic separator. It enabled the study of various factors which affect the distribution of the electric field in these electrostatic devices. By changing the shape and the size of the high-voltage electrode, and by modifying its position with respect to the inclined grounded plate, the electric field can be designed to meet the requirements of any specific application. The next step towards a numerical procedure for the optimization of the electrode system of these installations would be to use the field analysis results for the simulation of the electrostatic separation process, by computing particle charge and trajectory under various operating conditions. Fruitful discussions with Prof. P.L. Levin on the use of the “Charge Simulation Program” are acknowledged.