The influence of moisture stress on microbial communities in decomposing coniferous litters was investigated using phospholipid fatty acid (PLFA) profiling. Studies were carried out in German and Greek forest plots under contrasting climatic conditions from the late summer to the early winter periods. Litterbags containing spruce (Germany) or pine (Greece) needles were subjected to different irrigation treatments over 4 months. The influences of climate and litter type on microbial community structure were larger than those imposed by irrigation or moisture stress treatments. In the German spruce litter, the PLFA signatures indicated that there was initially a larger bacterial than fungal biomass and both components decreased with time. Concentrations of individual PLFA, proportions of PLFA subgroups and principal component (PC) scores showed that, apart from sample date, mesh size was more important than irrigation treatment in determining microbial community structure; though treatment effects were less apparent in the third (winter) sample. Pine litter in the Greek site, with a Mediterranean climate, had a larger fungal than bacterial biomass. Little effect of treatment on individual PLFA concentrations or PC scores was measured, though both fungal and bacterial communities increased significantly with regular irrigation in the third (winter) sample. Effects of mesh size in the German spruce litter were related to differences in the abundance of microarthropods. This effect was absent from the Greek pine litter where there was a relatively low abundance of fauna. The final spruce litter sample, taken in winter, exhibited very different PC scores from other samples, suggesting marked changes in the microbial community in response to snow melt. Certain long chain fatty acids associated with eukaryotes were only found on this occasion. This study has shown that structure of bacterial communities associated with decomposing conifer litters is highly sensitive to changes in environmental conditions. There was, however, little indication that these differences in biota were functionally important for the initial phases of plant litter decomposition.Litter decomposition in forest soils is mainly carried out by microorganisms (particularly fungi), but many studies have demonstrated the importance of soil fauna on the composition and activities of these microbial communities ( Much of the information on the succession of soil fauna communities has been obtained using litterbags ( The present study was part of an extensive investigation (the GLOBIS project) into the effects of drought stress on the diversity and functioning of soil organism communities involved in the decomposition of conifer needles in boreal, temperate and Mediterranean forests. Litter moisture on the forest floor was experimentally manipulated and decomposition rates of needles in litter bags related to changes in carbohydrate and lignin constituents, soil fauna diversity, and microbial communities. This paper describes changes in the phospholipid (PLFA) profiles of bacterial communities in decomposing conifer litters in German and Greek forest sites and the modifying effects of watering treatments on seasonal moisture conditions in the enclosed and unenclosed litters. In order to define fauna as a treatment effect, litterbags were prepared with or without microarthropod populations before placement in the field rather than relying on the rather variable processes of natural colonization. The German site was located in a forest stand of 46–54-year-old spruce trees ( The Greek site was located at Taxiarchis, Chaldiki, 64 The same litter handling procedures were followed in both sites. A few days prior to starting the experiments, bulk collections of spruce (Germany) and pine (Greece) needles were made from the surface litter layer in the field sites and placed in plastic bags. The material was sorted in the laboratory to remove twigs, pine cones, moss and seedlings. The litter was defaunated by placing it in a modified Kempson extractor ( Litter samples were freeze-dried and sent to the Exeter laboratory. The litter samples were ground using a ball mill (Rescht MM2000, Glen Creston, Stanmore) to a particle size of less than 10 Fatty acids were designated in terms of total number of carbon atoms, with the number of double bonds given after a colon. The position of the double bond is defined by the symbol Bacterial biomass was estimated from the summed concentrations of the following PLFAs: PLFA data were analysed using principal component analysis (PCA). This was performed on log The two field sites in Germany and Greece had different climate regimes with lower mean temperatures, and less temperature variation, in Germany than in Greece for most of the experimental period. Air temperatures decreased during the course of the experiments in both sites. This was most marked in the German site where the mean temperatures ranged between 12 and 18°C at the start of the experiment then fell to below 0°C in mid November. The Greek site initially showed wide temperature variation in September, between about 9 and 27°C, but both the range and mean temperatures decreased over the winter period. The minimum temperatures at the Greek site rarely fell below freezing but no detailed climate data were available from this site during late December and early January. The moisture contents of pine and spruce litters collected at the onset of the experiments were similar ( Spruce and pine litter collected from local sites had similar initial profiles of the dominant PLFAs 16:0, 18:2 Concentrations of total bacterial and fungal PLFAs (in nmol g Concentrations of some individual PLFAs selected as biomarkers ( Molar percentage PLFA concentrations indicative of Gram-positive bacteria were lower than those indicative of Gram-negative bacteria during the second sample of the spruce litter study, having been roughly equal during the first sampling ( PLFA data from both sites were subjected to principal component analysis (PCA). PC1 and PC2 had eigenvectors of 12.20 and 7.13 and accounted for 33.9 and 19.8% of the total variation, respectively. PC scores on these axes were well separated on the basis of site and sample date ( Details of responses by soil fauna to the treatments will be published elsewhere (A. Taylor, unpublished data). The following overview is given so that fauna effects can be related to microbial communities in the litter bags. The spruce litter bags initially contained larger numbers of nematodes with mean densities of 654 ind. g litter This study has illustrated the sensitivity of microbial communities associated with the early stages of conifer litter decomposition to changing microclimatic conditions and the effects of soil fauna on their composition in litter bags. As a consequence of the short duration of these experiments, and the low number of sampling periods, these results constitute a series of ‘snapshots’ showing how combinations of these environmental variables affected the structure of microbial communities, rather than the time course of microbial succession in litter. However, because climatic conditions were different for each sampling occasion the PC analysis of PLFA profiles showed that time, and site, were the main effects on microbial communities in the litters. The interaction of the watering and moisture-stress treatments with prevailing climatic conditions also affected the concentrations of certain PLFAs indicating responses by the microbial community to microclimatic conditions in the litters. There were two main effects of site/litter type and sample date relating to microclimate and faunal communities. There were major differences between sites in climate and litter moisture that affected the composition of the microbial communities and treatment responses. The moisture content of the undisturbed litters was generally lower for pine than spruce, reflecting the warmer and drier climate in the Greek site, and may account for the dominance of fungi in the pine litter. The low concentrations of bacterial PLFAs in the initial and second pine litters could also explain of the lack of treatment effect on PC scores in these samples. The microbial community in German spruce litter became more bacterially dominated during the experiment due to a progressive decrease in fungal PLFA concentrations over the three sampling occasions. Bacterial community structure also changed in the spruce litter. Although concentrations of both Gram-positive and Gram-negative markers decreased in the second sample, the proportion of Gram-negative markers increased. The third spruce litter sample showed a marked separation from the others on the PCA plot. The temperature increased from −5 to 5°C immediately prior to this sampling, and it is probable that melting snow resulted in a flush of nutrients, as well as changes in microclimate. The fact that certain longer chain fatty acids, including some biomarkers for eukaryotic organisms such as 20:4 and 16:0 dioic ( In the third set of pine samples, moisture contents in litterbags increased to amounts comparable to those of the third spruce sample, as did both bacterial and fungal PLFA concentrations. There was, however, an increased sensitivity of some PLFAs to the drought treatment (and mesh size) in this sample. These effects were marked for 18:1 The PCA scores showed a significant effect of mesh size on PLFA profiles in spruce litter but not in the pine litter. For spruce these differences could be related to the defaunation and refaunation treatments of the litter whereas faunal effects were less evident in pine litter because of comparatively low animal population densities. Fungal PLFA concentrations were lower in refaunated spruce litter whereas terminally branched and cyclopropyl PLFAs were present at higher concentrations in defaunated litter. This resulted in a reduction in the fungal-to-bacterial PLFA ratio with a higher proportion of Gram-negative marker PLFA in coarse-mesh litter. In pine litter, only microeukaryotic markers were affected by mesh size and microclimate appeared more important than biotic interactions in determining the structure of microbial communities. In the second spruce sample the higher moisture content in coarse-mesh than fine-mesh bags complicated the interpretation of these treatments simply in terms of fauna effects. Nonetheless, such shifts in the composition of microbial biomass in litter from fungal to bacterial dominance, caused by microarthopod feeding activies and transport of inocula, are well established ( Mean mass losses from the litterbags were about 20% from spruce and 40% from pine over a period of 17 weeks in the field with no significant treatment effects. Furthermore, concentrations of litter constituents (phenylpropanoids and carbohydrates) indicated negligible transformation of structural polysaccharides or lignin during the experiment (J.M. Anderson, S.C. Wilkinson, P.R. Splatt, unpublished data). Hence there was no evidence that the observed differences in microbial community structure were functionally important for decomposition processes during this period. Mass losses during the initial phase of decomposition in temperate systems are often dominated by leaching of water-soluble materials and the growth of bacteria and microfungi exploiting these labile resources ( In conclusion, the biomass and composition of microbial communities in the spruce and pine litters were largely determined by climatic conditions and litter type but those in spruce litter showed some sensitivity to the superimposed drought treatments. In the pine litter these treatments only became apparent at the third sampling when conditions were relatively moist. Differences in faunal populations between spruce litter treatments, initially by refaunation and subsequently as a consequence of litterbag mesh size, had marked effects on microbial communities. The effects of litterbag enclosure were consistent throughout the experiment. These factors will need to be taken into account when experiments are designed. PCA plots also demonstrated the speed and sensitivity with which the microbial communities respond to changes in local conditions, though these changes had no apparent, direct functional consequences for litter decomposition. This research was funded by the European Commission. We are grateful to Peter Splatt and Peter Cox for assistance with chemical analyses.