The Al-Mg-MnO2 composite is a MnO2 particulate reinforced Al metal matrix composite. Its substantial ductility makes it promising composite for study. The Al-3Mg-MnO2 and Al-8Mg-MnO2 composites were synthesized by stirring 3, 5, and 8 wt% of MnO2 particulates in Al-3Mg melt and Al-8Mg melt to study their mechanical properties. Their microstructure shows intermetallic precipitates of Al, Mg, and Mn at dendrites, grain boundaries and within the grains. In both sets of composites, the hardness, and the yield strength increases with increasing MnO2 content in the cast and forged composites. Both the groups of composites show an increase in tensile strength with increasing particle content from 3 to 5 wt%, a further increase in particle content to 8 wt%, leads to an abrupt decrease in tensile strength in both the group of composites. The percentage elongations in forged composites are lower than those in cast composites, but this decrease is more prominent in Al-8Mg-MnO2 composites in comparison to Al-3Mg-MnO2 composites. The J
                     
                        IC
                      value decreases as the percentage of MnO2 particles increases in Al-3Mg-MnO2 and Al-8Mg-MnO2 composites. Forging increases J
                     
                        IC
                      values in both the class of composites in comparison to their cast counterparts due to work hardening and healing of pores. Crack growth toughness also decreases as the MnO2 particle content increases in Al-3Mg-MnO2 and Al-8Mg-MnO2 composites. Forged Al-3Mg-MnO2 shows decreased T/E ratio in comparison to their cast counterparts except at 8wt%. However, forged Al-8Mg-MnO2 shows improved T/E at 3wt% and a drop at 5wt% and 8wt% MnO2. Variation of crack growth toughness between cast and forged Al-8Mg-MnO2 is minimal in comparison to that between cast and forged Al-3Mg-MnO2 composites.Metal Matrix Composites (MMCs) are emerging as an attractive class of materials that could synergize the properties of their constituents to create a unique combination, not available in the constituents. Aluminium alloy based composites are very appealing on account of their higher elastic modulus and strength to weight ratio, which makes them demanding in lightweight components of automobiles and aircraft applications [ Al-Mg alloy does not show sensitization at 3wt% Mg. Therefore, in the present study, the mechanical properties of composites synthesized by dispersing 3, 5, and 8wt% MnO The chemical analysis of the commercially pure aluminium and magnesium ingot has been carried by using a vacuum spark emission spectrometer (Thermo Jarrell Ash, Atom Comp 181, Franklin, USA). Compositions of Al and Mg are shown in In this method, Al was melted in resistance furnace, and magnesium pieces were added into molten aluminium at 800 °C. Continuous stirring at 700 rpm was maintained during the addition of preheated MnO The The optical microstructure of a typical as-cast A3/5 composite is shown in Clusters of MnO The dark portions at higher magnification in Both sets of composites, Al-8Mg-MnO The X-ray diffraction pattern indexing of the extracted particles obtained after leaching the composite Al-3Mg-MnO The Brinell hardness of cast and forged Al-3Mg-MnO The Al-3Mg-MnO The fractograph of specimens used for the tensile test is shown in The hardness of Al-3Mg-MnO The hardness of particulate composites depends on many factors such as hardness of reinforcement, the extent of grain refinement, impeding of dislocation, and how effectively load is being transferred from matrix to reinforcement [ The variations of yield strength, tensile strength, and percentage elongation of Al-3Mg-MnO Enhanced particle content increases nuclei sites for solidification and results in smaller grain sizes, as evident in The presence of fine reinforcement causes Orowan strengthening and refines gain size. It has strengthening effect in particulate metal matrix composite. The reinforcement particles always have a mismatch of elastic and coefficient of thermal expansion with the matrix, and it enhances the strength of the composite [ This adverse effect may be due to enhanced porosity ( The matrix strength, strain hardening capacity, reinforcement volume fraction, shape, size, and spatial distribution are important parameters that affect the ductility of the composite [ Smaller grains have more boundaries than larger grains; therefore, they create more hurdles in the path of dislocation movement than the large grains. This obstruction leads to a decrease in ductility. Forging increases work hardening, reduces pores, and restricts the movement of dislocation. The forged composite shows much lower ductility than the cast composites. Forging has reduced the percentage elongation of A3/3 composite by 16.89%. However, forged A3/5 composite shows meagre reduction of 2.93%. It gives the sense that A3/5 composite has more percentage elongation in comparison to forged A3/3 composite. Forged A3/8 composite shows a reduction of percentage elongation by 36.78% in comparison to its cast counterpart. The work hardening in forged A3/3 is more than forged A3/5 composite because the porosity content is more at higher particle content. The work hardening in forged A3/8 composite is least in comparison to A3/3 and A3/5 composites. Nevertheless, it is not showing the highest % elongation because the sample was broken due to porosity before it could yield more ductility. Unhealed pores had a detrimental effect at this stage and led to a quick fracture of the sample. Due to this reason, after forging, the % elongation reduction in A3/5 composite is less than the A3/8 composite. The percentage elongation of Al-8Mg-MnO The J-R curves of as-cast and forged Al-3Mg-MnO The initiation of fracture does not take place simultaneously across the entire crack front, an offset of 0.2 mm is taken to draw the blunting line, and its intersection with the The Crack growth toughness is decreasing as the MnO A comparison of mechanical properties of Al-3Mg-MnO The microstructure of both sets of composites shows intermetallic precipitates containing Al, Mg, and Mn at dendrite boundaries and within grains. Hardness increases with increasing MnO The yield strength increases linearly with increasing MnO The tensile strength of Al-3Mg-MnO Both the set of composites show a linear decrease in % elongation as the MnO The Crack growth toughness decreases as the MnO Vikas Narain: Conceived and designed the experiments; Performed the experiments; Analyzed and interpreted the data; Wrote the paper. Subrata Ray: Conceived and designed the experiments; Contributed reagents, materials, analysis tools or data. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The authors declare no conflict of interest. No additional information is available for this paper.