Pervious concrete can purify water, mitigate storm water runoff and reduce the urban heat island effect due to its larger porosity. However, its highly porous inner structure causes a lower compressive strength in comparison with normal concrete. Therefore it is vital to accurately predict the two basic parameters: permeability coefficient (PC) and uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) before field application to reduce time and cost of a construction project. As traditional mathematical models cannot model the highly nonlinear relationships between PC (or UCS) and its constituents, this study addresses this problem by applying a hybrid artificial intelligence model: multi-output least squares support vector regression (MOLSSVR). This model can also improve the prediction accuracy by utilizing the relationship between the two outputs: PC and UCS. In addition, the hyperparameters of MOLSSVR are tuned by a beetle-antennae search (BAS) algorithm which is modified by incorporating self-adaptive inertia weight and Levy flight. To train the proposed model, a large number of pervious concrete samples with different mixture proportions were prepared in laboratory. The results show that the searching efficiency of the modified BAS is significantly higher than that of BAS. The proposed hybrid model achieves better prediction accuracy than other models in the literature. This method can be used to address other multi-output problems in civil engineering.The natural pervious ground is being transformed into impervious land surfaces by large-scale construction of traditional impervious pavements To address such environmental problems, researchers and planners are focusing on constructing pavement systems using pervious concrete due to its economical, structural and environmental benefits The mechanical properties such as UCS of pervious concrete are of vital importance as the durability and design thickness of the pavement layer are dependent on UCS. Another important property of pervious concrete is the permeability coefficient (PC) as it signifies the capacity of pervious concrete to drain the ponding water from the concrete surface Linear regression methods are commonly used to predict UCS and PC of pervious concrete. The general form of a linear regression model is To address this problem, artificial intelligence (AI) tools have been increasingly applied in computer-aided cementitious materials design Among many AI methods, support vector regression (SVR) has been extensively applied for predicting concrete properties such as unconfined compressive strength (UCS) The hyperparameters of a machine learning model were usually tuned using grid search method This study makes several contributions to the literature as follows: Ninety concrete samples with different mixture proportions are prepared to study the effects of water-to-cement ratio, aggregate to cement ratio and aggregate size on UCS and PC of pervious concrete. The laboratory database is then used to develop AI models for UCS and PC prediction; An MOLSSVR model is used to improve the prediction accuracy of UCS and PC of pervious concrete. The hyperparameters of this model is tuned using BAS algorithm; Self-adaptive inertia weight and Levy flight are introduced to avoid BAS being trapped into local optima by changing the beetle’s step size dynamically according to its fitness value, which improves the searching efficiency of BAS obviously. The chemical composition of the Portland cement used in this study is tabulated in  To prepare samples of pervious concrete, firstly, fresh concrete was poured into steel moulds to vibrate on a vibration table for 1 min. Afterwards, the samples were pressed under a pressure of 2.0 MPa for 3 min using a press machine. Finally, the specimens were cured in air at relative humidity of 95% ± 5% and temperature of 20 ± 1℃. After curing for 28 days, the PC and UCS values were tested as per Chinese Technical Specifications for Pervious Concrete Pavement (CJJ/T 135–2009) This algorithm is briefly iterated as follows. Assume we have the following dataset: T= The following performance measures are applied to assess the predictive performance of the proposed model. Root-mean-square error (RMSE) RMSE measures the difference between predicted and observed values using the following function Correlation coefficient (  Several methods for validating the regression model have been used such as simple substitution method This study applied the radial basis function (RBF) as the kernel function for SVR: The hyperparameters are tuned on the training dataset, including 70% of the instances as per the recommendations of previous literature The hyperparameters of MOLSSVR are tuned using grid search method in the previous literature BAS is a recently proposed The searching behavior of the beetle can be defined as follows: The detecting behavior of the beetle is described by: In the traditional BAS algorithm, the step size of a beetle is fixed or decreases with each iteration. This simple step size adjustment strategy has some drawbacks. If the randomly selected initial location of the beetle is far from the global optimum, and the step size is set very small, the algorithm will converge slowly or can be trapped into a local optimum. If the position of the beetle is initialized close to the global optimum, and a large step size is set, the global optimum may be skipped, and the results may oscillate. Therefore, the BAS algorithm is improved in this study by introducing Levy flight and self-inertia weight. The modified BAS (MBAS) has the following capability: 1) to adjust the step size quickly based on the current fitness value to reduce oscillation using self-adaptive weight; 2) to randomly increase the step size when BAS is trapped into a local optimum using Levy flight. (1) Levy flight In the traditional BAS algorithm, the step size of a beetle is fixed or decreases with each iteration. The BAS algorithm can be easily trapped in a local optimum. To solve the issue, this study has introduced Levy flight to adjust the step size of BAS. Levy flight has been used in many optimization algorithms and the results are promising In the implementation, when the BAS algorithm is trapped into a local optimum, the following equation is triggered to enlarge the step size of the beetle: The Levy flight is triggered when the difference between the adjacent two fitness values ( (2) Self-adaptive inertia weight The self-adaptive inertia weight is implemented using a monotonically decreasing function: where In the training set, the hyperparameters of the proposed model are selected by 10-fold CV and MBAS. The predictive performance of the model with optimum hyperparameters is then evaluated on the testing dataset. The whole procedure of the implementation of the proposed hybrid system is shown in As stated before, three hyperparameters in MOLSSVR need to be tuned: The results of the laboratory experiments are shown in To assess the performance of the proposed MBAS model, eleven benchmark functions are employed, including 6 uni-modal ones and 5 multimodal ones Box plots ( It can be seen from To verify the effectiveness of MBAS tuning, the performance of the MBAS-MOLSSVR (on the test set) is also compared with BAS-MOLSSVR in the previous literature The predictive performances of the models are evaluated using R and RMSE as shown in An additional dataset is introduced to validate the generalization ability of the multi-output model, i.e.: the model should utilize the relationship between any related properties of concrete, not just the compressive strength and permeability of pervious concrete. This database including 755 different mixes of manufactured sand concrete is collected from 41 experimental studies to train and test the model The performance of the MBAS-MOLSSVR in predicting the UCS and STS is demonstrated using a scatter plot (see From This study developed a hybrid intelligent model by incorporating MBAS with MOLSSVR in order to improve accuracy in predicting PC and UCS of pervious concrete. The recently proposed The MBAS-MOLSSVR achieves higher PC and UCS prediction accuracy in comparison with BAS-MOLSSVR (indicating MBAS can find better hyperparameters of MOLSSVR), and the independent BAS-SVR (indicating the relationships between PC and UCS are utilized), as well as baseline models. The MBAS is developed in this study to tune hyperparameters of MOLSSVR with an RBF kernel. However, this improved  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The work is supported by 