The dissolution kinetics of natural quartz powders in strong caustic-carbonate solutions and synthetic Bayer liquor was investigated using a gas-fired digestion apparatus at 250 °C for up to 20 min. In caustic-carbonate solutions, a large number of etch pits formed with reaction time and contributed to the dramatic increase in B.E.T specific surface area. The surface roughness (ratio of B.E.T. area to geometric surface area) increased from ~280 to over 2000. In synthetic liquor, fewer etch pits formed because of the coating effect of sodalite formed on the surface. The dissolution rate in both caustic-carbonate solutions and liquor is proportional to the geometric surface area and not the B.E.T. area. The geometric area normalised rate in liquor is about one-fourth the rate in the caustic-carbonate solutions due to the coating of sodalite. The dissolution process in both cases, including the dissolution of fine quartz (<3 μm) in liquor, is better described by a shrinking sphere model than the phenomenological model used previously in the literature.The Bayer process is the principal method for producing alumina from bauxite. In this process, alumina-rich minerals in bauxite are digested into hot caustic solution. Insoluble components are separated from the liquor and gibbsite (Al(OH) For ores containing boehmite and diaspore, digestion temperatures are often over 250 °C ( With increasing demand for alumina and diminishing reserves of high-grade bauxite, processing of low-grade bauxite with high reactive silica becomes inevitable. The study of quartz dissolution kinetics (and consequent soda loss) during high temperature bauxite digestion is important in the evaluation of new and existing bauxites, especially for the accurate prediction of soda losses for proposed digestion conditions. Numerous geologically based studies of quartz dissolution have been conducted because of its significance to mineralisation and weathering ( The kinetics of quartz dissolution directly relevant to the Bayer process was studied by Recently, Other authors investigated the influence of surface areas on quartz dissolution, but in deionised water ( In this paper, we report a study of the effect of surface area on natural quartz dissolution in strong caustic solutions and synthetic Bayer liquor under extreme conditions typical of the Bayer process. The particle size distributions that have been chosen are representative of liberated quartz particles from bauxite (which range from 10s to several hundred microns) and to a fine fraction that may occur naturally or through the action of bauxite milling prior to digestion. Natural quartz used for this work was supplied by Cook Industrial Minerals of Western Australia. It was wet screened to different size fractions. Most experiments used a mean sieve size 231 μm quartz (standard quartz, D(0.5) Specific surface areas of the quartz were measured by nitrogen adsorption via the B.E.T. method (TriStar Surface area and porosity analyser, Micromeritics). The size distributions of the quartz were determined using a Malvern Mastersizer (model 2000) with sodium hexametaphosphate as dispersant. All the fractions showed a normal distribution. The true density of the quartz (2.696 The morphology of the quartz before (and after) dissolution was examined using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (JEOL, JSM-5800LV). Apart from some small pits and cracks, a reasonably smooth surface was observed for all starting particles. A typical microphotograph of the quartz is shown in The purity of the quartz within each fraction was analysed by XRF (Art Philips PW2404) and was higher than 99.5%. XRD (Phillips X'PERT) examination found that quartz was the only phase detected. Two types of solutions relevant to the Bayer process were used for this study: caustic-carbonate solutions and synthetic Bayer liquor. Caustic-carbonate solutions were prepared from AR grade chemicals. Synthetic Bayer liquor (hereafter called Bayer liquor) was prepared from a commercial caustic aluminate concentrate (Coogee Chemicals, WA). The concentrate was adjusted to the appropriate aluminium, caustic and silica concentrations using gibbsite (C31, Alcoa Chemicals), AR grade silicic acid, sodium hydroxide and carbonate. All supplemental materials were directly added to, and dissolved in, the reactor according to pre-determined amounts. The quartz was charged at 30 g/L and dissolved in an Inconel bomb (250 mL in volume) using a gas-fired reactor system. The sealed bomb was rotated at ~ Two dissolution temperatures (250 °C and 175 °C) were investigated. These temperatures were chosen because they are representative (respectively) of high temperature bauxite (boehmitic) processing and a low temperature bauxite (gibbsitic) process used by a particular refinery where quartz attack may be significant. As the reactor is not isothermal, the amount of quartz dissolved during heating to the thermostatic temperatures (either 250 °C or 175 °C) was pre-determined and subtracted from the total mass dissolved. Reported dissolutions are thus only those measured during the holding period (up to 20 min, typical in the industry) at the stated temperature. All exit slurries were pressure filtered using a 0.45 μm membrane filter. The residue cakes were washed three times using aliquots of deionised water to ~ The amount of quartz dissolved in caustic-carbonate solutions was determined gravimetrically from the residue. However, this was not possible in synthetic liquor because part of the dissolved quartz forms a sodalite precipitate leading to a mixed phase residue. To determine the amount of quartz dissolved in this case, the residues were first analysed by XRF to obtain the total silica in the residues. An accurately weighed ~ Some of the residues were examined by XRD and SEM for phase and morphological information, respectively. They were also analysed for surface areas and particle size distribution. Four quartz powders of distinct size fractions from 75 to 335 μm (   The same quartz fractions were then digested in a more concentrated caustic-carbonate solution (starting NaOH Averaged reaction rates based on the initial geometric surface areas for the dissolution in both the low and the high caustic-carbonate solutions were calculated as (2.49 Quartz with a mean size (231 μm) was dissolved in a caustic-carbonate solution (starting NaOH Specific surface area increases with reaction time ( The change of morphology of the reacted quartz can be characterised by the surface roughness factor (λ) ( The effect of aluminate (Al(OH) Dissolution of quartz in Bayer liquor is complicated by the formation/deposition of sodalite on the quartz surface. A typical morphology of a reacted quartz particle is shown in  The effect of sodalite formation and the change in surface area with time was studied by dissolving large quartz particles (231 μm) in Bayer liquor. Particle size distributions of the residues were examined and found to be bimodal. A typical distribution of a residue reacted at 250 °C for 5 min is shown in The surface areas of the acid-washed residues were respectively measured by the B.E.T. method and the Malvern method. The surface roughness factor was calculated and is shown in The impact of sodalite coating on the dissolution can be further supported by the geometric surface area normalised rate ( The results of quartz dissolution show that the rate increases with geometric surface area and caustic concentration. Quartz dissolution has been shown previously to be chemically controlled ( The shrinking sphere model can be compared to the widely used Oku–Yamada model ( quantity of quartz in suspension at time time (min) NaOH concentration (g/L) absolute temperature (K). Despite the deficiencies of the Oku–Yamada expression, it has found widespread acceptance and is often accurate in predicting quartz dissolution under refinery conditions. It is probable that this comes about because the size (or surface area) distribution of quartz in the bauxite used in its development is similar to that which occurs in many other bauxites. By assuming that For given conditions of temperature and caustic concentration, Eq. Comparison of the shrinking sphere model and the Oku–Yamada model in describing the quartz dissolution process was assessed using the kinetic data acquired under three representative conditions: the dissolution of quartz (231 μm) in caustic-carbonate solution at 250 °C the dissolution of quartz (231 μm) in Bayer liquor at 250 °C and the dissolution of fine quartz (<  The above mentioned data were reprocessed using the shrinking sphere model (Eq. The agreement of the shrinking sphere model with the dissolution kinetics of the quartz in synthetic liquor is significant, meaning that where surface areas are difficult or inconvenient to measure, the modelling can still reliably predict the reaction rate. The slope of the regression line gives a rate constant of 1.60 Unlike the Oku–Yamada model, the shrinking sphere model fits the dissolution rate of the fine quartz well, giving a rate constant of 0.86 The values of the rate constant  The dissolution of quartz in both strong caustic-carbonate solutions and synthetic Bayer liquor causes a large increase in B.E.T. surface area due to the formation of etch pits which contain a large area of which a high proportion is relatively less reactive. The dissolution rate of quartz in both solutions is directly proportional to the geometric surface areas of the reacting particles rather than the B.E.T. surface areas. The coating of sodalite reduces the reactive surface areas of quartz and hence the dissolution rate. The dissolution rate of quartz in both caustic-carbonate solutions and Bayer liquor, including fine quartz in liquor, can be described by the shrinking sphere model. The incorporation of surface area term in the shrinking sphere model overcomes the problem of the Oku–Yamada model with particle sizes, confirming that the mechanism of quartz dissolution is a surface reaction process. The authors gratefully acknowledge the exacting work of the CSIRO Minerals analytical team at Waterford, Western Australia. The authors also appreciate the comments made by Dr Mitch Loan (now with Alcoa Australia) at the beginning of this work.