The anionic polyacrylamide PAM (with various contents of carboxyl groups) adsorption mechanism on the surface of SiO2-TiO2 (ST) mixed oxides in the pH range of 3–9 was examined. Two types of ST solids differing in their composition were applied, namely ST 20 (80% silica and 20% of titanium dioxide) and ST 80 (20% of SiO2 and 80% of TiO2). The adsorption affinity of anionic PAM for the mixed oxide surface was determined using UV–Vis spectrophotometry, whereas the influence of polymer presence on the solid suspension stability was specified using turbidimetry. The most probable adsorption mechanism of polyacrylamide at the solid-liquid interface was proposed additionally based on the surface charge density and zeta potential values calculated from the potentiometric titration and the electrokinetic measurements respectively. The obtained data revealed that the anionic polymer has greater adsorption affinity to the surface of silica-titania mixed oxide which contains 80% of TiO2. For both examined oxides the PAM adsorbed amounts are higher in solutions of higher pH values and for polymeric macromolecules containing a larger number of carboxyl groups. The specific nanostructure of PAM adsorption layers formed on the ST oxides surface influences solid suspension stability (generally promoting steric or electrosteric interactions).Nowadays a great variety of adsorbents with specific structure and surface properties are applied in many fields of human activity (mainly in environmental protection, agriculture and industry) [ To design the specific surface characteristics of sorbent (required for a particular practical application), the mixed oxides were synthesized. In such a way the combination of physical and chemical properties of individual components can be obtained. Among the methods of mixed oxides synthesis the most popular are: co-precipitation, hydrothermal technique, sol-gel process, sonochemical approach and oxalate technique [ Our previous studies focused on the mixed oxide surface modification by the synthetic polymers with a relatively low-molecular weight. The effect of anionic poly(acrylic acid) molecular weight and solution pH in relation to the silica-alumina oxide was examined [ The present research concerns determination of high-molecular weight anionic polyacrylamide (PAM) impact on the stability of nanostructured silica-titania mixed oxide suspension. The specific conformation of the adsorbed macromolecules is a result of influence of many parameters, such as solution pH, polymer molecular weight, content of carboxyl groups in macromolecules and mixed oxide composition. By appropriate selection of these parameters one can obtain polymer films with the desired structure, which leads to effective control of the solid suspension stability in the polymer presence. The anionic polyacrylamide is widely used in the flocculation process in the procedures of industrial wastewater purification and drinking water treatment. Due to the ability of long PAM chains to form polymer bridges between the solid particles, the undesirable suspended solids, polyvalent metal ions, organic compounds and microorganisms can be efficiently removed from the aqueous medium [ Mixed fumed oxides SiO High-molecular weight anionic polyacrylamide (PAM) was applied in experiments as an adsorbate. It was delivered by the Due to the fact that both solid surface charge density and dissociation of polymer functional groups depend on solution pH, the adsorption measurements were performed at the three solution pH values, i.e. 3, 6 and 9 ±0.1. The static method was applied. All experiments were performed at 25 Potentiometric titrations were performed at 25 The solid surface charge density was calculated numerically using the special computer program “titr_v3” authored by Prof. W. Janusz. The glass and calomel electrodes ( The mixed oxide suspensions in the NaCl solution (0.01 The stability measurements of SiO The suspension with 1  At pH The comparison of the adsorbed amounts of anionic polyacrylamide on the surfaces of two mixed oxides indicates that PAM shows significantly higher affinity for the surface of silica-titania containing 80% of TiO Higher adsorption of PAM with a greater percentage content of carboxyl groups (i.e. 50%) is a result of not only higher molecular weight of the polymeric sample, but also confirms greater affinity of the PAM carboxyl groups for the mixed oxide surface (compared to the amide ones). Thus the carboxyl groups of anionic polyacrylamide (not dissociated and ionized) participate mainly in the hydrogen bonds formation with the solid surface groups. A similar observation was made for the system containing other metal oxides and anionic PAM with different contents of carboxyl groups [ The analysis of the potentiometric titrations results presented in The polymer carboxyl groups connected with the segments directly bound with the mixed oxide surface (located in the train structures of the adsorbed chains) cause the observed increase in the σ A completely opposite effect is observed after the PAM addition regarding the zeta potential of mixed oxide particles ( The decrease of ζ potential of the solid particles caused by the polymer adsorption at the solid-liquid interface may also result from the shift of slipping plane from the particle surface [ The changes in the ST suspensions stability after the anionic polyacrylamide addition as a function of solution pH are presented in The mixed oxide dispersions without PAM are the most unstable at pH The observed behaviour of examined suspensions in the anionic PAM presence is the consequence of specific conformation of adsorbed macromolecules (with a particular content of anionic groups) under given pH conditions, which was characterized in the previous chapters of this paper. The anionic polymer at pH The composition of silica-titania mixed oxide determines its adsorption properties in relation to the anionic polyacrylamide. The polymer exhibits greater affinity for the surface of the solid containing 80% of TiO The research leading to these results has received funding from the