At the concentration plant of the Gol-E-Gohar Iron Ore Company (Iran) three 9m×2.05m AG (autogenous) mills (fixed speed) are used in parallel in a dry operation. The performance of AG mills has been lower than the target value indicated by an increase in the product size (P80; 80% passing size) from 450μm (target) to 515μm and low power draw (50% of nominal). By simulation it was found that increasing the liner lifter face angle from 7 to 30° while keeping the original lifter height (i.e., 22.5cm) could provide an appropriate charge trajectory. When the proposed liners installed in one of the AG mills, the throughput increased by 27%; when 5% (v/v balls were added the throughput increased by 40%. The product size also decreased from 515 to 501μm.The use of large AG (autogenous)/SAG (semiautogenous) mills in the mineral industry has been on rise due to a significant reduction in capital and operating costs and increase in the plants throughputs. The availability of these mills plays an important role in the economics of the operation. One of the main reasons for mills down time is the time required to change worn or broken liners The use of liners with large face angle lifters along with wider lifter spacing has grown in recent years, especially in large SAG mills. The claimed benefits were reduced ball on liner impacts, leading to increased liner lives and less ball breakage. These reduced packing and improved ball-on-charge impacts, leading to improved mill performance It has been known for many years that a change in the face angle on SAG mill shell lifters results in a change in the trajectory of the “thrown” grinding balls. With the development of trajectory generating computer programs, the effects of face angle, packing and lifter height have been incorporated in shell lifter design. Increasing shell lifter face angles (for the same mill speed) does reduce the impact point of thrown balls and can reduce shell liner damage Lifters are essential elements in the tumbling action of a grinding mill, whose purpose is to prevent slippage of the mill charge. Such slippage consumes energy without substantial breakage, and the mill may not lift the charge sufficiently high to promote impact breakage. Hence, the size, shape and number of lifters have a strong impact on the tumbling action of the media The availability of large-scale cost-effective computing power in recent years has allowed the development of Discrete Element Modelling (DEM) computer programs that model charge flow in mills. DEM helps to understand charge motion in SAG mills for given liner designs and lifters, ball and rock properties and mill operating conditions. Based on the success of the 2-D model of the SAG mill the 3-D model in DEM was developed. The model could help to study charge motion and energy draft more accurately and also could provide information regarding the effect of shell liner spacing as well as lifter face angle on charge motion. Yahyaei and Banisi As the charge volume increases, the greater fraction of the net power draw is consumed in the form of charge abrasion and low energy impacts, while the fraction of net power that leads to high energy impacts gradually decreases A correct balance between the low and high energy impacts is essential for successful comminution practices. This could be achieved by introduction of wide-sized (mature) balls into the mill which in turn provides a broad spectrum of forces to be applied to the particles. This research was carried out to convert existing AG mills to optimized SAG mills at the Gol-E-Gohar concentration plant to improve both grinding efficiency and to decrease the sulphur content of concentrate by increasing the degree of liberation of sulphur bearing minerals. There had previously been at least one report of such a conversion on a smaller scale, which resulted in higher grinding performance In order to determine charge trajectory, a software called GMT (Grinding Media Trajectory) was used In order to determine ball trajectories at different operating conditions and liner profiles, a 100 In order to exactly duplicate the plant liners arrangement in the mill, a polyurethane ring was accurately machined to create 36 lifters in a row ( The Gol-E-Gohar iron ore concentration plant located in southeast Iran. Three 9 To convert AG to SAG mills 5% (v/v) balls with the sizes and amounts shown in The charge trajectory of 125 The balls impact points clearly indicates that with the original liner design ball addition could results in direct impact of balls on the liners causing severe damage. The low throughput of the mill could also be attributed to inappropriate trajectory where the toe of the charge does not receive any appreciable direct impacts from the falling load. The effect of different fillings on the positions of the balls impacts was also studied ( The analysis performed by the software does not take into account the interaction between balls and particles and also the forces acting on the balls due to charge and liner profile. It is also a 2-D analysis and does not consider the effect of charge interaction along the mill length. In addition to some simplified assumptions in arriving at the trajectory, the assumed shape for the charge also is not very realistic. In order to find safe operating windows where no direct impacts of balls on liners occur, the charge trajectories of some mills with no liner breakage were determined by the GMT software. The name of the plants, and all input data along with the balls impact points measured as the distance between the impact points and the toe are shown in Considering the standard deviation of the distances (σ The new liner not only should provide an appropriate load trajectory, but it should also be as similar as possible to the original liner design for easy installation and removal. By simulation of charge trajectories at various liner shapes it was found that lifter face angle was the most effective parameter influencing the charge trajectory; as a result for the new design the lifter face angle increased while lifter height was kept constant. To obtain a lifter face angle which provides an appropriate charge trajectory, the face angle increased from 7 to 30° and the trajectories obtained by the GMT software were compared ( Since balls impact points were within the safe operating windows (i.e., 17.4 to 36.2°), the lifter face angle of 30° was selected for the new design. To ensure the appropriate load trajectory, the laboratory-scaled models of the original and new liners were constructed and tested in the 1-m diameter laboratory mill. The transparent end of the mill made possible to monitor the charge trajectory inside the mill. Steel balls within the size range of 4–12 Considering the charge shape and impact points it is evident that mill fillings should be more than 20% to prevent direct impact of balls to liners. Given the promising results obtained in the laboratory mill, the new liners with 30° lifter face angle and unchanged lifter height (i.e., 22.5 To evaluate the effects of new liner design, the average throughput of the mill (No. 2) for a period of 18 Operating three identical AG mills in parallel provided a unique opportunity to separate ore characteristics effects from the influence of the liner change. The average throughputs of mill No. 1 and No. 2 over a period of 18 The average product size (P An important prerequisite to convert AG to SAG mills was to assure that the mill fillings was above 20%. On two occasions the mill was crash stopped and the fillings were found to be 22 and 26%. To provide 5% (v/v) balls, 21 In SAG milling mode the throughput increased from 532 to 589 The product size (P The main manipulated parameter to control the dry SAG mill was the exhaust fan power draw. The higher the power draw of the fan the higher the amount of discharged particles. When the amount of discharged particles increased the feed rate to the mill was also increased to keep the power draw of the mill at the set point value. In other words, the power draw of the exhaust fan and the feed rate to the mill was interrelated. The power draw of the mill was set at 2300 A liner relationship (Eq. To arrive at the product size of 450 When the feed rate (F) was plotted vs. P To obtain the product size of 450  The charge trajectory in the AG mills of the Gol-E-Gohar iron ore concentration plant was simulated by a spreadsheet-based software called GMT with a view to optimizing the liner profile. The safe operating windows in plants, defined here as milling conditions that do not result in liner breakage because of direct impacts of balls to the mill shell, corresponded to the ball impact points with a distance between 17 and 36° from the predicted toe. Increasing the lifter face angle of AG mill from 7 to 30° while keeping the original lifter height (i.e., 22.5 Testing the original and proposed liners in a 1-m diameter 2D model mill indicated that total mill filling should be more than 20% to prevent direct balls impacts to liners. Throughput of the AG mill increased by 27% due to the change in the liner design, without any adverse effect on the product size. Conversion to SAG milling by adding 5% (v/v) balls resulted in an overall increase of 40% in the mill throughput, and a relative reduction of 3% in the product size. More stable plant operation was obtained in the SAG operating mode, as quantified by a reduction of 16% and 15% in the standard deviations of mill power draw and product size, respectively. The target product size (P The authors would like to thank