This study assesses the processing behaviour and mechanical properties of different thermoplastic polymers filled with Electric Arc Furnace Dust (EAFD). Design of Experiments (DoE) approach enabled the evaluation of the influence of each component and the interactions between them. There were prepared different composite formulations varying the content of EAFD. The mechanical properties and the melt flow index (MFI) of composites were selected as output responses and the effect of CaCO3, BaSO4 and EAFD fillers as well as different polymer matrixes were evaluated. It was observed that slight variations in the formulation yield to a broad range of response values. Polyethylene-co-vinyl acetate (EVA) concentration showed a significant effect on all responses. It was found that the presence of EAFD increased fluidity and decreased the elasticity modulus and the elongation at break. In addition, when added with barite, the presence of EAFD caused an increase of the tensile strength.The use of composite materials made from thermoplastic polymers and mineral fillers is a solution widely used by industry in several technical applications. Fillers are added to polymers to improve or modify their properties. Calcium carbonate and barium sulphate can be found among the most used fillers in polyolefin based composites. The first one is commonly used in plastic industries due to its low price, and barium sulphate added in a thermoplastic matrix, improves mechanical properties and increases the density of the final composite. It is also used in a variety of polymers in applications that require very high level of chemical resistance The use of mouldable heavy layers of polymer composites as acoustic barriers is an extended solution used by the automotive industry due to the combination of high density and flexibility. Commonly reported composites for automotive industry consist in a thermoplastic polymer matrix containing elastomers such as ethylene–butene or ethylene–octene copolymer and/or polyethylene-co-vinyl acetate (EVA) In a previous work the feasibility of incorporating EAFD in polymer composites was evaluated The main goal of the present paper is to evaluate the effect of EAFD on the composite properties. The implementation of a factorial design model using DoE made possible to extract the maximum information of the experiments performed. Various factors and components were chosen and their effects on the composite properties were quantified. Predictive theoretical mathematical models were determined for each response, allowing to estimate the composites behaviour as well as to find the adequate formulation from required properties. A set of formulations was studied. They were composed with a polymer matrix (18 Calcium carbonate (>98.5%) and barium sulphate (74–76% of BaSO Several formulations were compounded in a plastic mixer with rotor speed of 55 Melt flow index (MFI) values were determined following the Standard UNE-EN ISO 1133 according to a typical test procedure (190 The mechanical properties characterization was carried out in a universal testing machine at a cross head speed of 100 Tensile fracture surface of the composites was studied on carbon sputter-coated samples by means of scanning electron microscopy (SEM) in a SEM Quanta 200 FEI. Usually the effect of mineral filler addition on the blend has been analyzed individually, by a “trial and error” approach. The DoE technique helps to verify whether or not there is a synergistic effect between the variables on the final properties of the composite or parameters affecting its manufacturing Performing of the different runs must be random to minimize systematic and/or cumulative errors on the final results. The analysis of DoE results is based in the analysis of variance (ANOVA) The Tensile properties determined from the experimental stress–strain curves: tensile strength, elongation at break and 1% secant modulus, as well as MFI values are listed in The results have been divided to analyze the influence of the studied variables in each considered material property. In every case the models obtained were statistically significant with large Statistical analysis of MFI values reveals that the factors under investigation (EVA concentration, BaSO All the results derived from the modification of any of the controllable variables can be translated into a predictive mathematical model. For the MFI values, the model can be written according to Eq. Mathematical model for MFI values  In this case, an increase of the MFI value is identified when higher amounts of dense fillers (barite and EAFD) are added, especially in composites with large EVA contents. Therefore, the higher MFI values, 6.1 and 6.5 Statistical analysis of 1% secant modulus ( Owing to the fact that EVA grade is a categorical variable two mathematical models have been obtained for the elongation at break response. Eqs. Mathematical model for 1% secant modulus Grade 18 VA EVA Grade 24 VA EVA The addition of EVA increases modulus values ( Statistical analysis showed that three of the factors under investigation, EVA grade, and EVA and barite content had a significant influence on this response (see Mathematical model for tensile strength Grade 18 VA EVA Grade 24 VA EVA Tensile strength values rise with EVA amount reflecting a positive interaction with The statistical analysis revealed that the four factors under investigation, EVA grade, EVA, barite and EAFD concentration had significant influence on the elongation at break results. Eqs. Mathematical model for elongation at break Grade 18 VA EVA: Grade 24 VA EVA: From Optimization means to reach a compromise in some values to reach good performance in other properties. This statistical model can be employed to find the optimal formulation once the responses are specified. In order to give the model some freedom degrees some variables were not fixed and putted in range. The statistical method was employed to predict the effects of variables on final properties. It was established a model which explains the overall behaviour of the system. This set of models allows not only to estimate the response of each formulation but also to optimize the whole system to obtain a compromise between the factors constraints and the responses obtained. The application of the design of experiments methodology helps to understand the interaction between different variables which could not be studied using a single variable method. The addition of EVA instead of ethylene-1-butene increases MFI, tensile strength and elastic modulus, but decreases elongation at break. Regarding the EVA grade, the EVA24 improves elongation at break and tensile strength. The incorporation of dense fillers increases the MFI. However, EAFD causes a decrease in the values of mechanical properties compared with barite. Despite this fact, revalorization of EAFD as a dense filler could be possible combining it with barite, as it has been confirmed by several positive interactions between fillers. The authors would like to thank the