Manure contains all the macro- and microelements needed for plant growth; however, it represents one of the most underutilized resources in the US. The major problem with the use of manure on cropland is the direct effect of its composition on application cost. This cost is a function of the mineralization process of organic matter. The mineralization process is influenced by the properties of the manure, properties of the soil, moisture, and temperature. This study evaluates the simultaneous effect of these variables on the optimal use of manure on cropland.
                  The results show that the properties of manure and soil significantly affect the mineralization of organic nitrogen and thus the optimal quantity of manure required to satisfy the nutrient requirement of crops in a given rotation system. Manure application costs range from a low of 18%of the cost of commercial fertilizer for chicken manure applied to one type of soil, to a high of 125%of the cost of commercial fertilizer for cow manure applied to another type of soil. The maximum distance to transfer manure to the field, that will equate its application cost to the cost of commercial fertilizer, ranges from a high of 35 km (22 miles) for chicken manure applied to one type of soil, to a low of 1 km (0.62 miles) for cow manure applied to another type of soil.
                  For rotation system 2, manure application costs range from a low of 37% of the cost of commercial fertilizer for chicken manure applied to one type of soil, to a high of 136%of the cost of commercial fertilizer for cow manure applied to another type of soil. The maximum distance to transfer manure to the field, that will equate its cost to the cost of commercial fertilizer, ranges from a high of 20 km (12.5 miles) for chicken manure applied to one type of soil, to a low of 0 km (0 miles) for cow manure applied to another type of soil.Animal manure represents one of the most underutilized fertilizer resources in the US. In 1976, over 160 million tons dry weight of animal manure was produced in the US. Approximately 40% The major outlet for animal manure is application to cropland. Land application of animal manure increases soil organic matter and improves a number of soil properties including soil tilth, water-holding capacity, oxygen content, and soil fertility ( Economically, animal manure, as a source of fertilizer in crop production, is a valuable resource to be utilized (  Effective utilization of animal manure on cropland is a function of the cost associated with hauling and spreading the bulky waste materials. This cost is directly related to the quantity of manure needed to satisfy the nutrient requirements of crops in a given rotation system. The quantity of manure needed is a function of the mineralization rate of organic matter in the manure, which is influenced by the manure properties, soil properties, soil temperature and moisture. The objective of this study was to evaluate the simultaneous effect of these variables on the optimal quantity of manure that satisfies the nutrient requirements for crops in different rotation systems at least cost. Data developed by Daily soil temperature in several locations in Idaho is collected each year and compiled for several years by the Idaho Climate Lab. Data on manure hauling and spreading cost were obtained from the Custom Hauling and Spreading Services in the Twin Falls area of Idaho in 1998–1999. Data on the quantity and cost of recommended commercial fertilizer presently applied to crops in the rotation systems considered in this study were obtained from the Crop and Livestock Costs and Returns Estimates, published annually by the Department of Agricultural Economics at the University of Idaho. Analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was used to evaluate the effect of manure and soil properties on the mineralization of organic nitrogen. A full model containing dummy variables to separate the effect of each soil–manure combination on the mineralization process over time is shown in The reduced model generated from The sums of squared errors (SSE) for the full and the reduced models were estimated and used to determine the Chow- The Chow- The mineralization rate of organic nitrogen in each manure–soil combination is essential to determine the quantity of manure required to satisfy the nutrient requirements for crops in a given rotation system. Several models were developed and tested for their accuracy in predicting the mineralization rates of organic nitrogen over time. All models were compared using mean squared errors (MSE's) and coefficients of multiple determinations ( The four linear models tested had high MSE and low Multinomial transformations are used to correct the cyclical trend and the heterogeneity of the variance, and, thus, improve the fitness of the models. Although such transformations do improve the error behavior, they reduce the models' prediction capacity. Models resulting from such transformations tend to predict nitrogen accumulation (immobilization) instead of a continuous mineralization, which is not consistent with the trend in the data set. The Q–Q graphs for the linear models also indicate a light tailed distribution of the residuals. Due to the above statistical results, the linear models were considered poor predictors of the mineralization of organic nitrogen over time. Four different non-linear functional forms were developed and tested to explain the mineralization process of organic nitrogen, they are: two-parameter exponential function, three-parameter exponential function, three-parameter Weibull function, four-parameter Weibull function ( The non-linear models have a serious model mis-specification as detected from the residual plots. The Q–Q graphs show the existence of a non-linear trend that cannot be explained by the models. The trend is cyclical in some cases, and most cases is quadratic indicating a lack of fit. Thus, the non-linear models are considered poor predictors of the mineralization of organic nitrogen over time. Exponential smoothing method is found to be most effective when the parameters describing the time series are changing slowly over time. This method uses last period error to add to or subtract from this period value to predict next period value. Three different exponential smoothing models were compared and tested, they are: Double Brown, Linear Holt, Holt–Winter two-parameter ( Compared to the others, the Holt–Winter two-parameter model had the lowest MSE and the highest The accumulated mineralized nitrogen from organic nitrogen in the manure, estimated by the Holt–Winter model for each of the 15 manure–soil combinations, was used in In the Twin Falls area of Idaho, 19 is the maximum number of two-week periods in a year in which soil temperature is over 5°C and mineralization occurs. Both Rem A typical chemical or enzymatic reaction has an approximate The hauling and spreading cost to apply manure to crops is a function of the distance traveled, transportation cost per ton/mile after the first mile round trip, and the cost per ton for loading and hauling one mile round trip. The hauling and spreading cost is defined in Custom services in Idaho generally use trucks with 10-ton capacity equipped with an 8-foot spreader. These services charge $19 per truck for loading and hauling one mile round trip, and $1.50 per mile per truck load for each additional mile after the first mile round trip. For the purpose of this study, custom service charge is used to account for the fixed and variable costs associated with loading, hauling and spreading manure. The distance traveled to haul and spread the manure ( rectangular field, circular field. The distance traveled to haul and spread manure on a rectangular field is estimated by The distance traveled to haul and spread manure on a circular field is estimated in In the case of the circular field the cost function is shown in The maximum distance traveled to equate the cost of hauling and spreading the required quantity of manure to the cost of commercial fertilizer for a given rotation system is estimated by Manure application rate, cost and distance estimated in this study, using the models outlined in the materials and method section, were converted from short tons per acre to metric tons per hectare, cost was converted from $ per acre to $ per hectare, and distance was converted from miles to kilometers using the standard conversion ratios. Manure application rates per hectare were determined for the following three-year rotation systems: Potato–Wheat–Wheat (PWW), Sugar beets–Wheat–Wheat (SWW). For rotation system 1, the stabilized optimum quantity of manure, ranges from a high of 220-66-72 metric tons per hectare for cow manure applied to soil type 1, to a low of 58-16-18 metric tons per hectare for chicken manure applied to soil type 4 ( For both rotation systems, the cost of applying manure to a rectangular field is slightly higher than for a circular field. For rotation system 1 and a rectangular field the cost of applying all three types of manure is the highest for soil type 1 followed by soil type 2. The cost of applying manure to soil types 3, 4, and 5 is about the same and ranges between 43% For rotation system 2, and a rectangular field, it is not economical to apply manure to soil type 1. The cost ranges from a high of 136% The economics of utilizing manure on cropland as an alternative to commercial fertilizer is influenced by the cost of hauling and spreading the manure and the cost of commercial fertilizer. In the long run, both costs fluctuate with fluctuation in the price of oil. Custom service cost for hauling and spreading manure has been the same for 1997–1999. Commercial fertilizer cost is based on the actual input rates and prices of the various fertilizer used for crops in 1998. The input rates for potatoes per hectare are: 325 kg of nitrogen, 262 kg of phosphorus, 112 kg of potassium, 22 kg liquid phosphate, 90 kg of sulfur, and $74 for micronutrients. Commercial fertilizer cost for potatoes also includes $26 for custom fertilizer application and $39 for consultant fee. Input rates for wheat per hectare are: 112 kg of nitrogen, 45 kg of phosphorus, and $13 for custom fertilizer applications. For sugar beets, input rates are: 168 kg of nitrogen, 112 kg of phosphorus, $13 for custom fertilizer applications, and $39 for consultant fee. Commercial fertilizer prices per kg reported by the budget generator for 1998 and 1999, and used in this study are: $0.77 for nitrogen, $0.24 for phosphorus, $0.15 for potassium, $0.37 for liquid phosphate, and $0.18 for sulfur. The economic potential of utilizing animal manure as an alternative to commercial fertilizer is influenced not only by the distance traveled to spread the manure, but also by the distance between the source of the manure and the receiving field. This distance is lower for a rectangular field than for a circular field. The maximum distance to transfer manure to the field, after the first 1.6 km (1 mile) round trip that will equate the cost of using manure to the cost of commercial fertilizer for rotation system 1 is shown in For rotation system 2 and a rectangular field (see The utilization of animal manure as an economic alternative to commercial fertilizer has not been adequately analyzed by previous studies.   anaerobic lagoon, slurry basin. The above studies ignored the effect of manure properties, soil properties, soil temperature and moisture on the mineralization rate of organic nitrogen. These studies also ignored the year-to-year residual effects of organic nitrogen in the manure and its accumulative effect on the optimal quantity of manure needed to satisfy the nutrient requirements of crops in a given rotation system. In general, these studies failed to determine the optimal required quantity of manure, its effect on hauling and spreading cost, and the economically maximum distance manure can be hauled from its source to the receiving field.  The method developed in this study is a significant addition to previous methods used in evaluating the economic utilization of manure on cropland. It simultaneously estimates the mineralization rate of organic nitrogen and determines optimal application rate and least cost utilization of manures with different properties applied to soils with different properties and temperature. The models developed in this study adjust for all variables. Compared to previous studies, the method developed in this study determines the optimal required quantity of manure and accurately determines the breakeven hauling distance to transfer manure from its source to the receiving fields for different manure–soil combinations. Since the early 1940s, research results indicate that animal manure is a viable biological resource with positive environmental and ecological benefits. In 1998, over 131 million tons of animal manure was produced in confined beef and dairy cattle operations in the US. This resource is not efficiently utilized and often considered a source of pollution. Land application of manure improves soil properties, increases yield, reduces erosion, and reduces nutrient leaches. The major outlet for animal manure is application to cropland. Nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium are the elements that are most frequently needed for crops in relatively large quantities. Phosphorus in manure is equally available to plants as inorganic sources. Potassium is not part of any organic structure. Nitrogen in manure must be mineralized before it is available to plants. Several statistical procedures were developed and tested to estimate the mineralization rate of organic nitrogen over time adjusted for soil temperature. The Holt–Winter two-parameter exponential smoothing was found to be the best method to estimate the mineralization rate of organic nitrogen over time for three types of manure applied to five different soils. The results show that the properties of the manure and the soils significantly affect the mineralization rate of organic nitrogen. The mineralization rate is the principle factor used to determine the optimal quantity of manure needed to satisfy the nutrient requirement of crops in a given rotation system. Manure application rates were determined for the following three-year rotation systems: potato–wheat–wheat, sugar beets–wheat–wheat. For rotation system 1, manure application costs ranged from a high of 91% The results of the study show that manure can be transferred long distance from its source to the receiving field before its cost equates the cost of commercial fertilizer. For rotation system 1, the maximum distance ranges from a low of 1 km to a high of 35 km, depending on the type of manure and the soil that receives the manure. For rotation system 2, the maximum distance ranges from a low of −3 km to a high of 19 km. Chicken manure is the most economically efficient type of manure. This efficiency is due to its high pH, low organic carbon, high inorganic nitrogen, and low carbon/nitrogen ratio compared to the other types of manure. In addition to its environmental and ecological benefits, the results of this study clearly indicate that animal manure is an excellent economic alternative to commercial fertilizer and a viable biological resource to be utilized on cropland. The models developed in this study on the mineralization rates of organic nitrogen, manure application rate to satisfy the nutrient requirements of crops in a given rotation system, manure application cost, and the economically maximum distance to transfer manure will provide economists, soil scientists, and environmental scientists with the tools to efficiently utilize animal manure or other biological resources. These models have useful applications in the developed and developing parts of the world on the economic use of a bio-resource that is often considered a waste to be disposed of rather than a resource to be utilized.