Aligned nano-tubular TiO2 layers were synthesised and their gas sensing abilities were compared to those of magnetron sputtered titania films towards NO2 and CO. TiO2 nano-tubes were grown on the titanium foils, via anodic oxidation method (hereafter anodisation) using of fluoride containing ethylene glycol (EG)-based electrolytes. Both amorphous, nano-tubular titania structures and magnetron sputtered titania layers were annealed at 450 and 700°C. Magnetron-sputtered titania films were anatase on deposition and converted to rutile on heat-treatment in air for 3h at 800°C. Nano-tubular titania layers were converted to anatase at about 400°C and above 600°C to rutile. The sensor performance of the nano-tubular TiO2 layers annealed at 450°C (anatase) and at 700°C (anatase and rutile) was investigated at 300–500°C towards NO2 concentrations of 10, 25, 50 and 100ppm and CO concentrations of 25, 50 and 75ppm and compared to those of the magnetron sputtered TiO2-layers annealed at 450°C (anatase) and 800°C (rutile and anatase). The nano-tubular TiO2-sensor layers yield very promising results for sensing NO2 with some cross-sensitivity towards CO in relatively small concentrations and in a wide concentration range up to 500°C.In the last decades, atmospheric pollution and the resulting global warming have reached critical levels. High-temperature processes involving combustion in airplanes, energy, power production plants, vehicles and industrial settlements are the main sources of this pollution. NO For decades, the oxides of the transition metals such as SnO An alternative solution for achievement of higher performance in gas sensors is to increase the surface area of the sensing electrodes by micro- or nano-scaled structuring. As early as 1991, Yamazoe et al. have shown that the reduction of crystallite size strongly increases the gas sensing performance and selectivity of SnO Since, all these interactions occur on free accessible surfaces of the sensor material, it can be assumed that the larger the surface area of a sensing material, the higher the sensitivity increase will be. The changes in resistance or conductivity are caused by the increasing or decreasing amount of the charge carriers. Thus, the challenges in the area of chemical gas sensors are shifted on to the fabrication of sensing electrodes as small-scaled and highly crystallised materials. One-dimensional metal-oxides are advantageous due to high “surface area to volume” ratio as well as easy and simple production methods Although, magnetron sputtered layers of Al, Cr, Y-doped titania were tested as CO and NO This study describes the use of TiO Sensor devices of this study consist of nano-tubular TiO TiO Al For the investigation of the morphology, the diameter and the length of the TiO The phase analysis of the samples was carried out by X-ray diffraction measurements (XRD) with an equipment model D5000 from SIEMENS employing Cu Kα radiation ( The gas sensing properties of the nano-tubular TiO The gas sensing measurements of the nano-tubular TiO Raman spectroscopy measurements were carried out in a Raman Shift range of 100–1800 The top view and cross sectional SEM images of magnetron sputtered TiO The thickness of the layer after anodisation was 14–16 The phase constituents of the magnetron sputtered titania and nano-tubular titania films produced in EG based electrolyte were investigated with XRD in as-produced state and after annealing at the temperatures of 450 and 800 The XRD results showed that the as-anodised TiO  The resistance changes of the sensor devices were recorded under a constant current of 1 The sensors with the magnetron sputtered TiO The sensors having magnetron sputtered TiO These results indicate that the sensors produced with magnetron sputtered TiO CO is a typical exhaust gas and almost always present with NO Previous studies report that TiO This study reports the sensor characteristics of the sensor devices having nano-tubular TiO The results confirm that the sensors with the nano-tubular TiO It appears from the results that the preparation method of the sensing layers substantially influences the sensitivity of the sensors due to the resulting morphology and surface chemistry. The sensors with nano-tubular TiO The phase constituents of titania may also influence the sensor behaviour. Depending on the annealing temperature and preparation route, the TiO It was reported by Knauth and Tuller Anatase and rutile were reported to exhibit n- and p-type semiconducting properties, respectively. During the transformation to rutile phase, the excess oxygen reacts with titanium interstitial defects, resulting in this change of semi-conductivity Generally, all the investigated sensors show a sensitivity decrease as the sensor test temperature increases from 300 to 500 In the case of the reducing gas, CO reacts with the surface adsorbed oxygen of the anatase phase, releasing the trapped electron back and increasing its conductivity. With rutile where the majority of the charge carriers are holes, the injected electron recombines with hole, resulting in a conductivity decrease The phase sequences and morphological properties of the sensor layers influence not only the sensors sensitivity but also its response and recovery behaviour. The variation in response and recovery times of both TiO The response times get shorter with the magnetron-sputtered layer as the temperature increases. The surface adsorbed reactants must be rather inactive at lower temperatures (e.g. <300 The charge carrier concentration on the surface of a semiconductor is sensitive to the composition of the surrounding atmosphere Another issue which is important in terms of a gas sensor is its selectivity towards the target gas, in other words the cross-sensitivity of the sensor. Relying on these results, it can be assumed that the sensor with nano-tubular TiO The sensor with nano-tubular TiO Considering that TiO Vertically oriented TiO Low temperature annealed magnetron sputtered TiO The present results confirm that the nano-structuring the TiO The sensors with un-doped nano-tubular TiO The authors thank Mr Ayhan Yüce for providing the magnetron sputtered sensor devices and for his valuable support during sensor characterisation. Prof. C. Rüscher from Leibniz University of Hannover is thanked for the Raman-measurements. The project is partly financed by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: