The effect of mechanochemical activation (high-energy grinding) on mixtures of natural FeWO4 with two forms of carbon has been investigated by X-ray powder diffraction and Mössbauer spectroscopy. The crystallinity of the mechanically activated mixtures, which have previously been found to exhibit enhanced reactivity as precursors for carbothermal production of tungsten carbide, is shown by X-ray powder diffraction to decrease on grinding, but without detectable formation of new crystalline phases. Mössbauer spectroscopy shows that the grinding process is accompanied by the appearance of an unexpected new singlet resonance, attributed to the formation of dilute FeC regions. The Mössbauer spectra also show that mechanochemical activation under the present conditions results in progressive oxidation of the Fe2+ in the wolframite to Fe3+; this oxidation is more marked in wolframite ground in the absence of carbon, suggesting that the latter exerts an oxygen-scavenging effect on the system. Similar results are obtained irrespective of whether the carbon source is activated carbon or graphite. The crystallization of iron tungsten carbides on subsequent heating of the ground mixtures in argon suggests that the regions identified by Mössbauer spectroscopy as containing iron–carbon interactions may also be associated with tungsten.Tungsten carbide (WC) is an extremely hard material of technical importance as an abrasive and a significant constituent of hard metals. WC is typically prepared by the energy-intensive direct reaction at 1400–1600 Although carbothermal reduction of wolframite with coal is reported to result in the formation of little WC, There are several mechanisms by which mechanochemical activation may facilitate the present carbothermal reaction of wolframite. The most obvious mechanism, consistent with the changes observed in the X-ray diffractograms of the precursors, involves the reduction of grain size (cominution) of the reactant mixture, resulting in a greater degree of intergrain contact and homogeneity of the resulting precursor. The increased surface area and exposure of new crystal faces will also facilitate subsequent solid–gas interactions occurring in the carbothermal process. Another possible mechanism involves mechanochemically induced surface reactions between the components of the mixture. This interesting possibility cannot be explored by XRD; such mechanistic details on the molecular level must be obtained by a spectroscopic technique such as The present communication reports a Mössbauer study of the effects of mechanochemical activation on the Fe in mixtures of natural wolframite with both activated carbon and graphite, the use of the latter being suggested by the ready availability of spent graphite electrodes from heavy industrial processes and the desirability of re-using these waste products. The Mössbauer results were analysed for evidence of chemical changes in the iron-containing component of the samples arising from their mechanochemical treatment. The natural wolframite used in this study was supplied from the ore-dressing plant in Bayan-Ulgii, Western Mongolia. Its chemical composition (wt.%) is 71.85% WO Mixtures were prepared according to the stoichiometry of the reaction: The X-ray powder diffractograms of the unground mixtures and mixtures ground for various periods of time are shown in In both the starting mixture containing graphite and that containing activated carbon, grinding has the effect of decreasing the intensity of the FeWO The Mössbauer spectra of the unground FeWO As the graphite-containing mixture is ground for increasing lengths of time ( The integrated area of the Fe Changes in the occupation of the various iron sites in mixtures of wolframite–graphite and wolframite-activated carbon are shown in  When mixtures of wolframite (FeWO The behaviour of the iron during mechanochemical activation was monitored by Concomitantly with the development of the new Fe These mechanochemically induced reactions are essentially independent of the nature of the carbon used as the starting material. The authors are indebted to Martin Ryan for assistance with the interpretation of the XRD results. This research was partially supported by a COE 21 program (Life Conjugated Chemistry) and by a joint project of the Japanese Information Centre of Particle Technology (Rational Utilization of Mongolian natural Raw Minerals).