Microbial enhanced oil recovery (MEOR) is a type of enhanced oil recovery (EOR) technology, generally employed as a tertiary stage where oil recovery using primary and secondary traditional methods is not feasible anymore. Amongst several potential biological agents useful for MEOR, biosurfactants (biologically produced amphiphilic surfactants) play key roles. They are mostly equivalent to or better than their chemical counterparts in several aspects including; better environmental compatibility, production from renewable waste substrates, maintaining activity at harsh environmental conditions, lower or no environmental toxicity. Biosurfactants are still not cost-competitive when compared to chemical surfactants. Different strategies like the use of cheaper raw materials, optimization of media components, fermentation processes and downstream processes, use of hyperproducers are currently explored to improve biosurfactant production economics. Biosurfactant mediated MEOR (BS-MEOR) could be applied by either in-situ or ex-situ techniques. In-situ BS-MEOR could be applied by injecting biosurfactant producing microorganisms in the oil well with or without additional nutrients. Generally followed by shut-in phase and subsequently monitoring microbial activities, metabolites production and oil recovery from the producer wells. Whereas for ex-situ BS-MEOR applications, the biosurfactant is produced outside the oil well and injected directly for enhancing oil recovery. This review highlights the biosurfactant production and economics, general protocols for applications from lab-to-field scale, different successful trials along with pros and cons of both in-situ and ex-situ BS-MEOR applications.Since the beginning of civilizations, we human kinds are always dependent on fuels, such as wood, whale-oil or fossil fuels - coal, and crude-oil related products (kerosene, diesel, petrol). Amongst all those different kind of fuels, fossil fuel played a big role in industrial revolution ( During the primary recovery stage, the initial oil is produced under natural pressure (due to natural gas), where generally 10–20% of the oil initially in place (OIIP) is recovered. Later the oil recovery rate falls due to reduction in natural pressure of the oil-reservoir, and secondary recovery technologies are used to increase the recovery. During secondary recovery stage an increase of total recovery up to 40–50% of OIIP can be observed ( Surfactants are amphiphilic agents, attracted to both hydrophilic and hydrophobic phases. Chemical surfactants are one of the widely used compounds in different sectors like, household, cleaning, printing, and petroleum field as EOR agent ( In recent past, few reviews covering different aspects of MEOR were published with little description for the role of biosurfactants in different aspects of petroleum biotechnology and MEOR ( Biosurfactants are biologically produced surface active agents, produced by humans (lung surfactant), plants and microorganisms ( Generally the biosurfactant production media contains carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) sources as major components, along with phosphates as buffering agent and phosphorous source and metal salts as trace elements (like Mn Even though biosurfactants showed some superior traits over chemical surfactants, widespread industrial applications are quite limited – mainly due to cost-competitiveness. Still chemical surfactants are comparatively cheaper than biosurfactants. Large-scale industrial production of biosurfactants is still a challenge, mainly because of problems associated with scale-up (process and substrates), downstream processing and purification – which can account for almost 60–70% of the production cost. The production scale greatly impact the process economy, as it is directly related to the product yield and the associated costs. The operating and production costs can be brought down by different approaches which can increase the yield or reduce the overall cost, such as: by using renewable substrates such as waste cheaper agro-industrial by-products ( Recent updates in our understanding of the structure-function relationship of biosurfactants and advances in chemical synthesis procedure have led to chemically synthesized biosurfactants and structural modifications to improve the activity and purity. One group of researchers at the University of Arizona in Tucson, USA, chemically synthesized glycolipids-biosurfactant using transformative approach ( MEOR is a tertiary stage of oil recovery, where oil recovery by water flooding is not economical anymore ( MEOR technology can be applied in two possible ways – in-situ and As mentioned before, different types of microbial products have potential role in MEOR – biosurfactants, biopolymers, biomass, biosolvents: either individually or in combinations. Amongst all those potential mechanisms, biosurfactant based technology is fairly documented for EOR applications ( The biosurfactant production can be screened by a variety of methods including oil-spreading method, surface tension and/or interfacial tension measurements ( The process to grow the bacteria in bulk (scale-up) should also be standardized, after performing different combinations of core-flood experiments, and then used for pilot-scale field experiment (ideally for stripper wells with very high water cut-off and single injector and nearby single producer well). Based on the pilot-scale field experimental results, it can be decided whether to go for full-field applications or not. Biosurfactant mediated e Core-flood experiments are carried out as described earlier, where water flooding is followed by injection of cell-free biosurfactant flooding (5–6 pore volumes) and analyzing the additional or enhanced oil recovered (AOR or EOR). After confirming the potential for EOR, stability of biosurfactants under different harsh conditions (temperatures, salinity and pH) and adsorption studies on different rock surfaces are essential. After different combinations of core-flood experiments, stability and adsorption studies, biosurfactant scale-up processes (in industrial level bioreactors) need to be optimized. Pilot-scale field experiment are carried out in stripper wells with high water cut-off, as huff and puff or single injector and nearby single producer well, followed by full-field applications. There are several reports highlighting the success of biosurfactant based  All these reports highlighted the ease of application and lower cost of applications to the incremental recovery per barrel. However there are some unresolved issues associated with in-situ BS-MEOR methods: promoting the growth of useful indigenous microbes and controlling the harmful ones (like Sulfate reducing bacteria - SRBs) under oil reservoirs is a bit tricky and not completely possible, the quantity of in-situ produced biosurfactants can’t be controlled, only the facultative aerobic or anaerobic bacteria can be used for in-situ MEOR applications, limited applications are possible as the bacteria should be able to grow under different conditions if intended for application in diverse fields ( MEOR is not a novel-untested technology, but extensively studied one. Since first field-scale testing back in 1954-until the present day, much has been investigated, understood, and documented regarding the mechanisms responsible for improving the oil recovery. Biosurfactants are one amongst highly regarded compounds produced by microorganisms, which are shown to have great potential application in MEOR. The laboratory EOR experiments showed 10–85% increased oil recovery, but the field-scale studies showed around 3–10% extra oil recovery (over S In contrast to The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.