Textile industry produces a high amount of residues that, nowadays, are poorly managed. The majority of such wastes are dumped and landfilled. Among all the textile value chain, cotton yarning factories produce wastes in the shape of fiber flocks, with lengths smaller than 10 mm that prevent their reintroduction in the textiles manufacturing process. Nonetheless, such waste cotton flocks could be used as reinforcement for short fiber mould injected composites. This paper reports on the behavior of the interphase between the cotton flocks and a polypropylene matrix. It was found that the organic dyes present on the cotton flocks seem to affect the quality of the interphase in two ways: on the one hand by increasing the affinity between the cotton fibers and the matrix, and on the other hand by limiting the effect of the coupling agents. Micromechanic models are used to further research the quality of the interphase and the intrinsic properties of the composites.Since the textile industry is generating huge amounts of residues, the increasing environmental consciousness and demands of legislative authorities is driving this sector to look for solutions to deliver the remainders into recycling processes and convert these waste products into valuable byproducts Textiles represent about 3 wt.% of a household bin. At least 50% of the textiles we throw away are recyclable; however, the proportion of textile wastes reused or recycled annually is only around 25%. Although the majority of textile waste provides from household sources, waste textiles also arise during yarn and fabric manufacture, garment-making processes and from the retail industry. In this sense, textile waste can be classified as either pre-consumer or post-consumer. Pre-consumer textile waste consists of by-product materials from the textile, fiber and cotton industries. Each year 750,000 tons of this waste is recycled into new raw materials for the automotive, furniture, mattress, coarse yarn, home furnishings, paper and other industries. Through the efforts of this industry approximately 75% of the pre-consumer textile waste that is generated is diverted from our landfills and recycled. Some post-industrial waste is recycled 'in-house', usually in the yarn and fabric manufacturing sector. The rest, aside from going to landfill or incineration, is sent to merchants Textile waste in landfill contributes to the formation of ‘leachate’ (the noxious fluid produced in landfill sites) as it decomposes, which has the potential to contaminate both surface and groundwater sources In the particular case of cotton based textiles, the process used to prepare the fabrics, generates byproducts in the form of cotton flocks. As can be seen in Although a lot of studies about the reinforcement of polypropylene with wood-and non-wood cellulose fibers can be found in the literature, only few of them report the use these cotton flocks byproduct as reinforcement for polypropylene-based composites One of the main limitations of the these composites is the maximum wt.% of cotton flocks content due to the flock aggregation without any prior treatment. In this sense, Petrucci et al. In this work, waste dyed cotton flocks were used as reinforcement for polypropylene-based composites. The cotton flocks were used without any chemical treatment and only were cut down to ensure their correct individualization and dispersion in the matrix. Composites with 30 and 40 wt.% of waste cotton strands (WCS) were prepared. Percentages of polypropylene functionalized with maleic anhydre (MAPP) ranging from 0 to 8 wt.% were added to the composites to find the highest tensile strengths. The results showed tensile strengths higher than expected for the uncoupled composites. Then, the effect of the dye on the interphase was investigated by preparing composites reinforced with virgin cotton fibers. Additionally, the virgin cotton flocks were chemically analyzed. A modified rule of mixtures was used to compute the intrinsic tensile strength of the WCS. Initially a good interphase was hypothesised for all the coupled composites. The intrinsic tensile strength of the dyed strands was found to be noticeably inferior to that of the virgin fibers, indicating a negative effect of the dye on the quality of the interphase. Single fiber tensile tests were carried out to obtain the tensile strength of the WCS. The obtained results were submitted to a Weibull analysis to find the characteristic strength of the WCS. The results were tabulated against the fibers length and it was possible to find the characteristic strength of the WCS used in the composites, after its morphologic analysis. Then, the modified Kelly and Tyson equation was used to define the interfacial shear strength of the interphase and the orientation factor. The cotton flocks residues, treated with a reactive dye, from textile industry and with not enough length for spinning, were kindly supplied by Fontfilva S. L. (Olot, Girona, Spain). The polymer matrix used was polypropylene (PP) (Isplen PP090 62 M) and was kindly supplied by Repsol-YPF (Tarragona, Spain). In order to improve the compatibility between cotton residues and PP, polypropylene functionalized with maleic anhydre (MAPP) (Epolene G3015), with an acid number of 15 mg KOH/g and Mn of 24800, was used as a coupling agent. This was acquired from Eastman Chemical Products (San Roque, Spain). Sodium hydrosulphite (Na The cotton residues were cut down to a nominal length of 1 mm using a blade mill in order to obtain a better dispersion in the composite. Then, PP, MAPP and cotton flocks residues were mixed at different wt./wt. ratios in an intensive melt mixer Brabender Plastograph (Brabender, Duisburg, Germany) at 185 °C for 10 min, and at 80 rpm, in order to ensure to obtain a well-dispersed material. The blends were cut down to pellets with a particle size in the range of 10 mm using a pelletizer equipped with a set of knifes and different grids. The pellets were dried and stored at 80 °C for 24 h. After that, the composite blends were injection-molded in a Meteor-40 injection machine (Mateu & Solé, Spain). The machine is equipped with three heating areas working at 175, 175 and 190 °C, the highest temperature corresponding to the nozzle. First and second pressures were 120 and 37.5 kg.cm Processed materials were placed in a conditioning chamber (Dycometal) at 23 °C and 50% relative humidity during 48 h, in accordance with ASTM Cotton residues were extracted from composites by matrix solubilisation using a Soxhlet apparatus and Decalin as a solvent. Small pieces of composites were cut and placed inside a specific cellulose filter and set into a Soxhlet equipment. A small cotton tab was used to prevent the fibers from getting out of the filtering tube. The fiber extraction was carried out during 24 h. Afterwards, fibers were rinsed with acetone and then with distilled water in order to remove the solvent residue. Finally the fibers were dried in an oven at 105 °C for 24 h. Fiber length distribution and fiber diameter of the extracted cotton fibers were characterized by means of a Kajanni analyzer (FS-300). A diluted aqueous suspension (1 wt.% consistency) of fibers was analyzed during 2–5 min, and the length of the fibers was evaluated considering an amount of individual fibers in the range of 2500–3000 units. Minimums of two samples were analyzed. The Kajanni analyzer offers complete fiber, fines and shiv morphology characterization, but only the fiber length and fiber diameter distribution were used the present work. The fibers were also measured with a Leica DMR-XA optic microscope with a 2 μm optical resolution. The degree of polymerization (DP) of cotton fibers was determined according to UNE 57-039-92. The viscosimetric average molecular weight was calculated from the equation The cationic demand of cotton fiber was determined using a Mütek PCD 04 particle charge detector. First, 0.2 g (dried weight) of cotton fiber was diluted in 15 ml distilled water. Then 25 ml of cationic polymer polydiallyldimethylamonium chloride (polyDADMAC) was added to before fiber solution and it was mixed for 5 min with magnetic stirring. After this time the mixture was centrifuged in a Sigma Laborzentrifugen model 6 K 15 for 90 min at 4000 rpm. Then, 10 ml of the supernatant was taken to the Mütek equipment. Anionic polymer (Pes-Na) was then added to the sample drop by drop with a pipette until the equipment reached 0 mV. The volume of anionic polymer consumed was used to calculate the cationic demand though: Extractives and lignin of cotton fiber residues were determined following TAPPI standard methods, T222 om-88 and T223 cm-84, respectively. Cellulose content was measured according to Wise et al. (1946). The tensile strength of the cotton flocks was obtained from the force-displacement curves, following ASTM To remove the dye from the cotton flocks, one dry gram of cotton residues was submerged into a hot Sodium hydrosulphite solution (25 wt.%) for 2 h. Then, cotton flocks were water rinsed and dried at 50 °C. When hydrophilic natural fibers, as cotton, are used as reinforcement for a hydrophobic matrix, as PP, the use of coupling agents as MAPP is a common practice to obtain good tensile and flexural strength  It was found that adding MAPP increased progressively the tensile strength of the composites besides the reinforcement content. The composites with a 30 wt.% of WCS increased their tensile strength a 57.2, 63.7 and a 70.6% against the matrix when 2, 4 and 6% of MAPP was added, respectively. If the same values are compared with the composite without MAPP the respective increases were 13.6, 18.3 and 23.3%. Further MAPP contents caused a drop of the tensile strength of the composite. The most probable cause could be the self-entanglement of the MAPP chains The uncoupled composite materials with 30 and 40 wt.% WCS increased the tensile strength of the matrix a 38.4 and a 51.1%, respectively. Such increases are really significant when compared with other uncoupled cellulosic fiber reinforced composites. A probable cause for such behavior could be due to the dye agents affecting surface chemical character of the cotton flocks. In that sense, the cationic demand of the dyed cotton residue flocks, expressed in micro-equivalents of polyDACMAC per gram of reinforcement, was estimated at 16.39 μeq. g/g, while the virgin cotton fibers showed a 58.7 μeq. g/g demand It was found that the dyed and the faded cotton flocks had affinity with the organic phase (hexane), and aqueous phase, respectively. Consequently, it was apparent that the dying agents changed the surface character of the cotton fibers, increasing their hydrophobicity, and consequently their affinity with the PP, and thus resulting in comparatively high tensile strengths for the uncoupled composites Nonetheless, it is probable that such dying agents also affect the interactions of the cotton fiber surfaces with the MAPP, limiting its strengthening power. To that effect, a modified Rule of Mixtures (mRoM) was used to analyze the experimental results (Eq. The mRoM was used to obtain the value of the intrinsic tensile strengths of the cotton fibers, using the experimental results ( The obtained For comparison purposes, virgin cotton flocks were used to prepare a composite with a 20% of such fibers as reinforcement (the composite was coupled with a 6% of MAPP). Once tensile tested its tensile strength was 46.86 MPa and its strain at break was 4.9%. These new experimental data were used anew to back calculate the correspondent intrinsic tensile strength of virgin cotton flocks, by using the mRoM, and assuming a 0.2 coupling factor, obtaining a 1017.4 MPa value. The dyed and the virgin cotton strands are very similar, being its main difference the presence or not of dying agents and consequently its effect on the reactivity between the strands surface and the MAPP. Then, if the intrinsic strength of the cotton flocks is established at a value around 1000 MPa, it is clear that the coupling factor in the case of the dyed cotton strands-based composites is lower than 0.2, and such composites could not considered fully well bonded. It is known that the contribution of a reinforcing fiber to the tensile strength of a composite depends on its intrinsic tensile strength, but also in the nature of the bonds between the matrix and the fibers, and the number of such bonds per volume fraction. These virgin cotton flocks were chemically analyzed ( It was found that the cellulose and the alpha-cellulose contents, and its degree of polymerization were comparatively very high. A bleached pine Kraft pulp (BPKP) shows lesser cellulose contents (84.1 wt.%, with a 15.9 wt.% of hemicelluloses), and a polymerization degree of 1197. A PP-based composite material reinforced with a 40 wt.% of BPKP, coupled with a 6% of MAPP reported that the intrinsic tensile strength of the BPKP is 474.6 MPa. The qualitative and quantitative differences with the cotton fibers are clear. With the objective of clarifying the value of the intrinsic tensile strength of the cotton flocks single fiber tensile tests were performed.  The width of the single fibers was very regular, fiber to fiber, with slight variation between them. The mean diameter of all the evaluated fibers was 17.35 μm. Then, the fibers were submitted to tensile test. The intrinsic properties of the Cotton fibers were computed after a Weibull analysis of the single fiber tests experimental results. The Weibull analysis describes the probability of failure of a fiber under stress. The probability of failure under a given stress (   The low value of the Weibull modulus reflects the exhibited wide scatter. The measured mean intrinsic tensile strengths are similar to their respective characteristic strengths. The characteristic strengths also visualize the highest probability of failure for the longest fibers. Usually the mean lengths of the fibers inside the composites show values much shorter than that of the gauge lengths. The regression equation can be used to compute the intrinsic tensile strength of the reinforcing fibers, once such fibers are morphologically characterized. This morphological analysis indicated that the mean diameter of the fibers was 16.5 μm. It was found that the mean arithmetic lengths of the coupled composites with 30 and 40 wt.% WCS contents were 239 and 210 μm, respectively. In the same way, the respective single weighted length was 374 and 339 μm. The equation presented with With the morphologic data of the reinforcing fibers and the results of the tensile tests of the matrix and the composites it was possible to use the modified Kelly and Tyson model In Equation Previous works found that the orientation angle was highly influenced by the machinery used during the mould injection of the specimens. It was found that such parameter also rendered values between 0.25 and 0.35. It is accepted that the relation between the orientation factor and the mean orientation angle ( A numerical solution for the Kelly and Tyson equation was proposed in order to know the value of the interfacial shear strength and the orientation factor for the composites that added a 6% of MAPP. If the equation is handled individually for both composites shows two incognita, being impossible to solve. On the other hand it is wise thinking that both values will be similar for the composites with a 40 and 30% of cotton fiber reinforcement, being the case in previous researches Finally, the mRoM (Eq. A by-product of the textile industry in the shape of waste cotton flocks was used to reinforce polypropylene. This use could inertize such by-product and extend the value chain of the textile industries. It was found that the organic dyes favored the interphase between the cotton flocks and the matrix, as long as their composite materials showed comparatively relevant tensile strength, without any coupling agent. At the same time, it was apparent that the aforementioned dyes affected negatively the action of the coupling agents. The tested cotton flocks presented intrinsic tensile strengths superior to that found in the bibliography. With such strengths, its composites could replace glass fiber-based reinforced composites. The intrinsic tensile strengths of the cotton flocks were obtained by single fiber tensile test, and as it is known that the fibers suffer morphologic changes when composed. Thus, it is probable that its intrinsic tensile strength inside the composite is different to that outside. A more accurate micro-mechanics analysis could unveil possible deviations from the experimental values. The interfacial tensile strength and the orientation factor obtained in the analysis are consistent with the literature.