Lime slaking is important for its use in a number of industrial applications. There are normally a number of factors that can influence the rate of the hydration of lime, which include, amongst others, production and storage conditions and the constitution of the water used in the slaking process. This paper describes an investigation of the effect of mode of agitation during the slaking process of the limes from different geological origins. During the investigation normal mechanical shaking was compared with ultrasonic agitation when the limes were contacted with water. It was found that the ultrasonic shaking enhanced both the rate and the degree of hydration of the different limes being slaked. The geological origin of the various limes also exerted an influence in the slaking process.Lime is undoubtedly a highly important industrial mineral that is widely used in a number of industries. Its most common applications include water treatment, neutralisation of acidic effluents, cement production and acting as a flux in the refining of steel from iron ore. Very often the desired species in a particular application is Ca(OH) The authors ( The effects of chemical variables like chloride and sulphate ions present in the slaking water, have also received attention ( This short note will describe the effect of yet another variable, namely the effect of energy, during the slaking process of lime, on its hydration behaviour. Samples from naturally occurring limestone deposits of different geological origin were collected from three sites in South Africa. Pienaarsriver limestone, just to the north of Pretoria, is a secondary limestone deposit occurring as calcrete nodules embedded in a silt/clay matrix, while Beestekraal limestone, between the towns of Brits and Thabazimbi, is a primary deposit with a significant level of magnesium contamination. Lime Acres limestone is chemically the most pure limestone deposit in South Arica and the source of the bulk of unslaked lime sold in the country. The chemical composition of these three samples, as obtained by XRF analysis, is given in The various calcium carbonate-containing samples were each heated at 900 °C for 5 h, cooled in a desiccator, and 3 g of each sample was then added to 250 ml of distilled water in a clean plastic bottle. The bottle with its contents was shaken on a platform shaker for fixed time intervals before being removed and filtered immediately. After filtration the residue was dried at 120 °C for 1 h to remove any adsorbed water. The percentage slaking was calculated by determining the amount of Ca(OH) The distilled water was then replaced by solutions of 1 mol The difference in the degree of slaking obtained when various lime samples were hydrated in water under normal conditions with a shaker as compared to the cases when ultrasonic energy was employed, is shown in From the results summarized in The use of ultrasonic energy generally increases the degree of hydration of all lime samples, especially during the first two minutes of hydration. The effect of the ultrasonic energy on the lime slaking process was the smallest for the pure lime sample, confirming once again that purity of the material does play a role in the hydration of the lime. The ultimate degree of slaking is achieved after 15 min when the conventional shaker is used and varies from 93.8% to 99.3%. However, when an ultrasonic shaker is employed the ultimate degree of slaking is achieved within 2.5 min and the variation is much less (98.0–99.3%). The Pienaarsriver lime slaked the fastest and easiest, as well as to the greatest degree, of all three natural materials evaluated. The exercised was repeated with water containing 1 M NaCl, to investigate what the difference in slaking behaviour of the various samples would be when using the said different agitation modes during hydration of the lime. The results are summarized in A similar picture than in the initial part of the investigation emerged from the results given in When sodium sulphate was added to the slaking water to investigate the effect of sulphate ions on the hydration of lime, the results shown in From the data summarized in  The following conclusions can be made from this investigation: All the limes slaked faster and to a larger extent under the influence of ultrasonic agitation when compared to situations when normal (mechanical) agitation was used. In agreement with previous results, it was found that the presence of chloride in the slaking water enhanced the amount of hydration occurring, while the presence of sulphate ions retarded the degree of slaking of each lime investigated. It seems that the chemical purity of the lime played a significant role in the degree of hydration actually achieved by the respective lime sample. The Medical University of South Africa (Medunsa), the University of Pretoria, the Technikon of Pretoria and the National Research Foundation (NRF), are all gratefully acknowledged for financial assistance.