The fatty acid stabilization of magnetite nanoparticles is important for a broad field of studies and applications. In numerous previous studies TGA analyses are applied to investigate these compounds and draw conclusions such as magnetite concentration and surface grafting densities of the chemisorbed molecules. There are however deviations in interpretation of the analysis results. In the presented work we contribute to the discussion on the inert gas decomposition of the fatty acid ricinoleic acid adsorbed on the surface of magnetite nanoparticles with a priori knowledge of magnetite concentration. We report on impacts of autoxidation of the fatty acid as well as significant reduction of magnetite from carbonaceous residues. The findings are based on subsequent gas analysis with FTIR coupled to the TG device. We show how stoichiometric calculations on the reduction in the temperature range of 600–900°C let conclude that the residues are most probably from the chemisorbed fatty acid molecules. Only the physically adsorbed fatty acid molecules have decomposed or detached before 600°C. In context to the investigations on chemically adsorbed fatty acid on magnetite we compare the decomposition of pristine fatty acid and fatty acid physically adsorbed on a high surface area SiO2 nanopowder. Three distinct steps of decomposition which have often been reported before are found and accounted.Magnetite nanoparticles are a very broadly applied and investigated nanomaterial for a range of technological applications spanning from the biomedical sector Unfortunately the mismatch for the magnetite concentrations derived from TGA is only obvious when one knows the magnetite concentration prior to the thermal analysis which was only found in one publication that was reviewed The following chemicals have been used as received. For the synthesis of magnetite nanoparticles with a crystallite size of about 15 As another nanoparticulate material, which carboxylic acid has not been reported to chemically adsorb on, Aerosil 200 from Evonik with a comparable primary particle size of about 12 The thermogravimetric analysis is acquired with a Netzsch STA 449 F3 Jupiter at a heating rate of 20 The magnetite concentration was furthermore derived from AAS analyses of Fe with a PerkinElmer spectrometer after decomposition of the nanoparticles in liquid KHSO For semi-quantitative analysis of the CO XRD measurements using a PANalytical X’Pert Pro powder diffractometer with Cu Kα light source are acquired for the fatty acid coated magnetite before TGA and for the residue after inert heating to 900 In this paragraph we want to discuss the decomposition of pristine ricinoleic acid, its molecular structure displayed in Due to the before mentioned broader decomposition towards temperatures below 350 The common features of both gas phase spectra are the dominant symmetric and asymmetric C This paragraph is dedicated to the evaluation of the thermal degradation of the ricinoleic acid coated magnetite nanoparticles (RA-Fe Before investigating the individual steps is to mention that the total mass loss should be only 16.7% for all samples if the entire fatty acid was decomposed and the residue would be magnetite as this is the assumption in most papers found in literature. This is not the case for there is a total mass loss between 25% and 30%. The high temperature step shows the highest mass loss in the three investigated samples. One distinct difference between the samples is the significantly higher and lower mass loss for the first sample (low RA concentration in DCM) in the second and third step, respectively. The loss in the first step is more or less equal for all of the three RA concentrations. However, we assume that lower concentrations of RA in DCM at the phase transfer lead to a lower surface grafting density. This would, as a first clue suggest that at the second step only weakly physically bound acid is detached (decomposed) which more dominantly is the case for the lower ricinoleic acid concentration. This step will be discussed in detail below. The difference for 2% and 3% RA concentrations however is not dominant which might be due to a certain limiting concentration where surface grafting density is not influenced any longer because the liquid–liquid interface is quickly fed with fresh molecules. In order to clarify and verify what happens in each step as an extension of all the referred literature the evolved decomposition gases are analyzed with gas-FTIR and the result is shown in At the lower temperature step with a peak value of about 255 As mentioned in the previous section the content of magnetite neither corresponds to the TGA result at 600 We see that the difference in concentration is most dominant comparing the magnetite content with the residue at 900 In this reaction it is supposed that all magnetite is reduced to wüstite FeO and ferrite Fe. The factors a through Before addressing the question what the resulting amount of chemically grafted fatty acids is we would like to support the presented reduction mechanism by looking at the crystal structure of the iron oxide before and after inert gas TGA in the next paragraph. This is supposed to show the expected occurrence of ferrite (Fe) and wüstite (FeO). In this paragraph we present the results of the powder diffraction analysis of pristine magnetite after the precipitation and of the iron oxide residue after TGA in inert atmosphere to 900 Before the thermal analysis the only crystal structure identified is magnetite Fe In order to check the before discussed mass balance to quantify the reduction reaction in Eq. It has to be mentioned that there is also the possibility to obtain maghemite γ-Fe In this section we are presenting a simple calculation based on the findings above which is dedicated to the evaluation of how many molecules are chemically grafted to the surface of magnetite. The simple assumption shall be that the residual carbon which leads to the reduction and therefore the mass loss for inert TGA beyond 600 Obviously it cannot be the case that the residual carbon results from degraded individual molecules which have less than about 10 carbon atoms for the surface area would be too small if one assumes a maximum grafting density which indeed is very questionable. The calculated negative value for a hypothetical residual single carbon atom from the C18 molecules (  A last question we would like to address is: how does the carboxylic acid decompose in inert TGA if it was not chemically grafted to the nanoparticle surface but only in physical contact with another high surface area material? In this chapter we therefore report on the decomposition of RA mixed with Aerosil 200. Aerosil has a similar primary particle size and thus a comparable surface area like the as-precipitated magnetite. The mass ratio of RA and SiO The RA curve has been described and explained above. For the two investigated nanomaterials we find a coincidence of the first two decomposition steps at about 250 One special feature is the strong absorption bands of desorbing water which has been bound to SiO We have presented a study on the decomposition of the fatty acid ricinoleic acid when adsorbed and chemically grafted to magnetite in a liquid–liquid phase transfer using TGA in inert atmosphere. As an extension of the information obtained from the gravimetric thermal degradation we investigated the decomposition gases released with gas phase FTIR which is coupled to the TG device. Furthermore we looked at the decomposition of pristine RA and RA physically adsorbed to high surface area SiO Future research of our group based on the liquid–liquid phase transfer process involves the study of other carboxylic acids as well as nanoparticles together with variable process parameters and will make use of the information obtained in this paper. One will also be able to extent the information to the analysis of more complex systems such as iron oxide nanoparticle containing polymer composites. We give thanks to the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 