The transport of Au(CN)2
                     − between aqueous solutions and organic phases of the mixture of the amine Primene JMT and the phosphine oxide Cyanex 923 in xylene was studied under various experimental conditions, i.e., extractant mixtures and gold concentrations. The behaviour of the system with different organic diluents, aqueous ionic strength and the selectivity of the system with respect to the transport of different metal–cyano complexes were also investigated. The transport of gold(I) can be ascribed to a mechanism which consists of (i) a diffusion process through the feed aqueous diffusion layer, (ii) a fast interfacial chemical reaction and (iii) a diffusion of HAu(CN)2RL and HAu(CN)2RL2 (R=the amine, L=the phosphine oxide) through the membrane.The past years have shown a growing interest in the investigation of new alternatives for the processing of liquid solutions that contain valuable or toxic metals. Liquid membrane technologies have been proposed as a real challenge for the treatment of such solution. Supported liquid membranes (SLMs) have the claimed advantage (i.e., vs. conventional solvent extraction) that the extraction, stripping and regeneration of the organic phase are reduced to a single stage. Although hydrometallurgical processing of gold–cyanide is well established Relatively little data can be found in the literature about the use of SLM technologies in gold–cyanide processing Little systematic study has been conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of such mixtures for permeation of gold(I) across supported liquid membranes. Thus, carrier-facilitated membrane transport of gold across a supported liquid membrane was investigated using the organic reagent mixture of primary amine Primene JMT and phosphine oxide Cyanex 923. The aim was to optimise several parameters and so obtain efficient supported liquid membranes. The characteristics and properties of both extractants used in the present investigation, the primary amine Primene JMT and the phosphine oxide Cyanex 923, have been published elsewhere The organic membrane phase was prepared by dissolving the corresponding volume of Primene JMT and Cyanex 923 (unless stated otherwise) in xylene to obtain carrier solutions of different concentrations. The polymeric support was impregnated with the carrier solution by immersion for 24 h, then leaving to drip for 15 s before being placed in the FSSLM cell. Previous experiments showed than prolonged immersion times (i.e., 36 or 48 h) do not change the results obtained after 24 h. The flat-sheet membrane used was Millipore-Durapore GVHP 4700, its characteristics being obtained elsewhere Single-stage FSSLM measurements were carried out in a cell which has been described before On the other hand, the percentage of metal transport (% Solutions of 0.1 M NaOH were used as the receiving phase, as previous solvent extraction experiments have shown that this phase is effective to remove gold(I) from loaded organic solutions The optimum concentration of Primene JMT and Cyanex 923 in the mixture was first studied with the objective of obtaining higher metal transport. These experiments were carried out using feed solutions of 2.5×10  Conditions to establish adequate hydrodynamic conditions were determined. The permeability of the membrane was studied as a function of the stirring speed on the feed side and receiving solution side. Results obtained are shown in Thus, the thickness of the aqueous diffusion layer and the aqueous resistance to mass transfer were minimized, and the diffusion contribution of the aqueous species to the mass transfer process is assumed to be constant. The influence of initial gold concentration on the transport of the metal was studied using feed phases which contained different gold concentrations at pH 9.5±0.05 and an organic phase of Primene JMT-Cyanex 923 (20:20% v/v) in xylene. As can be seen from  It can be seen that the transport of gold increases with the increase of the extractant mixture concentration, although no significant change in the permeability was found at concentrations above 20:20% v/v. This limiting permeability value could be attributed to a permeation process controlled by the diffusion in the stagnant film of the aqueous feed phase. Thus, It is recognized that the organic diluent influences the performance of many liquid membrane systems The change in the organic diluent influences the transport of gold. Thus, transport using the carrier mixture of Primene JMT and Cyanex 923 is enhanced using organic diluents with lower viscosity and of aromatic nature, though it is difficult to ascribe the transport of the metal to any particular property of the organic diluent. To study the effect of aqueous ionic strength in the feed phase, experiments were carried out with organic phases of Primene JMT-Cyanex 923 (20:20% v/v) in xylene and aqueous solutions which contained 2.5×10 This study was again carried out using an organic phase of Primene JMT-Cyanex 923 (20:20% v/v) in xylene and an aqueous phase containing 2.5×10 The variation in the metal transport is explained according to the different ease of extraction of the complexes using the Primene JMT-Cyanex 923 mixture. The extraction of the gold(I)–cyanide complex is favoured over that of the other metal–cyano complexes at these alkaline pH values. The extraction of Au(CN) According to the literature In this expression, the equilibrium and diffusion parameters involved in the Au(CN) To determine the value of the resistance to mass transfer, the next expression, obtained from the above equation, has been used: In the present investigation, experiments on gold transport have been carried out at pH value of 9.5, and the parameters By substituting in Thus, by plotting 1/ The diffusion coefficient of the gold complexes in the bulk organic phase ( The transport of Au(CN) Authors thank Mr. Bascones and Mr. Lopez for technical assistance throughout the experimental work and CSIC (Spain) for support.