Bilateral acetabular fractures in elderly patients due to seizures are very rare and management is a challenge. The standard treatment for acetabular fracture, open reduction with internal fixation, is not recommended for the elderly because of poor bone quality and the need for bed rest. In the acute phase, total hip arthroplasty may be the best treatment option because it allows early mobilization and avoids bed rest complications. We report the case of a 76-year-old man with a bilateral comminuted acetabular fractures and a left fracture dislocation of the shoulder, treated by immediate shoulder arthroplasty and a one-stage bilateral total hip arthroplasty procedure at 3 weeks, with a good result at 1-year follow-up.During an epileptic episode, severe muscle contractions may lead to shoulder, hip, or vertebrae compression fractures We report here a case of a 76-year-old male with simultaneous bilateral central acetabular fracture dislocation and posterior shoulder fracture dislocation, secondary to a grand mal seizure, to describe a unique surgical treatment with a successful outcome. A 76-year-old male patient arrived in our emergency department following a generalized tonic-clonic seizure. He had a history of epilepsy, depression, and benign prostatic hyperplasia. His initial independence was complete with a Parker score of 9 We opted to treat the shoulder immediately and then treated the acetabular fractures by bilateral THA 3 weeks later. The day after the trauma, left shoulder hemiarthroplasty (Ulys prosthesis; Ceraver, Roissy-en-France, France) was performed for the shoulder fracture dislocation by a deltopectoral approach, without any hemodynamic complications. During the post-operative period, passive shoulder mobilization started. The bilateral central hip subluxations were treated conservatively initially without traction due to minor pain, but with some minimal physiotherapy of the lower limbs. Pain was controlled by medication and epilepsy treatment was reviewed by a neurologist. Three weeks after his seizure a single-stage bilateral THA under general anesthesia was performed. We operated first on the right side and next on the left during the same anesthesia. The patient was supine with the 2 lower limbs in the operation area without a fracture table. The 2 surgeries were performed by 2 senior surgeons following the same steps and using the same instruments. A direct anterior approach (Hueter The second day after surgery and for 2 weeks following, the patient walked with immediate weight bearing and with only 1 crutch on the right side. The patient lived alone at home and required physiotherapy in a rehabilitation center for 2 months. Six weeks after surgery, the patient walked without any help and had no hip pain. At the last follow-up (1 year), the patient was living alone at home, which matched the pre-trauma conditions. The patient was able to walk without crutches, except for long walks (more than 30 minutes) and without limping. He had slight pain but no compromised activity. On clinical examination, bilateral hip mobility was very good with 100° of flexion, full extension, 15° of abduction, 20° of adduction, 10° of external rotation, and 10° of internal rotation. For both hips, the Harris score The patient consented to data concerning his case being submitted for publication. Various studies describe shoulder, hip joint, or vertebral fracture following an epileptic episode Since 1970, only 29 cases of acetabulum fracture dislocation have been described secondary to seizure from a variety of causes ( In elderly patients, most acetabular fractures are pathological due to osteoporotic bone. In the presence of osteoporosis, a simple fall or a seizure may result in a comminuted fracture. Osteosynthesis in elderly patients may not be the best treatment option due to osteoporotic bone and the complications associated with the period of bed rest required. Overall, such an approach is associated with a poor prognosis and a higher rate of long-term complication Articular impaction of the medial roof or posterior wall, dislocation of the hip, comminuted posterior wall fractures, injury to the femoral head, and impaction of the acetabulum that involved more than 40% of the joint surface have all been associated with early failure after attempted reduction and internal fixation When considering a delay between a fracture and THA in the elderly, some authors agree that an acute surgery within 21 days after fracture is best, whereas others conclude that surgery should be delayed so that the fractured bones have time to heal. In elderly patients with severely displaced acetabular fractures with non-anatomical bone alignment or severe pain, early THA is an alternative way to achieve a painless and stable hip THA for acetabular fractures is a surgical challenge and requires an experienced arthroplasty surgeon; successful THA is dependent on the stabilization of the displaced acetabular fragments to allow a solid fixation of the acetabular component A metal-on-polyethylene couple without dual mobility was used in this 76-year-old patient. Some studies recommend using a dual mobility cup in elderly patients due to the increasing risk of dislocation associated with weaker musculature Simultaneous bilateral THA was first reported by Jaffe and Charnley in 1971 Anterior approach THA has the advantage of a single supine position for bilateral simultaneous surgery, so it is appropriate in this case. A study showed that blood loss was significantly lower during an anterior approach rather than a lateral approach in a bilateral 1-stage surgery, as was the transfusion rate Acute THA in elderly patient with acetabular fracture allows patients to return to the previous daily life activity In the elderly, bilateral acetabular fractures due to a seizure may be treated by 1-stage bilateral THA through an anterior approach with good results. Thanks to Miss Sally Spurr for translation help. 