This paper is a study of the dependence of the volume of voids in a granular material on the particle size distribution. It has previously been proposed that the volume of voids is proportional to the volume of the smallest particles. In a particle size distribution which is progressively becoming wider (e.g. as occurs due to crushing during the compression of sand), the smallest size of particle decreases, yet there are only ever a few of these particles out of many thousands or millions. This paper attempts to identify which particles govern the overall density of a granular material, and a new definition of the ‘smallest particles’ is proposed. These particles are shown to govern the void space in a range of simulations of spherical and non-spherical crushable particles. The theory also applies to idealised Apollonian sphere packings.voids ratio, = porosity, = volume of solids volume of the smallest particles total volume, = volume of voids The packing characteristics of granular materials have been studied for over a century. It is generally accepted that the comparative density of any granular material is a function of particle shape, size range and size distribution ( The packing of granular material has a direct influence over its engineering properties. For sands, the density determines the dilatancy and peak strength when sheared ( Given the dependence of packing characteristics on the particle size distribution, particle crushing, which changes the distribution therefore also has a major influence on the constitutive behaviour. The importance of crushing in sands for example has long been acknowledged; when a sand is subjected to monotonic increasing stress (normal compression), it is well known that after a high enough stress is reached, particle crushing begins and causes a permanent decrease in volume (e.g. Recent Discrete Element Method (DEM) simulations incorporating particle crushing have enabled all the main features of sand behaviour to be reproduced. This has led to new micro mechanical insights into the normal compression and shearing of sands, critical states, and yielding; and has further highlighted the influence that particle crushing and the particle size distribution (PSD) has on the observed macroscopic behaviour for sand (e.g. The work presented here focuses on how the PSD controls the overall volume of a soil sample, with a particular focus on how crushing, and therefore a change in the size distribution, governs changes in overall volume. A background to the theory linking the particle size distribution (in particular the smallest particles) to the current voids ratio or porosity is given in the next section. When sand is subjected to increasing stress (e.g. isotropic or one-dimensional), after yielding the sample follows a unique normal compression line (NCL) in volume-stress space, known to be caused by particle crushing. Following The slope of the NCL is therefore a function of the particle strength size-effect. In deriving The second step—relating the particle size distribution to the current void space will now be revisited, and is the subject of a more detailed analysis. A fractal particle size distribution is usually defined as one in which (e.g. The collective volume of particles of size A fundamental assumption used by For the confined compression of a granular material, the volume of solids ( Substituting The rationale behind the assumption in The porosity Apollonian sphere packing is the process of iteratively filling the voids between existing spheres with the largest possible mutually-tangent sphere (e.g. In a previous attempt to quantify the volume of the smallest particles, from simulations of crushable spheres it was found that the most suitable method was using the coordination number, defining the so-called smallest particles as those with minimal contacts (as opposed to using some finite physical measure). This approach seemed logical as it was capable of tracking a continuously and gradually evolving PSD, whilst also taking into account any local variations in the PSD through the sample. Thus, defining the 'smallest particles' as those (spheres) with 5 or fewer contacts, there emerged a direct proportionality between the cumulative volume of these smallest particles, In this previous analysis, which used spheres, it was speculated that the value of 5 contacts was unimportant and assumed to be a function of particle shape. Although ostensibly arbitrary, the value of 5 was taken based on the fact that higher coordination numbers are only possible if a particle is surrounded by smaller particles. For a dense random packing of spheres, the minimum number of contacts a load-carrying particle may have is 4. The only feasible way for a sphere to be in contact with a much greater number of surrounding particles is if they are much smaller. Although theoretically the greatest number of contacts possible with equally-sized neighbouring spheres is 12 (strictly for hexagonal close packing), for real, random packings this number will be much lower. This work seeks to define a more rigorous definition of the 'smallest particles', avoiding the use of an arbitrary value of contacts by investigating non-spherical particles, and further explore what governs the overall density of a granular material. New isotropic compression simulations are presented for crushable sands using a range of particle shapes, followed by a brief analysis of sphere-packing. Isotropic compression simulations were performed on crushable samples with varying particle shapes, for the purpose of achieving a decrease in overall volume caused by a changing particle size distribution. The principles and modelling procedure behind all simulations are identical to previous work by the authors, the only difference being the use of non-spherical particle shapes. Modelling details such as the contact model, simulation procedure, breakage mechanism and criterion, and all other mechanical properties are given in several prior publications (e.g. All simulations were performed using PFC ( A total of 5 different shapes were used including spheres. Three simple clump shapes consisting of 2 or 3 sub-spheres are illustrated in The compression simulations were performed on cylindrical triaxial samples, illustrated in The stress-strain results which are used to perform volumetric analysis are presented in All initial samples have identical, uniform initial PSDs. The final PSDs from all normal compression simulations are shown in A similar approach to defining the 'smallest particles' based on the coordination number is used here. The average coordination number for the various clump simulations varies greatly from that for spheres. Before crushing, the average coordination number for spheres is around 6, whilst that for clumps varies between 6 and 12 depending on the shape (with greater variation once crushing begins). The prism-shaped clumps ( It therefore seemed logical to use some relative measure of coordination number, and it was found that a more robust definition of the smallest particles is achieved by comparing the number of contacts a particle has with smaller and bigger neighbouring particles. If The use of particle contact information to determine whether or not a particle is effectively the smallest means that these 'smallest particles' will include particles with different physical sizes, and has the advantage of taking into account local differences in the sample grading. Calculating the cumulative volume of all such smallest particles as  One observation is that the relation To further investigate the proposed theory—that particles with mainly larger neighbours are representative of the voids—the analysis will now be applied to an Apollonian sphere packing. Apollonian sphere packing is the process of iteratively filling the voids between existing spheres with the largest possible mutually-tangent sphere (e.g. An Apollonian packing was created starting with 4 initial spheres of unit radius, see Despite the apparently regular process of sphere insertion, the resulting particle size distribution is far more continuous than that obtained from the compression simulations, in which particles undergo hierarchical splitting. Of the 473,039 particles, there are over 10,000 different sizes; 4 spheres with the maximum size The initial motivation for trying to relate the PSD to the current voids ratio was in the derivation of a compression law, able to predict the compressibility of crushable soil. The follow-up analysis here appears to reveal a more fundamental relation between the smallest particles, which are representative of the surrounding voids, and the overall packing density or voids. The proposed definition is that these 'smallest particles' are defined as those with predominantly larger neighbouring particles. The cumulative volume of these effectively-smallest particles appears to correlate directly with the overall pore space, and appears to be valid irrespective of stress path or whether the PSD is fractal, as long as there is some range of physical particle sizes. The fact that crushing leads to a fractal distribution, allows a prediction to be made of the quantity and volume of these particles, and provides the link needed for the compression law. In a fractal distribution, at the fine end of the PSD, the geometrical configuration is always the same—for example in an Apollonian packing the smallest particles are always mutually tangent to exactly 4 surrounding larger spheres. In other words, the distribution of contacts is self-similar. However this self-similarity will be different for different stress paths—for example, samples compressed under one-dimensional conditions, or critical states, are loaded anisotropically and will have a different distribution of contacts, and the 'smallest particles' will be different in each case. For spheres, in Going forward, it would seem sensible to attribute a new term to these particles, such as the 'mechanically-smallest' or 'effective' particles, or some such expression, avoiding repeated and potentially confusing use of the term smallest particles. In any case, it is hoped that the proposed definition of the effectively-smallest particles, which govern the overall porosity will form the basis of further analytical solutions or predictions of granular densities. It has already been shown that if it can be predicted (or it is known) how the PSD changes, then the change in volume of these smallest particles can be inferred, which under the same loading conditions can be taken as a measure of the change in voids ratio. Knowing which particles control the overall density or porosity could have possible applications in issues of internal erosion (in which fine particles are gradually removed, changing the soils engineering properties), as well as in predicting changes in permeability due to changes in grading (e.g. caused by crushing). The permeability of any granular or soil sample depends on more factors than simply the void space, however empirical solutions typically use values such as This work aimed to clarify what governs the void space in granular soil. It has previously been speculated that the volume of voids is linked to the volume of the smallest particles. A new definition of 'smallest particles' has been proposed, where the smallest particles are those that have relatively fewer contacts with smaller particles compared to larger particles. The volume of such particles is proportional to the void space, and this is true for all particle shapes investigated, as well as idealised Apollonian packings of spheres. For soil, the strength of the smallest particles gives the hardening law as stress increases. It appears that the normal compression of soil is the breakage of particles in order to achieve an efficient space-filling packing, similar to Apollonian packing and with the same fractal dimension. This work was supported by the