A comprehensive understanding of how species/functional group interactions determine population dynamics, community composition and their effect on ecosystem functioning is necessary if we are to understand the consequences of species loss. This paper presents data from a mesocosm experiment, based on the simplex design, to examine the effect of interactions between earthworm functional groups, food supply and initial overall biomass on community structure. All communities containing anecic species moved towards domination by anecics. The survival of anecics remained constant irrespective of initial conditions, with no effect of initial community structure, food supply or initial biomass. The proportional biomass of epigeics increased when they were placed in communities dominated by anecics. Initial overall biomass had a significant effect on the survival of endogeics, with increased survival at low biomass. Juvenile production was significantly increased in communities that contained a higher initial abundance of epigeics. The anecics had significantly increased production of juveniles at lower levels of initial biomass. Overall, earthworm functional group diversity had an idiosyncratic effect on earthworm assemblage structure but the presence of synergistic interactions suggests that the persistence and optimal contribution of the earthworm assemblage to ecosystem service is dependent on the presence of a number of functional groups.Earthworms play important roles in determining soil fertility and structure ( Both intra- and inter-specific/group competition have been shown to affect the survival, growth, maturation and cocoon production of earthworms and these effects have even been demonstrated between species from different functional groups ( Competition also affects burrow systems and burrowing behaviour ( These effects are usually interpreted as being due to competition for food resources; however, little research has been done on the influence of food resource availability on earthworm interactions. In fact, in one of the few studies, which have specifically addressed this issue, it was found that, while growth and maturation of hatchling The study reported here is one of a series designed to answer the question posed by Because of the difficulties identified with many previous experimental designs ( The experiment was carried out at two densities of earthworm, 1.7 and 3.4 The experiment ran for a total of 30 weeks. It was housed in a potting shed where temperature was never extreme and would certainly never reach values which would affect the viability of worms in soil. The experimental units consisted of Plexiglas cylinders (15 The soil used in this experiment was topsoil obtained on the campus of University College Dublin. Initially, the soil was hand sorted to remove macrofauna, large particles and plant fragments. It was then sieved through a 4 Adult earthworms were obtained from a meadow in University College Dublin and sorted into three distinct functional groups based on The individual weights of the earthworms added to the experimental units were recorded at the beginning of the experiment and weights were again recorded when the experimental units were being dismantled. Thus, survivorship and growth could be examined. Assessing factors that affect changes in community composition: The composition of a community will change if the relative growth rates of functional groups differ. Therefore, the differences in relative growth rates between functional groups in a community should be analysed in order to determine the factors that affect changes in community composition ( For this three functional group experiment, anecics were chosen as the reference and so the response variables are RGRD This is the simplest model and could be generalised to include interactions between biomass and food or proportion of functional groups. These interactions were tested and none proved to be significant and therefore the simple model as above was used. Functional group effects are assessed through the coefficients of the functional group proportions in the model: Differences in coefficients reflect the effects of neighbours. If The effect of a change in initial endogeic proportion on the relationship between anecics and epigeics is measured through The effects of initial assemblage biomass and of the amount of food added on the relationships between functional groups are measured through the    The log link function ensures that the mean number of juveniles for each community predicted from the fitted model is positive. The average biomass of worms increased to 3.7 The parameter estimates for the two RGRD models are given in The survival of anecics remained constant irrespective of initial conditions. There was no effect of initial community structure, food supply or initial biomass. The average survival rate was 73%. Survival rate of epigeics was very low in communities dominated by either epigeics or endogeics ( The survival rate of endogeics was significantly higher in communities that contained a higher initial abundance of endogeics (cf. positive coefficient on the initial proportion of endogeics in the community) ( The production of juveniles increased in communities that contained a higher initial abundance of anecics as indicated by the positive coefficient for the proportion of anecics ( Food supply significantly affected the production of juveniles. In particular, there was a significant interaction between the proportion of epigeics in the initial assemblage structure and food supply and large numbers of juveniles were present in monocultures of epigeics at high food supply ( A comprehensive understanding of how functional group interactions determine population dynamics, community composition and their effect on ecosystem function is important. The coexistence of species/functional groups in the same habitat can lead to interactions, which can have a positive or negative effect upon them. Although interactions between organisms are generally well documented ( In this study all communities containing anecics, even those initially dominated by either of the other groups, became more dominated by this group as the experiment progressed. In fact, the relative growth rate of the anecic population was increased as the proportion of epigeics and endogeics increased. However, the anecics became less dominant in communities containing the large initial biomass of anecics perhaps indicating competition for food and/or habitat. The relative growth rates for epigeics on the other hand indicate that they are significantly negatively affected by increased biomasses of the other two groups. Similar trends were observed with survival. The survival of the anecics remained constant irrespective of initial condition. There was no effect of initial community structure, food supply or initial biomass on their survival. There was evidence of intra-group competition or lack of required synergistic effects occurring in communities dominated by the epigeics, as their survival was found to be significantly lower in these communities. The results imply that the survival of the epigeics may be directly related to optimal habitat availability. As with the proportional biomass, the survival of the epigeics was greatly increased as the initial proportion of the anecics in the community increased. This suggests that a positive inter-group interaction was occurring. Despite the very poor survival of endogeics in communities dominated by either anecics or epigeics, the greatly enhanced survival where these species are in balance is intriguing. The anecics may have provided a food resource to the endogeic earthworms by depositing faecal organic matter (or casts) into the soil where the endogeics can reach it. The epigeics play a major role in organic matter comminution and reduce the size of organic matter particles during the passage through the earthworm and in doing so makes organic matter more assessable to digestive action by other decomposers. Endogeics prefer feeding on well-decomposed organic matter. Hence, these combined effects may have played a role in the improved survival of these earthworms. In communities dominated by endogeics, their survival was reduced at high biomass suggesting intra-group competition. The production of juveniles was significantly increased in communities that contained a higher initial overall abundance of anecics. This is presumably correlated with the high rates of growth and survivorship of this group. However, there was also an increased survivorship of epigeics under these circumstances and, although the biomass of this group may have been low under these circumstances, the smaller adult sizes of these worms and the fast rate of development of epigeic cocoons could have contributed to the increased production of juveniles ( This experiment was designed primarily to assess changes in relative biomass of functional groups and, while we believe that the patterns of juvenile production observed are accurately reported and interpreted, there is a need for caution in extrapolation to certain situations. Most particularly, the spatial and temporal scales of the experiment were not sufficiently large to allow accurate assessment of reproduction in combinations where there were low proportional biomasses of particular functional groups. For example, there were some assemblages where there was only a single worm from a given functional group and, even where there were more than single individuals, they might be from the same species. However, we feel that the general patterns do reflect the outcomes expected as the analyses used would pick up such patterns even if individual points were essentially outliers. It is clear that, increased functional group diversity had an idiosyncratic effect on earthworm assemblage structure. The survival of epigeics was non-lineary related to the proportional biomass of anecics in the assemblage; the survival of endogeics was greatest when in a mixture with approximately equal biomasses of anecics and epigeics and the numbers of juveniles produced were greatest in mixtures of all three functional groups. Most significantly, the study demonstrates synergies between the functional groups which indicate that their assemblage is most likely to survive when all three groups are present. The consequences of the persistence of such assemblages is seen in the context of their roles in ecosystems where all three groups appear to make different contributions to ecosystem services and where synergistic effects have been demonstrated ( This project was partially funded by the Environmental Protection Agency, Ireland, as part of the ERTDI programme under the National Development Plan (2001-CD/B1-M1).