Although spent nickel metal-hydride (NiMH) batteries are not considered hazardous waste, there are valuable materials that could be recovered; therefore the recycling of these batteries should be considered. This paper discusses spent NiMH batteries characterization and describes a simple process to recover valuable materials based on mineral processing techniques, hence the specific objective of this work is to study a process for the recovery of valuable metals from spent NiMH batteries. Batteries were manually dismantled in order to classify their components. The electrodes could be separated during the manual dismantling and were characterized through X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. A significant fraction of the batteries, around 37wt.%, is composed of Ni-based alloy. The spent batteries were treated using laboratory equipment. The treatment that produced the best results was hammer milling, magnetic separation, knife milling, magnetic separation and size separation. The overall metal yield was in the order of 86%. A preliminary economic study is presented to show the feasibility of the process.Although the use of nickel metal-hydride (NiMH) is growing, very little research exists on their recycling, Generally, batteries are complex systems containing a great number of materials inside a small volume, but NiMH and lithium ion batteries contains more valuable materials than primary cells and nickel–cadmium (NiCd) batteries. Even though much work has been done to improve the performance of this system in the last years, a remarkable lack of information still exist on the development of a recycling facility. The use of portable devices is increasing nowadays and along with it, the use of batteries. The disposal of an increasing amount of spent batteries created a necessity to study ways to recover or recycle the materials that exist inside these batteries. The main primary accumulator used is Zn–MnO In the southern hemisphere primary batteries are still preponderant over secondary ones. Zn–MnO The lead acid battery is the cheapest secondary battery, and the process for its recycling is well-known in many countries around the world. It is specially used where the weight has little importance. In appliances where the weight is important, NiCd, NiMH and Li ion batteries compete. Although NiCd batteries are still very popular, their use tends to decrease because of environmental problems. However, NiCd batteries are cheap, have a long life cycle and high discharge rates. Cadmium is a toxic metal, so NiCd batteries must be properly treated before being disposed off. NiMH and Li ion batteries were developed to replace NiCd batteries. These two new types of batteries have less environmental impact. Comparing NiMH batteries to NiCd, NiMH batteries have a higher capacity, but a lower life cycle and lower charge current. NiMH batteries are also more expensive than NiCd ones. Li ion batteries are used when high density of energy is required, but its cost is still high compared to NiCd and NiMH batteries. In addition to these features, it is important to highlight that NiMH and Li ion batteries were designed to replace NiCd due to the environmental aspects related to Cd disposal. NiCd and NiMH batteries have similar charge and discharge features. Li ion and NiMH batteries exhibit no memory effect. A NiMH battery for cell phones is basically composed of four–five cells connected in series inside a plastic case. Each cell has nine parts The positive electrode is composed of a porous blade made of a nickel-based alloy and a paste basically composed of nickel hydroxide. The negative electrode is composed of a porous nickel-based alloy blade and the metallic case is essentially a nickel coated steel plate cup that gives the structural shape of battery and also acts as a negative pole NiMH batteries were developed based on the Ni–H According to Yoshida et al. The following general equations show the main processes in a NiMH battery The goals of the present work are to characterize the main components of a NiMH battery, and to define a process to recover the Ni-containing materials from spent NiMH batteries. To reach the described objectives, the study was divided in two distinct steps. The first step was the characterization of spent batteries, and in the second was a test of the unit operations of mineral processing. The unit operations of mineral processing were used, essentially due to their low intrinsic cost. Dismantling of batteries and X-ray diffraction (XRD) were the two techniques used to characterize the spent batteries. A great number of batteries were disassembled through the use of scissors, saws, knife, and a set of hand devices. Each component was classified, separated and weighted. The inner part of the accumulator is a three-layered bobbin. The layers were composed of positive electrode, separator and negative electrode. The electrodes were composed of a metallic screen and a paste. The pastes were scratched off and were submitted to XRD tests to identify their components. The separated components were classified according to the following classes: metallic components, plastics and remaining components. Thus, the proportion of these materials in the batteries was determined, and based on these figures the steps for recovering of Ni-containing metallic parts were selected. All of the tests were performed on a laboratory scale, e.g. the amount of material processed each time was around 5 The hammer mill was used to open the plastic case releasing the accumulators and circuits, which could be easily separated. A double hammer mill grinding was necessary to liberate all accumulators. The final product was a pile of accumulators free from circuits and almost all intact, that means that after grinding the accumulators do not open and most did not change their shapes. The first magnetic separation was done to separate the accumulators from circuits and plastic cases, as the Ni-based alloy inside the accumulator was attracted by the magnet. The knife mill was used to grind the accumulators. The sieve used in this equipment was a 5 The second magnetic separation was used to separate the metallic cup and screen from pastes and separators, since the magnet attracts the first ones. After this treatment some paste held by the metallic parts contaminated the metallic fraction, and it was necessary to isolate the metallic part. To release the contamination the size classification equipment was used. The sieve used was of around 2 Almost all spent NiMH batteries that were opened were composed of five 1.2 The classification and weight of each part provide the data shown in XRD was performed to identify the compounds present in the pastes from negative and positive electrodes, and the results showed the presence of the phases presented in Basically, these results confirm the data from the literature The treatment of spent NiMH batteries was carried out using mineral processing operations. A flow sheet of the process with the main separated materials in each step is presented in The outputs of the process are the plastic cases, the pastes and the Ni alloys. The cases are made of a thermoplastic material and consequently can be recycled, and the Ni alloys can also be recycled. As mentioned before, the electrodes contain valuable materials that may be recycled probably by a hydrometallurgical process. Zhang et al. The process developed by the authors and described in this paper recovers the metal parts of the batteries. One output of the process is composed of pastes (electrodes) and fabric. The process of Zhang et al. recovers metal values from the electrodes, so the process presented in this paper could be considered a complementary approach to the work of Zhang et al. Using the results reached in the laboratory scale study it is possible to do the mass balance presented in One can notice that about 33% of the total burden was recovered material containing valuable Ni. According to the characterization step, the amount of this material is 37%; thus, it indicates an overall yield of 86%. Nevertheless, these data were obtained in batch laboratory scale probably under industrial conditions the recovery would be even higher. A forecast for the NiMH worldwide use in 2001 predicts a production of around 1700 million units. In 1995 the production was about 300 million units. This big increase in the consumption was due to a strong decrease in the market for NiCd batteries, mainly because of the environmental restrictions on the Cd dissipation. Estimating a unit weight average of 20 The data presented in According to a steel making industry the material is suitable for charging in electric furnaces without any kind of melting or briquetting process, so the costs of packaging are negligible. Consequently, the overall cost to process 1 Battery recycling is motivated for environmental reasons. NiMH battery does not present any environmental problems related to its disposal. On the other hand, NiCd battery must be collected and recycled; although the recycling is not profitable. Generally the applications of these two types of batteries are similar and most of time they are disposed off together. Hence, NiMH batteries are collected along with spent NiCd batteries. Consequently, there exists a necessity for a process to treat NiMH batteries, and this paper demonstrates that the recovery of metal parts can be profitable. Around 37