The beneficial effect of leaching of carbonate gangue from flotation middlings and rougher concentrates with sulfuric acid prior their final flotation has been presented. This process was effectively applied within the existing flotation circuit in order to facilitate floatability of difficult-to-treat carbonate black shale copper ores. The leaching of flotation feed with sulfuric acid selectively decomposes the carbonate gangue and leads to selective liberation of sulfide minerals, enhancing flotation results. It was shown, that after leaching out of 50–70% of carbonates from flotation feed, both flotation recovery and concentrate grade increased considerably in relation to results observed for unleached feed. The products of acidic leaching comprise gypsum, soluble magnesium sulfate and gaseous carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide evolving during the reaction favorably creates the non-oxidizing atmosphere in the pulp during leaching and effectively prevents the digestion of metals from sulfide minerals. The beneficial effect of acid leaching on flotation was evidently confirmed during the pilot tests performed on several feed materials. The application of sulfuric acid leaching for flotation feed resulted in pronounced enhancement of flotation results (both metal recovery and concentrate grade) and could provide a rational use of H2SO4, particularly if it becomes a troublesome and difficult-to-sale product of copper metallurgy. Recently, the sulphuric acid prices are rather high.The recovery of metal in processing plants treating nonferrous sulfide ores is accomplished by comminution, a method of liberation of sulfides from gangue, and subsequent beneficiation by froth flotation. The degree of liberation of sulfide particles during the milling process is a critical parameter determining the flotation efficiency. However, there are substantial limitations resulting mainly from increase in grinding costs. The lowering of ore grades and declining beneficiation ability observed for years necessitates a search for novel techniques for processing of such hard-to-treat ores. The improvements in flotation efficiency usually tend to the increase metal recovery and concentrate grade. However, at many concentrator plants the chances of improving flotation efficiency, using only physical methods, are currently limited. Nowadays, chemical (hydrometallurgical) and biological (bio-leaching) processes increasingly support or even replace conventional physical methods of beneficiation.  Leaching operations for beneficiation of zinc–lead sulfide ores have already been applied in industrial flotation circuits for several years in at least two concentrators such as Tara Mine (Ireland) ( In early nineties the Escondida Copper in Chile developed a method of ammonia leaching of chalcocite concentrate ( Sedimentary nature of Polish copper deposits (Lubin-Glogow Copper Basin, SW Poland) results in most of sulphidic ores requiring exceptionally fine milling for effective liberation of sulfide particles prior to flotation. This is due to the fine dissemination of sulfides in the carbonate matter and in black shale-clay rocks that form the majority of the gangue. Fine dissemination of copper sulfides in carbonate matrix considerably reduces the susceptibility to effective liberation. The relative increase of amount of shale-clay and carbonate fractions in flotation feeds, which are known as mostly hard-to-treat in flotation circuits, is currently observed. A complex mineralogical structure and chemical composition of copper ores mined from Lubin-Glogow sedimentary deposits are the principal reasons leading to copper and silver losses to flotation tailings. The selective liberation of these fine particles is the only way to enhance copper recovery. However, this appears to be ineffective in the existing milling circuits. The intergrowths of metal-bearing minerals with carbonate or clay-organic matter greatly reduce both flotation selectivity and the metal grade in the concentrate. Moreover, hydrophilic slime coatings on sulfide minerals, which contain ultra fine carbonate and clay minerals, limit the efficiency of the flotation. Due to presently observed and forecasted unfavorable changes in ore mineralogical composition, the desired grade of copper concentrates can only be accomplished by lowering the copper recovery. It can be therefore concluded that the beneficiation technologies currently applied to Lubin-Glogow copper ores have already reached the limit of their technological efficiency. In the authors' opinion the only way to significantly reduce the copper and silver loses to flotation tailing is the recognition of, and application of the entirely novel approach involving major change in the flotation circuits. This approach primarily involves introduction of chemical methods of feed modification which, in general, changes the superficial properties of solids and remarkably enhances the floatability. The most promising method for the effective beneficiation of carbonate-shale ores appears to be the combined method based on chemical pretreatment of the feed and its subsequent flotation. The method described in this paper is based on a selective chemical decomposition of carbonate gangue minerals with sulfuric acid and results in the liberation of sulfide particles. It creates favorable conditions for succeeding efficient flotation of chemically liberated particles. It is apparent that for the ores containing sulfides disseminated in the carbonate host gangue, the essential part of mechanical grinding could be successfully replaced by a low cost chemical leaching process. The proposed method of chemical modification of the flotation feed and its subsequent flotation is based on application of the leaching stage with sulfuric acid ( During acidic leaching of the flotation feed chemical reactions take place between sulfuric acid and calcium or magnesium carbonates. Carbonate minerals are the main components of the hydrophilic solid forming intergrowths and impregnations with copper sulfides or creating hydrophilic ultra fine slimes on the surface of metal sulfides. Small diameter of the leached solid particles is beneficial for the high rate of the heterogenic leaching process. The following chemical reactions take place during the leaching: Hydrated calcium sulfate (gypsum) precipitates as a solid reaction product, whereas water-soluble magnesium sulfate and gaseous carbon dioxide are reaction by-products. The leaching of a carbonate gangue with H The amount of H The key parameter determining the amount of H Carbon dioxide, evolving in reactions (1) and (2), favorably creates the oxygen-free atmosphere in the leached slurry and prevents the undesirable digestion of valuable metals (Cu, Pb, Ag, Zn, Fe) that exist in the sulfidic form. This minimizes the metal loses to the solution and remarkably simplifies the process. Therefore, the saturation of the slurry with CO A selective chemical decomposition of non-floating carbonate-sulfide intergrowths is schematically shown in Another advantage of the investigated preleaching process is the benefit of the heat effect (ΔH The acidic leaching of the carbonate-containing flotation feed resulted in the apparent decomposition of solid particles by means of chemical, selective process which precisely and economically liberated sulfide minerals. In oxygen-free conditions all metal sulfides remain chemically stable when subjected to the flotation. This selective “chemical grinding” is very effective particularly for fine intergrowths, which cannot be disintegrated using typical mechanical methods of milling. High selectivity and low energy consumption are, therefore, additional beneficial factors of the process. We also believe that the application of leaching on industrial scale would remarkably simplify milling circuits or even eliminate some milling operations, leading to the further reduction of processing costs. The comprehensive laboratory investigations were performed between 1994 and 2002 for the difficult-to-beneficiate intermediate feeds (middlings) from Lubin and Polkowice Concentrators. Initially, the upgrading of final concentrates was tested for both concentrators and then the tests were conducted for selected middlings (feed for 1st and 2nd cleaning circuit) ( The feed material selected for the laboratory tests was taken from the industrial flotation circuit in the form of natural suspension and transferred to the laboratory in a sealed tight container to avoid the surface oxidation of sulfides. The sampling points for Lubin and Polkowice Concentrators are indicated in Vigorous stirring of the feed material was undertaken to average the suspension of the feed and then a sample was taken for standard flotation or leaching and flotation tests. Laboratory examinations were performed in “Mekhanobr” sub-aeration type flotation cell manufactured by IMN Gliwice (Poland). The slurry density was corrected to maintain natural density at flotation plants. The feed suspensions were subjected to the treatment procedures according to the flowsheet shown in The maximum demand for acid ( A sample of preleached material was subjected to the analysis of maximum acid demand and degree of carbonate decomposition, The leaching of flotation feed must always be conducted using the procedure maintaining the shortage of H We found that degree of carbonate decomposition ( For laboratory and pilot plant examinations a concentrated 96% H All laboratory experiments and pilot plant tests were always performed comparatively, using the same untreated and preleached feed with various carbonates decomposition degree ( Continuous pilot plant tests fully simulating flotation circuit of Lubin Concentrator system ( Pilot tests for selected flotation by-products from Polkowice Concentrator were conducted in a system of the three industrial flotation machines working as a separated stream within commercial circuit of Polkowice flotation plant. The three stage leaching of selected by-products was conducted in utilization node installed originally in Polkowice Concentrator for neutralization of sulfuric acid by carbonate tailings. Samples of products obtained in this special semi-industrial flotation line, concentrates, middlings and tailings, were additionally floated in laboratory flotation machine. Taking into account product yields of used industrial machines and results of flotation in laboratory machine the full flotation characteristic of tested feeds was constructed for comparing flotation results of leached and unleached streams. The pH-leaching time plots for various carbonates decomposition degree ( The flotation results for samples of final concentrate from Lubin Concentrator, given in Separation of metal-bearing sulfides from gypsum by means of xanthate flotation of chemically modified final concentrate from Polkowice plant leached with Such evidently beneficial effect of the chemical modification of feed with H The particle size fraction of + 0.044–0.075mm was separated from each test for mineralogical studies. The volumetric content of liberated metal sulfides related to the entire volume of minerals in the sample was determined by the image analysis examination. The relation between the carbonate decomposition degree, The results of flotation for unleached and leached samples taken from the plants in Lubin and Polkowice (cleaning flotation as in flowsheets in The surprisingly pronounced leaching effect was exhibited for cleaning flotation with samples taken from Polkowice Concentrator ( To confirm the laboratory examination results, several pilot plant tests were conducted using flotation circuits totally reflecting the industrial plant systems for Lubin Concentrator (  In The mean value for all reference experiments with untreated feed: copper recovery, The mean shift results for leached middlings (feed for 3rd cleaning flotation, solid line 2) are located evidently above the beneficiation line for untreated material (solid line 1). The increase in recovery by about 4% and in copper grade by 2% can be expected when flotation is performed after the feed leaching. The data labels in In addition, the similar analysis of pilot plant results for silver entirely confirmed the assumptions from laboratory investigations. According to the pilot plant results the increase in silver content of about 200g/ton and silver recovery by 3% can be expected. Solid lines 1 and 2 in Next investigations step was applied in the industrial scale at the Polkowice Concentrator for tailings of 1st cleaning, recognized as the most troublesome material in the flotation circuit. The experiments were performed in the separated module of the flotation plant. To enhance the flotation effectiveness of copper sulfide feed from carbonate ores the acidic preleaching operation with sulfuric acid is strongly recommended. The chemical leaching process appeared to be very selective and resulted in an apparent liberation of copper sulfide particles from non-floating, hydrophilic intergrowths and impregnations without digestion of copper. The results of laboratory experiments and pilot plant tests indicated that the application of leaching process with H Complete decomposition of carbonate gangue with H The leaching process is very rapid and after some 60 min the leached slurry achieves pH The pilot plant experiments for Lubin deposit ore performed in the pilot plant (with flotation system simulating industrial plant for Lubin Concentrator) show that the acidic leaching of the feed leads to the elevation of copper grade in final concentrate by 3–6%. Simultaneously, increase in copper recovery by 2–3% is entirely possible. The preleaching of a flotation feed with H The application of sulfuric acid leaching for flotation feed beneficiated both in enhancement of flotation results (both Cu, Ag recovery and concentrate grade) and provided rational utilization of H The authors would like to thank Ms. Renata Stec from Pilot Plant Division Ltd, Lubin (ZD Lubin) for participation and cooperation in pilot plant tests, Dr. Antoni Muszer from the Institute of Geological Science of the University of Wroclaw for conducting the mineralogical investigations, and Ms. Maria Kowalska from KGHM “Polish Copper” for valuable remarks and kind critical discussion during seminars and conferences.