InAs QDs on strained {GaAs/InAs} quasi-monolayer (QML) with an alternative growth mechanism were grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). The properties of quantum dots (QDs) were investigated by transmission electron microscopy (TEM), photoluminescence (PL), and photoreflectance (PR). TEM images and PR spectra of InAs QDs with strained {GaAs/InAs} QML only show a lack of the wetting layer (WL) compared with conventional InAs QDs sample. The Photoluminescence (PL) emission peak of the InAs QDs with 10 periods strained {GaAs/InAs} QML is red-shifted by 180meV at 10K relative to the reference InAs QDs sample which has no {GaAs/InAs} QML. The InAs QDs with 10 periods {GaAs/InAs} QML also show a strong PL emission with 1.32μm at room temperature. Similar to the various periods of QML in InAs QDs sample, the emission wavelength of InAs QDs changes significantly toward the long wavelength emission.In the past several years, self-assembled quantum dots (QDs) grown by the Stranski–Krastanov (S–K) growth mode have attracted much attention because of the interest in both their fundamental physics and potential applications such as optoelectronics In this work, we report the structural and optical properties of InAs QDs grown by using quasi-monolayer (QML) of GaAs and InAs using transmission electron microscopy (TEM), photoreflectance (PR) and photoluminescence (PL). The emission peak position of InAs QDs with QML is red-shifted more than that of reference sample. In particular, the PL spectrum of InAs QDs with 10 periods QML has 1.32 The samples used in the present work were grown by a Riber 32P MBE with semi-insulating GaAs (1 We used PR measurement to analyze of the existence of wetting layer (WL) in QDs samples. The modulated reflectance as a function of the surface and interfacial electric fields in QDs sample was produced by mechanically chopped 5 In PL measurement, the Ar The formation and structural characterization of the InAs QDs were done by TEM measurement. The dot densities in reference sample (S1) and 5 periods QML QD sample (S4) are found to be 6.5×10 A high-resolution TEM image of QML QDs with 10 periods of 1.2 In order to further analyze the existence of WL in our QDs samples with QML, PR measurement was carried out.   The InAs QDs were grown by using QML with different InAs layer thickness and their structural and optical properties were investigated by TEM, PR and PL measurements. From the results of TEM images and PR spectra, the InAs wetting layer was not shown when the QDs formation by the strained {GaAs/InAs} QML. The lack of the InAs WL in the {GaAs/InAs} QML QDs indicates that the QDs growth by using QML are not formed by S–K growth mode. Also, we consider that the lack of InAs WL contributes to reduce the dislocations in QDs sample. The PL emission peak position from QDs grown by using 10 periods {GaAs/InAs} QML was red-shifted by 180 This work was supported by a grant no. R01-2002-000-00096-0 from Korea Science & Engineering Foundation.