The PVC screens of recent monitoring wells (MWs) have thin slots and a low open area, usually in the 2–8% range. The MW screen and filter pack may cause important head losses which are not taken into account when interpreting the data of permeability tests performed using the MW. The equivalent hydraulic conductivity K of usual PVC screens was defined by hydraulic tests in a water tank, which have shown that gas micro-bubbles, a common problem in MWs and filter packs, contribute to increase the parasitic head losses. Closed-form equations and numerical models are used to explain by how much a field permeability test in a MW under evaluates an aquifer K value due to parasitic head losses in the screen and filter pack. The MW can properly measure the local soil K value only if it is markedly lower than the maximum MW value as obtained in a water tank. The MW measuring capacity can reach 5×10−3
                     m/s for large slots and deaired water, but is most often between 10−5 and 10−4
                     m/s for small slots in field conditions, and it can be only 10−6
                     m/s for poorly designed and installed MWs. The limited measuring capacity may yield artificial permeability scale effects as often registered in environmental studies.Many engineering geology problems, with or without environmental issues, require installing monitoring wells (MWs) in specific aquifer or aquitard layers. Each MW is characterized by several parameters for the pipe, screen, filter material around the screen, and sealants for the annular space between the borehole and the MW pipe. Many regulating agencies have guides on how to design and instal MWs. For example, the design and installation of MWs in aquifers are described in detail in Monitoring wells are used to measure the hydraulic head For example, in 1982, an excavation in the Quebec City harbour required a huge pumping system to evacuate a tide-dependent inflow rate reaching 114 Many pumping wells have stainless steel screens with large slots, surrounded by pea gravel which is the usual filter material: the “filter pack” is then a “gravel pack”. Monitoring wells are not installed to continually extract water. They typically have PVC pipes (51 However, there are no such criteria for hydraulically efficient MWs. A screen with fine slots and a small OA, and fine filter sand, may induce significant head losses during a permeability test which gives a This article examines how the screen and the filter sand influence the This section provides basic rules to select the filter material and the screen slot size. Five steps must be followed: (1) obtain the correct grain size distribution curve (GSDC), (2) select the filter material, (3) select the screen slot size, (4) instal the MW, and (5) document in detail the MW installation. Different drilling methods may be used to instal MWs. Also, different soil sampling methods may be used. Well drilling methods are more soil disruptive than geotechnical drilling methods. According to in-hole geophysics, hollow-stem augering is more disruptive than rotary drilling, and driving a flush-joint casing yields the least disturbance ( The filter sand is selected among commercially available, washed and screened, natural siliceous sands, with rounded abrasion-resistant grains, and appropriate GSDC. An example of GSDCs for commercial filter sands is shown in First, to avoid segregation when falling in water, uniform soils are used; their uniformity coefficient For any MW and pumping well, the screen slot size, There is a clear difference between a pumping well and a MW. When a pumping well is installed without a filter pack, a common rule is to select a screen slot size In the case of a MW, high stresses and brutal displacements must be avoided during development otherwise the soil may be severely damaged ( Centering guides (centralizers) must be used to centre the casing and screen string in the borehole. This ensures that the filter pack fills the annular space evenly around the screen. This ensures also that the sealing materials fill the space evenly around the solid riser pipe. The filter sand may be installed through a tremie pipe which is withdrawn in stages as the sand is placed. The filter material should not be poured dry into the annular space or the tremie pipe, otherwise the emplacement may be poor, and large quantities of gas are trapped in the filter pack as adhering tiny bubbles that may occupy over 15% of the filter total pore space. After several days, these bubbles are enlarged by coalescence, may rise and get trapped in the upper part of the annular space between the wall of the borehole, the solid riser pipe just above the screen and the annular sealant. It is wise to soak the filter material in water and pour it with water. A cleaned stainless steel tamper helps to place the filter material, and the bentonite pellets or chips. Do not forget to respect filter criteria between the filter pack material and the grout or bentonite above. In many cases, it means that several filter materials must be used. For example, assume that the filter material is pea gravel, the filter pack fully intercepting a gravel aquifer. If a grout is placed above the filter pack, it will easily seep into the void space of the filter material and thus, will clog the MW. Similarly, if bentonite pellets are placed directly above the pea gravel, hydrated bentonite will move into the void space of the filter material and all ground water samples will be turbid. Between the pea gravel and the bentonite (or grout), it is necessary to instal two (secondary) filter materials, first at least 15 During step 4, the installation must be fully documented. As the filter pack is placed, the casing and the tremie are withdrawn in stages of preferably 15 Organizations for which the facilities safety is very important have installation sheets and procedures ( According to After having presented basic rules about the filter material and the screen apertures for MWs, the paper explains how the equivalent hydraulic conductivity Six common PVC screens for MWs were selected to be hydraulically tested. The screens have an internal diameter of 51 The equivalent hydraulic conductivity For the steady-state pumping tests in a water tank, the screen was treated as a porous material of equivalent hydraulic conductivity During permeability tests in MWs, Darcy's law applies because all fluid velocities are small enough to have low Reynolds numbers and no turbulence, which was verified. As a result, two methods were retained to estimate the The Thiem's equation (Eq. Here the aquifer thickness A steady-state pumping test with the screen alone is also a constant-head permeability test: all head losses occur within the screen ( For each tested screen, the If a field permeability test is performed in a MW equipped with this screen, the field hydraulic head losses occur in the screen, the filter pack, and the tested soil. Therefore the field The influences of the filter pack ( Consider a vertical MW, fully screened in a horizontal confined aquifer of constant thickness, thus a simple case of radial symmetry. The following notations are used: The differences in hydraulic head, Δ As a result, the Eqs. If If the screen is pervious enough but the filter pack is not pervious enough, then If the screen is not pervious enough but the filter pack is pervious enough then For these special cases, Eqs. Contrary to Eq. The numerical results were compared to the analytical solution for constant-head permeability tests using fully penetrating MWs. In the field, most often variable-head tests or slug tests are performed in partially penetrating MWs. The case of a variable-head test is not solved analytically in this paper. It is numerically examined in In the water tank, a few tests were made just after filling it, or the day after: these tests created many tiny air bubbles in the screen slots. Other tests were made after letting the water rest for at least two days: these tests created less air bubbles. The air content in water influenced the With less aired water, the head losses were too small for 3 of the 6 screens to be precisely measured. Having more tiny air bubbles decreases The previous values were obtained with a screen in clean water. In field conditions, the screen slots are partially blocked or clogged by solid particles. To assess the performance of pumping well screens after full development the clogging factor is usually taken as 50% ( As a result, the field The reduction of When there is no filter pack, the obtained The obtained If If When A few variable-head tests were numerically simulated using the code Seep/W ( Numerical results for slug tests with an unclogged screen ( The slug test was performed using a partially penetrating MW whereas the constant-head tests were performed using a fully penetrating MW. The slug test has a smaller radius of influence due to the short duration of initial slugging. It means that for slug tests in MWs, the maximum After having shown that usual MWs have a field measuring capacity in the range of 10 Consider a second case of an aquifer material with the following characteristics: The aquifer This paper has studied only permeability tests with MWs (middle scale evaluation). It has determined how the parasitic head losses in the screen and filter pack influence the Because pumping tests involve large volumes, which are more likely to meet preferential flow paths, one may believe that they may yield larger Head losses in the MW screen and filter pack may strongly influence the permeability test results. Most often, this leads to underestimate the sought For studies to assess the field With known When evaluating groundwater conditions at any site, the permeability data must be examined with caution because the permeability tests may have been performed in poorly designed and installed MWs with limited measuring capacities. This field condition results in under evaluating the field The authors thank FQRNT (Quebec) for an individual scholarship and