Scandium is an important member of rare earths and always associated with other metals. A novel aminophosphonate compound di-(2-ethylhexyl)[N-(2-ethylhexyl) amino methyl] phosphonate (Cextrant 230, L) was applied for the selective extraction and recovery of scandium from sulfate medium. The extraction mechanism was determined by the slope analysis method and the extracted chelate was deduced to be Sc(HSO4)SO4·2L. Thermodynamic parameters (ΔH, ΔG, ΔS) were calculated, implying that the extraction reaction of scandium is an exothermic process. Cextrant 230 was found to be an efficient extractant for the selective extraction of scandium. By just one stage extraction, the concentration of scandium in the sulfuric acid leaching of red mud decreased obviously from 3.57 mg/L to about 0.3 mg/L while the main element aluminium was nearly not extracted. A flow sheet for the recovery of scandium from red mud was proposed.Although scandium is a member of rare earth elements, it has some different physical and chemical properties from other rare earths, such as being light, soft and having high melting point ( Red mud is a bauxite residue generated from the bauxite calcinations method or Bayer process for alumina production ( In recent years, α-aminophosphonate have been applied to the extraction of alkali metals, alkaline earth metals, rare metals, noble metals, lanthanides and actinides ( Di-(2-ethylhexyl)[ pH measurement was processed with a model PHS-3C digital pH meter made by Shanghai REX Instrument Factory. FT-IR spectra (KBr tablets) were recorded on a Bruker Vertex 70 Spectrometer. The metal concentrations were determined by an inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES, PerkinElmer Optima 8000). Equal volume (3 mL each) of aqueous and organic phases were mixed and shaken for 15 min to ensure the equilibrium at 298 ± 1 K (unless stated). After phase separation, the metal concentrations in the aqueous phase were determined by ICP-OES. The metal concentrations in the organic phases were determined by mass balance. The extraction percentage ( The extraction of Sc The extraction mechanism of Sc The equilibrium constant, The logarithmic expression of Eq. When the initial metal concentration and aqueous acidity were fixed, the effect of Cextrant 230 concentration on the extraction of Sc Therefore the extracted complex can be proposed asSc(HSO To further understand the chelating of scandium ion with Cextrant 230, IR spectra was used to analyze the organic phase before and after extraction ( The effect of temperature on the extraction of scandium was investigated at a fixed concentration of Cextrant 230 in the range of 293–313 K. The results indicate that the scandium extraction decreases with increasing temperature in the studied range. The enthalpy change (Δ The change of Gibbs energy ∆ The loading capacity of 30 vol% Cextrant 230 in For a good extraction system, it is also important to strip the metal ions from the loaded organic phase easily. The stripping of the loaded scandium was investigated with different mineral acids such as HCl, H Generally, scandium is always associated with other metal ions, it is important to separate it from impurities for the efficient recovery. The extraction of various metal ions by Cextrant 230 was investigated in sulfate media ( Based on the above results, a process shown in Novel aminophosphonate extractant Cextrant 230 (L) was found to be a potential one for the selective extraction and recovery of scandium from sulfate medium. The extracted complex was determined to be Sc(HSO This work was supported by