The complication rate of conventional plate osteosynthesis (CPO) of periprosthetic femoral fractures above total knee arthroplasties (TKA) is high. Indirect reduction techniques were introduced to reduce surgical dissection at the fracture site.
                  Twenty-one patients (4 men and 17 women) with femoral fractures above well-fixed total knee arthroplasties were consecutively treated with the indirect reduction technique. AO/ASIF (Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen/Association for the Study of the Problems of Internal Fixation) Type 33A fractures were included. The mean age was 78 years (range, 67–94 years). Four fractures were stabilised with bone grafts, three in combination with bone cement. Nineteen of the patients were seen at a 1-year follow-up, 15 were seen after a long-term follow-up of 9 years (range, 7–12 years). There was only one implant failure in a comminuted fracture with severe osteoporosis, no infection, and no non-union. At the 1-year follow-up malalignment of 5° varus occurred in one patient. The mean range of motion of the eighteen patients was 98° (range, 65–110°). The mean knee society score was 74 (range, 62–84), the mean function score was 52 (range, 39–72). At the long-term follow-up, the mean range of motion of the patients was 101° (range, 65–115°). The mean knee society score was 77 (range, 65–88), the mean function score was 55 (range, 40–75). Our results suggest the 95° condylar blade plate in the indirect reduction technique is still a good implant with good long-term results. It works best in proximal fractures when there is minimal comminution of the distal fragment in the hands of an experienced trauma surgeon. Knee function and range of motion increased less over time.The incidence of supracondylar fracture after total knee arthroplasties (TKA) is approximately 1% with reported rates ranging from 0.3% to 2.5%. The treatment of periprosthetic fractures around the knee can be challenging for a number of reasons Stress shielding about the femoral component may lead to distal femoral osteoporosis, which both predisposes the femur to fracture and complicates fixation of these injuries. Mast et al. Long-term follow-up studies of the indirect reduction technique for periprosthetic fractures with the 95° condylar blade plate (Synthes, Paoli, PA, USA) do not exist. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the long-term results of the indirect reduction technique for periprosthetic fractures with the 95° condylar blade plate. This study was approved by the Ethical Committee ( Twenty-one patients (4 men and 17 women) with distal femoral fractures above a well-fixed total knee arthroplasty were surgically treated with the 95° condylar blade plate between March 1994 and April 1999. Fractures were categorised according to the AO/ASIF (Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen/Association for the Study of the Problems of Internal Fixation) classification. The interval from arthroplasty to fracture was measured. Notching of the anterior aspect of the femoral component was defined as greater than a 3 Two plain radiographs of the complete femur and focused views of the knee were taken after fracture, preoperatively, and at the latest follow-up evaluation. The preoperative radiographs were used to assess the level of the fracture, the degree of comminution, and the quality of the cortical bone. All patients underwent surgical stabilisation with the 95° condylar blade plate. The length of the 95° condylar blade plate was selected using the AO/ASIF (Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen/Association for the Study of the Problems of Internal Fixation) templates (Synthes Corporation, Paoli, PA). Leg length and axial alignment of the contralateral extremity were determined. All but one patients were treated with a stable internal fixation within 24 Four fractures were stabilised with bone grafts, three in combination with bone cement to enhance screw fixation in severely osteoporotic bone with marked comminution and bony defects. The screws were fully inserted into the cement while it was still soft after the plate was provisionally fixed to the femur, and the screws were tightened after the cement had set. Postoperatively, all patients except one with the associated periprosthetic tibial fracture were allowed toe touch weight bearing for 6–8 weeks. Two patients were mobilised with a glider cane for three months. After removal of the suction drains on the second postoperative day, we started with continuous passive motion. Follow-up radiographs were obtained on the second postoperative day. Further radiographs were taken at 6 week intervals by the authors until fracture healing, and afterwards, every three months until a 1-year follow-up, and finally, at long-term follow-up. The radiographic measurements of alignment and assessments of prosthetic fixation were made according to the Knee Society Roentgenographic Evaluation and Scoring System Radiographic angular values and ROM were measured by goniometer and recorded to the nearest 0.5°. The anteroposterior femoral alignment was described in terms of changes in the Knee Society femoral component alignment parameters (angle All patients were evaluated using the clinical rating system of the Knee Society including the knee score of the Knee Society and the function score of the Knee Society. The mean age of the patients was 78 years (range, 67–94 years). The primary diagnosis requiring the total knee arthroplasty was osteoarthritis in 18 and rheumatoid arthritis in three knees ( The mean operating time was 80 At the 1-year follow-up, nineteen of the patients were seen; two patients had died. Malalignment of 5° of femoral varus angle occurred in one patient. The sagittal plane alignment was acceptable in every case. There was no leg length difference >2 Fifteen of the patients were seen after a long-term follow-up of 9 years (range, 7–12 years). By then, six patients had died. Two patients needed two canes and six needed one cane for walking. The mean range of motion of the patients was 101° (range, 65–115°). The mean knee score was 77 (range, 65–88), the mean function score of the knee society was 55 (range, 40–75). Two patients required revision total knee arthroplasty due to aseptic loosening after 5 and 6 years, respectively. The fractures were healed, the condylar plate was removed and a revision hinged total knee arthroplasty has been implanted in both cases. Several options are available to provide secure internal fixation of supracondylar fractures of the distal femur. The current study indicates that the indirect reduction technique with the 95° condylar blade plate reduces some of the complications seen with the CPO (conventional plate osteosynthesis) technique, and it obtains good short-term and long-term results. A strength of this study is the trial protocol with clear inclusion and exclusion criteria and the long-term follow-up. Weakness of this study is the small sample size and the retrospective design with only historical control groups. There are comparable studies in terms of methodology and treatment strategy, however, they only have short to medium-term follow-up. Cusick et al. The advantages of the 95° condylar blade plate are that no bone has to be removed from the distal fragment when this device is inserted and that the blade is relatively thin. The indirect reduction technique allows the use of longer plates with less pullout force acting on the screws. In three patients, we used bone cement to enhance screw fixation in severely osteoporotic bone. Only one knee had a plate–bone interface failure after 4 weeks. The fork plate (a modified angled 95° condylar blade plate) enables the implant to surround the anchorage pegs of the prosthesis and to be inserted more distally in qualitatively better bone. The epiphyseal and frequently the intramedullary blood supplies of the distal femur are interrupted after total knee arthroplasty. Mast et al. Retrograde nailing is recommended in femoral components with an open box. The intercondylar distance of the box should be at least 1 In a meta-analysis with a total of 415 fractures retrograde nailing was associated with relative risk reduction of 87% ( Our results suggest that the angled 95° condylar blade plate in indirect reduction technique is still a good implant with good long-term results. It works best in proximal fractures when there is minimal comminution of the distal fragment in the hands of a surgeon experienced with this device. Knee function and range of motion increase less over time. No benefits or funds were received in support of this study.