The first laboratory tests on biooxidation and cyanidation of gold ores in Turkey were carried out using samples of the Copler Gold Mine. Over a 3year R&D test period, mixed bacterial/archaeal cultures improved biooxidation of the Copler ore. The highest sulphide oxidation of 87.35% over 432h was achieved in shake flasks in the presence of the mixed culture (MODM: Sulfolobus acidophilus and Sulfolobus thermosulfidooxidans). Bioreactor tests resulted in greater dissolution rates for iron and arsenic than did shake-flask tests, which led to a greater extent of sulphide oxidation within a shorter period of time. The maximum sulphide oxidation in the bioreactor tests was 97.79% after 240h when the EXTM (Acidianus brierleyi and Sulfolobus metallicus) mixed culture was used. After the biooxidation experiments with solids contents of 10% and 20% (w/v), the gold recovery from the oxidised ore was lower than that achieved in the presence of 5% solids (w/v) because the extent of sulphide oxidation was reduced as the pulp density increased. A strong correlation between the sulphide oxidation and gold recovery was also established. The highest gold recovery of 94.48% was achieved during cyanidation from the biooxidised ore produced from the experiment conducted using the EXTM mixed culture.Submicroscopic gold, which is typically trapped in a matrix of arsenopyrite/pyrite, cannot be effectively recovered, even when extensive fine-grinding processes are applied. To reduce the initial investment cost necessary for the construction a large-scale facility, the ore is typically crushed and milled, and a flotation concentrate is produced because gold is mostly found in the arsenopyrite/pyrite fraction. A pre-treatment process must be applied to the flotation concentrate before cyanide leaching. For the pre-treatment process, the flotation concentrate can be heated at 600–700 Although the biological processes used in the recovery of metals have been well known for centuries, the term “biohydrometallurgy” first appeared in 1972 in a manuscript titled “biohydrometallurgy of cobalt and nickel” ( Recently, metal recovery using biological processes (bioleaching and biooxidation) is more economical and compatible with wastes from production processes and low-grade ores than other methods, and interest in metal recovery through the use of biological processes is increasing ( Several gold biooxidation plants were commissioned over the last 25 In this study, laboratory biooxidation experiments were performed using mixed culture of mesophilic (MESM1), moderately thermophilic (MODM) and extremely thermophilic (EXTM) microorganisms on refractory gold ore from the Copler (CROM) mine prior to cyanidation. To increase the gold recovery efficiency of the direct cyanide leaching procedure, from which low gold recovery is typically obtained, the biooxidation process was performed in Erlenmeyer flasks or in a bioreactor before the cyanide leaching procedure. The oxidation ability and the performance of bacterial/archaeal cultures used in the biooxidation process of a refractory gold ore were investigated at different temperatures. Additionally, the oxidation rate of sulphide compounds was quantified to determine the influence on the gold recovery efficiency and on the cyanide consumption in the cyanidation step. Turkey has a large and diverse mineral resource base, and metal mining dates back at least 9000 In Turkey, the estimated total number of gold ore beds is 267; 13 of these beds have a potential of more than 150 metric tonnes, 40 have a potential between 30 and 150 metric tonnes and 234 have a potential of less than 30 metric tonnes. Two gold mine beds were founded in Usak, which has a potential of approximately 208 metric tonnes, and in Erzincan, which has a potential of approximately 112 metric tonnes; these results confirmed those of the model study ( Gold was traditionally produced in Turkey as a by-product from the Çayeli mine, now owned by Inmet Mining Corp, from Turkish-owned (mainly state) operations on other base-metal deposits, and from the Gümüskoy silver mine, owned by Eti Gümüs AS. Gold production from the first true Turkish gold mine began in 1997 at the Ovacik mine then run by Normandy Mining; this activity, however, was short-lived. Following what became an infamous legal case and after four years of proceedings in and out of court, Ovacik eventually started commercial production in 2001. From only a handful of companies in 1990, approximately 30 gold exploration and mining companies currently operate in Turkey, at least two thirds of which were established by foreign investment. This enhanced exploration activity has increased Turkish gold resources/reserves from 16 Refractory gold sulphide ore (Copler) was used in experimental studies. The ore sample was collected from Copler Village at the Cukurdere (Erzincan) gold mine bed of Anagold Mining Industry and Trade, which is a partnership company associated with Alacer Gold Corp. and Lidya Mining Industry and Trade. The structure of the gold ore bed of Copler Village is complex, and the bed contains different types of copper–gold mineralisation. Mainly porphyry, marble, and Mn-containing zones are found in the gold mine bed according to feasibility studies performed by Rio Tinto, Inc. After drilling work was performed, the main porphyry zone contained 2.3 Mineralogical and metallurgical pre-studies (cyanidation) and analyses of the ore bed were performed by Rio Tinto, Inc. Based on the feasibility studies, gold was not found to be suitable for enrichment because of its association with sulphide minerals (approx. 15–20% free gold particles) and because of its inclusion into small particles. Although a high gold recovery can be achieved through the use of oxidised mineralisation, low gold recovery was obtained from sulphide mineralisation because of the refractory sulphide mineralisation that surrounded the gold ( Full chemical analyses of gold ore samples were performed by Acme Analytical Laboratories (Canada), which is an accredited laboratory (ISO 9001:2000). Fire assay methods for gold and silver analysis, Leco instrument methods for carbon, sulphur and sulphate analysis, and ICP-ES and X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (XRF) methods for the analysis of other elements were performed to determine the content of the ore samples. The results of the chemical analyses of the ore samples taken from Copler Village are shown in As evident from the results in Mineralogical phases observed in the XRD analysis (PANalytical, PW3040/X’Pert Pro) of the ore are shown in The size distribution and size fraction of gold-containing particles in the ore sample were determined through wet-sieve analysis of representative milled samples using a Fritsch sieve machine. The sizes of the particles were found to be less than 106 As shown, the d The microbial cultures used in this study were mixed culture of mesophilic, moderately thermophilic and extremely thermophilic microorganisms respectively. The microbial cultures were supplied by the Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen (DSMZ, Germany) as pure cultures. Mixed cultures were prepared from the pure strains. The pure strains were chosen for laboratory experiments based on their high oxidation capacities and because they are among the most commonly used bacterial/archaeal cultures in the literature ( Processes for the growth of microbial cultures were performed in 250 During this stage, laboratory-scale experiments were performed in 500 The initial pH of the bacteria/archaea cultures was adjusted to 2 using 10 A New Brunswick Scientific BioFlo 110 model bioreactor with a 1.3 After the biooxidation experiments were completed, filtration was used to enable S/L separation. Whatman #41 filter paper was used to remove the liquid portions of the samples, and the oxidised ore was collected. After the samples were filtered, 0.1 Cyanide leaching tests were applied to the oxidised ores after the biooxidation experiments were completed. Cyanide leaching tests were performed by shaking a 100 Samples of 3 The total iron and arsenic concentrations were determined using an inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) instrument (Perkin Elmer, Optima 5300 DV). The iron(II) concentration was determined by a titrimetric method using potassium dichromate (K Various sulphur compounds, such as total sulphur (TS), elemental sulphur (S The cyanide concentration during the cyanidation tests was determined in pulp samples drawn at 3 The free cyanide (CN The biooxidation degree of Copler gold ore was found to be very high with mesophilic mixed culture MESM1, moderately thermophilic mixed culture MODM and extremely thermophilic mixed culture EXTM ( Because of the low arsenic content (0.21%) in the ore, the arsenic dissolution rates were similar at the tests of 5% and 10% solids. Mean arsenic dissolution rates in these tests were varied between 0.18–0.21 and 0.32–0.37 The sulphide oxidation rates of each experiment with different solids contents were correlated with the rate of dissolution of iron. The sulphate content in the oxidised ore that contained 5% and 10% solids (w/v) was higher than that in the ore that contained 20% solids (w/v). Based on the increase in the redox potential and the iron(III)/iron(II) ratio for the bacterial experiments with 5% and 10% solids (w/v), the sulphate content may increase due to the formation of ferric iron precipitates (jarosite (M After the biooxidation experiments, XRD analyses were performed on the oxidised ore samples, and the results indicated that almost all of the sulphide minerals (pyrite, arsenopyrite) were oxidised and that jarosite precipitation occurred ( The iron and arsenic dissolution rates after bioreactor tests are shown in The sulphide oxidation was greater than 97% in experiments where MODM and EXTM cultures and 5% solids (w/v) contents were used in a bioreactor test ( The cyanide leaching results for oxidised CROM ore in which shake-flask biooxidation tests (5%, 10% and 20% solids (w/v)) were implemented are presented in The results of biooxidation experiments in which solids contents of 10% and 20% (w/v) were used are lower than those of biooxidation experiments in which a solid content of 5% (w/v) was used because the degree of sulphur oxidation is lower in biooxidation experiments with higher solids contents. In conclusion, the efficiency of the yield of recovered gold is related to sulphur oxidation of the ore, where a decrease in the degree of S or sulphide phase oxidation in the ore results in an increase in yield of recovered gold. In this respect, a linear relationship exists between sulphur oxidation and the yield of recovered gold. The relationship between the yield of recovered gold and the level of sulphide oxidation in the oxidised ore achieved through the use of mesophilic and high-temperature bacterial cultures in shake-flask and bioreactor tests is shown in The changes in the NaCN consumption and in the yield of recovered gold obtained after biooxidation occurred in the bioreactor in the presence of MESM1 are given in The NaCN consumption values varied between 4.34 and 10.86  After the first 24 The mixed bacteria/archaea cultures (MESM1, MODM, EXTM) showed high biooxidation performance in the biooxidation of the Copler refractory gold ore. The greatest degree of sulphide oxidation during the shake-flask tests occurred in the presence of the MODM culture, where sulphide oxidation was 87.35% after 432 Mesophilic bacterial cultures were observed to show better performance in higher pulp densities. Extremely thermophilic cultures were also observed to show high oxidation performance in low pulp density (5%); however, the development and performance of these types of microorganisms decreased as the solids ratio was increased. Most strains of acidophilic bacteria including both mesophiles and moderate thermophiles have a rigid cell wall with a relatively high shear resistance. On the other hand, the extreme thermophiles have a distinctive morphological characteristic with the lack of a rigid cell wall that would probably make them more sensitive to the adverse shear effects than mesophiles and moderate thermophiles. The iron and arsenic dissolution/oxidation yields decreased with increasing solids contents during biooxidation. Additionally, the growth rate of all the investigated types of bacterial cultures decreased with increasing solids ratios. The adverse effect of increasing pulp density in the biooxidation could be attributed to the decrease in the number of bacteria-to-solid ratio, the inhibitory effect of increasing concentrations of metal ions in solution, the limited availability of nutrients and, O The gold recovery percentage is related to the degree of sulphide oxidation, and a decrease in sulphide content of the ore results in an increased gold recovery. The highest percentage of gold recovered using cyanide leaching was achieved from biooxidation experiments performed using the EXTM culture, and the yield was 94.48%. During cyanide leaching, the NaCN consumption was lower (5.16–7.76 This work was fully funded by TUBITAK (