Laboratory ultrasonic measurements are important for the analysis and evaluation of seismic, sonic and microseismic field data. Ultrasonic velocities and attenuation measurements are often used as an index for characterizing rock properties. Historically, attenuation values are also more difficult to obtain experimentally than velocities Assessments of roof stability for tunneling and mining operations often use acoustic measurements as indications of rock mass strength and integrity The objective of this paper is to describe an adaptation to an axisymmetric triaxial cell to enable accurate and reliable measurements of P-wave attenuation; velocity and acoustic emissions under in situ stress and pore pressure conditions. Uniaxial strain condition is applied to the rock sample to represent conditions far from underground void spaces, such as tunnel openings or boreholes. Simultaneously, linking geomechanical and acoustic variations presents a more meaningful, higher-resolution picture of changing rock conditions. A mathematical model with an analytical approach is presented to describe the nature of the initial waveform as it passes through the experimental apparatus. Geomechanical testing is often conducted using servo-controlled loading frames and associated pressure cells to replicate in situ stress, strain and flow conditions. Axial displacement or load control conditions may be used to most accurately simulate field conditions. Rock core diameters may vary depending on the industry and available equipment; however, the length-to-diameter ratio of prepared specimens is recommended between 2 and 2.5 by ASTM standards Ultrasonic attenuation measurements in the laboratory have been historically done using various techniques such as pulse transmission, pulse echo, resonant bar, and rise time Ultrasonic velocity measurements were first done by Birch Diffraction phase corrections as described by Khimunin For this setup we assume a laterally extensive medium where the direct wave represents a pure longitudinal or compressional mode. The direct P-wave propagating through the apparatus will have a wavelength Acquisition of acoustic emissions (AE) has been made with a single piezoelectric transducer located either on the top or bottom of the testing apparatus. Signals emitting from the rock within triaxial cells may be filtered and amplified to isolate or enhance characteristic acoustic emissions that correspond to rock deformation. AE parameters such as cumulative events, event rate, The physical experimental apparatus is shown in The transmitting piezoelectric transducer is connected to a pulse generator that is used to create the ultrasonic source waveform. The receiving transducer is connected to the digitizing board in the PC through a signal amplifier. The receiving signal is sampled at 40 For acoustic emission monitoring, the ultrasonic acquisition system is configured to trigger on-line voltage. The line trigger threshold is iteratively adjusted to ambient acoustic noise in the laboratory to ensure the signals detected are in fact emitting from the sample. On-board DSP filtering parameters in the PC may be set for certain frequency ranges for detailed studies. A simplified version of the experimental setup is presented as a three-layered, one-dimensional model derived from the wave equation for non-attenuative plane waves. The first layer represents the upper steel platen with the loading piston and upper flow disk, which are all made of the same material (4130 HR Steel). The sample layer is presented as layer 2, which is in the form of aluminum for the non-attenuating ‘standard’ measurement. The third layer is made of the same material as layer 1 and represented the lower flow disk, base plate and lower piezoelectric transducer platen. As stated earlier, the P-wave for this case is laterally constrained and will not be affected by vertical boundaries of the apparatus. Also, since the piezoelectric transducers are centered directly above and below the loading piston and sample, a 1D model is more than adequate for analysis. The entire derivation of the model is located in the Appendix. This model is a basic mathematical representation of wave transmission through non-attenuating layered medium. Attenuation expressions may be incorporated into the model when more detailed mathematical expressions are needed to describe the waveform. The major result is that the nature of the output wave is critically dependant on the period of the input wave. Namely, if the input period In this stage, the influence of the waveform propagation through the custom platens and triaxial cell was evaluated by comparison with the waveform propagated through the sample only. A quartz sandstone core sample with cylindrical dimensions of 54  The quartz sandstone was placed in the triaxial cell, and a laboratory test was done to examine cyclical pore pressure changes to simulate production and injection in a petroleum reservoir. Axial, radial and pore pressure was ramped to in situ conditions before the pore pressure was dropped from 50 to 30  A very weak synthetic sandstone specimen was used for the same type of simulated depletion, under the uniaxial strain condition as done with the quartz sandstone. Portland cement, sand and water were used to manufacture the sample and mixed proportionally as per procedures outlined in Nouri et al.  An existing triaxial cell has been modified to accurately determine P-wave quality factor and velocity, as well as detect AE from within the cell. Ultrasonic correction factors have been considered as well as wavelength and dimensional calculations have been made to ensure that the P-wave being measured is representative of changing rock properties. Quality factor was determined inside and outside the cell for a quartz sandstone, and the values were found to be very consistent. High precision and repeatable attenuation, velocity and AE measurements from two tests have been presented for simulating pore fluid depletion from porous media under the uniaxial strain condition. This is only an example of the various geomechanical tests that could be performed using this system with the enhancement of either transmission or AE ultrasonic measurements. Future laboratory testing will include evaluating quality factor and velocity in highly attenuative and dispersive rock under simulated production and injection scenarios. Incorporation of shear waves is planned as well, which will enhance the petrophysical and geomechanical characterization of the rock. Shear-wave polarization measurements will also be investigated for examining heterogeneities in the rock fabric. This research was funded by Petroleum Research of Atlantic Canada (PRAC), Schlumberger Canada Limited, Dalhousie University Faculty of Engineering and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC). Technical assistance was provided by Dalhousie University machinist Darrell Adams and Schlumberger electronic technician John Cromwell. Discussions with Dr. Smaine Zeroug and the acoustic group at Schlumberger-Doll Research provided valuable insight and were very helpful. We consider a three-layered medium the top boundary of which is subjected to an incoming pulse, and the bottom boundary is free ( Three wave equations, one for each layer, describe the wave propagation in the medium, There are six boundary conditions, one on the top boundary, To obtain the solution, we apply the Laplace transform to the equations (A.1)–(A.3) to eliminate time, and then solve the ordinary differential equations we arrived at and ‘match’ the solutions on the interfaces. The transformed equations are, The procedure of ‘matching’ (A.17)–(A.19) is quite technically exhausting even though not conceptually complicated. Direct substitution of (A.17)–(A.19) into (A.4)–(A.5) provides one with six equations for Since we only have one boundary condition on the top and bottom boundaries, neither the coefficients Now we can easily evaluate We use an idea based on the expansion of the term We expand (1+ Now, when we know the inverse transform of Eqs. (A.42) and (A.43) give the exact solution of the problem which is valid for any First of all, we note that More importantly, the physical interpretation allows us to simplify (A.43). Namely, we know that the first non-zero spike is located at From a physical point of view, it means that if the input pulse is such that its first full period Moreover, knowing the location of the first spike (at Note that if the loading platens are the same, then we can simplify (A.47) even further, In summary, we can conclude the following. If the period of the input pulse (or at least the period of the first full wave) satisfies (A.47), then, within the considered model, the first full period of the pulse will pass through the three-layered medium without any change of the form. The arrival time of the pulse at the bottom boundary will be delayed by