Zircon is the most important commercial source of zirconium, its compounds and alloys. Several methods are used for industrial processing of zircon for production of zirconium dioxide and tetrachloride. These methods include sintering of zircon with sodium carbonate or sodium hydroxide or calcium oxide or calcium carbonate and with potassium fluorosilicate, chlorination of zircon mixture with coal in blast furnace and carbidization of zircon in a mixture of coal in electric arc furnace. All these methods are carried out at high temperatures and have many disadvantages.
                  The present work illustrates a study of a new technique for extracting zirconium from Egyptian zircon concentrate by its simultaneous ball-milling and pressure alkaline leaching, to improve the recovery of zirconium from zircon. Experiments were carried out in stainless steel ball-mills of cylindrical shape under different conditions of temperature, pressure and time. The ball-mills were heated and mechanically rotated in an electric furnace by means of roll mechanism.
                  The filtrate after leaching of zircon, containing excess of sodium hydroxide was regenerated by its treatment with calcium hydroxide for purification from silicon impurity. Then, the solution was evaporated to the desired concentration (500 g/l Na2O) and recycled to the reactor of leaching.
                  The results obtained show that complete recovery of zirconium from zircon (99.7%) by simultaneous ball-milling and alkaline leaching was attained at 250 °C within 3 h, using amount of sodium hydroxide 150% of theoretical requirement (satisfying favourable conditions of zirconate cake for subsequent acid leaching).
                  The standard free energy (ΔF
                     o) and equilibrium constant (K) of the reaction of zircon with sodium hydroxide were calculated as—19.58 k cal mol−
                     
                     1 and 2.29·1014, respectively. The kinetics of the technological alkaline processing of zircon in ball-mall autoclaves was studied over the temperature range 150–275 °C.Zircon is the most important commercial source of zirconium, its compounds and alloys. Zircon occurs widespread as a common accessory mineral in pegmatites, particularly in syenitic and granitic pegmatites and granites, diorites and gneisses. Zircon, being a heavy mineral and being resistant to chemical decomposition and erosion, is concentrated with other heavy resistant minerals in placer deposits, principally in river and beach sands. Large commercial detrital deposits are found in Australia, Brazil, Ceylon, India, Madagascar, USA and Egypt. Zircon is commonly associated with other heavy minerals such as illmenite, magnetite, monazite and rutile ( In Egypt, zircon occurs as large reserves in rich deposits of black sands that are found along the northern beaches of the Nile Delta from Rosetta to Damietta. The black sand concentrate is composed of ilmenite, magnetite, zircon, rutile, monazite and garnet and makes up about 80% of the concentrate. Mineralogical analysis of typical concentrates follow: ilmenite 55%, magnetite 15–20%, zircon 7–8%, garnet 4–6%, rutile 1.5% and monazite 0.5–1%. Zircon is concentrated by gravity, magnetic and electrostatic methods ( Several methods are used for industrial processing of zircon to extract zirconium and production of zirconium dioxide and tetrachloride ( Sintering of zircon with sodium carbonate or sodium hydroxide are commonly used for production of zirconium dioxide in industry. Chlorination of zircon mixture with coal and its carbidization, followed by chlorination are used for production of zirconium tetrachloride. All these methods of processing of zircon are carried out at high temperatures and have many disadvantages; the most important of them are preliminary high degree of grinding of zircon concentrate, difficulty of equipment design, rapid corrosion of furnaces and their coatings, high temperature and consequently large expense of electric energy. The present work deals with a study of a new technique for extracting zirconium from Egyptian zircon by its processing with sodium hydroxide solutions in ball-mill autoclaves; where grinding and leaching of zircon are combined together in one process at lower temperature and shorter time. This research was carried out using zircon concentrate separated from Egyptian black sands. Zircon grains are colorless to pale brown in thin sections, showing short and long prismatic form with rounded ends grains, weak pleochroism, high relief, straight extinction and high birefringence. Cracking and inclusions are observed in metamict zircon. Some zircon grains are zoned and twinned. Zircon crystallizes in tetragonal system and is optically positive. Zircon is associated with traces of mineral grain impurities such as monazite, rutile, garnet, hornblende, epidote, quartz and others. The mineralogical and chemical composition of the zircon concentrate are given in Experiments of ball-milling and alkaline leaching of zircon were carried out in stainless steel ball-mill autoclaves of cylindrical shape with a volume of 250 ml. A number of ball-mills were heated and mechanically rotated in an electric furnace by means of a roll mechanism A 25-g zircon concentrate at 92% − The leaching efficiency of zircon was determined by the dissolution of the hydrated cake in sulphuric acid (amount 150% of theoretical requirement) at 70 °C within 30 min in a beaker with electric stirrer. The zirconyl sulphate solution was filtered under vacuum and the insoluble residue was washed with dilute acid and then water. Filtrate and washed water were added together and analyzed for the zirconium content. Before starting the experiments of zircon processing, the vapor pressure over sodium hydroxide solutions of different concentrations was measured at different temperatures, in a specially designed autoclave connected to a manometer. Before the study of the technological processing of zircon, an attempt was made to calculate the thermodynamic constants of the reaction. The thermodynamic data given in The free energy of sodium zirconate may be calculated from the following equation. The reaction of leaching of zircon with sodium hydroxide may be represented as: The equilibrium constant of the reaction of alkaline leaching of zircon may be calculated from the equation relating to 25 °C. The equilibrium constant is large and the reaction of leaching of zircon with sodium hydroxide may be considered in practice to be irreversible. The technological processing of Egyptian zircon by its alkaline leaching in ball-mill autoclaves is based on the formation of sodium zirconate and silicate according to the chemical reaction (Eq. The separation of zirconium from silicon is based on the dilution of the pulp of leaching with water, where sodium silicate being soluble is separated in solution, while sodium zirconate and other compounds are insoluble and remain in the residue. During dilution process, some hydrolysis of sodium zirconate and silicate takes place according to the following reactions: The acidic dissolution of the hydrated zirconium cake in sulphuric acid takes place according to the following reactions: The vapor pressure data measured over sodium hydroxide solutions of different concentrations at different temperatures are shown in Also, the vapor pressure was measured over the product of zircon leaching with sodium hydroxide solution of concentration 500 g/l Na  To determine the optimum amount of sodium hydroxide at which complete leaching of zircon is attained, a series of experiments were carried out at 250 °C for 3 and 4 h, each using 500 g/l Na The effect of temperature and time on the alkaline processing of zircon was investigated at different temperatures from 150 up to 275 °C at different times, using 150% of theoretical requirement of sodium hydroxide at concentration, 500 g/l Na The recovery of zirconium from zircon generally increases as the temperature and time increase, except at 275 °C and longer time than 8 h, it decreases slowly. The increase of zirconium recovery is at different rates, depending on the temperature and retention time. The higher the temperature, the larger the increase of zirconium recovery. The increase of recovery of zirconium from zircon with temperature is due to the increase of vapor pressure over the pulp (at 150, 175, 200, 225, 250 and 275 °C, the vapor pressure is 3.2, 5.6, 10, 17.8, 30.7 and 42.4 kg/cm At 150–175 °C, the recovery of zirconium sharply increases during the first 6 h, then gradually increases. At these temperatures, complete recovery of zirconium is not attained even at 6 h (33.4% at 150 °C and 55.6% at 175 °C). At 200 and 225 °C, the recovery of zirconium from zircon sharply increases during the first 4 h (reaching 97.6% at 225 °C), then gradually increases with time. Complete recovery of zirconium (99.6%) is attained within 5 h at 225 °C and 8 h at 200 °C. At 250 and 275 °C, the recovery of zirconium sharply increases during the first 2 h, reaching 86.6% and 96.8%, respectively. At both temperatures, complete leaching of zircon (99.7%) is attained within 3 h and remains unchanged with time at 250 °C and up to 8 h at 275 °C, after which there is a gradual and small decrease of leaching of zircon. This decrease may be due to the partial dehydration of the sodium zirconate produced or the formation of complex sodium zirconium silicate as the temperature and time increase ( From these data, it is concluded that complete leaching of zircon (99.7%) is attained at 250 °C within 3 h. The kinetics of the technological processing of zircon with sodium hydroxide solutions in ball-mill autocleaves was studied over the temperature range 150–275 °C during different times, according to the experimental data obtained ( The alkaline leaching of zircon is mechanically activated by its processing in ball-mill autoclaves. At 200–275 °C, the surface coatings of sodium zirconate and silicate produced, are easily and continuously removed as formed, by the grinding action of steel balls. This leads to the exposing of fresh zircon particle surfaces to the alkaline leach solutions. In this condition, there will be no resistance to the flow of alkali solution reaching the interface and the rate of the reaction is not affected by the surface coatings. The process of leaching is therefore controlled by the chemical reaction at the interface and the kinetics of the reaction may be described by the following equation ( The experimental data in From the Arrhenius plot ( At 150 and 175 °C, the alkaline processing of zircon leads to the formation of dense thick suspension of the fine particles of zircon and the reaction products. This phenomenon was observed in spite of performing the leaching of zircon in ball-mill autoclaves. The fine zircon particles are surrounded by compact saturated layer of sodium zirconate and silicate. For this suspension of very fine mineral particles and products, the velocity of rotation of autoclave and balls are beyond the critical value such that diffusion through the product layer is rate controlling. The alkali solution reaches the mineral with difficulty. In order that leaching of zircon proceeds, the alkali must diffuse through the product layer to reach the surface of the mineral. Therefore, the process is controlled by the rate of diffusion of alkali through this layer. In this case, the rate of the reaction may be determined by application of Jander's equation and Crank–Ginstling–Brounshtein's equation (Eqs. If leaching of zircon is controlled by diffusion through the product layer, the experimental data in It is concluded that at 150 and 175 °C, the alkaline processing of zircon is a diffusion controlled process, depending on the rate of flow of alkali solution and its velocity of diffusion through the product layer to the surface of zircon particles. The diffusion resistance through the coherent product layer controls the overall kinetic process. The suggested flow sheet of the technological processing of Egyptian zircon is shown in The study of the technological processing of Egyptian zircon by its alkaline leaching in ball-mill autoclaves revealed the following conclusions: In general, the recovery of zirconium from zircon increases at different rates, depending on the temperature and time. The higher the temperature and the longer the retention time, the larger the increase of zirconium recovery will be. The increase of zirconium recovery with temperature is due to the increase of vapor pressure over the pulp of zircon leaching. At 150 and 175 °C, the leaching efficiency of zircon is low even at 6 h, reaching 33.4% and 55.6%, respectively. This is due to the low vapor pressure over the pulp of leaching (3.2 and 5.6 kg/cm At 250 and 275 °C, complete recovery of zirconium from zircon (99.7%) is attained within 3 h and remains unchanged with time. At 275 °C and longer time than 8 h, there is a small decrease of recovery, which may be due to the partial dehydration of sodium zirconate or the formation of complex sodium zirconium silicate. The calculated values of the standard free energy (Δ The kinetic study of the technological processing of zircon by its alkaline leaching in ball-mill autoclaves is governed by the structure of zircon and the condition of the product surface coating. The experimental data reveal that the rate of the reaction of zircon leaching is controlled by diffusion through the product layer at 150 and 175 °C. At 200 °C and higher temperatures, it is chemically rate-controlled, as confirmed by the high value of the calculated apparent activation energy (27.01 kcal mol It was found that the most favourable conditions of the technological processing of zircon with sodium hydroxide, at which complete recovery of zirconium (99.7%) could be attained, are 250 °C within 3 h using 150% of theoretical requirement of alkali at concentration 500 g/l Na Zircon leaching with alkali solution was mechanically activated and accelerated in ball-mill autoclaves as a result of the grinding action of steel balls, that caused continuous removal of sodium zirconate and silicate from the reacting particle surfaces. This leads to the exposing of fresh zircon particle surfaces to the alkali leach solution. The main advantages of the present technological processing of Egyptian zircon can be summarized as the following: No preliminary grinding of zircon is required. Simultaneous grinding and leaching of zircon, which can be achieved in one process. Relatively low temperature requirement (250 °C) for alkaline leaching and moderate time, compared with sintering processes of zircon. Cheap and common reagents (sodium hydroxide and sulphuric acid) can be used in the leaching of zircon and acid dissolution of zirconate cake and they can be regenerated. Simplicity of design and construction of the reactor of leaching.