Temperature-driven models of soil respiration (SR) are crucial for estimating C-balances of arable soils. However, model construction may be severely influenced by tillage operations. The impact of tillage on the temperature dependence of SR was studied to reveal the temporal patterns of model quality of temperature-driven SR-models. To obtain SR, CO2 fluxes were measured with a dynamic chamber technique in treatments of an energy crop rotation amended with biogas residues (BR) and mineral fertiliser (MF). Measurements were performed with short intervals during the first three days after tillage operations, then with extending intervals between measurements up to 35 days after tillage. Additionally, soil concentrations of hot-water extractable organic carbon (HWC) were determined before and during the experiment. Overall, in all treatments individual CO2 fluxes were affected by the extent of soil disturbance and fertiliser treatment. The highest tillage-induced fluxes where observed after disking in MF treatment. Tillage also induced an immediate increase of HWC, indicating additional labile C and a fast response of microbial activity. However, the change of HWC lasted only one day and approximated the pre-tillage values within a week. Even though BR soil had a higher HWC content, the increased C mineralisation in one repetition of MF suggests that buried plant residues might have a higher influence on SR after tillage than the type of fertiliser. Directly after soil disturbance by tillage it was impossible to construct temperature-driven models for SR in all treatments. Assuming that the coefficient of determination is appropriate with R
                     2
                     ≥0.5 and the model quality is good with NRMSE≤0.15, the qualities of the models increased continuously with time, but were unsatisfying for at least two weeks. During this time, SR showed a high sensitivity to changing environmental influences like precipitation and soil moisture or available C for microbial turnover, rather than temperature. The treatment BR showed a less sensitive pattern, which might be attributed to an altered soil structure and microbial activity of soil after long-term application of an organic fertiliser like BR. Therefore, temperature-driven models for the prediction of soil derived CO2 emissions should be applied carefully for the days and weeks after tillage and verification by measurements in shorter intervals is advisable.Soil respiration (SR) is an essential part of the terrestrial carbon cycle. As a large component of ecosystem respiration, SR is the main process of carbon transport from terrestrial ecosystems to the atmosphere ( In the long term, SR equals the total CO Since the decay of SOM and organic residues is the only source of SR on bare soils ( Precise information about the impact of management activities on soil CO It is of great practical significance to know the duration of the “disturbed” state with CO The study site is located in northeast Germany's terminal moraine of the Weichselian glacial period at 53°48′35″N and 12°4′20″E (elevation 10 Five days following the whole-plant harvest of winter wheat (27 July 2012), the field site was prepared for mustard as catch crop with the following management measures: liming (1 Three fertiliser treatments were compared: (1) mineral fertiliser (MF), (2) biogas residue (BR) and (3) a mixture of 50% MF and 50% BR (MFBR). Whereas the BR and MFBR plots were located next to each other, the MF plot was at a distance of 50 During each measurement run we recorded soil temperatures in 2, 5 and 10 Measurements of CO The measurements started generally within 1 Composite soil samples (consisting of five individual subsamples, sharing distances of 25 Measured CO Statistical performance indicators were evaluated from regression analyses of observed and modeled data. This evaluation included the significance of models by All statistics were run using the During the study period, the average daily mean air temperature at 20 Directly before liming and the following tillage operations, all treatments showed similar mean fluxes between 0.24 and 0.28 Overall, CO The values of HWC changed immediately and profoundly after tillage ( The temperature driven model of soil CO Until “day 5, 7, 8”, best model fits were found with soil temperature at 10 The model fits (Eq. The temperature during this study was in accordance with the long-term observations, but the cumulative precipitation of 35.9 Average CO In treatment BR, there was also an immediate increase of CO In all treatments, the efflux after the first tillage operation with the deep loosener showed a similar pattern with an immediate increase, but no explicit burst. Since the magnitudes of post-tillage fluxes were higher after disking than after DL, the CO Thus, for the increase of CO The tillage operations on the second day did not cause any additional increase of CO The order of the treatments in terms of CO On the second day, after the end of the tillage operations, the order of CO From the third day on, in the treatment MF a relatively high SD was observed. One of the repetitions showed significantly higher fluxes (permutation test, HWC accounts in large parts for microbial biomass and carbohydrates, thus it is recommended as a good indicator for microbial activity ( The sharp increase of HWC directly after tillage, especially in the two BR treatments, indicates both a formation of labile C and a rapid feedback of microbial community. This behavior could be attributed to a higher proportion of active to dormant micro-organisms in soils fertilised with BR ( Due to harvest before tillage, no measurements of undisturbed bare soil were available on the studied site. But the soil was still bare on the last measurement day. Therefore we can assume this last day as a reference for undisturbed soil. In general, all quality parameters of the model fits showed high temporal variability in the days after tillage operations. Directly after tillage, it was impossible to calibrate temperature driven models ( Another evidence for the disruption of the temperature dependence of SR by tillage is the shift of the depth where the soil temperatures give a good model fit. For example, in treatment BR there is a change from 10 Tillage has a large influence on subsequent CO Tillage also induced a transient increase of HWC for approximately one day, when the treatment BR showed the highest and MF the lowest change. This quick increase of HWC followed by decrease indicates a fast response of the microbial community to the additional supply with labile C and oxygen after tillage. Overall, we can state that tillage disturbed the temperature dependence of SR for at least two weeks, with SR being relatively sensitive to environmental parameters like soil moisture rather than temperature. The impact on the recalibration of temperature driven SR models was shorter in treatment BR compared with the MF treatments. On the contrary, an increased mineralisation was observable in treatment MF for four weeks. For this reason, temperature driven models for the prediction of soil derived CO We thank the technicians Steffen Kaufmane and Sascha Tittmar for their assistance in our work. Many thanks also to the research facility for agriculture and fisheries of the federal state of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania (LFA) in Gülzow for their co-operation, especially Jana Peters and Andreas Gurgel. The joint research project underlying this report was funded by the