Vibrating screening is still one of the main operations considering solid–solid and solid–liquid separation processes. Although it is an equipment of simple design and execution, the full description of a screening unit operation may be difficult to predict, considering that several operational variables can influence it. Therefore, the main objective of this work was to evaluate the best possible combination between the process variables screen aperture size, the volumetric concentration of solids in the feed, and the g-force (measurement of the vibration). This configuration predetermined values for moisture content of the retained material over the screen and separation efficiency regarding particle size. For this, a suspension of phosphate rock concentrate (with a particle density of 3.25g/cm3 and average particle size of 95μm) was diluted in water to perform the experiments in a pilot-scale vibrating screen. The results were analyzed statistically and correlations for each response were fit. The highest values of separation efficiency were found with the lowest values of cut-size diameter, which is desirable in terms of separation. A multi-objective optimization in the experimental range was developed, finding the optimal point for the moisture content of 17.29% and the separation efficiency of 86.88%. The effects of screen aperture size and g-force had important roles in this study.Screening is considered one of the oldest unit operations of relevance to separation in the industry and is also widely used as a method of particle size characterization Screens have evolved throughout the years, from small and simple equipment, capable of processing only coarse solids, to modern designs installed in various industry sectors. Historically, the evolution of vibrating screen design has allowed the use of finer screen cloths. This evolutionary process has led to four different phases of technology to reach a better screening performance. Such phases can be defined by the type of motion produced by the rotating vibrators, which depend on the location and number of the vibrators: unbalanced elliptical, circular, linear or balanced elliptical Although screening is a unit operation of simple execution, its mathematical description and detailed understanding may not be trivial The effect of some variables on the vibrating screening performance has been investigated by many researchers both in the minerals industry and in the oil well drilling area. In dry screening, Fowler and Lim In screening applied in the oil well drilling area, El Dorry This study aims to evaluate the best possible combination between the screen aperture size, the volumetric concentration of solids in the feed, and the g-force (measurement of the vibration), considering constant feed flow rate and screen tilt. This configuration predetermined values for moisture content of the retained material and separation efficiency using a suspension of phosphate rock concentrate with particle density of 3.25 Although the screen aperture size cannot be continuously adjusted in real time, it was used as a process analysis variable in this study to achieve the goal defined previously, which could achieve a certain performance index for the vibrating screen. In the drilling of oil wells, for example, the screen of the vibrating screen must be replaced as the particle size distribution of the drilling fluid changes. This operation requires that the equipment stops to replace the screen. Three types of standard screen (Tyler) available on the market (130, 106 and 95 The criterion adopted to choose the process variables was their relevance in the performance of the equipment; various industries adjust the process parameters to achieve satisfactory performance in the screening operation in the mineral processing and in oil and gas drilling wells. Additionally, the concentration of particulate matter in the suspension that is fed onto the vibrating screens fluctuates in industrial operations and justifies the selection of this variable. The practical use of the results obtained in this study is to improve the capacity to predict the values of residual moisture in the retained material and the efficiency of particle size separation under different steady state conditions and with different cut-size diameters. This information can be applied to modern control systems and maximize the objective function in real time. The factorial design has been widely applied in basic and technological research, presenting advantages such as: better prediction of variables and the possibility of estimating interaction effects among different factors The independent variables chosen were: the aperture size of each screen ( According to the proposed design, the number of experiments would be 27. However, each experiment was carried out in triplicate, thus making a total of 81 experiments. To perform the experiments, one barrel (159 In this work the following responses were evaluated:    All particle size distributions were determined by the Mastersizer 2000 particle size analyzer. A schematic diagram of the experimental unit is shown in 500 L stirred feed tank; Rail for the feed of the suspension; Screen surface; Tank to collect the retained material (approximately 80 Tank to collect the material that passes through the screen cloth (approximately 200 Centrifugal pump; Rotating vibrators; Piezoelectric accelerometer to measure the vibration of the screen; National Instruments USB-6008 data acquisition board; Frequency inverter to adjust the rotation of the vibrators. The vibrating screen used to execute the experiments has the following specifications: Dimensions: 1.65 Equipped with two 0.75 It has a frame for mounting screen cloths of 0.4 It was decided to tilt the screen downward in order to provide a better conveyance The execution of the experiments followed the methodology described below: Mounting of a screen cloth and preparation of the suspension in the feed tank. The suspension was kept under constant mechanical agitation to prevent sedimentation of the solid and subsequent clogging in the pipe tank; Start of the screening by opening the valve installed at the tank base to allow flow of the suspension to be discharged onto a rail in order to enable a more uniform distribution on the screening surface. From that moment the operation time count was started; Adjustment of the g-force by means of a proportional control algorithm configured in the data base of Labview™ data acquisition system. The current signal generated by the accelerometer was used as a controlled variable and the rotating vibrators' rotation was manipulated by the frequency inverter. The g-force control was needed, since its value decreases as the suspension is being fed onto the screen Interruption of the operation when all suspension was depleted from the feed tank. The vibration was stopped and the operation time was registered. The retained material was collected in a small tank and weighed, whereas the material that passed through the screen apertures was discharged into the 200 Collection of samples of the retained material to determine the moisture content; Collection of samples of both retained and passing materials to determine their particle size distributions. To find the optimal point at the studied experimental range that combines both low moisture content and high separation efficiency, a study of optimization was performed to maximize the objective function given by Eq. In the definition of The experimental results were analyzed using the criteria presented below: Execution of a full multiple regression to fit a 2nd order model for the referred response with the determination of the square of correlation coefficient (R Plot of the residuals to verify the randomness of these data and whether there are high residuals; Identification of any experiment related to a high residual (also called an outlier) so that it can be removed from the regression; Execution of a new multiple regression. This procedure was executed until there were no more outliers, and at least two experiments of each experimental condition were kept for the analysis; Execution of a regression with the mean values in each experimental condition with determination of R Elimination of the non-significant estimators by the t-Student statistical test at a 5% significance level. All the statistical analyses were performed using STATISTICA 7.1 software.  From the analysis of the data presented in Still regarding Referring to the cut-size diameters obtained experimentally and shown in For evaluation of the significant estimators to predict the moisture content, separation efficiency and cut-size diameter, Eqs. The R Eq. Regarding the multiple regression for the separation efficiency shown in Eq. Eq. Similarly, Eq. In some applications, it is important that the vibrating screen retains the particles larger than the screen aperture size and it is also desirable to have the highest retention of particles in order to assist the subsequent equipment performance, such as for the hydrocyclones in the oil well drilling area. Therefore, analysis is needed of the retained solids on the screen in relation to the separation efficiency ( By observing In order to find the operating optimal point that combines low moisture content and high separation efficiency, a multi-objective optimization in the experimental range was performed by calculating the objective function described by Eq. Thus, the optimal operating point corresponds to experiment 25, in From the results shown in this work, the main conclusions can be highlighted: The lowest observed moisture content was achieved with the screen aperture size of 95 The highest observed separation efficiency was achieved with the screen aperture size of 106 The highest values of separation efficiency were found with the lowest values of cut-size diameter. The smallest screen aperture size and the highest g-force promoted such a conclusion; The optimal operating point in the experimental range that combines low moisture content and high separation efficiency was found with the calculation of the objective function. The values of the responses were 17.29% for the moisture content and 86.88% for the separation efficiency; This optimal point was achieved with the aperture size of 95  volumetric concentration of solids in the feed (%) cut-size diameter (μm) particle size (μm) frequency (in volume) of the distribution evaluated of frequency (in volume) of the distribution evaluated in function that consists in the normalization of the values of objective function (−) function that consists in the normalization of the values of moisture content of the retained material (%) maximum moisture obtained in the experiments (%) minimum moisture obtained in the experiments (%) mass of solids in the feed (kg) mass of retained solids (kg) coded form of the screen aperture size (−) coded form of the volumetric concentration (−) coded form of the g-force (−) accumulative size distribution of the feed (−) accumulative size distribution of the retained material (−) g-force (−) maximum separation efficiency obtained in the experiments (%) minimum separation efficiency obtained in the experiments (%) separation efficiency of the retained material (%) screen aperture size (μm) The authors acknowledge the financial support provided by