Non-steady state deformation and annealing experiments on vein quartz are designed to simulate earthquake-driven episodic deformation in the middle crust. Three types of experiments were carried out using a modified Griggs-type solid medium deformation apparatus. All three start with high stress deformation at a temperature of 400 °C and a constant strain rate of 10−4 s−1 (type A), some are followed by annealing in the stability field of α-quartz for 14–15 h at zero nominal differential stress and temperatures of 800–1000 °C (type A+B), or by annealing for 15 h at 900 °C and at a residual stress (type A+C).
                  The quartz samples reveal a very high strength >2 GPa at a few percent of permanent strain. The microstructures after short-term high stress deformation (type A) record localized brittle and plastic deformation. Statisc annealing (type A+B) results in recrystallisation restricted to the highly damaged zones. The new grains aligned in strings and without crystallographic preferred orientation, indicate nucleation and growth. Annealing at non-hydrostatic conditions (type A+C) results in shear zones that also develop from deformation bands or cracks that formed during the preceding high stress deformation. In this case, however, the recrystallised zone is several grain diameters wide, the grains are elongate, and a marked crystallographic preferred orientation indicates flow by dislocation creep with dynamic recrystallisation. Quartz microstructures identical to those produced in type A+B experiments are observed in cores recovered from Long Valley Exploratory Well in the Quaternary Long Valley Caldera, California, with considerable seismic activity.
                  The experiments demonstrate the behaviour of quartz at coseismic loading (type A) and subsequent static annealing (type A+B) or creep at decaying stress (type A+C) in the middle crust. The experimentally produced microfabrics allow to identify similar processes and conditions in exhumed rocks.Major earthquakes nucleating in the seismogenic layer (termed schizosphere by Microstructural evidence for such episodic deformation, reflecting earthquake-related stress cycles in an ancient uppermost plastosphere, has been reported from rocks exposed in the Sesia Zone, Western Alps ( Owing to its importance for the mechanical behaviour of continental crust, there is a vast number of experimental studies on the deformation of quartz. Most of them are designed to simulate steady state flow at slow natural strain rates. The objectives of these studies are to determine slip systems, to elucidate the development of crystallographic preferred orientations, to explore the role of water related defects during crystal plastic deformation, or to calibrate paleopiezometers (e.g. In contrast to such experiments at generally high temperatures (> Comparison of experimental and natural record provides insight into processes, conditions, length and time scales characteristic of episodic loading and relaxation in the middle crust driven by seismic activity in the upper crust. Such insight may be crucial for the interpretation of aftershocks and geodetic observations of aseismic creep following a major earthquake (e.g. The experiments were performed in a modified Griggs-type solid medium deformation apparatus ( The starting material was taken from two different natural vein quartz samples (Qu and CR1; ∼ Three types of experiment were carried out ( In type A experiments the sample was deformed at temperatures of 400 °C and a confining pressure of 2.0 GPa. The axial force was increased up to 60–80 kN by propagating the axial piston with a constant velocity of 2.5–2.9 mm/h (corresponding to a strain rate of 10 Type A The type A Stress–strain curves were derived from the force displacement curves ( The experimentally deformed samples were cut into halves along the cylinder axis. A polished thin section (∼ The crystallographic orientation and microfabric of quartz were analysed by SEM, using a LEO 1530 instrument with field emission gun, forescatter detector, and electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) facilities. The thin sections were chemically polished using a colloidal silica suspension (SYTON®) . The SEM was operated at an accelerating voltage of 20 kV, with the thin section tilted at an angle of 70° with respect to the beam, and with a working distance of 25 mm. For indexing and processing of the data the The arrangement and density of dislocations in quartz were analysed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). For preparation of TEM samples of naturally deformed quartz, a GATAN PIPS ion mill was used. This method was not feasible for the experimental samples, because of their small size and the high density of fractures developed during unloading. For preparation of the experimental samples we therefore used the focussed ion beam (FIB) technique. This technique allows preparing site-specific electron transparent foils (10–20 μm wide, 5–15 μm high and 100–200 nm thick) through Ga-ion milling on a standard thin section ( The microstructures of type A samples, rapidly deformed without subsequent annealing (Qu4, CR1-1, CR1-3; see Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) reveals a high density of dislocations in both, deformation bands and the vicinity of shear fractures ( Microstructures in deformed samples annealed at 800–1000 °C and quasi-hydrostatic conditions (Qu2, Qu6-8; CR1-4; CR1-7; CR1-8, CR1-9) are characterised by mostly isometric recrystallised grains with an average diameter of 2–20 μm ( While the majority of isolated recrystallised grains appears to be aligned along former deformation bands or fractures ( The strings of recrystallised grains are mostly oriented at an angle of < For a comparison of different experiments, the average grain diameter and the area proportion of recrystallised grains have been determined from EBSD data (see Inspection by TEM reveals that the new recrystallised grains are almost devoid of dislocations, while the host grain is characterised by a high density of defects and irregular low angle grain boundaries ( Sample CR1-2 has been annealed at 900 °C at non-hydrostatic conditions subsequent to deformation ( After the type A The transgranular shear zone displayed in The microstructure of the inner zone is characterised by elongate recrystallised grains with a diameter of ∼ The majority of the recrystallised grains have no systematic orientation relation to the host grain or the outer zone ( The preferred orientation of rotation axes representing the misorientation of host grain, outer zone and few grains at the transition to the inner zone (misorientation angles 3–25°, Long Valley Caldera, California, formed by a cataclysmic eruption at 760 ka (e.g. In sample LV1, small recrystallised grains within mm-sized quartz grains are aligned like beads on a string. The recrystallised grains are characterised by an average diameter of ∼ On the TEM scale, the vein quartz of sample LV1 shows subparallel healed microcracks decorated with fluid inclusions ( In the present study, the conditions of the deformation experiments are chosen to correspond to those thought to be relevant for coseismic loading in the middle crust, where seismogenic faulting causes stress redistribution (e.g. Annealing at quasi-hydrostatic (type A Type A samples show the microstructural record of short-term deformation at high strain rate and high stress, with a few percent of finite strain. Compared to the undeformed starting material, the microstructures are diagnostic of both brittle failure and inhomogeneous crystal plastic deformation. Within optically visible deformation bands, TEM inspection reveals a high dislocation density indicating crystal plastic deformation by dislocation glide ( Shear fractures probably result from the coalescence of arrays of microcracks. Locally, these shear fractures are observed to merge into deformation bands. TEM observations reveal that such shear fractures can be flanked by a zone of ∼ Beyond the optically visible deformation bands and fractures, the TEM-scale microstructure appears to be not notably modified during the deformation experiment. This means that the strength of the quartz crystals is so high, that the maximum nominal differential stress of 2–4 GPa was still insufficient to cause distributed plastic flow. The differential stress quoted in The stress strain curves ( After static annealing at zero nominal differential stress, the samples previously deformed at high stress and low finite strain show recrystallised grains aligned like beads on a string is most striking ( After annealing at temperatures > The random crystallographic orientation and the lack of a systematic orientation relation to the deformed host crystal indicate that recrystallisation was by a nucleation and growth processes. The microfabric is not consistent with a subgrain rotation recrystallisation mechanism ( A high stored strain energy provides a high driving force and allows static recrystallisation even at relatively low temperatures. As known from metals and alloys, the temperature at which static recrystallisation occurs, decreases with increasing stored strain energy (e.g. TEM inspection of the crystals beyond the zones of localized deformation in the type A samples shows no discernible modification of the defect structure compared to the undeformed reference samples, and hence no excess driving force for recrystallisation. However, the diameter of the recrystallised grains generally exceeds the typical width of deformation bands or the damage zone along shear fractures ( In the type A In the outer zone, misorientation increases inward from the undeformed host grain and reaches up to ∼ The inner zone of the shear zone consists of recrystallised grains, with a grain size of ∼ Cataclastic shear zones were observed in the experiments by The shear zones in the type A The experiments were performed with the goal to produce microfabrics identical to those presumably developed in nature, where middle crust is subject to stress cycles driven by seismic activity in the upper crust. For comparison with the experimental record, suitable natural samples were provided by Long Valley exploratory Well, where hydrothermal quartz veins were episodically deformed at temperatures of ∼ On the optical scale, the strings of recrystallised grains in naturally deformed vein quartz of sample LV1 are nearly identical to those experimentally produced in the type A On the TEM scale, the microstructures of the LVEW vein quartz compare best to the microstructures in sample Qu8, type A The striking similarity between the experimental product and the natural record suggests creation by identical processes. In accordance with the experimental results, the strings of isometric grains in the vein quartz from LVEW are therefore interpreted to reflect brittle and localized plastic deformation at high stress followed by quasi-static annealing. The natural sample, however, may have experienced multiple earthquake-related minor stress cycles at decreasing temperatures (100 °C at the time of recovery by drilling) and therefore a multiple overprint at various temperatures and peak stresses. This interpretation is in accord with the episodic deformation recorded by a wide variety of peculiar microstructures and sudden effervescence in the hydrothermal fluid, which is attributed to stress cycles driven by earthquakes ( Coseismic loading by stress redistribution in the middle crust is expected to lead to an instantaneous (i.e. in seconds) change in the stress state, with very high peak differential stresses indicated by the microstructural record of exhumed metamorphic rocks ( Microstructural changes during annealing can proceed at quasi-static conditions, when deformation during stress relaxation is localized elsewhere. In the present study, this situation is explored in the type A At Long Valley Exploratory Well at a depth of 2265 m, the record of fluid inclusions along healed cracks ( In the laboratory, the characteristic microstructures have developed within 15 hours ( The laboratory experiments in the present study are designed to investigate the behaviour of quartz subject to cyclic stress changes in the middle crust, near the tip of a seismogenic fault, aiming at an improved base to interpret the corresponding natural microstructural record. The experimental scheme comprises (1) short-term deformation at high stress (corresponding to quasi-instantaneous loading by coseismic stress-redistribution), and (2) annealing at nominally hydrostatic conditions or low residual stresses. Notably, deformation is performed at near-natural conditions, albeit at probably somewhat The quartz samples reveal a very high strength of ∼ Microstructural changes during annealing at temperatures of 300–400 °C, suspected to be characteristic for the base of the seismogenic layer in the continental crust, require application of temperatures ≥ Quasi-static annealing requires deformation during stress relaxation to be localized elsewhere. To investigate the effect of concomitant deformation on the microstructural evolution, an experiment (type A In view of the predicted strong stress fluctuations in the middle crust, beneath the seismogenic layer (e.g. An improved understanding of the natural record of the middle crust is considered as essential for the set-up of advanced models of the earthquake cycle, and for the interpretation of geodetic observations after major earthquakes. Reading the structural and microstructural record of natural rocks provides the only direct access with sufficient detail to isolate processes and rate-controlling steps, including the possibility of integration over several orders of magnitude in length and time. The authors thank Richard Wirth for preparing some of the FIB foils and Jörg Renner and Frank Bettenstedt for most valuable help and advice during the experimental work. The constructive reviews by two anonymous referees are gratefully acknowledged. The work was funded by the German Science Foundation within the scope of the Collaborative Research Centre 526 ”Rheology of the Earth — from the upper crust into the subduction Zone”.