Hydrogels that solidify in response to a dual, physical and chemical, mechanism upon temperature increase were fabricated and characterized. The hydrogels were based on N-isopropylacrylamide, which renders them thermoresponsive, and contained covalently cross-linkable moieties in the macromers. The effects of the macromer end group, acrylate or methacrylate, and the fabrication conditions on the degradative and swelling properties of the hydrogels were investigated. The hydrogels exhibited higher swelling below their lower critical solution temperature (LCST). When immersed in cell culture medium at physiological temperature, which was above their LCST, hydrogels showed constant swelling and no degradation over 8weeks, with the methacrylated hydrogels showing greater swelling than their acrylated analogs. In addition, hydrogels immersed in cell culture medium under the same conditions showed lower swelling compared with phosphate-buffered saline. The interplay between chemical cross-linking and thermally induced phase separation affected the swelling characteristics of the hydrogels in different media. Mesenchymal stem cells encapsulated in the hydrogels in vitro were viable over 3weeks and markers of osteogenic differentiation were detected when the cells were cultured with osteogenic supplements. Hydrogel mineralization in the absence of cells was observed in cell culture medium with the addition of fetal bovine serum and β-glycerol phosphate. The results suggest that these hydrogels may be suitable as carriers for cell delivery in tissue engineering.Thermally responsive hydrogels have attracted much research interest over the past years for their use in biomedical applications Our group has previously reported the synthesis and characterization of macromers for the fabrication of hydrogels that can form in situ with two independent, physical and chemical, solidification mechanisms The objective of the present study was the fabrication and characterization of thermally responsive and chemically cross-linkable hydrogels that form upon temperature increase to physiological. The ultimate goal of this work is the application of hydrogels for cell delivery in craniofacial bone tissue engineering. The potential of these hydrogels for this aim in terms of hydrogel properties, cell encapsulation and mineralization are investigated. More specifically, we examine the effect of macromer end group (acrylate or methacrylate) on swelling and degradation of the hydrogels. The effects of these properties on encapsulated mesenchymal stem cell viability and osteogenic differentiation are evaluated. Thermally gelling macromers were synthesized from pentaerythritol diacrylate monostearate (PEDAS), Methacrylated macromer solutions were prepared in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (pH 7.4, Gibco Life, Grand Island, NY) at a concentration of 10% (w/v). Ammonium persulfate (APS) and N,N,N′,N′-tetramethylethylenediamine (TEMED) (Sigma–Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) were used as free radical initiators for chemical cross-linking of the macromers. Stock solutions of the initiator system in double distilled (dd) water were added to the macromer solution at different concentrations, resulting in final APS/TEMED concentrations of 10, 15 and 20 Hydrogels were fabricated using APS/TEMED at 20 Hydrogel samples were prepared as described below in Section Cells were harvested from the marrow of the femora and tibiae of male 6–8-week-old Fischer 344 rats (Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA) as previously described Vacuum dried macromers were sterilized with UV irradiation for 3 Samples reserved for biochemical assays were homogenized with a pellet grinder in 0.5 The hydrogel homogenates were analyzed for DNA content, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity and collagen and calcium content. The assays are described in more detail elsewhere Sections of 0.7 Hydrogels were embedded in freezing medium (Histo-Prep, Fisher Scientific, Fair Lawn, NJ) and frozen at −20 Hydrogels were fabricated as outlined above and were soaked in complete osteogenic medium, osteogenic medium but without the addition of FBS or simulated body fluid (SBF), which was prepared according to Kokubo and Takadama Data from the studies were analyzed using single factor analysis of variance (ANOVA) with a 95% confidence interval and Tukey’s post hoc test. The global effects of the conditions in the swelling study in medium and PBS were evaluated with a two-factor ANOVA and a 95% confidence interval. Data are reported as means Higher initiator concentrations and fabrication intervals resulted in increased hydrogel swelling ( The LCST of the acrylated macromers was 26.5 The swelling ratio of the acrylated hydrogels at 1 After 1 Overall, the global effect of the incubation medium was statistically significant for both acrylated and methacrylated formulations, each of which exhibited lower swelling in osteogenic cell culture medium compared with PBS. The biochemical assays revealed a drop in DNA content after the first week for both formulations ( Analysis for calcium showed significant accumulation in samples incubated with complete osteogenic medium for 4 The fabrication of hydrogels via a dual gelation mechanism was the objective of this study. The macromers used as building blocks for the hydrogels were designed to contain a thermoresponsive domain and chemically cross-linkable (meth)acrylate end groups. A physical gelation mechanism imparted by the thermoresponsive pNiPAAm segment in the macromer takes place once the incubation temperature reaches the macromer LCST, and covalent cross-linking of the macromer chains via the (meth)acrylate groups is triggered by the addition of a thermal free radical initiator system. The effect of the macromer structure (acrylate or methacrylate functional groups) on the properties of the resulting hydrogels was investigated. The swelling and degradation characteristics of the hydrogels were evaluated and these properties examined with respect to MSC viability and osteogenic potential upon encapsulation. Hydrogel systems based on The first study reported in this manuscript showed increased hydrogel swelling with longer fabrication times and increased initiator concentrations ( The effect of temperature on swelling of the hydrogels in water was investigated at temperatures below (4 Further swelling and degradation studies were performed over 8 One advantage of in situ forming hydrogels is the three-dimensional incorporation of cells and the potential control over their spatial distribution. In our system a homogeneous cellular distribution could be observed throughout the hydrogels for both formulations over 3 One problem encountered in these studies was the incomplete DNA extraction from the cells and/or the gels. Double-stranded DNA could be detected until the first day of culture, but a significant drop occurred at later time points. The presence of live cells was, however, confirmed by the Live/Dead staining. Possible interactions of the material and matrix components with DNA, as well as material autofluorescence, were accounted for. Moreover, the presence of single- and double-stranded DNA was evaluated with an Oli-Green assay kit MSCs can undergo osteogenic differentiation when cultured in the presence of supplements such as dexamethasone The mechanism of hydrogel mineralization was further evaluated with cell-free hydrogels immersed in three different mineralizing media, namely complete osteogenic medium, the same osteogenic medium but without the addition of FBS and SBF. SBF has a slightly higher concentration of calcium ions (2.5 The results from the present studies indicate that hydrogel mineralization here is mediated by FBS ( These studies have demonstrated the fabrication of hydrogels with a dual solidification mechanism, namely lower critical solution behavior and covalent cross-linking. Parameters that control the swelling behavior of the hydrogels are the chemistry of the macromer end group (acrylate or methacrylate), the concentration of the initiator system used and the fabrication interval, as well as the incubation temperature and medium. These factors exhibit their effects on swelling by affecting chemical cross-linking, as well as chain aggregation upon thermal transition. The hydrogels exhibited constant swelling and no degradation over an 8 This work was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at  Certain figures in this article, particularly Figs. 1–8, are difficult to interpret in black and white. The full colour images can be found in the on-line version, at