Chemical fertilizers, such as potassium chloride, ammonium nitrate and other chemical products like sodium hydroxide and soda ash are produced from electrolyte solutions or brines with a high content of soluble salts. Some of these products are manufactured by fractional crystallization, when several salts are separated as solid phases with high purity (>90%). Due to the large global demand for potassium fertilizers, a good knowledge about the compositions of salts and brines is helpful to design an effective process. A thermodynamic model based on Pitzer and Harvie's model was used to predict the composition of crystallized salts after water removal by forced evaporation and cooling from multicomponent solutions or brines. Initially, the salts’ solubilities in binary systems (NaCl–H2O, KCl–H2O and MgCl2–H2O) and ternary system (KCl–MgCl2–H2O) were calculated at 20°C and compared with literature data. Next, the model was compared to our experimental data on the quinary system NaCl–KCl–MgCl2–CaCl2–H2O system at 20°C. The Pitzer and Harvie's model represented well both the binary and ternary systems. Besides, for the quinary system the fit was good for brine densities up to 1350kg/m3. The models were used to estimate the chemical composition of the solutions and salts produced by fractional crystallization and in association with material balance to respond to issues related to the production rates in a solar pond containing several salts dissolved, for instance, NaCl, KCl, MgCl2 and CaCl2.The solubility prediction of electrolytes in aqueous solutions is essential for a variety of processes such as brines and seawater desalination, drowning-out crystallization as well as liquid–liquid extraction in chemical, mineral and hydrometallurgical industries Batch crystallization experiments with a natural brine from a dry salt lake located at the north of Argentina were performed in a 2 The natural brine sample was distributed in four recipients and concentrated by forced evaporation at 85 The solutions were diluted and the respective wet salts dissolved in doubly deionized water to determine the sodium, potassium, magnesium and calcium contents by PerkinElmer NexION 200D ICP-MS. The chloride concentrations in the liquid and solid phases were determined by titration with a standard solution of AgNO Samples for X-ray diffraction were ground below 200 # TYLER MESH (0.074 The solubility equilibrium constant, Example: The saturation index (SI) for KCl is expressed by the ratio between the ionic product (IP) and the solubility product according Eq. The activity coefficients ( In order to check the results obtained by Pabalan and Harvie's model Experimentally determined equilibrium compositions of brines at 20 The calculated compositions by the Pitzer and Harvie's model  The brine produced after Step 2, followed by a reduction of about 74% of total initial free water, showed the formation of NaCl and KCl crystals. The salt had a composition of 62.8% w/w of NaCl and 37.2% w/w of KCl. The concentration of all salts, discounting NaCl, increased as the brine density grew up from 1.250 In Step 3 after evaporation of 85% of total initial free water, NaCl, KCl, KCl·MgCl The last step of forced evaporation, Step 4, led to an evaporation of about 98% of total initial free water and NaCl, KCl, KCl·MgCl The simulated and experimental results for natural brine (   The Pitzer's and Harvie's model As the salt crystals grow or accumulate on the pond floor, voids are created and some brine is trapped therein. The quantity of entrainment is a function of the quantity and type of salt deposited. The entrainment is generally expressed as a weight percent of the combined salts in the deposit and correspondent entrained brine. It was assumed an entrainment loss of 15% in steps 1, 2 and 3. Salts combined to entrainment are here denominated impregnated salts. Generally, the brine concentration throughout the solar pond is uniform and equal to the concentration in the brine that exists at each step. This observation is a key assumption for the pond material balance. It was assumed that the leakages and the exit brines have the same concentration, so these streams can be created as a single stream to simplify the material balance. For fixed concentrations at the entrance and exit points of the pond, the material balance is represented by a system of five variables: flowrate of feeding brine, flowrate of exit brine, evaporation rate, amount and composition of salts formed and pond area. The brines and salts compositions were calculated by the Pitzer and Harvie's model The overflow brine from Step 1 feeds the Step 2 and the overflow brine from Step 2 feeds the Step 3. The overflow brine from Step 3 is called bittern brine, rich in the most soluble salts, like, MgCl According to the solubility calculated by the Pitzer and Harvie's model The feed brine in Step 1 is saturated in NaCl and in CaSO Saturation in KCl is achieved in the overflow brine from Step 1 that feeds Step 2 (36.31 A mixture of halite, carnallite, bischofite and calcium chloride salts crystallizes in Step 3. This mixture is harvested and fed to an industrial KCl Plant as well. The brine density at 20 The brine leaving Step 3 has small amounts of NaCl and KCl and CaSO The total KCl recovery from the solar pond is 69%, consisting of 54% in the step 1 plus 15% in Step 3. The KCl obtained in Step 1 is not recovered due to the low KCl content in relation to the NaCl content. Considering a KCl recovery of 70%, an on-stream factor of 90% to process the salts in an industrial KCl Plant, for a calculation basis of one ton of KCl 60% K Experimental solubility data for various electrolyte systems were obtained and compared to Pitzer and Harvie's model The authors declare no conflicts of interest. Authors would like to thank Vale S.A., especially Patrice Mazzoni and Keila Gonçalves for authorizing the publication of this work; Nancy Parada, Consultant of Chemicals from Brines for participating in the study for the project involving production of potassium chloride from natural brine. CNPq and CAPES (Brazilian Council for Scientific and Technological Development) are also acknowledged.