Particle aggregation in the process of granulation is still a relatively poorly understood phenomena. While particle porosity, pore saturation, and moisture fraction each influence particle growth behavior, many traditional coalescence kernels are only size dependent. This work investigates how different internal particle parameters such as porosity, pore saturation, and moisture fraction affect growth through a series of experiments that highlight the multidimensional nature of the process. Furthermore, this work also analyzes how particle binder composition is influenced by both particle size and induction behavior during the granulation process. The binder composition for a sample is determined using a procedure where the powder and binder in a sample of granules are separated using a non-polar solvent (hexane).Granulation is a size enlargement technique where growth of small, dry particles is promoted through liquid binder addition and process agitation. The process of granulation can generally be described as a series of mechanisms. These granule mechanisms are quantitative measures to describe granule growth as well as deterioration. The modern approach to describe these mechanisms can be separated into three rate processes: wetting and nucleation, coalescence and consolidation, and attrition and breakage (see The evolution of a particle size distribution is typically modeled using a population balance equation (PBE). Discrete PBEs track a rate of accumulation of particles in one size class due to growth, consolidation, attrition, coalescence, and breakage of particles in each size class. When modeling the kinetics of granulation, the primary rate process involved is aggregation. In contrast to rate processes such as nucleation and growth, aggregation is still poorly understood. Hounslow Despite the fact that coalescence kernels are progressing towards more theoretically based models, many kernels still only use one internal coordinate: size. Of the size dependent kernels available in literature, many are based entirely using empirical models to fit experimental data. If there is a good fit, there is no guarantee that it is the best fit or that there is any physical basis for that model. There also is no deterministic procedure for choosing the form of these empirical models. Iveson Multidimensional population balance equations have been proposed by several groups to model the rate processes found in granulation. Gantt et al. Also note that increased dimensionality gives rise to systems engineering techniques not available with one-dimensional processes. Statistical techniques such as principal component analysis (PCA) can be performed to detect patterns in data of high dimension. Factor analysis can be used to discover simple patterns between the relationships among variables. Furthermore, increased dimensionality provides additional degrees of freedom when applying control schemes to industrial processes. Control algorithms applied to multidimensional models for granulation should be able to account for the internal effects binder addition (formation of a binder layer or the creation of oversaturated particles) which simple size dependent models could not determine. In short, multidimensional models should be more accurate and be more flexible than one-dimensional models. The goal of this work is to demonstrate using simple experiments that the multidimensional nature of agglomeration requires parameters in addition to size for the creation of an adequate model. The internal parameters that will be examined include pore saturation, particle porosity, and binder composition. Following each experiment, the binder composition will be examined using a procedure where the binder and powder are separated using a non-polar solvent. This analysis creates a deterministic view of the multidimensional nature of particle agglomeration and is intended to shed some light on how other internal particle properties can influence growth behavior. As stated, particle size is not the only significant factor when modeling the evolution of granule growth. A more accurate population balance equation model may also require the addition of several other factors into the coalescence kernel that influence growth dynamics. Consolidation behavior is responsible for much of the multidimensional dynamic found in granulation processes. It is well understood that granule compaction plays a role in coalescence behavior The density of the granules increases as they compact, forming stronger particles. Porosity directly determines the deformability and strength of a granule. Annapragada and Neilly Particle breakage is also dependent on particle density and deformability. Kenningley developed a model for particle breakage in a high shear mixer by equating the impact energy to the energy absorbed due to plastic deformation As granules compact in the mixer, air is forced out of the pores, resulting in an increase in pore saturation. There are several states of particle pore saturation as described by Newitt and Conway-Jones In some granulation systems such as fluidized beds where the impact forces are small, particle deformation rarely leads to coalescence. A binder layer must be present for coalescence to occur in these types of processes. The time it takes to form the liquid binder layer is called the induction time. Several coalescence models incorporate the formation of a binder layer (Ennis Composition of binder in each particle has also been shown to play an important role in the growth process. An increase in binder content is almost universally understood to produce an increase in the rate of agglomeration To test the multidimensional nature of granule growth, several experiments designed to exploit differences in porosity, pore saturation, and composition have been designed. Each experiment is intended to have the same binder to powder ratio (by volume) and same initial particle size distribution. The composition and the manner in which the binder and powder are distributed change from experiment to experiment. While each experiment has the same powder and binder mass, the granules formed in each experiment have differing pore saturations and porosities. Since the initial PSD and composition are the same for each experiment, many one-dimensional models may predict the same growth behavior for each experiment. Therefore, the differences in the growth behavior in each test should be due to the differences in the multidimensional nature of the granules. The first experiment is designed to test how composition and pore saturation influence growth. The second experiment is designed to examine how differences in porosity due to compaction influence growth. The mixer used for these experiments is a converted 6-quart Hobart HCM62 Bowl-style food processor. The solid used is calcium carbonate and the binder is 1.0 For the first experiment, the evolution of the particle size distribution for a homogeneous mixture of solid and binder is compared to that of a mix where the binder is not uniformly distributed. The homogeneous mix is 72% by volume calcium carbonate and 28% by volume silicon oil. Two other experiments are also conducted where the overall powder to binder ratio is the same, but the binder is Prior to each experimental run, the allotted powder and binder are thoroughly mixed together and pushed through a 2 Porosity of granular media in a high shear mixer is primarily controlled by consolidation behavior. As air is forced out of the granule, the particle becomes denser and a liquid binder layer may be formed. This experiment analyzes the evolution of a mixture where new, unconsolidated mix is added to a process where some degree of consolidation has already taken place. Under these circumstances, the new particles added to the mix are less dense than the old particles. The old granules are more likely to have a liquid binder present, and are more likely to be in a growth regime. This experiment examines how a mixture of pre-nucleated granules with different levels of densification affect the evolution of the particle size distribution. See Batches A–E were sampled prior to conducting the tests. Samples were also taken after 2, 4, 8, 15, and 30 Experiment 1 compares batches of calcium carbonate and silicone oil where the binder composition in the mixer changes with each experiment but the overall solid/binder ratio was equivalent. At first glance, one may conclude that tests B and C, where have the batch had a higher initial binder content may have faster growth since these particles may have reached a critical pore saturation. This hypothesis appears to be incorrect. Each test produced large, spherical, smooth, and dense particles. See As can be seen from this figure, test A produced the largest mean particle size and test C produced the smallest. One explanation is that the components for tests B and C which had less than nominal binder present produced particles following the nucleation step which were far from forming a binder layer. While most collisions for test A seemed to be in the non-inertial regime where all collisions are successful tests B and C had many more collisions in the inertial regime where success of the collisions depended more on particle size and the presence of a binder layer. Again, a one-dimensional kernel is unable to capture these changes in growth patterns due to inhomogeneous binder distribution. The second experiment is intended to show how consolidation influences particle growth. For each experiment, a mixture that has been consolidated for some time is mixed with freshly nucleated granules. Once the fresh mixture is added, the initial sample is taken. This means that half of the batch for tests D and E have consolidated. This does change the particle size distribution slightly due to the growth of the particles during the consolidation period for tests D and E. Again these tests are compared to the control test, A. The most striking observation from these experiments was the breakage observed as the consolidation period increases. Another aspect of the multidimensional nature of granulation in addition to the evolution of the particle size is the evolution of the binder dispersion. How does particle size influence the binder composition? How does kinetic energy influence binder dispersion? Would the experiments performed affect the dynamics of binder dispersion? Each of the questions was investigated using by separating powder and silicone oil following sizing. The separation was performed as a sample was taken from each particle size class for analysis. A non-polar solvent, hexane, was added to each sample and the particles were finely crushed to disperse the oil from the powder. Following several minutes of comminution, the solvent and powder were separated using a vacuum filter and the powder was then dried. The difference between the mass of the granules sampled and the mass of the dry powder is assumed to be the binder mass. Each experiment had 28% binder by volume which is equivalent to 11.72% binder by mass. It should be noted that this is a very repeatable procedure with a rather low error. Ten samples were taken to examine repeatability and the mean was found to be 11.52% binder and the standard deviation was found to be 0.324%. Separations were performed for tests A–E. In addition to those five tests, a sixth test was added to examine the role of kinetic energy. In this test, test F, a flat rotor was used instead of an impeller to see how a decrease in the kinetic energy of the system effected the binder distribution. The binder composition and sample size is otherwise identical to the control test A. Tests A–E proved to all have similar binder composition, despite the differences in composition in the system. Each test had an initial distribution where the smaller particles had the less binder present than the mean while the larger particles had the more. As particles coalesce in each of these tests, the binder distribution approaches a uniform, size independent value. In each of these processes, after 30 This coalescence behavior is then compared to behavior in test F, where a flat rotor was used instead of an impeller. Therefore, far less energy is present in test F. In Stokes regime analysis, this has two effects. While the impact velocity is lower, which decreases the viscous Stokes number, the particles are less dense which increases the Stokes number. Test F resulted in less growth than tests A–E. Test F also produced a mean particle size after 30 While the composition as a function of size is initially similar to the previous example, the composition after 30 Raw data from these experiments are provided in Granulation is a classic example of a multidimensional process which has been historically modeled insufficiently using simple one-dimensional models. This work illustrates the fact that in addition to particles size, both pore saturation and particle density also play a role in coalescence behavior. Two experiments were conducted which were designed to highlight the multidimensional nature of granulation processes. Experiment 1 compared three batches of pre-nucleated particles which all had the same overall solid/binder ratio, but the binder was nonhomogeneously mixed in two of the tests. This work showed that the homogeneous mix, test A, resulted in more growth as more particles were in a growth regime. As the binder was distributed in a less uniform manner, the growth rates decreased. This is probably due to a higher percentage of dry or crumb agglomerates being present which will not agglomerate well. The particles with a higher binder content seemingly preferentially coalesced only with other wet particles. Experiment 2 analyzed how particle density affects growth rates in a high shear mixer. Tests D and E showed how increasing the consolidation time not only makes particles more dense, but also results in brittle particles. In these tests breakage rates increased which therefore decreased the mean particle size and produced dense, misshapen, particles. Separation of the binder was performed to examine how particle size affected binder composition. Larger particles typically had a higher moisture fraction than smaller particles. Tests were also performed to analyze how the binder composition in granules is affected by the kinetic energy created by the process. An additional experiment is performed where the beveled impeller is replaced by a flat plate rotor. This experiment showed that as the kinetic energy present in the process decreases, so does the degree of binder dispersion. This work shows that simple size dependent models will typically not suffice when modeling growth rates in granulation processes. Thanks to improved solution algorithms, complex multidimensional PBE models should be more prevalent in future modeling of granulation processes. The authors gratefully acknowledge insightful communications with Jim Litster and all members of the particle technology group at the University of Queensland. Financial support was provided by the University of South Carolina and NSF Grant DMR-0353840.