Ni-based/SBA-15 catalysts, were promoted by 3wt % of samaria (Sm2O3), Yttria (Y2O3) and Zirconia (ZrO2), by two-solvent impregnation method. The catalysts characterization was performed by N2 adsorption–desorption, X-ray Diffraction (XRD), X-ray Fluorescence (XRF), High Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy (HRTEM), Field Emission Electron Scanning Microscopy (FESEM), Temperature Programmed Oxidation/Reduction (TPO/TPR) and NH3-Temperature Programmed Desorption (NH3-TPD) techniques. Then, evaluated by CO2/methane reforming.
                  The CO2/methane reforming outcomes revealed that samaria-promoted catalyst showed excellent activity, stability and cock resistance, while yttria-promoted catalyst just illustrated good activity at high temperature and zirconia-promoted catalyst didn't show any modification in catalytic performance in comparison to Ni-based catalyst with no promoter. Samaria-promoted TEM and TPR analysis, indicated adding samaria improved the NiO particles interaction with SBA-15 support pores wall and NiO dispersion. The TPO analysis displayed that coke deposition in samaria-promoted sample after 12 h reaction is less than yttria-promoted during stream of 5 h. Also, it is suggested that for samaria containing catalyst, cock deposition occurred on the support. Therefore, nickel active sites were preserved for time on stream of 12 h, which is the main reason for samaria-promoted catalyst superior stability than other's.In the last decades, methane production and conversion has increased, because it is one of the natural gas main components. Methane may convert to syngas by different reforming processes. Syngas is CO gas blend with H CO Among different metallic catalysts, Ni-based catalysts were mostly reported in methane reforming with CO In recent studies, Ni-based catalysts were improved by several promoters in order to delay carbon deposition and prolong the catalyst life. For instance, it has been investigated that Mg impregnation improves the catalytic performance of Ru/Ni/MCM-41 in methane reforming with CO In another work, Liu et al Although CH Therefore, in this research, we focused on a comparative study of samaria, yttria and zirconia promoted Ni/SBA-15 catalysts, with higher surface area than similar cases, on the catalytic stability and activity in the CO Nickel nitrate (Ni(NO The SBA-15 silica mesoporous was synthesized as a support by hydrothermal method as explained by Zhao and et al. Then, the two-solvents impregnation method was used in Nickel (10wt %) and promoters loading (3%wt ZrO Subsequently, the impregnation of the calcined nickel catalysts was repeat by Samarium nitrate hexahydrate, Yttrium nitrate hexahydrate and Zirconium nitrate hexahydrate (3wt%), in a similar way as mentioned for Ni incorporation. The bimetallic catalysts were dried at 90 °C and calcined similar to nickel. The fresh catalysts X-ray patterns were done at room temperature; with a Bruker D8 diffractometer with Cu Ka radiation (40 kV and 30 mA). The structural properties of unused catalyst such as; surface, pore volume and average pore diameter were obtained by BEL sorp mini-II gas adsorption at 77 K. primal to testing, the prepared samples became free of excess gas with exposure to N2 atmosphere for 2 h at 150 °C. The surfaces were measured by Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) equation and pore size distribution was investigated by the Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH). The XRF analysis was used to determine prepared catalysts chemical compositions by ED from 2000 models in Oxford Company. The nanoparticles of catalysts distribution were specified by a Tecnai 20–100 kV from FEI Company from USA and Zeiss-EM10C-100 kV from Germany. Prior to TEM tests, the catalysts were dispersed in alcohol by ultrasonic, a drop of dispersion was deposited and dried on carbon film grid. Temperature-Programmed Reduction (TPR) method was used for investigating reducibility of the catalysts, with a Micrometrics chemisorb 2750. For this test, 50 mg of synthesized catalyst was placed in the center of the fixed-bed reactor and treated from 100 °C to 700 °C (10 °C/min) in a mixture of 10H For investigating catalytic performance, the pressed and crushed samples were sieved to 40–60 mesh particles. Then 200 mg of the catalyst granules were loaded in quartz tubular fixed bed continuous flow micro reactor (i.e. 8 nm with 80 cm length) at 1 atm and different temperatures. The reactor was kept in a tubular furnace with one k-type thermocouple placing inside the catalyst bed and monitoring the furnace temperature. The feed composition was gas mixture containing of 50% CH Also, H Reproducibility of reaction tests was also done by some experiments for several times at the same reaction conditions. These results showed that our catalysts are extremely reproducible. Structural properties of Ni/SBA-15 catalyst and promoted Ni/SBA-15 with ZrO Since in this work, two-solvents impregnation method was used for nickel incorporation and promoters, it causes filling majority of porous volume on SBA-15 by Ni and promoters (as seen in HRTEM micrographs), homogeneous Ni/Si or promoter/Si molar ratios (according to XRF results) after calcination at 450 °C, increasing catalyst dispersion (as seen in XRD results and HRTEM) on the support and higher surface area (ca. 422–576 m   The promoted catalysts XRF analysis results in The TEM micrographs were done in order to study mesoporous structure of the support and NiO dispersion of the promoted-catalysts into SBA-15 support. The unused TEM and HRTEM micrographs catalysts are given in Besides, in ZrO Ni/SBA-15 catalysts' TPR and NH As seen in It seems that Ni/SBA-15 catalyst whit smaller peaks intensity, shows lower acidity properties than promoted catalysts. Among promoted catalysts, ZrO For studying catalytic performance, after catalysts reduction at 700 °C for 3 h, the temperature was declined to 500 °C, then the H Adding samaria played a remarkable role on improving the catalyst performance. The highest activity of Sm Moreover, ZrO Previously, Shanmugam and et al.  Short time stability tests were done at 700 °C for 5 h for all catalysts. A short time stability results showed that all promoted catalysts, except zirconia promoted, have sufficient stability during time on 5 h stream ( The H Spent catalysts TPO profiles after 5 h of reaction are given in Moreover, the fast burning of carbon during TPO analysis is generated a high volume of gas products, which is induced a rapid and intense change in the TCD detector intensity. However, for Sm The authors reported The FESEM and HRTEM images with Sm Previously, Wang and et al. In conclusion, samaria, yttria and zirconia promoted mesoporous SBA-15 have been successfully synthesized by two-solvents impregnation method, and studied in the CO The TPR profiles indicated that adding samaria promoter into the Ni/SBA-15 catalyst increased the reduction temperature more than other studied catalysts, due to strong interaction of promoters with barrier. Based on activity tests and TPO results, it is stated that incorporation of samaria into the Ni/SBA-15 catalyst improved methane conversion and diminished the coke formation against other catalysts. Although adding yttria into the Ni/SBA-15 increased the CH Therefore, the highest activity and long stability is introduced to Ni/SBA-15 containing of samaria promoter, due to smaller NiO particles, higher dispersion of NiO, strong interaction of NiO with support and lower cock deposition on the support. The authors thank semnan university, Dr. Mohammad reza Vaezi in department of materials and energy in materials and energy research center, catalyst and advanced materials research laboratory in chemical engineering department of kashan university, nanonafez company in semnan university science and technology park, and semnan university science and technology park for supporting of research.