The conventional constitutive models employed to describe rock mass creep behaviour associated with the squeezing mechanism are widely adopted in research and design practice. However, these models fail to explicitly replicate the 3-phase creep behaviour especially the accelerated creep phase; only the transient and steady-state creep phase are described explicitly. Hence, this paper presents a viscoelastic viscoplastic with isotropic damage (EVPD) constitutive model that describes the 3-phase behaviour explicitly. This is achieved by the Newtonian dashpot replacement with the fractal-order spring-pot that incorporates isotropic damage effect. Derivation of the fractal-order derivative-based creep constitutive equations is conducted using scaling transformations. The model is then calibrated using experimental data and its derived constitutive equation is implemented in FLAC3D using object-oriented C++. Furthermore, its numerical implementation is employed to simulate delayed response of a tunnel excavated in squeezing ground. The average radii of yield zone around the tunnel estimated by the CVISC and EVPD constitutive models are approximately 8.7 m and 14.7 m, respectively. Whereas the deformation is approximately 29% and accounts for 8% more than the CVISC estimation, the disparity attributed to time-dependent behaviour. It is observed that the EVPD constitutive model describes the creep mechanism and mean deformation in squeezing ground reasonably well.The time-dependent behaviour of rocks and rock masses in response to stress has a significant impact on the stability of underground tunnels. The behaviour might occur instantaneously after tunnel excavation and continue over time often referred to as creep. Hence, estimation and numerical modelling of the time-dependent behaviour of rocks and rock masses is of great importance in tunnel design and stability analysis ( The accurate estimation of these irrecoverable creep strains requires a proper and explicit description of the 3-phase (3-stage) creep behaviour ( The transient and steady-state creep phase combination can be represented by merging the Kelvin and Maxwell components into a Burgers model. However, representation of the entire 3-phase creep behaviour requires a combination of more rheological components, as discussed below. To describe the 3-phase creep behaviour, research has been conducted on modelling the accelerated creep phase. Modelling is divided into two broad categories which involve the non-linear rheological and damage rheological modelling ( Fractional-order derivatives have long been employed to model the transient and steady-state creep behaviour of rocks and rock masses. The employment has been feasible and successful in establishing the creep constitutive relation. Additionally, it has satisfactorily modelled the power-law rheological mechanism of these rocks and rock masses ( Adopts an adjusted Perzyna ( Ignores the assumptions that govern the conventional overstress constitutive models. Obeys the associative viscoplastic flow rule under which the potential function is equivalent to the yield. Neglects the integer-order and fractional-order derivative constitutive model assumptions. Adopts ideal and softening viscoplasticity and overlooks isotropic and kinematic hardening constitutive laws. The presented constitutive model is constructed by coupling the Burgers model with a rheological component that incorporates a fractal-order derivative spring-pot (variable dashpot) that considers isotropic damage. This component is required to describe the accelerated creep phase characterized by damage evolution in squeezing ground, which is responsible for delayed deformations. The widely adopted conventional constitutive models for the 3-phase creep mechanism description associated with squeezing include the Nishihara ( However, the accelerated creep phase responsible for squeezing can be considered with models that incorporate VP behaviour and damage evolution ( The conventionally employed CVISC model is comprised of a classic Burgers model able to replicate the transient and steady-state creep phases and a Mohr Coulomb (MC) frictional slider ( The FDVP constitutive model employs four rheological elements of the Burgers model for defining viscoelastic strains and two VP component elements for replicating viscoplastic strains ( As such integrating these constitutive laws will aid in a full 3-phase creep description. Hence, in this paper, the improved version of this constitutive model is presented which includes ideal viscoplasticity, softening viscoplasticity and visco-damage laws. When rocks and or rock masses are subjected to stress level which exceeds their yield strength, the accelerated creep process initiates and this leads to material failure.. In addition to that, damage evolution tends to occur during this creep mechanism, often referred to as creep damage. To replicate this mechanism, a VPD (viscoplastic with damage) component composed of an MC frictional slider and a fractal-order spring-pot is presented. During this creep process, the viscosity coefficient of the dashpot reduces as damage accumulates. Hence, it is important to consider damage evolution in the VPD component for an explicit description of the accelerated creep phase. Considering damage in the accelerated creep phase entails the viscosity coefficient of the fractal-order spring-pot may not be constant. The fractal-order coefficient employed in this spring-pot is assumed to obey the exponential decay law for non-constant viscosity and permanent viscous deformation ( Where Where Hence, the constitutive equation of the VPD component considering isotropic damage evolution is expressed as: Where There is a certain level of stress for damage to initiate in rocks (soft and hard), it tends to initiate when the applied stress is greater than Where Regarding Eq. (7), the accumulation of damage is not entirely dependent on This combination can be represented by the constitutive equations (Eq (8)) expressed in one-dimension (1D): Where In this section, the theory of fractal-order derivatives is adopted to formulate a time-dependent constitutive model for viscoelastic viscoplastic geomaterials (rocks and rockmasses). The rheological behaviour of geomaterials can be accurately described by employing the fractional-order derivative constitutive equations. However, as mentioned earlier fractional-order derivatives require a lot of computational time. Hence, compared to fractal-order derivatives they are less efficient in numerical computation ( Where It can be drawn from Application of fractal-order derivatives in rheological models is presented as a spring-pot which experiences a spring or Newtonian dashpot response when different coefficient ( The spring-pot represents an element with the derivative order amid Eq. When Eq. (13) shows that the strain rate obeys the power-law mechanism and incorporating damage evolution, the fractal-order derivative formulation can be expressed in the form of fractal time. Applying the scaling transformation It is drawn from the illustration ( If we consider a stress level In Section 3, the derived fractal-order derivative with damage equation (Eq.16) for the spring-pot is integrated into the creep constitutive equations to construct the EVPD constitutive model. The EVPD rheological model is represented by the Kelvin, Maxwell and VPD components which consists of 14 parameters. It is an extension of the Burgers rheological model characterised by an EVP deviatoric behaviour, EVP volumetric behaviour and an improvement to the FDVP rheological model. The viscoelastic and viscoplastic constitutive equations presented in this section takes the form of the recently proposed FDVP constitutive model. They employ fractal-order derivatives with a few creep parameters for computational time reduction during numerical implementation and offers the same power-law description of rock mass response in 1D (Eq. (17)). Where Where Based on Hooke’s law Substitution of Eq. Where Where Where Where Additionally, to account for the fractal-order derivative power-law effect of the viscoplastic spring-pot while neglecting the isotropic damage variable. The adjusted 3D viscoplastic constitutive law incorporating the fractal-order coefficient is expressed by Eq. In this case, Where Where In Section 3, it was highlighted that the damage evolution is a significant factor and should be considered in estimating the accelerated creep phase. Research has postulated that damage evolution subjected to variable loading condition is highly dependent on the stress level and strain accumulation. In this study, the damage evolution is represented by the derived constitutive equation of the viscous stress and strain rate. The stress effect is embodied in a power-law function characterised by the fractal-order derivative integrated with the damage variable. The damage variable is a significant factor that is considered in estimating the long-term deformations characterised by visco-damage strains. Hence, coupling the viscoelastic viscoplastic constitutive equation with visco-damage effect will enable the explicit description of the accelerated creep phase. Therefore, substitution of the Newtonian dashpot with a fractal-order spring-pot an enhanced time-based constitutive model which incorporates isotropic damage effect is presented. In this constitutive law, when  Therefore, the 1D viscoelastic viscoplastic visco-damage strain is estimated by the constitutive equation (Eq (35)) when  When Coupling of the viscoplastic law and the isotropic damage law is possible in this section for the explicit definition of the 3-phase creep mechanism. This is essential in that the stress–strain response of the rock/rock mass depends not on the viscoelastic viscoplastic behaviour but also on damage evolution. Combining these constitutive equations will provide the means of attaining stress, strain, and damage evolution at an instance. Therefore, description of the viscoplastic with damage behaviour we require and adopt Eq. (34) which accounts for the viscous time effect and damage evolution. Additionally, when As well as being governed by the condition that if the stress state occurs below the yield surface then it is admissible, otherwise the condition is violated and, in this case,  Therefore, considering isotropic damage the 3D constitutive equation (Eq. (36)) with an associated viscoplastic flow rule Damage evolution develops overtime under high-stress levels, as a result, the primary, steady-state and accelerated creep occurs. Because the accelerated creep is influenced by the damage evolution, integration of the visco-damage component in the model’s constitutive equations is required. The viscoelastic viscoplastic constitutive equation employed to describe the 3-phase creep behaviour underestimate the behaviour including the explicit accelerated creep description. However, addition of the visco-damage constitutive equation to the viscoelastic viscoplastic model compensates this shortfall and explicitly describes the damage evolution-based creep phase. Therefore, the integrated EVPD creep constitutive equation under 3D stress state is expressed by Eq. (39). In the section that follows, the presented EVPD constitutive model is calibrated with experimental data attained from literature. In this section, the calibration procedure of the EVPD constitutive model is presented per the experimental data set attained from salt rock and Marble. The experimental data set of salt rock is attained from Zhou et al., ( In this model state, the isotropic damage effect has not yet been initiated or is insignificant and neglected under low-stress levels in the short term. Hence, the salt rock and Jinping marble in this state exhibits transient, steady-state and to some extent accelerated creep neglecting visco-damage. Constitutive equations employed for the calibration in this section are represented by Eq. (17). Which obeys an associative viscoplastic flow rule and ideal viscoplasticity whereas neglecting the isotropic and kinematic hardening laws. The creep strain rate calibrated curves of the constitutive model with experimental data as well as comparison with the recently proposed FDVP constitutive model are illustrated in The purpose of this section is to define the most sensitive and important parameter in the definition of the viscoelasticity and viscoplasticity creep curves. For a better understanding of the effects of these parameters on the creep strain rates, a parametric analysis is carried out. It is observed that the salt rock and marble strain rates are entirely dependent on these parameters ( The influence of the essential parameters The estimation of the stress level effect on the rates of creep strain is achieved by allowing the other parameters to be constant while the stress levels change. The level of stress applied to salt rock ranged from 14.1 MPa to 26 MPa and an increase in the level is observed to have an incremental effect on the strain rate ( When a rock mass is subjected to high stress levels sufficient to initiate damage evolution at this instant in time both the transient, steady-state, and accelerated creep occurs. Thus, the calibrated parameters in Section 5.1 considered for the viscoelastic viscoplastic constitutive model can be used to calibrate the viscoelastic viscoplastic visco-damage constitutive model. However, the fact that viscoelastic viscoplastic constitutive model neglects visco-damage it underrates the creep mechanism most importantly accelerated creep associated with damage evolution. Hence, the visco-damage constitutive law is coupled with the viscoelastic viscoplastic constitutive model to address the above limitation. Calibration of this coupled constitutive model is based on experimental data attained from a 3-phase creep mechanism test conducted by Chen et al., ( It is obvious that the time-dependent strain of the specimen depends on creep parameters, among which are The illustration also shows the creep strain response of the specimen from the effect of the applied stress level change (131–160 MPa) while The variation of the creep curves with time attained under a few In this section, the basic ingredients for implementation of the viscoelastic viscoplastic visco-damage constitutive model in a finite volume numerical framework require the following. an algorithm for numerical integration of the EVPD constitutive equations to be employed to update stresses and other state variables. the correlated viscoplastic modulus to be employed in the assemblage of the finite volume stiffness matrix. To illustrate the application of the EVPD constitutive model by constructing a numerical framework which provides components to its computational implementation in a finite volume numerical code. An algorithm comprised of the elastic predictor and the viscoplastic with damage return mapping is presented. The iteration algorithm is based on the closest point projection method (CCPM) which describes the behaviour of the viscoelastic viscoplastic and visco-damage material. An adjusted associated viscoplastic constitutive function is considered and assume that all initial variables at time (  Given the strain increment  If   Else    The formulated EVPD constitutive equations are transcribed in object-oriented C++ as a user-defined constitutive model (UDM). This UDM is then executed as a compiled Dynamic Library Link (DLL) in a finite volume numerical code FLAC     This numerical code allows the ability to build the EVPD user-defined material behaviour through the UDM. It employs an explicit material scheme using a time-step based solution more appropriate for computing non-linear material associated with large strain in squeezing ground. The solution computes the increment in strain and stress state at a time ( Implementing and running this model in FLAC In this section, a numerical analysis of a tunnel case is conducted within FLAC The simulation adopts the EVPD and CVISC constitutive models for comparative analysis. The results of this simulation show that the deformation and yield zone extension around the tunnel in a CVISC and EVPD simulation is extensive in the latter than the former ( In this section, a tunnel case at the Jinping hydropower station excavated at a depth of 2500 m is considered for time-dependent convergence estimation ( In Section 4, the EVPD constitutive model was calibrated with experimental data employing the value The integer-order derivative constitutive models fail to fully describe the 3-phase creep behaviour most importantly the tertiary creep phase. This phase is characterised by the time-dependent behaviour responsible for squeezing. Hence, a time-dependent constitutive model for squeezing ground conditions based on fractal-order derivatives constitutive equations is presented. This constitutive model is derived to efficiently estimate the time-dependent (delayed deformation) exprienced in squeezing ground. It is built as an extension and adjustment of the FDVP ( The different values of the fractal-order parameters employed in this constitutive model can be determined by the fractal mathematical law based on the condition 0.0 ≤ Additionally, modelling the 3-phase creep behaviour is very ambiguous with few or lesser parameters. It is almost impossible to attain that delayed time-dependent response characterised by the accelerated creep phase associated with squeezing. Therefore, additional parameters are required to explicitly describe this mechanism as such 14 parameters are adopted in the EVPD constitutive model. To this regard, results attained from the constitutive model validation, calibration and response show very close alignment with experimental data. It must be mentioned that to achieve the explicit description of the 3-phase creep mechanism, specified rocks/rock masses should be selected, and experimental conditions critically designed. Hence, the selected rocks employed in this study are those attained from an underground operation which experiences squeezing mechanism associated with creep. Additionally, the experimental setting adopted and data attained are from experiment set conditions by Zhou et al., ( Its finite volume numerical implementation proved successful as well as the actual simulation of the delayed deformations exprienced within tunnels excavated in squeezing ground. The constitutive model is intended to describe the squeezing mechanism characterised by the 3-phase creep behaviour and its occurrence during tunnelling in squeezing ground. The soft rock tunnel case study adopted in the numerical simulation to verify the constitutive model applicability is one which experiences severe squeezing occurrences. The 3D numerical simulation considers a staged excavation option and design analysis based on experience gained during excavation at the NUG. Finally, the simulation result shows that the CVISC model underestimates the squeezing based delayed deformations compared to the EVPD model. Thus, the presented constitutive equations will allow for the appropriate excavation and tunnel support structure design in squeezing ground. Furthermore, damage evolution consideration is critical in modelling and estimating the delayed deformation characterised by squeezing pragmatically. The strain rate curves of the EVPD constitutive model indicate near alignment with the experimental creep results. Hence, this validation signifies that its constitutive equations can describe not only the transient creep and steady-state creep but also the accelerated creep process. As such the following conclusion are drawn from this study; The results from the conducted calibration, validation and verification demonstrated that the constitutive model provides an efficient tool for describing the 3-phase creep mechanism, delayed deformation estimation and tunnel stability in squeezing ground. The model explicitly described the accelerated creep phase and its time-dependent characteristics when The numerically implemented constitutive model is shown to simulate the time-dependent tunnel deformation explicitly by comparing its performance with the built-in CVISC constitutive model. The yield extension is, according to the numerical calculation, more across the tunnel simulated by the EVPD constitutive model (14.7 m) relative to the constitutive model CVISC (8.7 m). Whereas the deformation is approximately 29% and accounts for 8% more than the CVISC estimation (21%), delayed (time-dependent) deformations are attributed to the disparity between the two results. The CVISC constitutive model underestimates the squeezing related delayed deformations in comparison with the EVPD constitutive model. The constitutive model employs rather simple and powerful fractal-order derivative constitutive laws which improves the estimation of squeezing mechanism associated with the 3-phase creep behaviour. It shows that the fractal-order derivatives can serve as a bridge between the fractional-order and integer-order derivative models by employing scaling transformation. As such preserves the integer-order derivative functionality and describes the power-law mechanism with few parameters. The EVPD constitutive model’s not too simple and not complex characteristic simply makes it a good fit in both research and design practice. This allows the model to be used with confidence in estimating the time-dependent deformation in squeezing ground. However, some limitations of the constitutive model which will require further research and improvement are attributed to the following: The constitutive model neglected heterogeneity influence on damage evolution characterized by the VP behaviour of the joints, discontinuities, and fractures. Which plays a major role on the extent of delayed deformations responsible for squeezing. The constitutive model considered static and quasistatic conditions neglected dynamic effects (attributed to blasting and seismic events) governed by material forces and time-dependent rock mass properties. The assumption adopted by the constitutive model neglects temperature effects even though its impact is significant. However, in cases of deep underground tunnels, influence of temperature on squeezing should be taken into consideration. Therefore, further work on the constitutive equations should consider the heterogeneity, dynamic and temperature effects on squeezing.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The EVPD constitutive equations are formulated by coupling the VPD component and the Burgers model, the strain rate relationship of the coupling is expressed by: Where Where Where Where  Alternatively, the strain rate acting in both the plastic slider and spring-pot of the VPD component can be integrated into one relation expressed as; The VPD component strain rate is further represented by the rock yield function Where the total strain rates and volumetric behaviour of the plastic slider in the VPD component is represented by Eqs. (A11), (A12) & (A13); Where Where Where