Notoginsenoside R1 (NGR1), a novel phytoestrogen isolated from Panax notoginseng, has been widely used in the treatment of microcirculatory diseases in Asian countries. Here we investigated the effect of NGR1 on osteoblast differentiation and mineralization process. Furthermore, we also evaluated NGR1's estrogenic properties, especially its effects on estrogen receptors (ERs). NGR1 activated the transcriptional activity of phosphorylated estrogen response element (pERE)-luciferase (Luc) and induced ERα phosphorylation in hBMSC. In addition, ER activation correlated with induction and was associated with osteoblast differentiation biomarkers including alkaline phosphatase activity and transcription of osteoblastic genes, e.g., type I collagen (COL1), osteonectin, osteocalcin (OC), runt related protein 2 (Runx2), and osterix. NGR1 also promoted the mineralization process of osteoblasts. The NGR1-induced effects were confirmed to be mediated by the ER by the observation that pretreatment of the osteoblasts with the ER antagonist, ICI 182,780 fully blocked the effects. Our results showed that NGR1 stimulates osteogenic differentiation of cultured osteoblasts by activating ER signaling and in turn might be a potential therapeutic alternative for the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis.Postmenopausal osteoporosis and the accompanied high occurrence of fragility fractures have become a major threat to public health, leading to an increasing economic healthcare burden worldwide Herbal medicines have traditionally played an important role in the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis in Asian countries for centuries. Therefore, in this study, we aim to investigate possible estrogenic and osteogenic effects of NGR1 in primary cultured osteoblasts. Furthermore, we sought to evaluate whether the NGR1-induced osteogenesis is mediated by modulation of the enzymatic activity of alkaline phosphatase (ALP), which is an osteoblast differentiation-specific marker, and transcription of osteogenesis-associated genes including type I collagen (COL1A1) and osteocalcin (OC) and the essential transcription factor, runt related protein 2 (Runx2) in cultured cells Notoginsenoside R1 (NR1, chemical structure C47H80O18, molecular weight = 933) was purchased from ShangHai YuanYe Biotechnology Co., Ltd.(purity above 98%, Shanghai, China). Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) and fetal bovine serum (FBS) were obtained from Invitrogen Technologies (Carlsbad, CA, USA). The Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) was obtained from Dojindo Molecular Technology (Japan). The primers were synthesized in Shanghai Bio-Engineering Technology Service Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). 17b-estradiol, ICI 182,780 and p-nitrophenyl- phosphate (pNPP) were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA). Rat primary osteoblasts were cultured and prepared as described previously The anti-proliferative effect of Notoginsenoside R1 on osteoblast cells was assessed with a cell counting kit-8 (CCK-8, Dojindo Laboratories, Kumamoto, Japan). Briefly, after treatment, 10 μl CCK-8 solution was added to each well; after 4 h incubation, absorbance was measured at 450 nm using a microplate reader. The effect of Notoginsenoside R1 on cell viability was expressed as percent cell viability with vehicle-treated control cells set at 100%. Lysate alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity was assayed using p-nitrophenolphosphate as the substrate, at pH 10.2, measuring the yellow product as absorbance at 405 nm. ALP in cell cultures was determined using naphthol phosphate substrate and fast violet B to visualize the product at pH 9.5 (alkaline phosphatase kit, Sigma, St. Louis, MO). Fixed cells were washed with distilled water and then incubated for 10 min at room temperature in a solution containing 2% of Alizarin Red S at pH 4.2. Images of histological samples were obtained with a Nikon camera. To quantify the Alizarin Red S staining, 10% cetylpyridinium chloride was added to each well and incubated for 20 min to elute the stain. 100 μl of this eluted stain was added to 96 well plates and read at 485 nm in a microplate reader. For the quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR), cells were treated with or without NGR1 for the indicated times. Total RNA was prepared using an RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions and cDNA was synthesized from 1 μg of total RNA using reverse transcriptase (TaKaRa Biotechnology, Otsu, Japan). The qPCR was performed using the SYBR Premix Ex Tag kit (TaKaRa Biotechnology, Otsu, Japan) and an ABI 7500 Sequencing Detection System (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The detector was programmed with the following PCR conditions: 40 cycles of 5 s denaturation at 95 °C and 34 s amplification at 60 °C. All reactions were run in triplicate and were normalized to the housekeeping gene glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH). The following primer sets were used: GAPDH: forward, 5′-ACCACAGTCCATGCCATCAC-3′ and reverse, 5′-TCCACCACCCTGTTGCTGTA-3′; ALP: forward, 5′-GCACAACATCAAGGACATCG-3′ and reverse, 5′-TCAGTTCTGTTCTTGGGGTAC-3′; Runx2: forward, 5′-CCACA-GAGCTATTAAAGTGAC-3′ and reverse, 5′-AACAAA- CTAGGTTTAGAGTCA-3′; Col I: forward, 5′-ACCTAAGGGTACCGCTGGA-3′ and reverse, 5′-TCCAGCTTCTCCATCTTTGC-3′; OCN: forward, 5′-TCTCTCTGACCTCACAGATGCC-3′ and reverse, 5′-TCCAGCTTCTCCATCTTTGC-3′; RANKL: forward, 5′-CCATCGGGTTCCCATAAAGT-3′ and reverse, 5′-CCCCAAAGTACGTCGCATCT-3′; OPG: forward, 5′-TGTTCCTACCAAGATTATACCAAAT-3′ and reverse, 5′-CGCTCGATTTGCAGGTCTTT-3′; ERα: forward, 5′-AGGGTGGCAGAGAGAGATTG-3′ and reverse, 5′-TCTTGAAGAAGGCCTTGCAG-3′; ERβ: forward, 5′-ATCAGCCCCACCATTAACAC-3′ and reverse, 5′-GAGCCACCCCATGTACTGAT-3′; We synthesized three repeats of the estrogen responsive element (ERE, 5′-GGTCACAGTGACC-3′) and subcloned it into a promoter-reporter vector pTAL-luciferase (Luc, Clontech, Mountain View, CA, USA) with a downstream firefly Luc gene as described previously We conducted ER-specific small interfering RNA (siRNAs) transfection into osteoblasts using the Lipofectamine 2000 (Life Technologies, Bethesda, MD, USA). The knockdown efficiency was determined using qPCR. The sequence pairs of the siERα were 5′-CUGGUUCAUAUG AUCAACUGG-3′ (sense) and 5′-AGUUGAUCAUAUGA ACCAGCU-3′ (antisense). The sequence pairs of the siERβ were 5′-GAGGGUACAAGUCCUCAAUTT-3′ (sense) and 5′-ACGUAUUGAGGACUUGUACCCUCTT-3′ (antisense). All values are presented as the mean ± standard deviation (S.D.) of the values obtained from three or more experiments. Statistical significances were determined by Student's t-test. A value of P < 0.05 was considered signiﬁcant. The molecular formula of NGR1 is shown in We investigated the pro-osteogenic effects of NGR1 in primary osteoblasts. As shown in Furthermore, we investigated the pro-osteogenic effect of NGR1 at the molecular level. Specific genes express in sequence during the osteoblast differentiation play critical roles in extracellular matrix formation and mineral deposition. In order to study the anabolic effect of NGR1, we examined mRNA expression of ALP, Runx2, COL1A1, and OC and the key findings are shown in Estrogen stimulates osteoblasts differentiation mainly through the actions of ERα and ERβ NGR1, a novel phytoestrogen derived from Furthermore, the osteoblastic ALP activity induced by both 17β-estradiol and NGR1 were almost entirely inhibited following treatment with the ER antagonist ICI 182,780 ( To confirm that the osteogenic effects of NGR1 were mediated by the ER, expression levels of ERα and ERβ were selectively silenced by transfection with ER-specific siRNAs. The silencing efficiency is shown in Postmenopausal osteoporosis is considered as a great threat to public health, and estrogen deficiency is a well-accepted pathogenic factor contributing to the development of this condition in postmenopausal women During the process of differentiation, osteoblasts sequentially express different markers specific to each stage of maturation such as Runx2, ALP, COL, and OC In the present study, NGR1 enhance ALP activity and calcium node deposits. These results were consistent with the increased expression of osteoblast differentiation-related markers (i.e., Runx2, ALP, and COL1) and matrix mineralization (i.e., calcium deposition). Moreover, differentiated osteoblasts were also found to express RANKL and OPG, which are both markers of osteoblast-regulated osteoclast function and bone resorption. RANKL is an essential factor for recruitment, differentiation, activation, and survival of osteoclasts after they binding to the specific RANKL receptor in the plasma membrane of osteoclast precursors and mature osteoclasts. On the other hand, OPG is a decoy receptor of RANKL and, therefore, inhibits bone resorption. NGR1 was capable of decreasing RANKL expression and RANKL/OPG ratio, indicating that it has the potential to suppress osteoclast-mediated bone resorption in vivo. NGR1 is a phytoestrogen and, therefore, the investigation of its estrogenic properties is reasonable. Our data revealed that NGR1 significantly induce ERα and ERβ expression in osteoblasts. Furthermore, following treatment with NGR1, osteoblasts expressing pERE-Luc showed an effect that was similar to that of estrogen on luciferase activity inducement. Moreover, both effects were fully blocked by the estrogen antagonist ICI 182,780. In addition, pretreatment with the ER antagonist ICI 182,780 or ER siRNA transfection abolished the effects of NGR1 on ER phosphorylation and osteoblast differentiation, further demonstrating that NGR1 acted via ER activation. In conclusion, the present study demonstrated that the phytoestrogen NGR1 enhanced osteoblasts differentiation and mineralization, which might in turn have promoted bone formation. We also showed that the pro-osteogenic activity of NGR1 was due to its estrogenic properties. Furthermore, the increase in the OPG/RANKL ratio further suggested that NGR1 suppressed the osteoclast-mediated bone resorption. Therefore, NGR1 is a promising candidate for development as a therapeutic agent against bone loss in postmenopausal women. No authors have any conflicts of interest to declare. The authors wanted to thank “Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital” for its great help.  Transparency document related to this article can be found online at Supplementary data related to this article can be found at