Treatment of tumorous bone defects needs complete elimination of residual cancer cells and, at the same time promotion of bone regeneration. Herein, manganese (Mn)-doped mesoporous bioactive glass-loaded with chlorin e6 (Mn-MBG/Ce6) can serve as a near-infrared (NIR) light-triggered phototherapy reagent for bone tumor treatment and bone regeneration. The Mn-MBG was synthesized by an evaporation-induced self-assembly (EISA) process. The addition of Mn to MBG imparted the controlled photothermal performance to Mn-MBG, but maintained well-ordered mesopores. After loading Ce6 into the ordered mesopore channel of 5Mn-MBG, the 5Mn-MBG/Ce6 displayed controlled NIR light-triggered Ce6 release. Furthermore, the mild hyperthermia induced by 5Mn-MBG/Ce6 facilitated the cellular uptake of Ce6, which significantly enhanced the efficiency of photodynamic therapy, and at the same time achieved a synergistic therapeutic effect in bone tumor therapy in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, even after short term of synergistic photodynamic and photothermal therapy, such 5Mn-MBG/Ce6 exhibited good biocompatibility and could help long term of bone tissue regeneration in vivo. Therefore, 5Mn-MBG/Ce6 could be used for ablating the residual tumor cells after surgery, and accelerating bone regeneration simultaneously, indicating a smart nanoplatform by combining photothermal/photodynamic therapy, nanomedicine delivery, and bone-forming bioactivity for treatment of tumorous bone defects.For treatment of tumorous bone defects, ablating the residual tumor cells and simultaneously promoting bone defect regeneration is an urgent problem [ In the past decades, phototherapies (photothermal therapy: PTT; photodynamic therapy: PDT) have attracted widespread interest in tumor treatment on account of its high efficacy and negligible toxicity [ Besides the synergistic therapy of deep bone tumors, the repair of bone defects is an integral part during the treatment of tumorous bone defects. Numerous studies indicated that bioactive ceramics and glasses displayed great potential in bone tissue regeneration [ Given the advantages of combination therapy (PTT & PDT) and the inherent bioactivity of MBG, we supposed that if the MBG possessed the photothermal property, which may combine the ordered mesopore channels loaded with Ce6 for simultaneous photothermal/photodynamic therapy of bone tumor, and at the same time, MBG maintains high bone-forming bioactivity for regeneration of tumorous bone defects. Manganese (Mn) is a necessary trace element in the human body and participates in many physiological processes, such as the metabolism of proteins and carbohydrates [ Here, the main aim of this work is to develop a NIR light-triggered intelligent biomaterial, Mn-MBG/Ce6, for treatment of tumorous bone defects, including deeper tumorous bone defects. Poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(propylene glycol)-block-poly(ethylene glycol) (P123) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Shanghai, China), Ethyl silicate (TEOS) and ethyl alcohol were obtained from Shanghai Lingfeng Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China), Triethyl phosphate (TEP), hydrochloric acid (HCl), calcium nitrate tetrahydrate (Ca(NO MBG (Si/Ca/P = 80/15/5) was prepared according to reference [ The X-ray diffraction patterns of as-prepared three Mn-MBG were obtained using the Cu Kα radiation (Rigaku D/Max-2550 V, Geigerflex, Japan). The physicochemical properties of as-synthesized Mn-MBG were examined by N To evaluate the photothermal effect of MBG, 2Mn-MBG and 5Mn-MBG. 0.05 g of the Mn-MBG powder was placed in a 48-well plate with or without PBS (250 μL), the powders were subsequently treated with 808 nm laser (diameter: ∼12 mm) at diverse power densities (0.36, 0.48, 0.54 W/cm The powders were mixed with Tris–HCl solution to assess the ionic release (n = 3). The solid-liquid ratio during the soaking process was 200 mL/g. After incubation in a shaker (37 °C) for 0.5, 1, 3, 5, and 7 days, respectively, the mixtures were centrifuged for 10 min (4000 r/min), then the supernatant was substituted by Tris–HCl solution. The ionic concentrations of collected supernatants were detected by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES; Vista AX, Varian, Palo Alto, CA, USA). To evaluate the Ce6 loading capacity in 5Mn-MBG, Ce6 was dispersed in ethanol at different concentrations (0.1, 0.3, 0.6, 0.9 and 1.2 mg/mL) for further use. 2 mL of the above solutions was added to 0.02 g of 5Mn-MBG (n = 3) and ultrasonically dispersed for 2 min. After incubation on a shaker for 3 h, the mixtures were placed in 4 °C for 24 h, centrifuged and subsequently washed 3 times with deionized water. The absorption spectra of all collected supernatants at 405 nm were measured with UV–vis Spectrophotometer. The loading ratio of Ce6 on 5Mn-MBG was calculated according to the eqn: Loading Ratio (100%) = (m To investigate the NIR light-triggered Ce6 and ionic release from 5Mn-MBG/Ce6 DPBF was served as the MG63 cells (osteosarcoma cell) were seeded in 96-well plates (1 × 10 To investigate the To visually confirm the results of phototherapy, MG63 cells were treated with the similar method. Among them, the photothermal temperature was 45 °C (25 min), and the laser power density used for PDT was 32 mW/cm The intracellular ROS production and Ce6 uptake were then evaluated. MG63 cells were seeded on glass substrates (n = 2) overnight. Then MG63 cells were treated with various leaching solution at the similar method. After being cultured with 2,7-dichloro-dihydro-fluorescien diacetate (DCFH-DA) for 20 min, MG63 cells were treated with different conditions. Among them, the photothermal temperature was 45 °C (25 min) and the power density of 660 nm laser was 32 mW/cm All animal experiments were performed in accordance with protocols approved by the Ethics Committee of Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical University (approve date: January 1st 2018). To construct the subcutaneous tumor model, 100 μL of LM8 cell (osteosarcoma cell, 2.0 × 10 To investigate the effect of ionic products on rBMSCs proliferation and attachment. The extracts of MBG, 5Mn-MBG, MBG/Ce6 and 5Mn-MBG/Ce6 were prepared according to the previous study [ 11 white rats (male, 8 weeks) were selected to assess the bone regeneration of 5Mn-MBG/Ce6 particles (0.85 mm–0.425 mm). Briefly, two critical-sized cylindrical bone defects ( All data were displayed as means ± standard deviation (SD), and statistical significance was calculated using one-tailed Student’s The MBG, 2Mn-MBG and 5Mn-MBG were prepared through an EISA process. The small-angle XRD patterns were displayed in During EISA, the surfactant concentration increased, and eventually exceeded the critical micelle concentration (CMC). At this time, micelles were spontaneously formed by non-covalent interaction. The amorphous pore walls were simultaneously produced through the hydrolysis and condensation of TEOS [ To explore the photothermal effect of Mn-MBG, heating curves and thermal images of Mn-MBG under NIR light irradiation were monitored. As shown in The ionic release profiles in Tris−HCl solution were displayed in In addition, NIR light could accelerate the ionic release of 5Mn-MBG in PBS as temperature increased ( The relationship between the feeding Ce6 concentrations and loading contents on 5Mn-MBG was investigated. Both Ce6 loading ratio and loading capacity were increased as the increase of feeding Ce6 concentrations. The results revealed that the loading ratio and loading capacity of Ce6 on 5Mn-MBG reached maximum of 34.3 % and 39.8 %, respectively ( The generation of The cytotoxicity of 5Mn-MBG/Ce6 particles on MG63 cells was first evaluated. The result confirmed that the viability of MG63 cells was remarkably decreased when the concentration of 5Mn-MBG/Ce6 particles reached 0.5 mg/mL. (Fig. S1a). The phototoxicity of 5Mn-MBG/Ce6 particles was further tested. After being treated with 660 nm laser for 6 min (24 mW/cm The combined therapeutic effect of PTT and PDT was then investigated The generation level of intracellular To evaluate the The tumor tissues obtained at day 10 or 14 were photographed ( Considering that the laser power density decreased with the increase of penetration depth, for superficial bone tumors (located in the hands and feet), the PA could generate hyperthermia to ablate tumor cells after being treated with low laser power density. For deeper bone tumors (located in limbs), the mild hyperthermia generated by the PA was insufficient to completely ablate tumor cells [ To study the effect of ionic products on rBMSCs proliferation. The ionic concentrations in 1/8 dilution of extracts were detected by ICP-AES (Table 3). Mn, one of the essential trace element in the human body, can enhance cells adhesion by improving the binding ability of integrins to ligands [ Considering the small bone size of nude mouse, it is hard to construct a critical-size bone defect model on nude mouse to evaluate the bone regeneration ability of large-sized materials. The animals currently used to construct bone defect models are mainly rats and rabbits. It is almost impossible to establish bone tumor models in rats and rabbits because of immunological rejection [ Previous reports had demonstrated that the temperature above 50 °C induced tumor cells necrosis, and the temperature between 41 °C–48 °C could cause irreversible tumor cells damage (exposure time > 60 min) [ In summary, a NIR light-triggered intelligent 5Mn-MBG/Ce6 nanoplatform was successfully prepared for treating tumorous bone defects, especially for the treatment of deeper tumorous bone defects. The incorporation of Mn into MBG endowed it with excellent photothermal property. Additionally, the photothermal effect of Mn-MBG could be well modulated by regulating the doping amounts and laser power densities. Moreover, the as-prepared 5Mn-MBG possessed high specific surface area, which was beneficial to Ce6 loading and delivery. Interestingly, the mild hyperthermia induced by the photothermal performance of 5Mn-MBG/Ce6 triggered the pulse release of Ce6, and enhanced the intracellular uptake of Ce6 by tumor cells. Therefore, the mild PTT could enhance PDT to achieve the optimal tumor therapeutic effects, especially for the deeper tumors, solving the main problem of single PTT not being able to ablate deep bone tumors completely. More importantly, the 5Mn-MBG/Ce6 nanoplatform possessed excellent biocompatibility. The controlled released of bioactive ions from it triggered by NIR light could accelerate bone regeneration. All these results indicate that 5Mn-MBG/Ce6 nanoplatform is a smart candidate for tumorous bone defect therapy, offering a promising strategy for tumorous bone defect regeneration, including deeper bone tumor. Yaqin Liu and Chengtie Wu conceived the project. Yaqin Liu performed materials preparation, characterization and The authors declare no competing financial interest. This work was supported by the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: