Open reduction and internal fixation of comminuted, displaced intra-articular or potentially unstable fractures of the distal radius with plate and screws has increasingly become a favoured treatment. Intra-operative assessment of fixation with the help of an image intensifier has always been difficult because of the anatomy of the distal radius. Imaging of the implants placed as distal as possible to achieve satisfactory fixation often shows the screws to be penetrating the joint. We describe two new radiographic views of the wrist joint, which we used intra-operatively in ten patients undergoing open reduction and internal fixation of distal radius fractures. Screws were thought to have been penetrating the joint in the standard lateral views of all of them and in the standard antero-posterior views of eight of them.
                  However, no screw was seen penetrating the joint in these new views. It was hence possible to place the plate distal enough to enable the screws to engage the sub-chondral bone. We recommend the use of these views in the open reduction and internal fixation of distal radius fractures.Internal fixation with plate and screws has become a favoured option for treating distal radial fractures after failed conservative management, in the presence of significant dorsal cortical comminution, or for displaced intra-articular fractures. This is mainly because external fixation of such fractures alone has failed to show consistently satisfactory functional results. Bridging external fixation has a high incidence of joint stiffness and reflex sympathetic dystrophy It is not uncommon that screws need to be placed close to the radio-carpal joint either because of the fracture configuration or because of the surgeon's desire to obtain a good hold in the sub-chondral bone which is felt to be denser than the rest of the distal radius. Use of an image intensifier is helpful, but in routine antero-posterior and lateral views it is difficult to assess the position of the screws because of the obliquity of the distal radius in both planes. As a result the plate may be positioned more proximally than desired. We describe two new radiographic views of the wrist joint, which, to our knowledge, have not been described before in the literature For the tangential antero-posterior view, the wrist is placed in full pronation on the operating table and is elevated above the table so that the forearm makes an angle of 10–15° to the operating table. For the tangential lateral view, the wrist is placed in mid-prone position on the operating table and is elevated above the table so that the forearm makes an angle of 20–25° to the operating table. Following the positioning of the forearm the X-ray beam is then directed perpendicular to the hand table ( These tangential views were used in addition to the routine antero-posterior and lateral views in ten consecutive patients who required the open reduction and internal fixation of distal radius fractures. Screws appeared penetrating into the joint in the standard lateral views of all the ten patients and in the standard antero-posterior views of the eight patients taken intra-operatively ( Several radiographic views of the wrist have been described in the literature. Most of these views are described to visualise carpal fractures and instability Comparison of images in