In teaching rock mechanics, often the theoretical part of the lectures are demonstrated by laboratory sessions, which are helpful in supplementing the teaching of rock mechanics principles to the students. In these laboratory sessions, an unconfined compressive strength (UCS) test can be followed by a conventional triaxial compressive strength (TCS) test on similar rock specimens. The former test is the one used most in the characterization of rock strength and in many rock classification systems; while the latter test has been widely used for the determination of design parameters such as The conventional TCS test consists of applying a hydraulic pressure to the external surface of a cylindrical rock specimen and at the same time axially loading the specimen in compression with increasing increments until failure of the rock. The procedure for measuring the rock strengths has been standardized by the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) Ideally, at each increment of the confining pressure the same rock specimen should be used for the test, but since rock specimens are broken after each test, obviously the failed specimen has to be replaced by a new sample. Thus, some conflicting results may be obtained due to inherent variability in the failure characteristics of a substituted rock specimen, e.g. sometimes the new rock specimen is broken at a lower axial load for a higher confining pressure applied than for the previous one. Although Kovari et al. In this Technical note, a practical approach will be introduced for establishment of pre-determined confining pressure levels for the triaxial test on rocks by directly using the UCS and TCS test values collected from past laboratory sessions of a rock mechanics course. Also, for the purpose of this study, the possible probability distribution models, which take into account the uncertainty and variability dictated by the nature of the strength of rocks under compression, have been evaluated and the acceptability of the assumption about the proposed distribution model can be further investigated. Most engineering problems involve some degree of uncertainty and variability. The causes of such uncertainty in an engineering content have been detailed by Bury Data uncertainty is caused mostly by the inherent variability of a measured quantity. No matter how carefully one measures such a quantity, variability among the measured values is unavoidable because it is an inherent quality. Statistical uncertainty is due to the limited amount of information that is typically available for a measurable quantity. The more data that are on hand, the more information on that quantity that is available. Thus, limited information implies uncertainty about the true nature of the quantity. Event uncertainty is a result of little information available on the occurrences of events, especially rare events and their probabilities. Model uncertainty is related to the mathematical models which the engineer uses in his/her work. Typically, these models represent only one or a few of the important characteristics of the physical phenomenon in question. Models only represent a restricted version of reality and, since they are an idealization of a real problem, they sometimes deviate from the actual situation. Duzgun et al. The inherent variability results from the fact that, even in a homogenous rock medium, the rock characteristics exhibit natural variability. The scatter of the strength values from a series of test specimens of the same rock material may be considerable. This is a result of the randomly distributed weak planes, micro cracks, or flaws in the rock, which influence the rock strength. The sample statistics, i.e. mean, standard deviation, of a rock property are subject to uncertainty because of limited field sampling and laboratory testing. This type of uncertainty is called statistical and it can be diminished readily with increasing number of samples. The systematic uncertainty comes from the discrepancies between the laboratory and in situ conditions, due to factors such as scale, anisotropy and water content. Supplementary sampling may not necessarily reduce these systematic discrepancy uncertainties, since the same test conditions persist and consistently yield different property values. If the variables in a process demonstrate uncertainty and variability, it is certainly necessary to describe the nature of their uncertainty and variability. This can be achieved with probability distributions, which give both the range of values that the variable could take and the likelihood of occurrence of each value within the range. Generally, the distribution and its parameters are initially unknown and need to be estimated from the available information about the random nature of the rock variable. The information is usually in the form of a sample of observed values and there are many theoretical probability distributions (e.g. over 30 The most basic categories of probability distributions relate to whether they are continuous or discrete. A discrete distribution may take one of a set of identifiable values, each of which has a calculable probability of occurrence. A continuous distribution, on the other hand, is used to represent a variable that can take any value within a defined range (domain) A good example for the expression of inherent uncertainty and variability in the context of rock engineering can be given as the values obtained for a rock material subject to unconfined compressive stress (UCS). Publication on this subject is limited, but there is work on the probabilistic strength determination of brittle materials Hsu and Nelson The rock type used in the experiments for the rock mechanics course taught by the authors is broadly described as Ankara andesite Ozcelik Preparation of the cylindrical rock samples was carried out in the laboratory and a diameter of not less than NX core size, approximately, 2 1/8 Comparison graphs are superimposed on the input data and the fitted distribution curve on the same graph, allowing one to visually assess the quality of the fit. Also, the frequency distribution of the sample may be statistically compared with the hypothetical distribution to see if this assumption is really warranted. The frequency histogram of the actual test results is shown in A more realistic and rational approach is to include all the variability in the analysis to reflect the randomness exhibited by the available data. This can be achieved directly by representing the UCS of andesite with a single probability distribution function. In To find the best fitting distribution type, a statistical software package, BestFit We can test how well the distribution of sample values conforms to a theoretical distribution by a test procedure called the goodness-of-fit or In the first column of As given in The apparent cohesion ( One of the first things to do when running a regression model is to look at how well the model fits to the data. The necessary model summary statistics, the analysis of variance ( The The difference between the estimated UCS value from the strength envelope and the actual one, whether meaningful or not, can be simply understood by conducting a Like UCS, the TCS of rock specimens should be essentially characterized by a probability distribution function at each increment of confining pressure. For instance, if the UCS of rock samples under consideration exhibits a normal distribution, the same rock specimens under different level of triaxial compression are theoretically expected to follow a similar normal distribution with different parameters, whatever confining pressure is applied to them. To make it understandable, the frequency distribution of rock specimens under 2, 4, and 6 Since the distribution of UCS ( The maximum observable UCS=3×Std of UCS+Mean of UCS=3×12.44+68.05=105.4 This number can be clarified intuitively as the necessary minimum confining pressure appropriate for the rock specimen of Ankara andesite so as to account for some of the natural variability inherent in the triaxial compressive strengths of rock samples. A confidence interval will have been settled between the lower and the next applicable lateral stress, so that the first observable maximum failure strength would not be greater than the expected failure strength of the next one. Expressed in another way, one is avoiding rock failure whilst the confining pressure is increased to a prescribed level; its expected failure load would not be lower than the maximum observed UCS of the same rock. Accordingly, by putting 105.4 If it is desired to express 7.4 A probabilistic approach has been explicitly detailed in this study towards the solution of a testing problem that can be encountered frequently in rock mechanics. Because of vague terminology usage in the Suggested Methods, researchers and students were facing difficulties concerning the pre-setting of confining pressure levels for a conventional TCS test on rock. This work reported here aims to solve this problem and some of the conclusions drawn from this work are as follows: UCS frequency distribution of rock samples can exhibit a high variation and, instead of using only one point estimate, it is more convenient to represent this value with a probability distribution representing the natural uncertainty and variability. Frequency distribution model for the UCS values of Ankara andesite used in the case study here is considered to be normal with the parameters, mean, Additional TCS tests are required on similar rock specimens to remove some of the statistical uncertainties and to delineate the type of possible distribution at different levels of confining pressure. A rough thumb rule may be recommended—the necessary minimum confining pressure applicable for any rock type should be around the 10% of the mean UCS. Another useful approach is to take the half of the CoV as the percentage of the mean UCS for the initial confining pressure level. When this rule is followed, since the randomness in the failure of rock samples has been taken into account, there will be much less risk of encountering situations in which rocks will fail at a lower axial loading when a higher confining pressure is applied to them. The authors gratefully acknowledge the following for their help during the course of this study: Technicians Nizamettin Aydemir and Hakan Uysal for their kind help in the preparation of the rock specimens and conducting the tests; Research Assistants, Sinem Sener for providing the UCS test results and Arman Kocal for providing some components of the TCS test values.