This work shows the results of gas dispersion parameters in a fully controlled laboratory column flotation cell, namely gas hold-up (εg), superficial gas velocity (Jg) and bubble size distribution, measured directly by image analyses using the LTM-BSizer. Gas hold-up and bubble size (and their distribution) were found to be strongly dependent on Dowfroth 250 concentration and superficial gas velocity. A fairly linear relationship between experimental εg and bubble superficial area flux (Sb) was established, and results are compared to those calculated using drift flux analysis. Data obtained are discussed in terms of solution, hydrodynamics and interfacial phenomena. Possible implications on the role of the frother in the energy dissipation in bubble generation and on interfacial tensions are explored.The properties of bubbles (gas) dispersion or hydrodynamic conditions clearly play an important role in froth flotation and applied flotation to effluent treatment. Recent developments ( Many attempts to relate these parameters to flotation performance have been made by a number of authors ( Some data reported suggests that bubble surface area flux ( This relation would have advantages, because the gas hold-up is easier to measure and would solve the problem of poor bubble size measurements ( With regard to the Sb values, Recently, some of these hydrodynamic plant data have been combined, whereby typical mean bubble diameter ranged between db In summarizing, bubble surface area flux has been related to flotation performance and claimed to be a key “machine variable”. However, most of the available data have been taken, calculated or measured in conventional cell and only a few have been done in column flotation cells. The effect of frothers has been revised lately, in terms of air dispersion into fine bubbles, froth stabilization, interactions at the water/gas interface and with collector molecules adsorbed into solid particles, water carrying effect and their main effect on bubble size and uprising velocity ( This article is a contribution to the general discussion on the possible implications of frothers in bubble generation (energy and size) -interfacial tensions and system hydrodynamics. A laboratory flotation column, 2.54 For the experiments in a two-phase system (water/air), the required amount of Dowfroth 250 was added to 30 Bubble size measurements were made using the LTM-BSizer ( This technique (LTM-BSizer) employs a sampler to draw bubbles, rising in a column, into a special viewing chamber and exposes them to a digital camera, after they have decelerated and stopped. Thus common problems related to the movement of bubbles, namely focus, illumination, photographic speed and bubbles overlapping are all overcome. Results obtained are in good correlation with those values reported with the traditional image analysis method and show that using this technique, accurate size distributions can be produced, conveniently and efficiently (  Results show that when the frother concentration increases, the bubbles become smaller with the Sauter mean diameters decreasing from about 1000 Explanations for this behavior have been given by a number of authors and the bubbles size decrease appears to be associated to the energy required for bubbles generation. This may be related to a decrease of the liquid–air interfacial tension, when the frother concentration increases, but there is no agreement on this issue. A frother may produce a dramatic effect on bubbles size distribution (and narrowed) but may not substantially decrease the air/water interfacial tension. In the absence of frother, big (not-measurable) bubbles are formed while for concentrations higher than 5 Conversely, The fact is, when bubbles are formed in pure water, where little pressure transfer exists, large bubbles are produced. At operating pressures lower than 3 Results obtained in previous works ( air–water surface tension (Nm flotation cell atmospheric pressure (atm or Pascal units); flow entrance pressure (atm or Pascal units) or pressure in the sparger Thus, the energy required to generate bubbles will be smaller with lower air–liquid interfacial tensions and with higher pressure differences across the sparger (inlet e outlet). Thus, when lowering the air–liquid interfacial tension ( Furthermore, many authors find that there is a poor correlation between bubble size and surface tension but not many works deal with errors committed in their experimental work.    Gas dispersion parameters were measured in a well characterized laboratory column flotation cell. Gas hold-up and bubble size (and their distribution) were found to be strongly dependent on Dowfroth 250 concentration and on superficial gas velocity. A good relationship between experimental gas hold-up and bubble surface area flux (Sb) was found for experimental values and with those calculated using drift flux analysis for Jw The authors gratefully acknowledge