In mining operations, jaw and gyratory crushers are generally used for primary crushing, and cone crushers are used for secondary crushing. During the past decade, however, high-pressure grinding rolls (HPGR) are being considered due to potential processing benefits such as energy savings, improved exposure/liberation and particle weakening. At this time there is no detailed quantification of particle damage and downstream benefits from HPGR crushing are uncertain. In the present research, copper ores (copper oxide ore and copper sulfide ore) were crushed by a jaw crusher and by HPGR and the products were evaluated for particle damage and copper grain exposure by X-ray computed tomography. Column leaching was done to determine the rate and extent of copper recovery.
                  X-ray computed tomography analysis and laboratory column leaching experiments for copper oxide ore revealed that products from HPGR crushing have more particle damage and higher copper recoveries when compared with products of the same size class from jaw crusher crushing. Generally the copper recovery from column leaching of the oxide ore was found to be dependent on the extent of grain exposure, which increases with a decrease in particle size.
                  In the case of the copper sulfide ore, copper recovery was found to be independent of the crushing technique despite the fact that more particle damage was observed in products from HPGR crushing. This unexpected behavior for the copper sulfide ore might be due to the high head grade and strong leach solution. Column leaching results also show that about 80–90% of the copper was recovered from the copper sulfide ore in a relatively short leaching time irrespective of crushing technique. As expected, copper recoveries improved with a decrease in the particle size of the copper sulfide ore as exposure of copper mineral grains increased.With the advent of high-pressure grinding rolls (HPGR) in the 1980’s, the comminution process efficiency improved to some extent in terms of energy savings. In HPGR, particle breakage is the result of high inter-particle stresses generated when a bed of solids is compressed moving through the narrow gap created between two pressurized rolls. As a result of higher inter-particle stresses a much greater proportion of fines are created in the HPGR product when compared to the product from conventional crushing. It has taken many years for high-pressure grinding rolls to make inroads into the mineral industry. Initially HPGR was used for diamond liberation, followed by preparation of iron ore for pelletizing and eventually into hard rock mining applications such as copper, gold and platinum ( In the last decade, HPGR has gained more importance and popularity since it is reported to offer numerous metallurgical benefits such as energy savings ( HPGR crushing skews the product particle size distribution to the finer size, which is reported to manifest itself in improved leaching and pre-concentration performance ( Intuitively, it is understood that energy utilization in size reduction must affect the ore properties related to mineralization and grain boundaries. In some cases HPGR promotes particle micro-fractures, micro-cracks in the crushed ore improving the metal recovery in subsequent heap leach operations and reducing downstream mill energy requirements ( The reported metallurgical benefits of high-pressure grinding rolls include increased liberation in cement ( In contrast it has been reported ( One of the reasons for this uncertainty regarding the effectiveness of HPGR may be inadequate information regarding the particle damage and quantification of preferential liberation. In the past, image analysis of narrow size fractions of HPGR product was accomplished by It is very difficult to quantify how damage (micro-cracks) and grain boundary fracture produced from HPGR crushing affects the downstream processes such as heap leaching and flotation, which further relates to the metal recovery. In a recent work on the same lines, HPGR was found to increase the extent of platinum liberation although no improvement was reported in the flotation performance, which may be due to the production of very fine particles ( It is quite obvious, that if an ore from the same deposit source is subjected to comminution by two different methods, such that the product particle size distribution is quite similar, and subsequent downstream treatment demonstrates substantial differences in recovery, then there is reason to believe that preferential exposure/liberation has occurred and the comminution mechanism has an effect on the downstream process such as heap leaching. Hence, in this study, investigation of the effect of crusher type (jaw crusher and HPGR), copper ore type (oxide, sulfide) and particle size (6.35–0.42 The initial sample preparation was carried out and about 450 The particle size distributions for both the copper oxide and copper sulfide crushed samples are shown in It is clear from X-ray computed tomography had its origin in the medical field with millimeter resolution and now the technique for 3D visualization has been extended with micro resolution. During the past decade X-ray micro computed tomography analysis has been developed for use in the coal and mineral industries ( As a result of particle size reduction by crushing, mineral grains are exposed and particle damage (micro-cracks) occurs. The number of valuable mineral grains available at the surface of the ore particles influences the copper recovery values from heap leaching. Similarly the formation of micro-cracks is expected to increase copper recovery during heap leaching. Both phenomena make the copper mineral grains more accessible to the leach solution and should increase the leaching kinetics. In this paper, the extent of particle damage is evaluated for the first time using micro XMT and mineral grain exposure analysis is used as described previously ( A total of five particle size classes (+6.35, 6.35 Copper recovery in heap leaching operations can be estimated for a specific particle size distribution, once the relationship between grain exposure and particle size is determined for the ore sample ( It can be observed that good exposure is achieved in both cases. More than 90% of the copper mineral grains in the copper sulfide ore sample were exposed for particles less than 6 It can be seen from both The difference in exposure characteristics between the copper sulfide and copper oxide samples exists because of the difference in texture (different grain size) which is evident from X-ray computed tomography images ( As can be seen from the exposure analysis plots ( The effect of crusher type on particle damage was studied for both ores and all size classes. Micro-crack formation during crushing is expected to result in increased copper recovery during heap leaching because the leach solution would penetrate through the micro cracks and solubilize the internal mineral grains. A total of five size classes and five crushing methods were investigated to determine the particle damage for both copper oxide and copper sulfide ores. The X-ray computed tomography scans of copper oxide and the copper sulfide sample are shown in The particles with cracks were counted for each ore type and each crushing method. Damage for the copper oxide ore is shown by the fraction of particles damaged (fraction of particles with cracks) in It must be recognized that damage analysis was limited to large cracks due to voxel resolution. Hence, only cracks of size greater than 40 With the use of Micro XMT-400, valuable information regarding particle damage, number of micro-cracks, size of cracks, and surface area of cracks, can be determined and correlated with energy for breakage. Future research will involve the use of Micro XMT-400 to investigate these issues. The products of both the crushed ores evaluated for particle damage were also assessed using column leaching to determine the rate and extent of copper recovery. The leaching experiments were conducted in two parts namely mini-column leaching and laboratory column leaching. The following section deals with both parts in detail. The mini-column leaching tests were performed to investigate if cone-beam X-ray micro tomography (XMT) can be used to quantify the leaching reaction progress and the significance of surface wetting and diffusion during column leaching for unsaturated flow conditions. In this regard, copper oxide ore samples (particle size of 2.00 Ten grams each of the jaw crusher product (2.00 Dissolution of copper grains for the copper oxide samples (2.00 The laboratory column leaching experiments were designed to better understand the effect of crusher type and ore type on the leaching response. Crushed copper oxide ore and copper sulfide ore samples were size classified into five different size fractions. Sixty samples were prepared from two ore types (oxide and sulfide), five crushing techniques (feed, jaw, low-pressure HPGR, medium-pressure HPGR and high-pressure HPGR) and five different size classes (+6.35 The laboratory column leaching tests were carried out with a disposable syringe (60 Three thousand samples were collected in disposable scintillation vials. However, higher copper concentrations could not be measured directly with the inductively coupled plasma (ICP) spectrometer and therefore each solution was diluted by a factor of 10 to determine the copper content in the leaching solutions for all samples. The column leaching recovery was calculated for each sample as a function of time as shown in Eq. The average copper recovery from two replicates after 10 As the particle size is decreased the percent copper grain exposure for the high-pressure HPGR sample is increased from 75% at the 6.35 The average copper recovery from two replicates after 10 Copper recovery for the sulfide ore tends to be independent of crushing method and also particle size. This unexpected behavior might be due to the high head grades for the copper sulfide ore samples (about 0.8%Cu). Also, the leaching solution used for the copper sulfide ore samples was stronger than that used for copper oxide ore samples. The leach solution for the copper sulfide ore had a pH of 2.0 whereas the pH for the oxide ore was 1.1. Of course the pH and leach solution composition is expected to affect the copper recovery. Comparison was made between copper recovery and mineral exposure to further examine the significance of exposure on recovery from laboratory column leaching. The comparison between copper recovery after 10 High-pressure HPGR produced a slightly finer particle size distribution when compared to other crushing methods for both copper oxide and copper sulfide samples ( As expected, grain exposure decreases with an increase in particle size. Grain exposure in the copper oxide ore samples was less (85% to 90% at 2.00 High-pressure HPGR crushing produces more internal cracks than other crushing methods in most of the particle size classes ( The grains from the copper oxide ore samples prepared by high-pressure HPGR and jaw crusher crushing dissolved after 29 For the copper oxide samples, copper recoveries were high for most of the high-pressure HPGR samples ( The above evidence suggests that high-pressure HPGR increases the leaching of copper oxide ore under the conditions considered. Whereas, the leaching of copper sulfide ore samples, under the conditions considered, is independent of crusher type despite greater particle damage for high-pressure HPGR samples. It is expected that the effect of damage would be more significant for the copper sulfide ore if a less aggressive leach solution were used. Thanks are due to Orhan Ozdemir and Aleksandra Opara for experimental support.