Woodchip is the most widespread form of wood biomass used in power stations because it guarantees homogeneous sizes and high load densities. From an environmental point of view, woodchip production has been studied from many aspects (comminution wood, transportation.), but no experimentations have focused on loading operations. The goal of this work was to evaluate the energy consumption and CO2 emissions of four types of loader used in woodchip loading. A knuckle-boom loader and three front loaders were tested. In the trials, a different woodchip pile position (near a wall and in an open square) was considered. Higher values on energy consumption were obtained by a mechanical shovel equipped with a standard bucket (5.59 and 5.01 MJ m−3, for woodchip stored in piles sited near a wall and in an open square, respectively), whereas lower values were observed during the use of telescopic loaders (1.89 and 2.09 MJ m−3, for piles sited in an open square and near a wall, respectively). The same results were also observed for CO2 emissions, where the best performances were obtained by the telescopic handler (58.6 kg h−1), with the worst by the mechanical shovel (118.4 kg h−1). The study pointed out that in woodchip loading, telescopic handlers equipped with a hinged bucket are able to reach a higher working efficiency with lower energy consumption and CO2 emissions in all working conditions.A mainly renewable source used for thermal and electrical energy production is biomass [ Woodchips can be obtained by comminuting wood harvested directly in short-rotation coppice [ Wood comminution is performed by specific machines able to cut the biomass into small part (chips). At present, there are different types of chippers that can load the woodchip directly on the vehicles used for the biomass transportation [ Up to now, many studies have been carried out on the machinery used in the woodchip supply chain: chippers [ Trials were carried out in the north-west of Italy, using both front loaders and knuckle-boom loader. In particular, four types of loaders used for wood chips loading were tested: 1) a wheel front loader equipped with a standard bucket; 2) a wheel front loader fitted with a high dump bucket ( Tests were performed using poplar woodchip produced by a drum chipper (Pezzolato PTH 1000) with an average moisture content of 42%. The moisture content of the material was measured using the gravimetric method [ The working rate values considered in this study were those reported in another study carried out by the same Author with same loaders in the same working conditions [ Energy required to perform woodchip loading operation was determined considering both indirect energy consumption (energy spent for machine manufacturing) and direct energy consumption (energy content of fuel and lubricant consumed during the loading operation) [ Output and input energy values of woodchip loading were determined by multiplying the amount of each material used (fuel consumption, lubricant consumptions …) by specific energy coefficients [ Moreover, a value of 1.2 MJ kg The energy content of the machines was determined using formula [ ME = machine energy (MJ m-3). E = energy coefficient (MJ kg L = useful life of the machine (year) G = weight of the machine (kg) T = economic life of the machine (h) C = productivity of the machine (m3 h-1) For overall loaders, an energy coefficient of 9.5 MJ kg In this study, the specific fuel consumption (g kWh The energy efficiency of the loading operation was analysed using the usual method adopted for the agricultural and forestry sectors: energy balance (EB). In this study, the energy balance was determined with the arithmetical method as the ratio between energy output (MJ m Human labour was not expressed in energy terms, but only in terms of manpower per unit time (h) [ The environmental impact of the woodchip loading operation was determined by CO Data were processed using Microsoft Excel Software and SSPS 23 (2016) advanced statistics software. The data were subject to analysis of variance (ANOVA). Eventual differences between tests were checked by performing Tukey's multiple comparison test [ The hourly fuel consumption ranged between 9.4 and 17.3 L ( Similar results were also observed referring to the diesel consumption for the volume unit (m Results also showed average specific fuel consumption in the loading operation of 221 g kWh The energy required for woodchip loading varied from 1.89 to 5.59 MJ m In contrast, results did not show any difference between the incidence of different energy consumption types (indirect, direct and maintenance) on total energy spent per volume unit. In fact, independent of the loader type considered, the indirect energy is about 28% of total energy cost, while the direct energy shows an incidence of about 56% ( The energy balance value is always positive for all loaders in different working conditions. In general terms, when the woodchip was stored in pile near a wall a higher energy efficiency was obtained (about 13%). Independent of the pile position, the telescopic loader (loader 4) showed the highest values of energy balance (1792 for piles sited near a wall, and 1618 for piles sited in a large square), while the lowest values was obtained by the shovel (loader 1) equipped with standard bucket (605 for piles sited in a large square and 676 for piles sited near a wall) ( The specific energy expressed per volume unit was different as a function of the loader type. Unlike the previous energy parameter analysed, the specific energy is inversely proportional to the bucket capacity ( An average value of 3380 MJ m The values of CO The hourly fuel consumption obtained in woodchip loading is proportional to the engine power. In fact, the lowest values were observed for the loader equipped with the engine of lowest nominal power. This trend is in line with those highlighted in other studies focusing on biomass crop planting [ Considering the productivity values reported by Manzone [ In addition, from the test it is pointed out that for woodchip loading, it is possible to consider an average specific fuel consumption of 221 g kWh The energy spent to perform woodchip loading range from 2.09 MJ m The average incidence of about 55% of direct energy consumption (lubricant and fuel) pointed out by this study is lower by about 30% compared to the values calculated for biomass harvesting [ The energy evaluation highlighted a positive value of the energy balance (output input ratio) for all loaders in all working conditions investigated. This can be considered a remarkable result because the loading operation, independent of loaders used and pile positions, does not affect the energy sustainability of the woodchip supply chain. From the analysis of the energy balance, the energy productivity and the specific energy values it can be pointed out that the agricultural telescopic handler equipped with a hinged bucket is the most efficient independent of the woodchip pile positions. Nevertheless, the best results of all frontal loaders were observed during the handling of woodchip stored in piles near a wall. No significant difference in the energy values were obtained by a wheeled loader fitted with a clamshell grab in the testing conditions. This value trend is mainly attributable to the working rate of the machines, although the main parameter that affects energy efficiency is productivity [ Data-processing showed different amounts (kg) of CO In addition to energy and environmental parameters, the reader must bear in mind that other important ‘operative’ aspects should be considered during loader choice. First, the ability to load common trucks used for woodchip transportation, because these vehicles have top sides of 4 m high, and this height cannot be reached by loader equipment (e.g. standard shovel or frontal loader fixed to agricultural tractors) [ This study highlighted that the energy spent in loading operation is very low (<1%) compared to woodchip energy content. The environmental impact of the woodchip loading operation can be reduced performing an appropriate choice of the loader type. In fact, energy consumptions and CO