Human skeletal muscle is an essential source of various cellular progenitors with potential therapeutic perspectives. We first used extracellular markers to identify in situ the main cell types located in a satellite position or in the endomysium of the skeletal muscle. Immunohistology revealed labeling of cells by markers of mesenchymal (CD13, CD29, CD44, CD47, CD49, CD62, CD73, CD90, CD105, CD146, and CD15 in this study), myogenic (CD56), angiogenic (CD31, CD34, CD106, CD146), hematopoietic (CD10, CD15, CD34) lineages. We then analysed cell phenotypes and fates in short- and long-term cultures of dissociated muscle biopsies in a proliferation medium favouring the expansion of myogenic cells. While CD56+ cells grew rapidly, a population of CD15+ cells emerged, partly from CD56+ cells, and became individualized. Both populations expressed mesenchymal markers similar to that harboured by human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells. In differentiation media, both CD56+ and CD15+ cells shared osteogenic and chondrogenic abilities, while CD56+ cells presented a myogenic capacity and CD15+ cells presented an adipogenic capacity. An important proportion of cells expressed the CD34 antigen in situ and immediately after muscle dissociation. However, CD34 antigen did not persist in culture and this initial population gave rise to adipogenic cells. These results underline the diversity of human muscle cells, and the shared or restricted commitment abilities of the main lineages under defined conditions.Comprehensions of the skeletal muscle development, homeostasis and physiopathology, and the expansion of new therapeutic strategies, require a thorough investigation of the different cellular compartments within the skeletal muscle. Due to species-specific differences in antigen epitopes, protein functions, or molecular differentiation cascades, human muscle cells have been less well documented than their murine counterpart; nevertheless several distinct cell types displaying myogenic potential have been described. The satellite cells, so called due to their position under the muscle basal lamina Previous broader analyses also indicated that several cellular markers were expressed by cells prepared from human muscle. Most observations related to crude preparations or, less frequently, to single populations. Cells or cell populations expressed one or several of the following markers: CD10, CD13, CD29, CD31, CD34, CD44, CD45, CD49e, CD73, CD90, CD105, CD106, CD117, CD133, CD146, αSMA, CXCR4, desmin, Flk1, M-Cadherin, VEGFR2, HLA-1 and vimentin While the myogenic potential of these muscle-derived cells was the first natural point of focus of such studies, alternative differentiation potentials have been explored more recently in biological and medical perspectives. We demonstrated that primary skeletal muscle cells differentiate towards a smooth muscle lineage and participate to angiogenesis both We have developed a standard procedure to prepare cells from human muscle fulfilling the clinical safety requirements, which is used in preclinical and clinical trials In order to refine the identification of human skeletal muscle cells, we carried out a four-step longitudinal study from the Muscle biopsies were obtained in the context of approved pre-clinical and clinical trials Seven µm transverse cryostat sections of muscle biopsies were immunolabelled to assess the presence of extracellular markers, and the position of the cells relative to muscle fibres and basement membranes or microvasculature. The different antibodies (Ab) used in this study were as follows: CD15, CD29, CD31, CD34, CD44, CD47, CD49, CD56, CD61, CD90, CD105, CD146 (Becton-Dickinson) ( The methodology has been described previously BM-derived MSC were separated on Ficoll (density 1.073 Freshly dissociated cells plated into 12 well-dishes were grown for 6 Fresh cells from dissociated muscle, or muscle-derived and BM- derived cells grown in culture and detached using trypsin-EDTA, were labelled with several mAb conjugated with phycoerythrin, allophycocyanin, or fluorescein isothiocyanate (BD, 1/20, 15 The identification of the main cell populations present at the onset of cell culture, or emerging Cells from selected fractions were cloned to confirm the major traits of their phenotypes. Cloning was carried out by limit dilution from the selected fractions. Cells were grown in 96-well dishes and expanded. Fifty thousand expanded cells prepared from clone cultures were seeded into 24-well plates after the first passage and allowed to proliferate for 48 Twenty thousand cells were seeded into 12-well dishes, grown for 72 Seventy to eighty percent confluent cultures incubated in 6-well dishes were shifted to osteogenic medium containing DMEM with 4.5 Seventy to eighty percent confluent cultures incubated in 6-well dishes were shifted to adipogenic medium Total RNA was extracted (RNeasy mini kit, Qiagen) and cDNA synthesized (InVitrogen). Osteogenic cDNA expression was quantified using the Syber Green quantitative PCR kit (Roche) in the Light-cycler (Roche). Amplifications were conducted in a total volume of 20 The cells displaying extracellular markers were anatomically localized in a qualitative manner ( As expected, the CD56 Some CD34 Several cell types were differentially associated to larger vessel architectures ( We characterized the cell populations released from the muscle biopsies by enzymatic treatment. This characterization was limited to a few markers, due to the small initial number of cells extracted from these small human biopsies. One dominant cell type expressed CD34 ( On the first day after seeding, the media change allowed us to separate the adherent from the non adherent cell fractions. The supernatants of all flasks were collected and contained mainly CD34 From days 5 to 8, adherent cells were harvested by trypsinization for flow cytometry analysis. In the proliferation medium, which was supplemented with bFGF, dexamethasone, 20% DFBS and promotes the expansion of myogenic cells, we observed a progressive decline in the proportion of CD34 To specifically follow the fate of CD34 To follow the fate of muscle-derived cells, successive expansions were performed as previously described The expression of extracellular mesenchymal, endothelial, myogenic and hematopoietic markers were analysed in these expanded cultures. At this stage, the entire population was found negative for several markers: CD11, CD14, CD18, CD19, CD20, CD34, CD38, CD45 and HLA-DR, most of which are markers of the hematopoietic lineage (not shown). The whole population was found brightly positive but heterogeneous for desmin, αSMA, HLA Class1 and, interestingly, positive for the classical MSC markers. Given our previous observations that CD56 A small percentage of muscle-derived cells and BM MSC expressed CD10 as the only hematopoietic marker ( Some differences were noted between the CD56 Finally, some partially discriminating markers (statistically significant differences) have been identified to characterize the global populations, essentially, CD10, most of the CD49 family (integrins), CD90, CD146. However, pure populations for a given marker were rarely observed ( Clones obtained from the CD56 To determine whether the phenotypic differences noted above reflected distinct programmes of differentiation A multitude of markers labelled muscle cells Most cells harbouring MSC markers were located in the endomysial compartment, as observed previously Several cell types were distributed among the different layers of intramuscular vessels structures, with variations according to the nature of structures (venous, arterial). The presence of cell types harbouring the same markers in different compartments such as endomysium and microvasculature suggests their phenotypical and functional heterogeneities. Cell phenotypes were characterized longitudinally upon tissue dissociation, then at different times during the first week in culture. Satellite cells expressing the CD56 In our culture conditions, as expected, the majority of the CD56 In our culture conditions, the newly described CD15 It should be noted that initial cultures contain double negative CD56 Some markers frequently observed Our results suggest that CD34 We observed the expression of a multitude of cellular markers on the muscle-derived cells. Some markers were very rarely observed Upon immunomagnetic selection, the two main populations were phenotypically compared. All classical mesenchymal markers were expressed both by BM MSC, CD56 The CD56 and CD15 markers clearly discriminated between muscle-derived cells and BM MSC cells. Although CD56 The differences between CD56 Osteogenesis was obtained from all human cell fractions tested Myogenesis was only obtained from CD56 The human skeletal muscle tissue contains a diversity of cell types which may be characterized using several extracellular markers typical of myogenic, angiogenic, hematopoietic and mesenchymal lineages. Their primary culture in myogenic condition followed by phenotypical and functional analysis This study was supported by the