The mineral enargite can be of interest to the mining industry as a copper and precious metal source. The mineral has a refractory character towards oxidation, which is attributed to the formation of elemental sulfur that seals off the mineral surface. In this study it was investigated whether elemental sulfur resulting from oxidation during industrial milling can be converted into hydrogen sulfide via bio-reduction. The removal of elemental sulfur in this process will clean the mineral surfaces for subsequent oxidation, prevent interference with the gold extraction process and reduce consumption of chemicals such as cyanide.
                  HPLC analysis confirmed that indeed elemental sulfur was formed during industrial milling of an enargite–pyrite gold concentrate. Removal of elemental sulfur via bio-reduction was successful and improved the gold leachability from 48.9% to 69.6%. The combination of milling and bio-reduction was therefore concluded to be a possible route to liberate metals. Further research is necessary to investigate if the enargite to sulfur conversion can be improved to obtain economically satisfactory (>90%) gold recoveries.Enargite, Cu This refractory character of enargite in oxidative leaching can possibly be ascribed to the formation of elemental sulfur that seals off the underlying mineral for further oxidation. Elemental sulfur can be produced both during chemical and mechanical treatment of ores. For enargite, as described by As a cost-effective alternative with a lower environmental impact, bio-leaching has been considered for enargite. Bacteria can facilitate reaction 1 by regenerating ferric iron and removal of elemental sulfur by sulfur oxidizing bacteria from the mineral surface leading to production of sulfuric acid ( Another alternative that has been tried for enargite is ultra fine grinding (UFG) as this mineral becomes more reactive as a result of mechanical activation and when reduced to a smaller particle size ( UFG offers the advantage that no iron addition is required. Furthermore, sulfates like CuSO Removal of elemental sulfur would push reactions (Eqs. ( The chance that the reaction in Eq. This paper investigates the bio-reduction/removal of elemental sulfur for an industrially milled enargite–pyrite gold concentrate as an alternative to further (bio) oxidation to liberate gold. The success of this process will be assessed by determining the improvement in the gold leachability. An industrial milled enargite–pyrite gold concentrate from Pascua Lama (Chili), a prospective gold mining site, was provided by Barrick ( For bio-reduction of elemental sulfur a sludge mixture known to contain sulfur and sulfate reducing bacteria was used. The sludge mixture contained anaerobic mud from marshes of Skidaway ( A defined medium dissolved in demineralized water was made with chemicals of analytical grade (Merck). The medium contained (g/L): KH A gas lift loop reactor experiment was performed in the same reactor setup as described in a previous study ( Aqueous samples were filtered over a 0.2 The composition of the enargite–pyrite gold concentrate was determined via acid microwave digestion and subsequent ICP analysis. The amount of elemental sulfur was measured via HPLC after acetone extraction. The sulfur present in the minerals was calculated to be: sulfur determined by ICP minus the sulfur determined by HPLC. Results of both methods are shown in Assuming that the phases of the XRD analysis ( Based on the presence of elemental sulfur, bio-reduction of the enargite–pyrite gold concentrate is expected to result in the formation of hydrogen sulfide. Process conditions selected, pH 5 and 35 From the first day, bio-reduction of elemental sulfur is prominent as indicated by its decrease in concentration and the production of hydrogen sulfide. Although elemental sulfur reduction seems to be preferred, any sulfate associated with the mineral is reduced as well. At the end of the experiment 90.5% of the expected sulfide was recovered in the recycle strip vessels. The rest of the sulfide may have remained inside the reactor solution or was lost as a ZnS-coating on the glass wall of the recycle strip vessel. Neither copper nor arsenic (data not shown) was found in solution in any detectable amount. The increase in iron from 0.0 to 6.5 Other parameters measured during the bio-reduction of the enargite–pyrite concentrate are shown in Under the selected conditions, the only reaction that can be confirmed by XRD analysis ( Results of CIL (Carbon In Leach) gold extraction tests of the enargite–pyrite gold concentrate are summarized in Apparently the presence of a small percentage of elemental sulfur forming a layer of about 3.5 The main ways to increase enargite conversion to elemental sulfur are via oxidative bio-leaching (Eq. Obviously, (deliberate) partial oxidation of sulfide ores to sulfur and subsequent sulfur bio-reduction can be a route to increase gold leachability and this is probably not only the case for enargite. Arsenopyrite ( Industrial milling of an enargite–pyrite gold concentrate resulted in the formation of elemental sulfur due to size reduction and partial oxidation of enargite. Milling to a particle size with a p80 of 32 The WUR authors like to thank