This study has investigated the antimicrobial potential of ring opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP)-based hydrogels. Initially, double charge containing cationic (DABCO)-ROMP polymers were synthesized and characterized. Subsequently, DABCO-ROMP polymer was added into a hydrogel formulation comprised of acrylamide (AAm), N,N'-methylenebis(acrylamide) (BAAm) and/or poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate (PEG diacrylate, M
                     n = 700 g/mol) in different quantities to investigate the antimicrobial efficiency of the hydrogel formulations. N,N,N′,N′-tetramethyl ethylene diamine (TEMED) is used with ammonium persulfate (APS) to catalyze polymerization in water. The structures of the resulting hydrogels were characterized using infrared spectroscopy (IR). The cross-linking properties and surface morphologies were investigated via the swelling behavior and scanning electron spectroscopy (SEM). Fluorescein (Na salt) staining measurements were also used to analyze the positive charge density of the hydrogels. The antimicrobial hydrogels showed excellent antimicrobial efficacy against Escherichia coli (E. coli, ATCC 25922), Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus, ATCC 29213) and Candida albicans (C. albicans, ATCC 90028). It was observed that the cationic ROMP polymer in the hydrogel formulation played a crucial role in the biocidal activity. Furthermore, cytotoxicity studies on human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) and tetrazolium salt assay (MTS) cell lines were also performed on the hydrogels and the most potent copolymer revealed no cytotoxicity. Therefore, the ROMP-based hydrogels show good biocidal properties with potential applications in various biomedical fields.Infectious diseases are a growing problem and critically important in global healthcare. Bacterial resistance against the most powerful antibiotics is a significant problem that occurs at an alarming rate. Based on the World Health Organization (WHO) database, the deaths due to bacterial infections between 2012 and 2014 are on the rise and not only in developing countries Hospitals are the main source and origin of multi-drug resistant bacteria and patients infected with these require clinical courses and prolonged hospital treatment. For example, two million nosocomial infections occur annually in hospitals in the United States (US), which add 5 billion US dollars to healthcare costs. Hospital infections mainly caused by multi-drug resistant bacteria require prolonged treatments and sometimes result in death. According to the report given by the Centers for Disease Prevention and Control (CDC), only 1.7 million healthcare associated infections occur annually in the US and that 99 000 deaths are linked to these infections Nowadays, new antibiotics with different mechanisms of action are needed due to bacterial resistance to antibiotics. Upon examining the literature, there are two main areas of research in this field. These include natural antibacterial peptides and their synthetic derivatives; the amphiphilic nature of these molecules and in particular, those with cationic and hydrophobic side chains, appear to be ideal therapeutic agents, and antimicrobial polymers possessing cationic functionality and hydrophobic groups on their backbone, which represent a class of biocides that have become increasingly important as an alternative to existing biocides and, in some cases, antibiotics The higher activity of polycationic compounds is as a result of the electrostatic interactions formed between the negatively charged bacterial cell surface. However, electrostatic interactions are not the only contributing factor to the antibacterial activity with hydrophobic interactions also playing a key role. Polymers with amphiphilic properties are able to disrupt the cell membrane via the carpet mechanism, penetrate inside the cell wall and disrupt the enzymatic process or interact with the DNA via the barrel-stave model Natural and synthetic polymers have an important place in the development of antimicrobial materials. In addition, polycationic antimicrobial polymers with quaternary ammonium and phosphonium, tertiary sulfonium and guanidinium functionalities are promising candidates for the development of antimicrobial agents In this study, we have synthesized highly antimicrobial surfaces based on a contact-active hydrogel layer prepared from the cationic ROMP-type polymers, poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate(PEG-diacrylate), acrylamide (AAm) and Accordingly, introducing different amounts of the starting materials during the preparation of the hydrogel achieved high antibacterial and antifungal activity with excellent biocompatibility. All reagents used in the synthesis of the hydrogels and antibacterial studies were of analytical grade and employed without any further purification. Distilled water was used for all the synthesis and antimicrobial activity processes. Grubbs second generation catalyst, AAm, BAAm, PEGDA (  The cell line used in this study was HUVEC obtained from American type culture collection corporation (ATCC-CRL-1730, Virginia, USA). Dubleco eagle’s minimum essential medium (DMEM; containing L-glutamine, Gibco) was used during the experimental study. To prevent infection, penicillin–streptomycin (Pen Strep, Gibco) and antimycotic (Anti-Anti (100X), Gibco) were added to the medium. Fetal bovine serume (FBS) was supplied from Gibco. Dulbecco’s phosphate buffered salt solution (DPBS; w/o: Calcium, w/o: Magnesium) was obtained from PAN Biotech, GmbH. Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, UK. In addition, MTS was obtained from Promega Corporation (CellTiter 96® AQueous MTS reagent powder). Quaternary oxanorbornene monomer and its ROMP-based homopolymer were analyzed using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy on a Bruker Avance III 500 MHz spectrometer. The Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) spectra were obtained on a Perkin Elmer Spectrum One Fourier transform infrared spectrometer with an attenuated total reflectance (ATR) accessory in the spectral range of 4000–650 cm The characterization of the release of ROMP based polymer from the matrix was measured by isocratic reverse phase high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC, Perkin Elmer Flexar) using a ODS-3 V, 5 μm, 4.6 × 250 mm enclosed in a column oven equilibrated at 25 °C. The injection volume was 5 μL, the flow rate was adjusted to 0.6 mL/min and detection was performed 210 nm. Used mobile phase was mixing KH In the first part of the monomer synthesis, furan-maleic anhydride adduct (compound After dissolving compound Compound   Compound The ROMP hydrogels were prepared via a free radical crosslinking-copolymerization of AAm, BAAm and PEGDA 700 in an aqueous solution at room temperature. A simultaneous free radical crosslinking-copolymerization was initiated with the APS/TEMED pair. Stock solutions of APS and TEMED were prepared by dissolving 8 g of APS and 8 mL of TEMED in 20 mL of distilled water, respectively. As an example of the hydrogel formation process, ROMP-Gel B (containing ROMP polymer (27.3 mg), which is 5.1 wt% of the solid content and AAm (250 mg), BAAm (3 mg), PEGDA 700 (224 mg) was dissolved in 2 mL of water. The reaction solution was stirred for 3 min over a magnetic stirrer plate at 100 rpm. After nitrogen purging for one minute, the APS/TEMED pair was added and the resulting mixture was then immediately transferred into a plastic tube-syringe (8 mm diameter × 5 cm length). The mixture turns into the hydrogel within seconds upon the addition the initiator solution. The complete composition of the hydrogels and their respective codes are listed in The hydrogels were prepared for the antimicrobial efficacy study by being cut into 0.8 cm diameter discs with a thickness of 0.5 cm. Meanwhile, the neutralization broth was prepared and autoclaved. Fresh passage was taken from each microorganism to be used and incubated overnight at 37 °C. 1 × 10 The cytotoxicity of the hydrogels and polymers (ROMP polymer) was investigated by utilizing the tetrazolium salt-based assay [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-ulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium, inner salt (MTS)]. It is a colorimetric technique that is used to predict the viability of the cells The cell line used during the Additionally, MTS assay was performed for four replicates of each treatment and the experiments were repeated twice for cell viability experiments. All experiments were performed at least in triplicate and were expressed as the mean ± standard error of the mean (RSD). A student's In this study, we determined the quaternary ammonium groups on the hydrogel surface by a colorimetric method based on the fluorescence complex and UV–VIS spectroscopy previously described in the literature According to an established procedure; ROMP-based polycationic hydrogels in a 1 wt% solution of fluorescein (Na salt) in water for 10 min and then rinsed three times with water. Then, 0.1 wt.% cetyltrimethylammonium chloride solution (5 mL) was added to desorb the dye with shaking (for 20 min). 10 vol.% of an aqueous phosphate buffer was added at pH 8.0. All solutions were prepared with Milli-Q water. The final solution absorbance was measured at 501 nm. The concentration of Na fluorescein was calculated using the independently determined value of 43 mM Without any further purification techniques, the synthesized hydrogels were soaked in water for 48 h to remove any unreacted monomers prior to the water uptake studies. The deionized water was exchanged every day. All the swollen hydrogels were then placed in a vacuum oven until constant weight. The weight of each dried film was recorded before placing the sample in a dish of deionized water at room temperature for 48 h. Then, after the samples were immersed in deionized water and the wet weight of each sample was recorded, the water uptake was calculated using the following equations:  After purification and characterization of the double charge bearing monomer (compound A targeted Polymer was not purified further to remove residual Ru catalyst. Although, it is reported that non hemolytic activity observed from the concentration of 100 µg/mL catalyst The cationic hydrogels were prepared via free radical crosslinking of AAm, BAAm, the cationic ROMP-type polymer and PEG-diacrylate in an aqueous solution at room temperature. A simultaneous free radical crosslinking-copolymerization was initiated with the APS/TEMED pair. The incorporation of the cationic ROMP polymer to the hydrogel matrix can be in the form of covalent or physical binding. Acrylate groups are more reactive in the free-radical nature of the cross-linking process than internal double bonds present in ROMP backbone. We thought that cationic ROMP polymers basically physically entrapped in the hydrogel matrix formed via the free-radical mechanism of cross-linking. HPLC analysis was performed for the characterization of the release of ROMP based polymer from the matrix. After incubation of hydrogels in 10 mL in water for 72 h, it was observed that release of polymer from the hydrogel matrix. The mixtures became a hydrogel within seconds upon the addition of the initiator solution (APS). The complete composition of the hydrogels and their respective codes are listed in  The FT-IR spectra of the ROMP-Gel B, ROMP-Gel C and ROMP-Gel E hydrogels are shown in The dried hydrogel samples were characterized by their porosity, which was derived from the presence of free space between the polymer chains in the structure of the hydrogels ( A water absorption test was used to investigate the crosslinking density and swelling behavior of the hydrogels. Generally speaking, a lower crosslinking density in the hydrogel will cause a low water uptake and vice versa. A lower crosslinking density allows the facile diffusion of water molecules through the polymer network The water on the surface of the samples was dried and weighed at specified times. The water retention capacity of the gels was related to the cationic charge density, PEG units and crosslinking density of the network. The hydrogels were weighed until equilibrium and a constant swelling value was reached. All the hydrogels swelled rapidly in the first few hours, which then slowed down after 8 h of swelling. The hydrogel with no cationic polymer group (ROMP-Gel E) showed the highest swelling and a water uptake up to 994.7% w/w at the end of day 7. Introducing PEG diacrylate into the hydrogel formulation ROMP-Gel B caused a decrease in the swelling value by ∼150% when compared to ROMP-Gel A. The addition of PEG-diacrylate enhanced the crosslinking density and resulted in a slight decrease in the swelling value when compared to the gel bearing the non-PEG diacrylate units in the formulation (ROMP-Gel A). ROMP-Gel B and ROMP-Gel D showed similar swelling behavior. This indicates that although their cationic groups and PEG units differ in the formulation, their crosslinking density and water uptake were almost the same. The surface density of the quaternary ammonium groups was measured using a colorimetric method based on fluorescent complexation and UV–Vis spectroscopy The antimicrobial properties of the hydrogels were reported in Survivor count on test surface noticed as “1” if bacteria colonies appear on the surface, if not it is valued as “0”. For example killing efficiency of ROMP-Gel B against The hydrogels are effective to different extents against the different types of microorganism studied, which is related to the fact that the microorganisms have different types of cell membranes. Upon evaluating the results of the antimicrobial tests of the hydrogels using the different microorganisms, it was apparent that the best antimicrobial activity was displayed by ROMP-Gel B. The control gel (ROMP-Gel E), which was formulated without any cationic polymer showed no activity against all the microorganisms studied. The gel with the lowest amount of cationic polymer present in the formulation (ROMP-Gel C) also showed no activity When the results obtained for the antimicrobial activity of the ROMP-Gel D sample were examined, it did not show any inhibitory antimicrobial activity against the Gram (+) and Gram (−) bacteria, and only showed activity towards the yeast strain, All the gel formulations show no activity against The hydrophobic tail groups present on the surface or anion exchange between the cell membrane and biocidal solid surface are proposed as mechanisms for cell-membrane disruption Hydrogels are a class of nanomaterials, which are comprised of polymers that were initially designed for human use Most polymers used for this purpose should be treated through cytotoxicity and During the cytotoxicity experiments, commercially supplied HUVEC cells (ATCC) were used and grown in DMEM (1X) with high glucose content (4.5 g/L) containing 10% FBS, 1% penicillin-streptomycin and 1% antimycotic. The cell culture study and experimental conditions were described in The MTS cell viability assays of hydrogels treated samples for HUVEC cells are shown in ROMP-Gel A showed no significant change in the cell survival upon increasing its concentration over 24 h. This remained the same after 72 h with the exception of that observed at a concentration of 1.25 w:w %, which showed a slight decrease in the cell viability. This was consistent with the result observed for ROMP-Gel B, since the cell viability was obtained in the closed range of the negative control and ROMP-Gel A. However, 1.25 w:w % of ROMP-Gel B, which has identical amounts of the polymer and AAm to both these gels with the addition of PEGDA did not significantly change the viability over 24 h. Recalling, AAm is a neurotoxicant, reproductive toxicant and carcinogen in animal species for cells at the limits reported previously In regard ROMP-Gel C, the cell survival was critical when the concentration was increased to 0.8 w:w. %. After 72 h there was a significant drop in the absorbance at ≥0.8 w:w.%. Therefore the sample of ROMP-Gel C starts to be toxic when the concentration exceed 0.4 w:w.% for both 24 and 72 h. The cells were both viable for the concentration 0.4 w:w.%. The polymer in ROMP-Gel D also exhibited non-toxic effects. However, there was still a slight drop in the cell survival relative to the control sample. However, the results are consistent with each other in regard the concentration. After 72 h, the cells slightly proliferated. Which may be attributed to the cell division being decelerated in the first 24 h due to the effect of the sample, but continue to proliferate over time due to having a sufficient amount of space. Moreover, ROMP-Gel E is non-toxic and quite similar to ROMP-Gel A in terms of the decrease of the cell absorbance upon increasing the concentration. Here, the PEGDA concentration may be crucial for cytotoxicity. The field of hydrogel-based ROMP polymers is rich with many strategies used to engineer materials with innovative functionalities and physicochemical properties. In the first part of this study, the polymer was synthesized from DABCO monomer via the ROMP technique. A targeted Upon evaluating the cytotoxicity of the hydrogels, it was found that the most favorable results were obtained for the ROMP-Gel B and ROMP-Gel D hydrogels, which contain the biocidal polymer in the hydrogel matrix. After 72 h of exposure to HUVEC, the majority of the tested materials did not demonstrate any cytotoxic properties. We think that present antimicrobial cationic hydrogel might be found application in medical field such as implant/prosthesis coating, catheter coating and wound dressing. Further research along this line is under progress. We gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: