Centrifuges represent a well-established tool in separation technology to handle high throughputs of suspensions with micron-sized particles. However, extraordinarily high centrifugal accelerations are required for even smaller particles. For this purpose, we make use of magnetic bearing and drive technology. We report the first application of this contactless technique in separation experiments. The presented prototype is based on a semi-continuous principle, where sediment is built up within the rotor while the liquid (which contains the fine fraction in case of classification) is discharged at the overflow weir. The new centrifuge allows rotational speeds of more than 64kmin−1. A broad variation of parameters with centrifugal accelerations of up to C=100,000 and flow rates of up to 0.4l/min provides a sound experimental basis for this study. The cut size and the product loss of three particle systems between 10nm and 1µm (silver nanoparticles, silica nanoparticles, and polystyrene) are precisely adjustable via the mentioned parameters. Furthermore, a good comparability with a commercially available device was found regarding the specific efficiency. We consider our approach to be a promising contribution to nanoscale separation technology where scalable high-throughput methods are rare.Applications of submicron and nanoscale solid particle systems are increasingly gaining in importance. In case that the production process, for instance crystallization, comminution or other syntheses, takes place in the liquid phase, a subsequent separation is required. In addition to a full-phase separation, it may be used to further influence size distribution width in the form of a classification step. However, a fundamental problem of this particle size range has been identified by An overview of the most common separation processes in the nanometer range is given by a topical review article by Another approach to nanoparticle classification is size-selective precipitation (SSP). It plays a special role among the mentioned methods, since it is no real separation technique. It functions independently of a flow field, but combination with a separation step is necessary. For the first time, The large-scale separation and classification of particles in the lower micrometer range is dominated by hydrocyclones and centrifuges. The principle of both is a rotating flow, which creates high centrifugal forces that lead to particle sedimentation. Hydrocyclones are continuously operated devices without rotating parts. As a decrease in cut size is obtained by a reduction of the cyclone diameter ( Using barium sulfate crystals ( A reduction of cut size is furthermore obtained by certain design features, such as conical installation in the upper cyclone part, but the effect is low ( Assuming a laminar flow and no hydrodynamic interactions between different particles, the settling velocity of a spherical particle is given by the Stokes equation: In Different types of centrifuges may be suitable for a certain separation task. Moreover, the operator might be interested in the scalability of the process if parameters need to be changed or a scale-up from laboratory to technical scale is planned. For this purpose, A modified version The g-volume approach is very similar to the Sigma approach, but less recognized among centrifugation experts. It considers the product of The Sigma approach and the g-volume approach both assume a plug flow regime in the rotor. The choice of the radius for the  Apart from  A picture of the rotor is shown in This material belongs to the group of the so-called maraging steels. While the carbon content is very low, it contains a high percentage of nickel, cobalt, and molybdenum. During a hardening procedure of several hours between 480 The three black sections in Friction losses are a significant problem of high-speed rotors. In the case of our system without any contact between stationary and rotating parts, the interaction between the surrounding gas phase and the rotor is the only friction loss. Its reduction represents a main issue for several reasons: Reduction of electrical energy demand. Less expensive design of the electronics. Less expensive design of the cooling system, as far as the heat can be led away at all. Avoidance of undefined thermal conditions (with focus on the material and the separation process). The permanent magnets need to be kept below the temperature of demagnetization. The power dissipation due to friction of a rotating body is given by the following equation (  Depending on the range of Reynolds number and the boundary conditions of the rotor, several approaches exist to calculating the coefficient The left side of Eddy currents occur in a conductor, which is placed in a time-variant magnetic field ( Hence, eddy currents are induced by field modulation of the armature and the permanent magnets. Moreover, a non-ideal sine-shaped armature field may lead to eddy current induction, too ( The power dissipation due to eddy currents leads to a reduction of power, which is used for torque generation. More problematic, however, is the consequent heating of the conductive permanent magnets. When a critical temperature is exceeded, demagnetization occurs. This must be avoided to ensure a safe operation. To reduce eddy currents, an axial segmentation is known as an effective measure as far as the individual segments are isolated from each other (  For comparison of the prototype with a commercially available machine, a GLE-type centrifuge manufactured by Carl Padberg Zentrifugenbau GmbH (CEPA), Germany was used. It has a rotor volume of about 250 Three different materials were considered in this work to cover the range from 10 The batch temperature of the suspension before entering the centrifuge was ambient temperature (20 The evaluation of the separation process is based on samples which were taken at the overflow of the centrifuge. The product loss The grade efficiency  Particle size distributions of silica under variation of The product loss for silica and silver NPs as a function of flow rate is shown in It has previously been demonstrated that a plot of cut size versus the square root of flow rate to The slope of the regressions is directly related to the relevant physical properties such as density of the particles and the liquid as well as the liquid's viscosity. Since water served as liquid in each case, the differences in slope in The Sigma approach presented in It has been proved successfully that magnetic bearing and drive technology may be applied for high-speed centrifugation. This contactless concept enables notable relative centrifugal accelerations (up to  relative centrifugal acceleration [dimensionless] friction coefficient [dimensionless] diameter [m] product loss [dimensionless] earth's acceleration [m/s separation efficiency [dimensionless] length of the rotor [m] leung number [dimensionless] molar mass [g/mol] power [W] pressure [N/m density distribution function [m flow rate [m radius [m] weir radius [m] inner rotor wall radius [m] universal gas constant [J/(mol reynolds number [dimensionless] size related grade efficiency [dimensionless] settling velocity [m/s] particle size [m] solids volume concentration [dimensionless] dynamic viscosity [kg/(m model correction factor [dimensionless] density [kg/m equivalent clarification area [m temperature [K] angular velocity [s The development of the centrifuge prototype was funded by The calculations on eddy current losses which were carried out by Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ulrich Beckert (TU Bergakademie Freiberg, Germany) were conducive to increasing the centrifuge performance. The authors would like to thank Dr. Michael Menzel, Dr. Franziska Emmerling (both from Bundesanstalt für Materialforschung BAM, Berlin, Germany), and Gregor Schneider (ras materials GmbH, Regensburg, Germany) for providing the silver NPs.