Experimental measurements are presented of the drag force on a spherical probe particle moving through an aqueous foam at the low speed limit, for particle/bubble radius ratios of 1.5–3.0. In froth flotation, this force is critical for understanding selectivity of these particles. The effect of surface wettability and particle diameter is both explored. A ‘hybrid’ model of the force is developed and compared with the experimental data. This combines forces due to yield of the foam ‘continuum’, both in the bulk and at the foam–particle interface, with forces due to attachment/detachment of individual foam nodes from the particle.The drag force experienced by a particle in motion through a foam depends on its size. Particles that are substantially smaller than the bubbles can move relatively easily through the Plateau borders. Movement of larger particles through the foam requires substantial deformation and structural rearrangement, and each particle may be in simultaneous contact with multiple bubbles. Historically, much of the work on particle mobility in foams has been motivated directly or indirectly by the need to understand the mechanisms of froth flotation, and that application is therefore worth discussing briefly at the outset. Froth flotation is widely used to separate mineral particles based on their surface properties. Hydrophobic particles tend to attach to bubbles, and rise to the top of the flotation cell, whereas hydrophilic particles stay in the liquid phase and drain back into the tails. Thus, previous work on particle mobility in foams has also focused strongly on the effect of the wetting contact angle at the particle surface, since this is the key to selectivity in flotation. In the past, flotation was used almost exclusively for particles that were much smaller than the bubbles ( For particles that are much larger than the bubbles, the foam could in principle be treated as a continuous deformable medium and its rheology described by an appropriate continuum model and boundary conditions. For instance, aqueous foams are often described in terms of yield stress, viscosity, and so on (e.g., The present work is based on an experimental study of the drag force on spherical bodies moving through a foam (i.e., in 3D). The measurement technique is similar to others developed independently to study drag on objects in foams ( The relative size of the particle and bubbles will dictate the type of model used to calculate the drag force. If the particle is substantially larger than the bubbles, the foam can be modeled as a homogeneous continuum, with an appropriate slip condition at the particle–foam interface. If, on the other hand, the particle is smaller than the bubbles, its motion through the foam can be modeled as a series of escapes from and captures by the nodes in the foam structure, with the forces calculated from mechanical deformation of the foam films. This study deals with particles that are intermediate in size between these extremes, typical of the ‘coarse flotation’ regime mentioned earlier. In this regime, the bubbles are too large for the foam to be thought of unequivocally as a continuous medium. On the other hand, the particles are large enough to be in contact with more than one bubble or foam film simultaneously. The drag force cannot therefore be described exclusively in terms of film or node attachments and detachments. As the particle comes into contact with more bubbles simultaneously, the geometric complexity of the film contact lines, as they migrate around the particle surface from the front to the rear, increases rapidly. The pressure difference between the front and rear of the particle also becomes important. The complex interaction and combination of the pressure and film network forces preclude analytic structural model forces, as was possible in the small-particle regime. There are two obvious alternatives for modeling the system in this intermediate size regime. The first is to construct a detailed three-dimensional numerical model, analogous to that of Deformation of the foam around a moving particle results in a larger density of contact lines at the rear of the particle than that at the front, resulting in a net drag force ( The mean drag force is modeled by assuming that the foam can be treated as a continuous yield-stress material, and that the effect of tangential stress at the body's surface varies with the contact angle. The fluctuations about this mean drag force are modeled in terms of attachment and detachment of the sphere from Plateau border nodes in the foam ( In this paper, we initially develop these two drag force models separately. The ‘continuum’ model for relatively large particles is presented first. Aqueous foams with a liquid volume fraction of less than ~ We deal initially with the average force on the body, and assume temporarily that the foam can be treated as a homogeneous medium. Substantial work has been done on the creeping motion of a solid sphere through a yield-stress fluid. The simplest and most commonly-used model for these fluids is the Bingham body ( A very large Bingham number is assumed in this work, and this assumption is tested experimentally. A recent study ( Without a detailed numerical model, it is difficult to precisely calculate the skin drag component for This result and those of If we were to assume conditions of perfect slip at the interface, In previous studies, The previous studies ( The simple ‘continuum model’ outlined above was based on the assumption that the foam could be treated as a homogeneous medium. In reality, movement of an object through a foam necessitates a series of discrete topological changes in the foam structure as foam nodes attach to the front and detach from the rear of the object. The ‘homogeneous fluid’ model can therefore do no more than predict the average drag force on the object. Variations about this mean due to the structure of the foam require a model of node attachment and detachment. The spherical probes used in the present study were ~ We do not attempt to model the foam structure in detail. However, since this study concerns spherical bodies and the effect of wettability, we adapt the ‘cut-off length’ concept accordingly. Consider a spherical body embedded in an ‘ideal’ Plateau border vertex (   The force at each of the three ‘  Topologically, attachment of a node to the sphere is effectively the same process in reverse. The attachment process must begin with the Plateau border junction splitting into a triangular arrangement of contact lines, the reverse of the process shown in If the sphere is smaller than the bubbles, its progress through the foam will consist of a series of attachments and detachments of successive nodes. The drag force would be expected to display positive and negative of approximate amplitude If the sphere is larger than the bubbles, the film geometry during attachments and detachments will be much more complex than assumed in the model above. In addition, multiple node attachments and detachments may overlap or occur simultaneously. For instance, in the two-dimensional models of It is useful to express the above model explicitly in terms of the liquid fraction, even though the present study did not examine the effect of varying the liquid content of the foam. This can be done directly by expressing the Plateau border radius The experimental techniques used in this study are very similar to those described by Probe tips were manufactured by heating an appropriate quantity of lead or solder with a blow-torch until it was pulled into a near-spherical drop by surface tension. Tips manufactured in this way had a sphericity better than 90%. Each probe tip was connected to the transducer input by a length of 250 To measure the drag force, the transducer head was positioned so that the attached probe was well inside a 45  The liquid fraction of the foam after sitting for 60 To check for consistency between the measured Plateau border curvature and liquid fraction, Eqs. In It is difficult to extract a numerical value from   The displayed curves correspond to  The sizes of the probes used in these experiments were in a sense the most difficult, and also the most interesting, to deal with theoretically. As already noted, they were not so much larger than the bubbles that the foam could be treated unequivocally as a continuum, and yet they were too large for the force to be modeled entirely as a series of unrelated node attachments and detachments. A ‘hybrid’ modeling approach – which combines a continuum drag model of the average drag force with a node attachment/detachment model for the transients – seems at least partly successful in characterizing the system. A particle's floatability in a flotation froth is in effect determined by whether its weight is sufficient for it to move downward through the froth. Particles that are substantially smaller than the bubbles can simply drain through the Plateau borders. In that case, selectivity is achieved because some particles adhere to the bubbles and others do not. For larger particles, whatever their surface wettability, the foam structure must be deformed and permanent topological changes must occur for the particle to move irreversibly through the foam. This study has presented experimental measurements of the low-velocity drag force on spherical particles in this larger particle size range. Wetting contact angles of 10  Bingham number (−) Stokes drag coefficient (−) Drag force Mean drag force Non-slip drag force Surface yield stress reference force Restoring force Redundant number of faces per bubble Constant in Eq. Non-redundant Plateau border length per bubble Redundant Plateau border length per bubble Polydispersity parameter (−) Parameter in Eqs. Particle/sphere radius Bubble radius Sauter mean bubble radius Plateau border curvature radius Chord lengths — see Foam film tension (N.m Bubble volume Angle — see Angle — see Gas–liquid surface tension (N.m Geometric constant (−) Wetting contact angle Bulk viscosity (Pa.s) RMS value of Yield stress (Pa) Bulk yield stress Surface yield stress The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of the