Impact shattering of bedrock and wind-driven sorting have been identified as primary processes modifying the size, shape, and roundness of basalt-derived sediments at the Spirit rover landing site in Gusev Crater, Mars. We experimentally explore how physical sorting can cause significant compositional modification of sediment relative to bedrock in the absence of chemical weathering. Two basalt samples, chosen to provide a range of source rock compositions and textures, were crushed and sieved. We quantify variations in sediment mineral proportions as a function of grain size, as well as accompanying changes in major- and trace-element geochemistry. Redistribution of phenocrysts imposes the primary compositional control on basalt-derived sediments, although minor mineral fractionations affect trace-element concentrations. Olivine accumulation pairs with increasing MgO, Fe2O3(T), Ni, and Co, and Al2O3 depletion. The observed chemical changes in physically sorted sediments in our experiments mimic those measured in martian soils. Aeolian transport models demonstrate that sorting of mineral components of basalts under martian conditions is likely. Given the potential for sorting by winds on Mars we argue that sorting must be considered, in addition to chemical weathering, when interpreting the geochemical changes in martian sediments.Interpretations of sediment compositions on Mars commonly focus on abundance of olivine to identify source rocks (  On the martian surface, transported and sorted sedimentary particles occur as dunes ( Lack of evidence for pervasive chemical weathering ( Physical breakdown of bedrock alone is generally insufficient to impose compositional changes on the resultant sediments, which indicates that additional processes leading to mineral segregation must be operative. For example in the Guys Bight Basin in Arctic Canada ( In addition to sorting of primary minerals, accessory mineral sorting has also been investigated. A case study from Lastly, in an example from the Eldborgir volcano, Iceland, aeolian-transported, minimally altered volcanic sand provides a basaltic comparison for mineral segregation ( The surface of Mars is strongly influenced by wind, with aeolian features including ripples and dunes observed at the MER ( The lack of observed sediment mobility during the extended Viking and MER missions ( Prior attempts to quantify possible effects of sorting on Mars have used mobile/immobile element ratios as a proxy for documenting mineralogic changes. For example, the Fe/Ti ratio in Viking, Pathfinder ( Global surface compositions indicate a basaltic composition for the crust of Mars ( Bedrock pulverized by impacts produces sediment with a Rosin grain-size distribution similar to what is generated from comminution experiments ( The mass of sediment retained at each successive sieve was recorded with a maximum loss from sieving at <0.5% for each sample. Resultant grain-size distributions resemble those observed in images taken by the MER Microscopic Imager (MI), with examples provided in The modal mineralogy of Cima and Kilauea rocks and sieved sediment samples was determined by point counting (500–1000 points) on 30 μm-thick thin sections. Sediment samples were classified into: (1) lithic fragments (polymineralic), (2) olivine, (3) plagioclase, (4) pyroxene, and (5) opaque oxides. Mineral compositions were determined using a Cameca SX-100 electron microprobe. Bedrock and synthetic sediment populations were powdered with a shatterbox using a ceramic dish and puck, then commercially analyzed by for major-, trace-, and rare earth element (REE) concentration by ACTLABS (4Lithoresearch package). The first examined rock is a trachybasalt (hawaiite) from the Cima volcanic field, Mojave Desert, CA ( Geochemical results ( The second studied rock is a porphyritic vesicular basalt from Kilauea volcano, HI, with abundant euhedral olivine phenocrysts set in a groundmass of olivine, clinopyroxene, plagioclase, and opaque minerals ( Major- ( Incident light images with a perspective comparable to the Mars Hand Lens Imager (MAHLI; Both analog sediments are skewed to coarse grain sizes ( The mineralogy and textures of Cima and Kilauea protoliths ( Isolation of phenocrysts as individual clasts in Cima coarse sediment is rare due to the very-fine sized crystals (microphenocrysts and groundmass) in the source rock ( Cima sediment samples are compositionally similar to the original basalt source rock for most oxides ( The most significant compositional variation of sediment relative to Kilauea source rock ( Complete trace-element analysis is beyond the capabilities of the Alpha Particle X-ray Spectrometers (APXS) on MER ( Results of source-sample-normalized trace-element analyses for Cima sediment are plotted in Kilauea sediment samples ( Beginning with a simple assumption that density differences between detrital phases studied here are not significant enough to drive substantive mineral fractionation, each sieve fraction would represent material of a specifically sorted grain size. Aeolian dunes, which are common on the martian surface, effectively select specific grain sizes in response to specific transport conditions, commonly resulting in well sorted grain-size distributions ( Plotting major-element oxides of the analog source rock and derived sediment samples ( The ranges and trajectories of Cima (shaded triangles, The range of SiO Changes in sediment compositions arising from chemical weathering can be interpreted by plotting the molar proportions of A (Al Soils examined by the MER Spirit rover in Gusev Crater show limited compositional deviation from Gusev rocks in A-CNK-FM plots, and only permit the presence of a small amount of sulfate minerals and clays ( The compositions of Cima and Kilauea bedrocks, analog sediments, and sediments at Gusev Crater and Meridiani Planum are plotted in A-CNK-FM space ( To compare compositional variations as histograms that focus on critical element variations associated with feldspar, pyroxene, and olivine, we use the quantity FM The data we report thus far for analog synthetic sediment represent sieved grain-size populations assuming no mineral separation during transport. However, considering the detrital phases possess a range of densities, it is necessary to consider additional sorting effects capable of separating constituent mineral components, which could potentially drive even larger departures in sediment composition relative to source. As evident from analog sediment mineralogy ( In Threshold friction velocity curves are plotted in The concept of hydrodynamic equivalence establishes the grain sizes of particles with different density (or sphericity) that can travel together at a fixed energy level. In this exercise, we are focusing on the effects only due to density variation and not shapes (grain axial proportions), in part because the shape differences between grains is small ( Under favorable conditions where density sorting prevails, lag deposits should theoretically become passively enriched in denser minerals while transported detritus would be enriched in less dense phases (cf., Models of threshold friction velocity (  Based on our experimental and modeling results, the total compositional effects of sorting in martian sediments would be enhanced by diversity in source-rock mineral densities, and with abundant phenocrysts, which are present in some basaltic rocks in Gusev Crater ( Hand samples of basalt from the Cima volcanic field and Kilauea were crushed to generate synthetic sediments, and sieved in order to test of mineralogical and geochemical changes imposed by grain-size sorting. Sediment compositions are controlled by the crystal-size distribution of the parent material, and the availability and redistribution of mineral phases caused by sieving. Variations in sediment derived from Kilauea basalt represent differences in the concentration of olivine phenocrysts. Less significant partitioning of minerals occurred in sediment derived from the aphanitic Cima basalt, which exhibited enhanced concentration of plagioclase, pyroxene, and olivine in fine sand. Major- and trace-element compositions diverge from expected source rock values. Olivine accumulation is paired with increasing MgO, Fe Cima trachybasalt and Kilauea basalt represent high- and low-alkali compositions, bracketing the compositions of most rocks and soils in Gusev Crater. The ranges and trajectories of Cima and Kilauea analog sediments show similar patterns to Gusev sediments in a total alkalis versus silica diagram. Kilauea sediments also match the ranges and trajectories of Gusev and Meridiani sediments in A-CNK-FM plots. Such trends can be produced from the sorting of basaltic rock comminuted by impact or aeolian abrasion in the total absence of chemical weathering. Aeolian transport modeling demonstrates the plausibility for density separation of minerals by selectively removing less-dense plagioclase and basalt clasts from denser grains of olivine, producing FeO We thank Devon Burr for discussions about aeolian transport and Allen Patchen for assistance with electron microprobe analyses. We thank reviewers for providing comments that improved the paper. This work was partly supported by a Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at The following is the Supplementary material related to this article.