The mechanisms and the reaction products for the oxidation of sulfide ions in the presence lead sulfide (formed by the addition of lead(II) ions) have been established. When the leach solution contains free sulfide ions, oxidation of sulfide ions occurs via electron transfer from the sulfide ion to dissolved oxygen on the precipitated lead sulfide surface, with polysulfides being formed as an intermediate oxidation product. In the absence of cyanide, the polysulfides are further oxidised to thiosulfate and sulfite, whilst with cyanide present, thiocyanate is also formed from the reaction of polysulfides and cyanide. All of these reaction products were detected using UV following ion chromatography with an anion exchange column and perchlorate eluent.
                  When the cyanide leach solution does not contain free sulfide ions, the oxidation of the lead sulfide to thiocyanate and lead(II) ions is the dominant sulfide oxidation mechanism, and thiosulfate and sulfite are not formed. The rate of lead sulfide oxidation is significantly slower than the lead sulfide catalysed heterogeneous oxidation of sulfide ions, although in a continuous reactor where the sulfide ion concentration is very low, the lead sulfide oxidation pathway is significant.Most metal sulfides decompose in aerated, alkaline cyanide solution to form metal ions, metal oxides or metal cyanide complexes and various sulfur-containing species including thiocyanate, sulfide and thiosulfate ions, with polythionates and polysulfides having also been detected ( Reactive sulfides such as chalcocite undergo non-oxidative dissolution in cyanide solutions to form copper cyanide and sulfide ions in solution, leading to passivation of the gold ( The addition of lead(II) ions to an alkaline cyanide solution precipitates mainly lead hydroxide due to the low solubility of lead cyanide. However, if excess sulfide ions are present or formed, then the dominant lead species present is lead sulfide. Of particular importance is the observation that the addition of lead(II) ions catalyses the oxidation of dissolved sulfide ions. This is thought to be via the formation of a lead sulfide precipitate coupled with the oxidation of the lead sulfide, hence releasing lead(II) ions back into solution to react with more sulfide ions ( The present paper further investigates the mechanisms of sulfide ion oxidation in cyanide leach solutions and the role of lead(II) ions, and in particular the sulfide ion oxidation products and the conditions which influence the distribution of products. This has been made possible by the development of an ion chromatography methodology, which allows the simultaneous determination of sulfide ions and its oxidation products in cyanide solutions. Batch experiments were carried out in an enclosed 500 Solutions were prepared from analytical grade reagents and DI water. In experiments with lead(II) ions, the lead was added to the cyanide solution as a concentrated lead chloride solution (lead nitrate was not use as the nitrate interferes with the sulfur species analysis and provides the same results as the reactions are not influenced by the anion), before a concentrated sodium sulfide solution was added to start the experiment (sulfide ions added to simulate the rapid dissolution of a reactive metal sulfides such as chalcocite). The quantities of reagents added was adjusted such that when made up to 300 Continuous experiments were carried out in an enclosed 100 Solutions were prepared from analytical grade reagents and DI water. At steady state, the pH and DO were measured and the reactor outlet sampled and filtered to remove the lead sulfide precipitate prior to analysis. A Waters 2695 HPLC separation module was used for the analysis of all samples, with the separation being effected using a Dionex IonPac AS16 anion exchange column equipped with a IonPac AG16 guard column. All analytes were detected using UV with a Waters 2996 Photodiode Array (PDA) Detector. A pump flowrate of 1 Sodium perchlorate was chosen as the mobile phase for the separation, as this analyte provides a rapid exchange of strongly adsorbing anion species such as metal cyanides, and it also has a low UV absorbance at all wavelengths. The eluent composition found to give the best separation of the various anion species in samples was 65  An initial test found that the oxidation of sulfide ions in cyanide solutions by oxygen alone was very slow, with less than a 10% reduction in the sulfide ion concentration after 4 Analysis of samples with time for the experiment conducted without cyanide found that sulfite and thiosulfate were the major sulfur-containing species formed from the oxidation of sulfide ions in the presence of lead(II) ions ( Another important aspect of the data shown in It should be noted that the HPLC chromatograph for the sulfide ion oxidation solution after 45 For the experiment shown in When cyanide was present in solution the major sulfide ion oxidation product was found to be thiocyanate, along with some sulfite and thiosulfate ( The mechanism for thiocyanate formation was further investigated by conducting an experiment with a less than stoichiometric quantity of sulfide ion addition to form lead sulfide with no residual sulfide ions in solution. When cyanide was present, no thiosulfate or sulfite was generated from the oxidation of lead sulfide, with thiocyanate being the sole reaction product. The rate of thiocyanate generation ( The generation of thiocyanate from the reaction of cyanide with polysulfides was investigated by adding cyanide to an oxygen free solution containing polysulfides; the exclusion of oxygen avoids all the oxidation reactions. Additional tests were conducted to investigate the effect of various parameters on the sulfide ion oxidation reaction rate and products. Varying the pH from 9.5–12 was found to have little effect on the reaction rates and hence product distribution (∼5% lower thiocyanate and slightly higher thiosulfate and sulfite at pH 9.5). The use of air instead of pure oxygen, or the use of highly saline process water, decreased the dissolved oxygen concentration and thus reduced the sulfide ion oxidation rate. This resulted in increased thiocyanate generation and reduced thiosulfate and sulfite generation. Increasing the cyanide concentration had a similar effect. Reducing the lead(II) concentration reduced the rate of sulfide ion oxidation to polysulfides and hence increased thiocyanate generation and reduced thiosulfate generation (sulfite though was relatively unchanged). The slow addition of sulfide ions reduced the formation of thiosulfate and sulfite and increased the formation of thiocyanate. The addition of lead(II) ions to a solution containing sulfide ions rapidly precipitates lead sulfide. In the presence of cyanide, the lead sulfide undergoes oxidation to form thiocyanate, which releases the lead(II) ion to further react with sulfide ions. However, in the presence of excess sulfide ions, the oxidation of sulfide ions occurs much faster and is essentially independent of the cyanide concentration. Polysulfides were identified as an intermediate product and the rate of this initial reaction step was found to be dependent on the reactant and lead(II) concentrations. The results indicate that the surface of the lead sulfide precipitate catalyses the heterogeneous oxidation of sulfide ions by oxygen to form polysulfides. This suggests the dominant initial reaction steps in the oxidation of sulfide ions in the presence of lead sulfide are: The chemistry of this system is complex as there also exists an equilibrium between sulfide ions and polysulfides: The change in polysulfide speciation as sulfide ions are oxidised (ignoring subsequent reactions) has been calculated using OLI for a solution initially containing 10 The formation of thiocyanate, sulfite and thiosulfate continued after the sulfide ions had been depleted, and all reactions only ceased when the polysulfides became depleted. Experiments confirmed that these products are generated predominantly from the homogeneous reaction of polysulfides with oxygen or cyanide. From the results, it would appear that the reactions of the intermediate polysulfides to produce thiocyanate, thiosulfate and sulfite would be Notably, the formation of thiosulfate is only from the polysulfides where The reaction between cyanide and thiosulfate is very slow in comparison to that with polysulfides or lead sulfide and thus does not contribute significantly as a reaction pathway. The addition of 5 These mechanisms are also consistent with the requirements for acid and base addition to maintain the pH during the experiments conducted. Initially, as the polysulfide concentration increased, the pH increased as a result of the hydroxide generated (Eqs. Cyanidation of ores is typically conducted in a series of CSTRs. The concentrations of reactants and hence reaction rates are very different in a CSTR compared to a batch test. Thus, at low sulfide ion concentrations the oxidation of lead sulfide is likely to be important. The mass balance equation for the oxidation of sulfide ions via Reactions 3 and 4 in a CSTR can be represented as: A series of CSTR tests at constant inlet sulfide concentration were conducted with varying air/oxygen addition rates and residence times ( At very high conversions (residual sulfide ions in solution below the detection limit), a significant change in the product distribution was found. This is shown in An ion chromatography methodology has been described that allowed identification of an intermediate species and the quantification of reaction products for the lead sulfide catalysed oxidation of sulfide ions in solutions, with and without cyanide present. From the results the mechanisms involved were established. The oxidation of sulfide ions by oxygen is catalysed by precipitated lead sulfide, which acts as a catalytic surface for electron exchange between the dissolved oxygen and the dissolved sulfide ions present in solution. This process generates polysulfides. In the absence of cyanide the polysulfides are further oxidised to form thiosulfate and sulfite. In the presence of cyanide the polysulfides are reacted to mainly form thiocyanate, with reduced oxidation to thiosulfate and sulfite. The lead sulfide itself is also slowly oxidised to form thiocyanate, though the rate is appreciably slower than the rate of the catalysed sulfide ion oxidation reaction described above. However, this mechanism is important in a continuous process where the sulfide ion concentration in the reactor is very low.