The depression of hematite in the reverse flotation system of oleate-starch-hematite was investigated at the atomic level by atomic force microscopy (AFM) combined with density functional theory (DFT). AFM imaging and cross-sectional imaging show that the adsorption configurations of oleate and starch on hematite were in shuttle and flake patterns, respectively, resulting in a greater adsorption thickness and adsorption area for starch than for oleate on the hematite surface. After functioned by starch, hematite was almost fully covered by starch so that there was no sufficient space for the adsorption of oleate. Corn starch was also detected aggregating fine hematite particles just like a flocculant. In the DFT study of the system, convergence tests were conducted to get the optimized hematite crystal geometry. The calculated interaction energies and Mulliken populations verified the favorable adsorption of oleate and starch on the hematite surface. Results indicated that covalent bonds formed between oleate and hematite, as well as between starch and hematite. However, in the oleate-starch-hematite system, the calculations showed that the distance between oleate and hematite in the presence of starch was too long to allow the adsorption of oleate. As for the water effect on the depression of hematite, the water molecules acted as a bridge between starch and the hematite surface by hydrogen bonds and were accompanied by chemical bonds between hematite surfaces and starch, which led to the depression of hematite. Therefore, in reverse flotation, oleate is hindered from adsorbing on the starch-covered hematite surface. The work presented here has profound implications for future studies of the depression of hematite, and may help solve the problem of screening and design of depressant of hematite.Reverse flotation is one of the most commonly used industrial beneficiation methods of hematite ores [ It is generally recognized that flotation is a surface-chemistry–based process that based on the differences in wettability between materials [ In our previous studies [ AFM has become an important microscopic techniques to characterize nanoscale morphology of surfaces, benefiting from its various innovative modifications [ DFT has the advantage of revealing the reaction mechanism at the atomic scale, which cannot be achieved by current experimental techniques. Computer simulation has been used successfully to investigate the interactions and properties of adsorbate molecules on the surface of minerals, allowing the prediction of stable adsorption complexes and the mechanisms of sorption [ Well known that the interaction mechanisms between starch and iron-bearing minerals have been investigated by many researchers and many different conclusions have been drawn. This study aims to recognize the adsorption configurations of oleate and starch on the hematite surface by AFM images to reveal the adsorption morphologies of oleate and starch on hematite, on which no one has ever focused, and to computationally elaborate the depression of hematite in the oleate-starch-hematite system at the atomic level by DFT to analyze the strength of bond and the electron transfer, which allowed to quantitatively demonstrate the adsorption mechanism. At the first place, hematite surfaces with oleate and starch were visualized using the PeakForce Tapping AFM mode, and the adsorbate form, adsorption area, and adsorption thickness were compared based on the height image and cross-section image. Next step, quantum calculations were then performed. Firstly, crystal optimization convergence tests were conducted, and the hematite slab surface energy was calculated to ensure the accuracy of the modeling. Secondly, different models of oleate on hematite, starch on hematite, oleate on hematite with starch and starch on water-functioned hematite were screened to calculate the adsorption energy. Finally, after the best adsorption model was selected, the Mulliken bond population and Mulliken atom population were calculated to analyze the mechanism of the depression of hematite. All calculations were performed using the software package CASTEP in Materials Studio 8.0. It was noteworthy that the modeling sequences of reagents onto mineral surfaces were the same as those in actual flotation, instead of using the total adsorption energy as the only criteria to evaluate the stability of the whole system. MultiMode8 microscope (Bruker, USA) operating in PeakForce Tapping mode was used to capture the AFM images. Hematite minerals were obtained from Anshan Iron and Steel Group Corporation in China with purity >99%. Before AFM imaging, the ultrasonic dispersion machine was employed to dispersed the pulverized hematite particles (<5 μm) at room temperature. Then the dispersed hematite particles were immersed in an oleate solution (50 mg/L) or starch solution (6 mg/L) so that the agent adsorbed on the surface and washed with deionized water. To prepare sodium oleate solution, 50 mg oleate was put into a 500 mL beaker at room temperature. And the solution was homogenized by an ultrasonic dispersion machine. Finally, the solution was added to a 1 L volumetric flask to make an oleate solution with a concentration of 50 mg/L. To prepare starch solution 6 mg corn starch coupled with 5 mL of 1 M NaOH solutions were put into a 500 mL beaker with deionized water. The causticized solution was stirred for 30 min at the temperature of 90 °C. Then the solution was transferred to a 1 L volumetric flask to make a stock solution. The previous studies [ After that, a mica substrate was cleaned by adhesive tape and the hematite particles after functioned were directly transferred onto it. Typically, 5 to 10 individual hematite particles were randomly selected for examination. The SNL-10 probes (Bruker) with spring constant of 0.35 N/m and tip radius of 2 nm were used to detected the hematite particles after functioned in room temperature. The pixel of 512 lines and scan rate of 0.8 to 0.9 Hz were selected to ensure images with high resolution and reliable mapping of mechanical properties. Finally, the Nanoscope Analysis v1.8 software (Bruker) was employed to processed the obtained AFM images. To obtain the optimum crystal geometry, crystal optimization convergence was conducted. The convergence tests were performed using a range of exchange-correlation potentials (including GGA-PBE, GGA-PW91, GGA-RPBE, GGA-PBESOL, and GGA-WC), k-points, and cutoff energies under the convergence criteria of energy = 2.0 × 10 An important measure of thermodynamic stability of a crystal exposed surface is surface energy. A more stable surface structure corresponds to a lower value of surface energy [ In this research, a hematite surface slab obtained from optimal bulk hematite supercell. To ensure an accurate slab surface of hematite, the slab depth and vacuum thickness were selected as 1.698 Å to 26.974 Å and 20 Å to 28 Å respectively, with the convergence tolerance defined as an energy change of <2.0 × 10 In this study, oleate, starch and water acted as adsorbates, and hematite surface was the adsorbent. Molecular structures of oleate, starch, and water were designed by the model of Visualizer. Before adsorption modeling, geometry optimizations of oleate, starch and water molecules were carried out using the CASTEP module to enable calculation of the interaction energies between the adsorbates and the adsorbent. Many conclusions have been drawn from the previous studies on the dissolution of corn starch. In the process of caustic heat treatment of corn starch, a very weak characteristic peak of carboxyl group were detected by FTIR showing the formation of a small quantity of carboxyl groups at NaOH concentration of 0.15%–4%, starch concentration of 0.5% (5 g/L) and temperature of 175 °C [ Oleate and starch can both behave as the adsorbate on the hematite surface, but they might differ with respect to adsorption form and adsorption thickness. AFM can be used to image the topography of a surface, enabling the differences between oleate and starch on hematite to be compared and described by height imaging and cross-section drawing. Height imaging of AFM is widely used in both two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) measurement of nanomaterials, whereas cross-section drawing enables the description of the wave surface and the exact height difference between the surface masses. Three specimens—clean hematite particles, oleate on hematite surface, and starch on hematite surface—were examined by AFM in the room temperature to determine their adsorption form.  The comprehensive analysis showed that regardless of the thickness, coverage area, or tightness of adsorption, the adsorption of starch on hematite was preferred to that of oleate on hematite. This implies that in reverse flotation, once hematite was aforehand functioned by starch, the starch adsorbed on the hematite surface by flake adsorption and hematite were nearly completely covered by starch. Consequently, there was not sufficient space for the adsorption of oleate, and oleate would be hindered from adsorbing on the hematite surface. Starch also acted as a flocculant for aggregating fine hematite particles. DFT calculations were carried out to investigate the adsorption mechanism at the atomic scale. To obtain the most accurate hematite crystal structure and optimum calculation parameters, a series of exchange-correlation potentials, Brillouin-zone k-points, and cutoff energies test were carried out in that order. First, the structural parameters of bulk hematite were independently calculated using five exchange-correlation potentials, GGA-RPBE, GGA-PW91, GGA-PBE, GGA-PBESOL, and GGA-WC, with Brillouin-zone k-point of 3 × 3 × 2 and the kinetic cutoff energy of 350 eV. The obtained lattice constants As shown in To identify the optimum k-point set, modelings with the GGA-PBESOL potential and the kinetic cutoff energy of 350 eV, and the k-point sets of 2 × 2 × 2, 3 × 3 × 2, 4 × 4 × 2, 5 × 5 × 2, 6 × 6 × 2, and 8 × 8 × 2 were performed. So the applied k-point sets versus lattice parameter differences and total energies are illustrated in From With the increase of cutoff energy from 320 eV, the total energy became progressively more negative. However, the decline in total energy slowed as the cutoff energy was increased beyond 350 eV. The parameter difference became essentially constant at cutoff energies >400 eV, with values fluctuating around 1.2%. Take the balance of calculation efficiency and accuracy into consideration, the results made clear that the 460 eV as the cutoff energy was sufficient to obtain converged geometrical parameters. Consequently, the exchange-correlation potential of GGA-PBESOL, cutoff energy of 460 eV and the Brillouin-zone k-point set of 4 × 4 × 2 were selected to optimize the bulk unit cell parameters of hematite. Surface energy is an important criterion that determines the dominant crystal face. Higher surface energy means the surface has a faster growth rate, and the slow-growing surfaces dominate the as-grown crystal morphology, whereas the fast-growing faces may disappear [ As shown in To investigate the mechanism of the depression of hematite at the atomic level, models of oleate interaction with the hematite (001) surface and of starch interaction with the same surface were built and calculated separately. The model of oleate interaction with starch-functioned hematite was then built and calculated. The Mulliken populations of bonds and atoms were used to reveal the extent of electron transfer between the interacting atoms and the strength of the bonds. The reagents and optimized hematite (001) were also quantified in terms of the total energy ( Mulliken population analysis was also used to characterize the bonding between reagents and mineral, allowing the bond types to be specified as either electrovalent or covalent. The covalent bond means the Mulliken bond population is a positive value, and the covalent bonding gets stronger as the Mulliken population greater. Likewise, a negative Mulliken population indicates that the bond type between two atoms is electrovalent, and a greater absolute value suggests a stronger electrovalent bond. Accurate adsorption position of reagent molecules on the free surface of the mineral plays a significant role in the quantum chemistry calculations. Therefore, several models of the mineral-reagent complexes were built to distinguish the interaction status of starch and oleate molecules on hematite. According to the adsorption energy, the most stable models were selected and illustrated in To geometric adsorption of oleate on the hematite surface, the exchange-correlation potential of GGA-PBESOL and cutoff energy of 460 eV were used. The parameters were converged to within an energy of 2.0 × 10 Starch is a macro-molecular compound and therefore had to be causticized before the experiment. During alkali digestion of starch, new chemical species can be produced [ In the procedure for depressing hematite in reverse flotation the depressant (causticized starch) is usually added first, followed by the collector. Therefore, having calculated the interaction of oleate and causticized starch on the hematite surface by DFT, the adsorption of oleate on hematite in the presence of starch was then calculated to investigate the mechanism of the depression of hematite in the oleate-starch-hematite system. The calculation process is shown in During the calculation process, the distance between oleate and hematite began at 2.5 Å, but became progressively longer as the calculation proceeded. As can be seen from Due to the interactions between regents and minerals take place in water during the reverse flotation process. To insight into the water effect on the depression of starch on hematite, the configurations of water-hematite and starch-water-hematite complexes were modeled and calculated. In actual flotation, minerals were introduced into water to experience beneficiation, so that water molecules were involved in the DFT calculation to demonstrate the hydroxylation of hematite surface. Limited by the computational capability and with consideration of the main objective was to clarify the water effect on hematite surface, two water molecules as a reasonable amount were incorporated into DFT calculation to re-assess the foregoing conclusions, according to the reference [ As shown in As a result, the calculated adsorption energy of starch-water-hematite complex was −337.276 kJ/mol, which manifested that starch could interact with hematite in the presence of water. The distance between starch and hematite was identified as 2.902 Å and the calculated bond population was 0.11, which apparently seemed that there was a weak interaction between starch and hematite surface. However, it was recognized that hydrogen bond formed between starch and water molecules, and it was illustrated above water could interact with hematite by means of covalent bond and hydrogen bond, revealing water molecules acted as a bridge between starch and the hematite surface to enable the depression of hematite. So the depressant effect of starch is due to the chemical bonds between starch and the hydrogen bonds among water molecules, hematite surfaces, and starch. This was in correspondence with the conclusion from Xia et al. (2009), who addressed that the underlying mechanism by which starch depresses hematite involves the development of a hydrogen bond between starch and the hematite surface as a result of the hydroxyl groups in the structures of both starch and mineral oxides. Regarding the depressing effect of starch to hematite, inearly studies, the primary mechanism for polysaccharide adsorption was considered for hydrogen bonding [ This present study was to highlight the adsorption configurations of oleate and starch on the hematite surface by AFM, and theoretical calculations in terms of the reagents-hematite complexes at the atomic level by DFT, aiming to verify the three hypotheses concerning the depression of hematite by starch in the reverse flotation process. The AFM images and cross-section images revealed the pure hematite surface was smooth and the hematite particles presented as hexagons. Oleate and starch adsorbed on the hematite surface in the form of shuttle and flake patterns respectively. The two adsorbates showed adsorption thickness of 0 to 5 nm and 0 to 15 nm, respectively. Once functioned by starch, hematite was almost completely covered by starch, there was not enough space for the adsorption of oleate. Starch was also identified aggregating fine hematite particles as a flocculant. DFT calculations were performed firstly in a vacuum and secondly in water to verify this depression mechanism. The cutoff energy of 460 eV, exchange-correlation potential GGA-PBESOL, and k-point mesh of 4 × 4 × 2 were determined to obtain the optimal crystal structure of hematite and to build models of oleate on hematite and starch on hematite. The adsorption energy and Mulliken bond population of oleate on hematite were −513.716 kJ/mol and 0.48, respectively, and those of starch on hematite were −353.358 kJ/mol and 0.55, which indicated that both compounds could adsorb on this mineral. It was shown that in the presence of starch, the distance between oleate and hematite was 3.846 Å, meaning that oleate could not adsorb on hematite in this three-component system. DFT calculation results with water suggested that the depressant effect of starch is due to the hydrogen bonds among water molecules, starch, and hematite surface, via establishing chemical bonds between starch and hematite surface. Which enabled the depression of hematite by starch in liquid condition. The computational calculation results verified the capability of starch depressing hematite in liquid reverse flotation process, which was experimentally validated by our previous study [ To summarize, in the reverse flotation process, if starch was introduced to adsorb on the hematite surface first. According to AFM observation, there was not enough space allowing oleate to adsorb, and DFT results indicated the distance between oleate and hematite was too far to interact. Thus, the adsorption of oleate on hematite was hindered. Corn starch was also found aggregating fine hematite particles, revealing it has the potential to improve reverse flotation efficiency where fine hematite particles are treated. Limited by the computational efficiency and accuracy, DFT calculation could not handle with a large system with atoms exceeding 300, so that only the main conditions were taken into account. According to Kumar et al. (2018), DFT results followed the same trend as experimentally obtained mineral recoveries, which was confirmed by our previous studies. The theoretical finding of this paper offered a new insight into the depression mechanism of hematite. A vivid overview of the oleate and starch on hematite surface at the atomic level was elaborated by means of AFM imaging coupled with DFT calculation. These results were supplements of the depression behavior of hematite by the latest research methods and provided a reference for screening and design flotation reagents for mineral processing application. This work was funded by the