An effective method is presented to elute Sb(V) from the amino-phosphonic resins that are used industrially to control the antimony concentration in copper electrolytes. Unlike Sb(III), which is amenable to elution with HCl and other reagents, Sb(V) is extremely difficult to elute from amino-phosphonic resins. Consequently, in industrial practice, a gradual build-up of Sb(V) often takes place on the resin beads, and this reduces the resin capacity and useful life. In this project, it was found that solutions containing 0.5–1.0g/L of thiourea in 5–7M HCl are effective eluting agents for Sb(V). It is postulated that thiourea reduces Sb(V) to Sb(III), a reaction that can only take place in concentrated HCl. The main parameters influencing the elution of Sb(V) with thiourea and HCl are presented and discussed.Antimony is a common impurity of the copper anodes that are processed by electrorefining to produce high-purity copper. During the electrorefining process, antimony accumulates in the electrolyte and its concentration must be carefully controlled to prevent the contamination of the copper cathodes ( Antimony in copper electrolytes occurs mainly in the trivalent oxidation state, Sb(III), but a variable amount of pentavalent antimony, Sb(V), is usually produced during the electrorefining process ( In this study, an extensive search was carried out for reagents that might facilitate the elution of Sb(V) through redox and/or complexing mechanisms. It was found that thiourea (CS(NH Most experiments were carried out with the amino-phosphonic resin Duolite C-467 (Rohm and Haas/Dow), because it was readily available to the author, but key experiments were repeated with Unitika UR-3300s, Purolite S950 and Lewatit TP-260, and almost identical results were obtained. The resins were washed repeatedly with deionized water and converted to their acid form using 1.68 All the elution experiments were carried out using glass mini-columns containing 10 The Sb(III) and Sb(V) solutions were prepared by dissolving an appropriate amount of an antimony compound in H The eluting solutions were prepared with hydrochloric acid (Certified ACS Plus, Fisher Scientific), thiourea (Reagent ACS, Anachemia) and deionized water. As previously mentioned, Sb(III) and Sb(V) respond differently to elution with concentrated HCl. The difference in the elution rate between Sb(III) and Sb(V) can be visualized by plotting the percent of Sb eluted versus the elution time, as shown in The difference in elution rates of Sb(III) and Sb(V) is most likely related to their different speciation and interactions with the resin groups and matrix. Unfortunately, this subject has not been sufficiently studied. Although it has been known for several years that amino-phosphonic resins can extract antimony from copper electrolytes, little information has been gathered about the chemical mechanisms involved. It is implied in the literature that Sb(III) (the only species studied by other researchers) undergoes a chelation reaction with the amine and/or the phosphate groups of the resin, despite the fact that Sb(III) has little affinity for amine or phosphate compounds ( As for Sb(V), its interaction with amino-phosphonic resins has apparently not been studied before. Although there is some disagreement among researchers, pentavalent antimony is commonly assumed to occur as SbO It is most likely that the HCl elution of both antimony species involves the formation of anionic chloro complexes. Both Sb(III) and Sb(V) form chloro complexes in hydrochloric acid media, but their structures are quite different. In the case of Sb(III), a series of simple chloro complexes has been identified ( By contrast, Sb(V) has a much higher affinity for OH Thus, the slow elution rate of Sb(V) is likely due to the fact that its chloro and chloro-hydroxy complexes are large and have a relatively low charge density. These complexes have a relatively low need for hydration and, therefore, their affinity for the aqueous phase is relatively low. Furthermore, the resin shrinks in concentrated HCl media, making the resin phase still more concentrated and decreasing the average pore size, so that sieve effects become more important ( Thiourea was added to the HCl eluting solutions in concentrations ranging from 0.1 to 1.6 It may be postulated that thiourea facilitates the elution of Sb(V) by reducing it to Sb(III). This can be inferred from the fact that thiourea is used to reduce Sb(V) in the analytical determination of antimony ( Because Sb(V) can be a fairly strong oxidant under specific conditions, a redox reaction with thiourea seems likely. This point will be discussed in more detail in The reason for the decrease in the antimony elution rate as the thiourea concentration exceeds 0.8 The concentration of HCl in solutions containing 1 The results support the assumption that thiourea reduces Sb(V) to Sb(III) because it has been established that Sb(V) can only be readily reduced in concentrated HCl. For example, Pentavalent antimony is a fairly strong oxidant in concentrated HCl. Thus, it appears that the reduction of Sb(V) by thiourea in concentrated HCl is thermodynamically favourable under specific conditions. However, the extent of the thiourea oxidation and, therefore, the reaction products of the redox reaction are unknown. An important corollary of the HCl effect is that Sb(V) cannot be readily reduced in chloride-free sulphuric acid solutions. Consequently, reducing the Sb(V) in the copper electrolyte before the ion exchange step (e.g., by means of metallic copper) is not feasible, and this was confirmed experimentally in this study. The temperature of the elution of Sb(V) from Duolite C-467, using solutions containing 1 The accelerating effect of thiourea on the elution of Sb(V) was tested on three other commercial amino-phosphonic resins, i.e., Unitika UR-3300s, Purolite S950 and Lewatit TP-260. As shown in Thiourea was found to have no effect on the elution of Sb(III) with 6 There was no evidence suggesting that thiourea causes a detrimental effect on the amino-phosphonic groups or the resin matrix. For example, many tests were performed with resin batches that had been used previously. Thus, one batch of Duolite C-467 was subjected to at least 14 adsorption/elution cycles during the course of this project and no decrease in performance was detected. This fact suggests that, at least in the short term, the resin active groups are not affected by the contact with thiourea. However, a more detailed study is needed to ascertain whether the presence of thiourea causes any detrimental effect on the resin properties. It was observed that whenever a thiourea/HCl solution came in contact with copper electrolyte (in experiments carried out with a synthetic copper electrolyte), a white precipitate formed that in some cases interfered with the flow of solution through the resin column. This precipitate, which could not be identified by X-ray diffraction or infrared analyses, dissolved in excess copper electrolyte and no subsequent detrimental effect on the resin was observed. However, this observation suggests that in industrial practice, it may be necessary to ensure that the copper electrolyte has been completely displaced from the resin bed before initiating the elution with a thiourea/HCl solution. The elution of Sb(V) from amino-phosphonic resins with HCl is extremely slow, and this may cause an antimony build-up which decreases the capacity and useful life of the resin. However, under certain conditions, thiourea-bearing HCl solutions elute Sb(V) at a rate that is similar to that of the conventional HCl elution of Sb(III). The mechanism apparently involves the reduction of Sb(V) to Sb(III) by thiourea in concentrated HCl. The efficiency of the thiourea/HCl elution Sb(V) depends on the temperature and the concentration of both thiourea and HCl. The Sb(V) elution rate is optimum at 60 °C, 7 M HCl and 0.8 g/L thiourea. Higher thiourea concentrations cause a slight decrease in the elution efficiency. Higher HCl concentrations may increase the elution rate, but the stability of the resin may be affected. The presence of thiourea does not interfere with the HCl elution of Sb(III), so that in industrial practice both antimony species may be eluted simultaneously with a thiourea/HCl solution. Alternatively, the thiourea/HCl might be performed periodically when the Sb(V) build-up has reached a certain level that causes a noticeable decrease in the resin capacity. The author gratefully acknowledges the technical support received from the Analytical Services Group of CANMET-MMSL. Special thanks are due to Dr Ruiping Wang and to Mr Duane Palmer for carrying out numerous analyses of antimony in various media.