This study presents the results from investigation of ash deposition characteristics of a high ash and sulfur content lignite co-fired with three types of biomass (olive residue, 49wt%; hazelnut shell, 42wt%; and cotton residue, 41wt%) in 0.3 MWt Middle East Technical University (METU) Atmospheric Bubbling Fluidized Bed Combustion (ABFBC) Test Rig. Deposit samples were collected on an air-cooled probe at a temperature of 500°C. Samples were analyzed by SEM/EDX and XRD methods. The results reveal that co-firing lignite with olive residue, hazelnut shell and cotton residue show low deposition rates. High concentrations of silicon, calcium, sulfur, iron, and aluminum were found in deposit samples. No chlorine was detected in deposits. Calcium sulfate and potassium sulfate were detected as major and minor components of the deposits, respectively. High sulfur and alumina-silicate content of lignite resulted in formation of alkali sulfates instead of alkali chlorides. Therefore, fuel blends under consideration can be denoted to have low-fouling propensity.Gradual introduction of increasingly restrictive legislations on emissions from combustion sources has been increasing the interest in biomass combustion. Biomass is a renewable energy source due to the fact that it is considered as CO For co-firing fuels with different characteristics fluidized bed combustion technology is usually indicated to be the best choice within the available technologies due to fuel flexible feature, uniform combustion temperature and high combustion efficiency ( High concentrations of sulfur and alumina-silicate content in coal ash results in binding of alkali chlorides in biomass ash to form alkali sulfates and release of chlorine as hydrogen chloride gas, instead of depositing. Ash deposition has extensively been studied in fluidized bed combustion systems co-firing of coals with various types of biomass ( There exist 9.3 billion tons of indigenous lignite reserves characterized by low calorific value and high ash and sulfur contents in Turkey. Moreover, Turkey is the leader producer of hazelnut and one of the leader producers of cotton and olive in the world. Availability of significant amounts of olive residues, hazelnut shells and cotton residues and indigenous lignite reserves make co-firing option attractive. Olive residue is a specific type of biomass from olive oil production process. It is the remaining part of olives after pressing and extraction of olive oil. Hazelnut shells are the residues of hazelnut crushing plants. Cotton residue is also a specific type of biomass produced from cotton oil production process. It is the remaining part of cotton seeds after extraction of cotton oil. Absence of studies on ash deposition in fluidized bed combustion systems co-firing indigenous lignite with olive residue/hazelnut shell/cotton residue, on one hand, and the recent trend in utilization of biomass with local reserves in industry and utility boilers, on the other, necessitate investigation of ash deposition characteristics of these fuel blends in fluidized bed combustors. In an attempt to achieve this objective, a typical Turkish lignite with high ash and sulfur contents was co-fired with different types of biomass with limestone addition in 0.3 MW This study is based on experimental data collected as part of a research project for the investigation of combustion and gaseous emission characteristics of biomass co-fired with a typical low quality lignite with high ash and sulfur contents. Tests were carried out on the 0.3 MW The test rig basically consists of a forced draft fan, a wind box with an ash removal system, a modular combustor, a cyclone with a recycle leg, a baghouse filter, an induced draft fan and a fuel and limestone feeding system. The main body of the test rig is the modular combustor formed by five modules of internal cross-section of 0.45 In order to measure the concentrations of O The output signals from analyzers and process values such as temperatures, air and water flow rates, pressures and speed of screw conveyors are logged to a PC by means of a data acquisition and control system, Bailey INFI 90. Further details of the test rig are given in In order to investigate the ash deposition during co-firing olive residue (OR), hazelnut shell (HS) and cotton residue (CR) three tests were carried out at biomass shares of 49%, 42% and 41% by weight, respectively. The characteristics of lignite (L) and biomasses burned in these tests are summarized in Inert bed material utilized in all tests was bed ash obtained previously from combustion of the same lignite in the same test rig. Limestone (88.92% CaCO Deposit samples were collected on an air-cooled probe which was located at the freeboard exit at 4.19 The morphologies and crystal sizes of the ash deposits were observed by JSM-6400 (JEOL) scanning electron microscope (SEM). During the SEM study, energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis method was applied in order to get elemental composition of the deposit samples. Deposits were also identified qualitatively from their X-ray diffraction patterns taken by a 100 Appearance of the deposit rings collected after the co-firing experiments carried out with olive residue, hazelnut shell and cotton residue showed that no deposit formation took place in the wind side which implies low risk for fouling under co-firing conditions for the biomasses under consideration. Lignite/olive residue co-firing test leads to higher deposit formation compared to lignite/hazelnut shell and lignite/cotton residue co-firing tests. Relatively high fouling rate of olive residue co-firing runs is also confirmed by the calculated values of rate of deposit build-up (RBU). RBU is defined as the amount of deposit collected per projected surface area of the probe per unit time (g/m After each test, removable ring was separated from the deposit probe and deposits were scraped off. The deposit powders were coated with carbon tape and subjected to SEM/EDX analysis. Deposits crystals of lignite/olive residue co-firing test are observed to have irregular shape in the size range of 1–3 The compositions of the deposits analyzed by EDX are shown in Co-firing of olive residue, hazelnut shell and cotton residue with a typical Turkish lignite was carried out in 0.3 MW The following conclusions were reached under the observations of this study: Lignite – olive residue/hazelnut shell/cotton residue mixtures show low ash deposition rates. SEM/EDX analyses of the deposits reveal high concentrations of silicon, calcium, sulfur, iron, and aluminum. XRD analyses indicated formation of calcium sulfate as the major component and potassium sulfate as the minor component in the deposits. The fouling propensity of olive residue, hazelnut shell and cotton residue is lowered by co-firing them with high alumina-silicate and sulfur containing lignite. Financial supports provided by the Scientific and Technical Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK) through a Research Project MAG 104M200 in aid of this research are gratefully acknowledged.