The direct preparation of LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2 (LNCM811) cathode materials from the hydrochloric acid leaching of laterite are promising; however, there are Cl− ions and other impurities in the hydrochloric acid leaching solution, thereby limiting the commercial application of LNCM811. In this study, we compared the LNCM811 prepared from Cl−- and SO4
                     2−- ion precursor solutions, and observed that the existence of Cl− ions could result in agglomerate disjointed and the primary particles grew separately during the sintering process, further deteriorating the electrochemical performance. Therefore, the initial raw Ni/Co solid residues were washed with deionised water and leached with 25 wt% H2SO4 solution to obtain an enriched Ni/Co solution with SO4
                     2− anions. Furthermore, considerable impurities in the enriched Ni/Co solution caused primary particle separation during the sintering process and led to the LNCM811 having poor electrochemical properties. Therefore, it was further purified by extraction with Cyanex272 to obtain a pure NiSO4 solution. The impurities in the NCM811 precursor prepared from this pure NiSO4 solution were below standard limits, the corresponding lithiated cathode delivers an initial reversible capacity of 192.1 mAh g−1 at 0.1C with an initial Coulombic efficiency of 86.5%; it retains 85.1% of its capacity after 100 cycles at 1.0C in 2.8–4.3 V, thereby achieving the standard of commercial LNCM811. On this basis, combined with the previous research of our group, high-value utilisation of laterite for preparing cathode materials includes the following processes: hydrochloric acid leaching, preliminary purification, alkaline oxidation precipitation, conversion of the Cl− solution system to the SO4
                     2− ion solution system, extraction, solution-phase synthesis, and calcination. Moreover, compared with the conventional process of preparing NCM811 from metal sulfates, the cost saving through the proposed process was found to be approximately 265.8 $/ton.Recently, with the rapid expansion of electric vehicles, the demand for lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) has increased sharply. However, LIBs are facing challenges, which require increased energy densities and low costs ( In the present market, the Ni compound is mainly extracted from sulfide and laterite ( The raw materials conventionally used for producing LNCM cathode materials are pure metal sulfates that are extracted and purified from ores. Considering that nickel and cobalt both exist in laterite ores, and a certain amount of impurities (Mg Considering the above-mentioned facts, in this study, we carefully examined the difference between the Ni To study the solution system (Cl  The Ni/Co solution was extracted with Cyanex272 and deoiled with activated carbon to obtain a pure NiSO TThe NCM811 precursors were synthesised through co-precipitation in a 5-L continuous stirred-tank reactor (CSTR), similar to our previous study (Ma et al., 2019). The precursor solution, 4 M NaOH solution, and NH Subsequently, these precursors were mixed with LiOH·H The content of the metal ions was analysed using inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES, Optima 8300DV, PerkinElmer, USA). The contents of the Cl To fabricate the electrode, the as-prepared cathode materials were mixed with polyvinylidene fluoride and carbon black with mass ratios of 80:10:10 in The purification of the RM1 solution was achieved via extraction with Cyanex272. The extraction reaction is shown in Eq. (1), where M represents the divalent cation of Co, Cu, Mg, Mn, and Ni present in the aqueous solution; RH is the molecule of Cyanex 272 (monomeric form); and the subscripts (aq) and (org) refer to the aqueous and organic species, respectively ( In general, the extraction sequence of these metal ions is as follows: Cu ~ Mn ~ Co > Mg > Ni, the Ni and other metal ions can be separated once (  The morphology of the prepared precursors in the different anion solution systems is analysed via SEM, as shown in The spherical morphology of the precursors was preserved after calcination to form lithiated cathode materials (    The rate capabilities of the cells were tested from 0.2 to 10.0C at 2.8–4.3 V and then back to 0.2C. As shown in  In summary, the Cl The morphologies of the precursors and lithiated cathodes prepared in Ni/Co solutions (of different purities) derived from laterite are examined using SEM (   The HRTEM images and EDS spectra of the marked areas were employed to further explore the effect of impurities. A separated piece was observed in sample RM1-LNCM811, as shown in  The thermal stability of cathode material is the key index of safety evaluation for Li-ion battery. The influence of impurities on thermal stability was investigated through TG/DSC experiments. The cells charged to 4.3 V were disassembled in a glove box with an argon atmosphere to obtain the cathode electrode, then washed by dimethyl carbonate for three times, and dried in the glove box for TG/DSC tests from room temperature to 400 °C. As shown in Fig. S3 in Supplementary data, the RM2-LNCM811 electrode started to decompose at approximately 223 °C, with a relatively large exothermic peak at 253 °C. By contrast, both the initial decomposition and peak temperature of RM1-LNCM811 cathode decreased, indicating that even a small amount of impurities reduced the thermal stability of the material. This is the reason for commercial cathode materials being very restrictive on impurities. As listed in Compared with the conventional process of preparing NCM811 from metal sulfates, cost saving through the proposed process was estimated. As demonstrated in In this study, starting with Ni/Co solid residues obtained from alkaline oxidation precipitation, a high-value utilisation of laterite for preparing LNCM811 cathode materials through hydrochloric acid leaching was proposed, which was based on the carefully comparative study of different anions and purity of Ni/Co precursor solution. As verified via SEM, XRD, TEM, and electrochemical test results: (i) the presence of Cl As a result, the impurities in the NCM811 precursor prepared from the pure NiSO This work was supported by the We have read and understood your journal's policies, and we believe that the manuscript and the study comply with Elsevier's ethical requirements. This manuscript has not been published or presented elsewhere in part or in entirety and is not under consideration by another journal. All authors and the authorities where the work was conducted approve the publication of this manuscript. If accepted, this work will not be published elsewhere (in English or any other language) without the written consent of the publisher. There are no conflicts of interest to declare. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Supplementary data to this article can be available online.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at