Background
                  Forearm fractures are among the most frequently encountered orthopedic injuries in children. The maintenance of satisfactory alignment can be problematic and postreduction displacement with resultant malunion can occur.
               
                  Objectives
                  The objective of the study was to evaluate pediatric emergency medicine (PEM) physicians’ performance on forearm fracture reduction to determine the impact of a Process Improvement Intervention Program (PIIP) on postreduction displacement rates after initial reduction. The PIIP was designed to improve our PEM physicians’ skills and knowledge in how to properly apply and mold casts to better maintain the alignment of reduced forearm fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  A PIIP was implemented during 2015–2016 when orthopedic surgeons mentored postfellowship-trained PEM physicians. Patient cohorts from pre- and post-PIIP implementation were investigated and compared to evaluate the impact of the PIIP on PEM physicians’ initial fracture reduction success rates and postreduction displacement rates. Descriptive and analytical statistics including univariate and multivariate models were tested to understand changes in physicians’ performance.
               
                  Results
                  Pre- and postcohorts had similar demographic and clinical characteristics and similarly high initial reduction success rates. When distal and midshaft fracture types were combined, there was no significant difference in postreduction displacement rates between the 2 cohorts, but when stratified based on fracture type, the distal radius postcohort showed a statistically significant improvement in postreduction maintenance.
               
                  Conclusions
                  A PIIP by pediatric orthopedic surgeons did not change the PEM physicians’ initial fracture reduction success rate, but it did result in a statistically significant improvement in maintenance of reduction rates.Forearm fractures are among the most frequently encountered orthopedic injuries in children The Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) 2017 Revised Program Requirements for Graduate Medical Education in Pediatric Emergency Medicine (PEM) states: “graduating PEM fellows must attain competency in closed reduction/splinting” There are numerous orthopedic-based studies that establish initial fracture reduction success as an indicator of success for nonoperative management of forearm fractures The objectives of this study were to evaluate PEM physicians’ forearm fracture reduction success rates, and to subsequently determine: 1) whether an intensive mentoring program improves the PEM physicians’ maintenance of reduction success rates during follow-up; and 2) other factors associated with the initial reduction success and maintenance of reduction at follow-up. We conducted an interventional study that focused on pediatric forearm fracture reduction and casting performed by PEM physicians by evaluating initial reduction success and maintenance of reduction at follow-up before and after implementation of a mentoring program by our pediatric orthopedic surgeons. Our medical complex is a regional, tertiary care pediatric hospital with a level 2 trauma center, staffed by board-certified/eligible PEM physicians. The annual ED census is approximately 45,000 patients with >200 children treated each year for forearm fractures. Our hospital is not affiliated with an orthopedic residency. The current practice in our ED is for almost all forearm fractures to be reduced and casted by the attending PEM physicians. None of the attending PEM physicians in our group has had formal fracture reduction training beyond what they received during their residency and fellowship years. Approximately 25 years ago, 2 pediatric orthopedic surgeons on our hospital staff offered voluntary mentoring in fracture reduction and casting to all members of the PEM physician group at the time. This helped meet the orthopedic needs of the ED and decreased the call burden on the orthopedists. Since then, our PEM physician group has maintained an ongoing internal mentoring program with experienced members of the PEM physician group proctoring each new PEM member in techniques of fracture reduction and casting. However, no formal training program had been developed or implemented within the group until September 2015. Our initial assumption was that our PEM physicians could reduce and cast pediatric forearm fractures with results like those of orthopedic surgeons and other emergency physicians. To verify this, we compared our reduction success rates with the previously published outcomes when performed by both orthopedic surgeons and other emergency physicians. After evaluation of the precohort phase, we recognized that at baseline, when compared with published outcomes by other emergency physicians, we had a relatively high initial reduction success rate and a similar maintenance of reduction rate In collaboration with our orthopedic surgery group, we developed and implemented a PIIP. The intervention consisted of 1-on-1 mentoring of all 16 members of the PEM physician group by one of our pediatric orthopedic surgeons. This (individual) orthopedic surgeon demonstrated and reviewed proper techniques of casting to each of the 16 PEM physicians with emphasis on molding to better maintain the postreduction position of the reduced fracture. Mentoring with each individual was deemed to be successfully completed by the orthopedic surgeon when the PEM physician was able to redemonstrate a requisite level of competence and knowledge in proper casting and molding techniques. A teaching video reviewing casting and molding techniques was recorded for the PEM physicians to refer to later, if needed. To evaluate the effectiveness of the PIIP on PEM physicians’ performance, including success on patients’ initial and follow-up outcomes, we used a pre/post design to compare outcomes from 2 pediatric forearm fracture cohorts treated by the same group of PEM physicians before and after the mentoring intervention. The PIIP started on September 1, 2015 and ended on June 30, 2016 (9 months). During this time, every PEM physician in the group received a consistent level of mentoring by the same orthopedic surgeon to assure a standardized level of competence. The composition of the pre- and postcohort PEM physician groups was not identical. Three members of the precohort PEM group left before completion of the PIIP and 3 new members joined the postcohort group during the PIIP. None of the 3 new PEM physician members had undergone any additional formal training in fracture reduction and casting before joining the group, and all 3 new members participated in the PIIP mentoring. Two time periods surrounding the PIIP were used as the temporal framework for patient data extraction. Time period 1 (T1) was from August 1, 2014 to September 31, 2015 (13 months). Time period 2 (T2) was from July 1, 2016 to June 30, 2017 (12 months). Patient data from T1 and T2 formed the pre- and postintervention patient cohorts, respectively (T1 = precohort; T2 = postcohort). All PEM physicians on staff at our institution participated in the training program. All potentially eligible patients were identified using Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) billing codes 25605 (closed treatment of a distal radial and ulna fracture with manipulation), or 25565 (closed treatment of radial and ulnar shaft fracture with manipulation). Patients for the precohort were retrospectively identified from the electronic medical records of all children <18 years of age at diagnosis who had been treated in our ED during T1 for forearm fractures and had initial treatment by a PEM physician. The same patient selection criteria were applied prospectively during T2. Patients were excluded if they had any of the following: Monteggia fractures, pathologic fractures, complex intra-articular fractures, multiple traumas, or if the initial reduction attempt in the ED had been carried out by an orthopedist. Eligible patients who were followed until completion of healing, but who then sustained a repeat fracture through the same or a different site and were treated again in the ED, were considered as separate encounters for data analysis purposes. For all patients in both cohorts, information collected was paralleled and aligned with the time of the initial ED treatment, the first post-treatment orthopedic follow-up visit, and subsequent post-treatment visits. Data extracted from the electronic medical record included patient identifiers (name and medical record number), demographic characteristics (sex, age at time of fracture, and date of injury), relevant clinical characteristics at diagnosis (distal vs. midshaft fracture location), and whether the initial reduction in the ED was successful. The initial reduction was deemed successful if the fracture was reduced to a position of clinically accepted parameters based on patient and fracture characteristics. Fracture angulation, displacement, and shortening were measured for each fracture at the time of initial presentation. Additional data were collected on all patients who were seen in follow-up by one of the orthopedic surgeons within our hospital system. Data collected at the first and subsequent orthopedic visits included residual postreduction degree of angulation, percent displacement, extent of shortening, and whether unacceptable displacement had occurred since the time of initial reduction. Loss of reduction was a clinical determination made by the orthopedic surgeon at patient follow-up appointments and was dichotomized in the measurement. Each patient in the study progressed to 1 of 3 possible endpoints: 1) an operative procedure or repeat closed reduction was performed by the orthopedic surgeon to correct fractures with unsuccessful initial reductions or which had progressed to an unacceptable degree of loss of reduction; 2) alignment and callus formation noted on radiographs were deemed to have healed satisfactorily by the orthopedist and the cast was removed; or 3) the patient was lost to follow-up. Two primary outcomes were measured and analyzed in this study: 1) initial fracture reduction success rate and 2) maintenance of reduction rate (reversely, loss of reduction rate) at the first and subsequent follow-up visits. Descriptive statistics of patients’ demographic and raw fracture characteristics were conducted comparing pre- and postcohorts for all eligible fracture cases using chi-squared tests or analysis of variance. In addition, fracture complexity was calculated by adding the 3 dichotomized variables (angulation, displacement, and shortening) to form a composite score ranging from 0–3 (with a score of 0 representing a fracture with no angulation, displacement, or shortening and a score of 3 representing a fracture with angulation, displacement, and shortening). The composite score was compared between groups using Wilcoxon rank-sum tests. Comparative analyses were performed on patients who had initial reduction success and completed the first follow-up. We then compared the initial reduction success and maintenance of reduction rates of patients between pre- and postcohorts. The clinical features of the patient’s fracture (midshaft vs. distal) were introduced to stratify the sample in the univariate comparison. Reduction success at the first follow-up was also compared between the 2 cohorts using chi-squared tests and stratifying by fracture type. Initial reduction success and maintenance of reduction at follow-up were both formed into dichotomized parameters as independent outcome variables to indicate first and secondary success (initial success = 1, initial failure = 0; reduction maintained = 1, reduction lost = 0) for modeling purposes. Multivariate logistic regression models were constructed to test for pre- and postcohort changes in these 2 independent primary outcomes, adjusting for potential confounding factors. We further adopted bootstrapping methods in all models to assess the sensitivity of the original regression estimates for odds ratios (ORs), bias, and the bias-corrected 95% confidence intervals (95% CI). All statistical analyses were performed using Stata 14 software (Stata Corp., College Station, Texas). In total, 399 eligible forearm fracture cases were involved in the study (precohort n = 201, postcohort n = 198). Patients’ demographic and clinical characteristics at baseline were not statistically different between the 2 cohorts, except that the precohort had a lower proportion of displaced fractures than the postcohort ( For all fractures that were successfully reduced and seen at first follow-up (n = 344) there was no statistically significant difference regarding age, sex, fracture category, nonsummer season (October–March) injury, or fracture complexity except for percentage of being shortened ( Twelve and a half percent of the precohort patients were lost before the first follow-up, compared with only 6.4% in the postcohort ( More than 95% (192/201; 95.5%) of patients in the precohort had successful initial reductions compared with 94.9% (188/198) in the postcohort ( Boys had a higher initial success rate than girls (97.1% vs. 94.3%,), but this difference was not significant ( In total, 344 patients had an initial successful reduction and completed their first orthopedic follow-up visit. Three hundred seventeen of these patients (92.2%) maintained the reduction at their first follow-up. When the 2 cohorts were combined, we found that age group, fracture composite score, nonsummer season, sex, and fracture CPT category were not significant in discriminating the loss of reduction rate in the univariate analyses. Further comparison of initial success of reduction between those lost to the first follow-up and those followed to completion of treatment also showed no statistical difference. When both fracture clinical categories were combined, univariate analysis showed that 10.1% of patients in the precohort incurred an unacceptable loss of reduction by the time of the first follow-up visit (89.9% maintained) compared with 5.7% in the postcohort (94.3% maintained, Analysis at subsequent follow-up visits again showed that the postcohort had a lower loss of reduction rate when both fracture categories were combined. For patients who were initially reduced successfully and completed subsequent follow-up (n = 309, precohort n = 149, postcohort n = 160), an additional 10.1% of patients in the precohort went on to incur an unacceptable loss of reduction (89.9% maintained) compared with only an additional 3.7% (96.3% maintained) in the postcohort ( In the regular logistic model, likelihood of initial reduction success was associated with having a lower fracture composite score (1 [OR = 18.25 {95% CI 4.144–18.365}] or 2 [OR = 4.47 {95% CI 1.776–11.239}] compared with 3) and with being male (OR = 2.41 [95% CI 1.074–5.406]). Other factors, including fracture CPT category, age, cohort, and season, were not statistically significant in predicting initial reduction success. When bootstrapping was adopted in the logistic regression, a smaller composite score was similarly associated with higher likelihood of successful initial reduction; however, other factors, including cohort and sex, were all insignificant ( Maintenance of reduction results were analyzed by cohort, controlling for sex, age, CPT category, fracture composite score, and season of injury. Postcohort cases were more likely to maintain reduction (OR = 2.61 [95% CI 1.203–5.665] in the regular model, When children with closed forearm fractures present to EDs, delay in definitive care can occur if the ED provider is not skilled in fracture reduction and casting, if the on-call orthopedic surgeon is not able to come to the ED on a timely basis, or if there is no orthopedic surgeon available. Delay in care may result in prolongation of pain, added patient and caregiver worry, unnecessary crowding of the ED, and added costs. Postponement of definitive care with admission to the hospital or transfer to another facility may in turn necessitate utilization of an operating room, which further adds to overall costs of care Outcomes of pediatric forearm fracture reductions carried out by emergency physicians have only recently been published. Two studies compared forearm fracture reduction outcomes by PEM physicians with those of upper level orthopedic residents. Pershad et al. showed that 9% of forearm fractures reduced by PEM physicians and 3% of fractures reduced by orthopedic residents required remanipulation In 2017, Milner et al. compared forearm fracture reduction outcomes achieved by PEM physicians with outcomes achieved by pediatric orthopedic surgeons Results of the first phase of our study showed that our initial reduction success rate (95.2%) compared well with other published reports. Initial reduction, however, is only 1 step in the process of treating fractures. Maintenance of the reduction can prove challenging, as is evidenced by the wide range of displacement rates (7–64%) cited by previous authors, though most have settled on a rate closer to 30% In a prospective randomized controlled trial of children with completely displaced distal radius fractures whose fractures were reduced by orthopedic surgeons, McLauchlan et al. noted that 21.2% in the closed reduction group had to undergo a second procedure because of an unacceptable position Fortunately, not all subsequent displacement progresses to unacceptable alignment or requires repeat reduction or operative repair. Depending on the age of the patient, the location of the fracture, and the extent of displacement, many children will undergo remodeling and will ultimately progress to satisfactory outcomes. In a 2015 prospective study by Assadollahi et al. of 135 distal radius fractures that underwent closed reduction and cast immobilization by orthopedic surgeons, displacement occurred in 28.8% of fractures; however, only 7.4% of fractures required a second procedure Although numerous factors have been cited as contributing to the risk for displacement, we focused on trying to improve 2 factors that we could control through training: 1) making a well-formed cast and 2) emphasizing the importance of molding to prevent recurrence of fracture displacement. It is our impression that we achieved our goal. Our statistical models suggest that this PIIP was associated with decreased loss of fracture reduction not only at the initial follow-up but also through completion of all subsequent visits with the orthopedic surgeon. We contend that PEM physicians should be able to definitively reduce and cast most forearm fractures in children. We were able to demonstrate that a focused mentoring program of post–fellowship-trained PEM physicians by orthopedic surgeons improved fracture reduction maintenance. Adoption of this model may lead to more efficient delivery of highly skilled treatment for pediatric fractures by emergency physicians, thus better addressing the patient’s pain, reducing delays in care, decreasing patient and caregiver worry, lessening ED crowding, and reducing cost. The study was pre- and postinterventional comparison in nature, but no patient or physician randomization was involved. Only a single center was involved and some of the data were retrospective. The composition of the pre- and postcohort PEM physician groups was not identical. As mentioned in the Methods, 3 members of the precohort PEM group left before the PIIP was completed and 3 new members joined the postcohort group. However, none of the new PEM physicians had undergone any additional formal training in fracture reduction and casting before joining the group. In addition, all 3 new members participated in the PIIP mentoring. Thus, physician bias was minimized. Management decisions about the adequacy of alignment, the need for reintervention, and the need for follow-up visits were made at the discretion of each treating orthopedic surgeon. A single pediatric orthopedic surgeon evaluated all the pre- and postreduction radiographs in both cohorts. Although this evaluator was extensively involved in the design and analysis of the study, the fracture measurements (displacement, angulation, and shortening) were performed in a blinded fashion, so no management decision bias is expected. The nature of the practice of emergency medicine is such that a PEM physician’s breadth of knowledge and procedural skillset must overlap with many specialties. PEM physicians should be able to definitively reduce and cast most forearm fractures in children. Not all current graduates of PEM fellowships, however, are given the opportunity to acquire competency in this skillset during their training. Until all PEM training programs can ensure that their fellows have more hands-on training in fracture reduction and casting, post-training collaboration between dedicated orthopedic surgeons and PEM physicians can serve as a mechanism for PEM physicians to master this skill. Our study demonstrates that mentoring of postgraduate PEM physicians by their orthopedic surgery physician colleagues, with focus on proper cast application techniques, can result in improvement in loss of reduction rates and subsequent long-term clinical outcomes.  Forearm fractures are among the most frequently encountered orthopedic injuries in children. Having pediatric emergency medicine (PEM) physicians expertly reduce and cast pediatric forearm fractures in the emergency department (ED), particularly in nonacademic health care settings, reduces delays in patient care, decreases ED wait times, more promptly addresses the patient’s pain, increases parental perceived satisfaction in care, and decreases costs. Although the 2017 Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education Revised Program Requirements for Graduate Medical Education in Pediatric Emergency Medicine state that “graduating PEM fellows must attain competency in closed reduction/splinting,” this is a skill that is not being uniformly taught among all PEM fellowship programs. Mentoring of postgraduate PEM physicians by their orthopedic surgeon colleagues, with a focus on proper cast application techniques, is a means through which postgraduate physicians can acquire this expert skill even if they did not have the opportunity to learn it during their training. At baseline, PEM physicians were able to reduce forearm fractures with a success rate comparable to that of orthopedic surgeons. However, their maintenance of reduction rate was not as good as that of orthopedists. This study showed that a process improvement mentoring program of PEM physicians by orthopedic surgeons resulted in significantly improved maintenance of reduction rates, with maintenance rates approaching those of orthopedic surgeons. Adoption of this model may lead to more efficient delivery of expert treatment of pediatric fractures by emergency physicians, thereby more efficiently addressing patients’ pain, reducing delays in care, decreasing patient and caregiver worry, lessening ED crowding, and reducing costs. TLH conceived the study, obtained institutional review board approval, and supervised data collection. TLH and RW designed the process improvement intervention program, mentored the study participants, and supervised the conduct of the participants. JM and BP provided statistical advice on study design. JM provided statistical analysis of the data. TLH drafted the manuscript and RW, JM, and BP contributed substantially to its revision. TLH, RW, and JM created the figures and tables. TLH takes responsibility for the entire article. We thank Paul Amoroso,