Cleaner and lower-cost recovery and separation of samarium(III) and cobalt(II) from waste SmCo magnets can effectively alleviate supply risks of the strategic metals. Based on this goal, a family of renewable, low-cost, biocompatible, non-toxic fatty acid-based ionic liquids (FAILs), including [N1888][DA], [N1888][LA] and [N1888][PA] were synthesized and developed for the separation of Sm(III)/Co(II) from samarium-cobalt simulated solution. The effect factors, i.e. equilibrium time, FAIL molar concentration, salting-out agent concentration and initial pH of aqueous solution were investigated. The extraction mechanism was proposed to be ion association by slope analysis and FT-IR. Under the optimized extraction conditions, a higher purity CoCl2 (99.5%) product was obtained by a simple extraction-stripping-washing process with the consumption of Na2C2O4 and NH3·H2O. The produced salty wastewater with lower concentration from the process could be recycled. Sm2O3 with a purity of 99% were obtained by roasting the Sm2(C2O4)3 at 800 °C for two hours. The whole process was simple and sustainable, illustrating its potential for industrial applications.Samarium cobalt (SmCo) and neodymium iron-boron (NdFeB) permanent magnets with excellent magnetic performances have wide applications in the fields of electric vehicles, microwave communications, instrumentation and other energy applications ( Hydrometallurgy is widely used as a sustainable and efficient process for the recycling of waste SmCo magnets ( Ionic liquid (IL)-based extraction has become a potential separation strategy for the recycling of waste SmCo magnets due to their unique properties, such as low melting point (<100 °C), adjustable functional group, negligible vapor pressure and low flammability ( Because fatty acids are widely present in biomass and have the advantage of biocompatibility, in recent years, some environmentally friendly ILs prepared from long-chain saturated and unsaturated fatty acids have attracted widespread attention ( Based on highly hydrophobic cation of [N1888] and saturated long-chain fatty acid, a series of ILs were synthesized. These FAILs exhibited stable, biocompatible, nontoxic, good lipophilicity and hydrophobicity ( In The pH was measured by a pHS-3C digital pH meter (the accuracy is ± 0.01 pH) manufactured by Shanghai Rex Instruments Factory. The concentrations of Sm and Co in aqueous phase were determined by Thermo scientific iCAP 6500 series inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) instrument in argon ( All the fatty acid-based ILs (FAILs) were prepared at a laboratory scale via one pot synthesis procedure using the acid-base neutralization reaction because it was suitable for a larger scale preparation (    To optimize the extraction procedure, the effects of equilibrium time, aqueous solution pH and FAIL molar concentration and salting-out agent concentration were investigated. Unless otherwise noted, the experiment was conducted at 298 ± 1 K and aqueous phase pH of 5.7. 5 mL aqueous solution containing Sm (0.01 mol/L) and Co (0.01 mol/L) was equilibrated with 5 mL FAIL diluted in 260# kerosene, i.e. the volumetric phase ratio of organic/aqueous (O/A) = 1/1. Sodium chloride was used as a salting-out In order to optimize the process of Sm(III)/Co(II) separation, the FAIL concentration in the organic phase was adjusted ( Organic acid anion functionalized ILs such as acid-base coupling bifunctional ILs (ABC-BILs) were recommended for REEs separation, all of them were sensitive to the pH values in aqueous solutions ( It is necessary to determine the equilibrium time for the separation of Sm(III) and Co(II) using FAILs prior to the extraction experiment. To that end, the effect of kinetics on the separation of Sm(III)/Co(II) was further studied. As can be seen in Slope method is commonly used to investigate the mechanism of IL based extraction of metal ions ( FT-IR was employed to further confirm the extraction mechanism for Sm(III). As can be seen in Similar results were also reported in the extraction of REEs with [N1888][P507], [N1888][CA12] and [N1888][CA100] et al. These extraction mechanisms were indicated to be not cation exchange but ion association ( In our previous investigations, oxalic acid and sodium oxalate were used for stripping and regenerating of IL extraction systems, and the rare earth oxide could be directly obtained by calcination, which shortened the separation process and effectively reduced the acid-base consumptions ( A complete flowsheet for the separation of Sm(III)/Co(II) from waste SmCo magnets simulated solution was developed in In this paper, FAILs was successfully used to separate Sm(III)/Co(II) in simulated solution from waste samarium-cobalt magnet. The effective separation of Sm(III)/Co(II) could be achieved by optimizing the conditions of the extraction. Slope analysis and FT-IR demonstrated that the extraction mechanism of Sm(III) by FAIL was ion association. Stripping could be carried out with HCl and H Qianwen Chen and Xiaoqi Sun designed the research, analyzed the data, and wrote the paper; Qianwen Chen performed the research; Qianwen Chen, Shuainan Ni, Guanghua Ai, Tao Zhang, Xiaoqi Sun participated in data collection and discussion. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work is supported by Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: