An easy-to-use technique is described for correcting the volume change caused by sampling during kinetic studies of a reaction of any order. The method is not restricted to a fixed sample interval nor assumes an unchanging rate constant. Equations are derived for pseudo zero-order and first-order reactions. Experimental data from the leaching of a gold/silver alloy in cyanide solutions and from the cementation of silver on copper are used to illustrate the implementation of the correction factor.The most common method employed in the study of hydrometallurgical reaction kinetics involves withdrawing solution samples with time and analysing for the species of interest. Assuming the change in volume due to sampling is negligible, the rate equation below is then used to describe the kinetics of the heterogenous reaction, In order to ensure the validity of Eq.  Two approaches were then adopted by Later, the authors furthered the work represented by Eq. Whilst presenting a functional approach to data treatment, the biggest limitation to the use of Eq. Interest in correcting for the cumulative effect of sampling when studying hydrometallurgical reactions appears to have waned since 1975. There is no denying that the far easier method of dealing with the issue is to engineer the situation such that the effect of sampling is negligible. However, when this cannot be achieved, the simpler method described in the current paper enables volume correction calculations to be performed. The approach is particularly useful for leaching and cementation reactions where the potential for the reaction to be influenced by mass transfer means the careful examiner should always use a rotating disc to determine the reaction kinetics. Thus, without the complication of shrinking particles, one is interested in the magnitude of the rate constant as well as any deviations from ideal pseudo zero- or first-order kinetics, the latter being indicative of phenomena such as changing reaction area due to blocking of the reacting surface. All experiments were performed using rotating discs mounted on an apparatus described previously ( The gold leaching experiments were performed using a 98% gold/2% silver disc of diameter 3.5 Zero-order reactions result when the rate of reaction is independent of the concentration of the reactant in the aqueous phase. True zero-order processes are rare, but many reactions can be categorised as pseudo zero-order. This behaviour results when there is no noticeable change in the concentration of the reactants in solution during the course of the reaction. To illustrate this point, consider the leaching of gold in alkaline cyanide solutions, shown in Eq. That the reaction is pseudo zero-order means the integrated form of the rate equation, Eq.  It can be concluded that non-linearity of the data is the direct result of a reduction in the reaction volume. The line of best fit applied to all but the last two data points gives a reasonable fit to the data, producing a rate value of 6.8 The simplest method to correct for volume changes during a reaction is to recognise that volume is not a continuous function. Following the removal of one sample and just prior to the taking of the next, the volume is constant. In the case of a heterogenous pseudo zero-order reaction following rate Eq. With sampling, it should be apparent that no volume correction is required for the first sample. But with the second sample, taken after time interval Δ Ideally the purpose of a correction factor for volume change would be to calculate the “true” concentration, C An obvious weakness with this method of volume correction is that it relies upon the accuracy of the values of Eq. Using the sample correction derived above, the data presented in As shown in The great majority of cementation reactions and some leaching reactions show first-order kinetics or, where the concentration of one reactant is held constant, pseudo first-order kinetics. For example, the kinetics of silver cementation on copper is followed by measuring the concentration of silver, and hence It is generally accepted ( A similar procedure can be adopted for volume correction in first-order systems to that derived above for zero order. To simplify the following discussion, P Hence, calculating all the values of  The paper describes a technique where changes in volume due to sampling can be implemented when studying kinetics in the laboratory with small cells or batch reactors. The crux of the paper is to account for volume reduction via a “time correction factor”,