A rare case of trans-triquetral dorsal perilunate dislocation is described. It differs from the Mayfield and Johnson theory of progressive perilunar instability in greater arc injuries which states that the injury passes from the radial to the ulnar carpal bones and soft tissues in stages. This injury supports the concept of a reverse greater arc injury from ulnar to radial being possible with the radial carpal bones being spared in some cases.According to Mayfield and Johnson's classification of greater arc fracture dislocations of perilunate carpal injuries, the injury starts from the radial carpal bones and soft tissues and then extends to the ulnar side of the carpus with increasing magnitude of injury ( We report a patient who sustained a wrist injury resulting in trans-triquetral perilunate dislocation with sparing of the scaphoid, capitate and hamate bones. The surgical treatment and clinical outcome are discussed. A 30 year-old right-handed man sustained an acute right wrist injury in a traffic accident in 1997. As he lost consciousness after the accident and had retrograde amnesia, the exact mechanism of wrist injury could not be recalled. The X-rays showed a trans-triquetral dorsal perilunate fracture dislocation associated with avulsion fracture of the radial and ulnar styloids ( At four-year follow-up, wrist motion was satisfactory with 60째 of palmar flexion, 70째 of dorsiflexion, full supination and pronation, but with a mild decrease in radial and ulnar deviation. The uninjured wrist could achieve 70째 of palmar flexion and 85째 of dorsiflexion. The grip strength of his right hand was 20 The mechanism of the greater arc injury is hyperextension, ulnar deviation and intercarpal supination of the wrist. The dorsal radial lip of the distal radius impinges on the waist of the scaphoid resulting in trans-scaphoid perilunate dislocation (Stage I). It further impacts on the body of the capitate and causes a trans-scaphoid, trans-capitate perilunate dislocation (Stage II) ( Our literature search suggests that an isolated trans-triquetral perilunate dislocation, i.e. an isolated ulnar carpal injury, with intact radial carpal bones has never been reported in the English literature. The injury described above would suggest that a greater arc injury can start ulnarly and progress radially.