The incorporation of reduced graphene oxide (rGO) nanomaterials into scaffolds structure can be explored to enhance the properties of these 3D matrices in bone regeneration applications. However, the weak water solubility and poor colloidal stability of rGO have hindered its incorporation in blends aimed to produce scaffolds by 3D printing. Furthermore, rGO is generally obtained by treating graphene oxide (GO) with hydrazine hydrate, which is a highly hazardous reducing agent. To overcome these problems, herein a novel environmentally-friendly method was developed to assemble 3D printed scaffolds incorporating rGO. Such was achieved through the in situ reduction mediated by l-Ascorbic acid of the GO already present on tricalcium phosphate/gelatin/chitosan scaffolds. The scaffolds functionalized with rGO through the in situ method (TGC_irGO) displayed enhanced wettability and improved mechanical properties without impairing their porosity when compared to their equivalents functionalized with GO and non-functionalized scaffolds (TGC_GO and TGC, respectively). Moreover, the TGC_irGO scaffolds displayed an improved calcium deposition at their surface and an enhanced alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, along 21 days of incubation. Additionally, scaffolds also displayed antimicrobial activity without compromising osteoblasts’ viability and proliferation. Such features reveal the potential of the TGC_irGO scaffolds for bone tissue regeneration applications.Graphene oxide (GO) is a 2D material composed of an oxygenated graphitic lattice [ Despite of the excellent properties of GO, the reduction of this material (a process that intends to restore its graphitic lattice by removing the oxygen-functional groups) can further enhance its mechanical properties and osteogenic potential [ Herein, a blend of tricalcium phosphate/gelatin/chitosan/GO was used to print the 3D scaffolds, that were subsequently immersed in Alizarin Red S, alkaline phosphatase, chitosan medium molecular weight (190 000–310 000 Da; degree of deacetylation: 83.35% ± 0.23), Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM-F12), ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), diethanolamine, gelatin 160 bloom, glutaraldehyde 25% (v/v), LB broth, hydrochloric acid (HCl), TCP and the Gel/CH were combined at an approximate ratio of 80/20 (w/w) to produce the TGC_irGO scaffolds ( For comparative purposes, TGC_GO and TGC scaffolds were also produced. The TGC_GO scaffolds were produced following the above described protocol but were not subjected to the The cytotoxic profile of the scaffolds towards normal human osteoblast (hOB) cells was evaluated through the MTS assay [ Cell adhesion at the surface of the scaffolds was evaluated by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). In brief, hOB cells were seeded (40 × 10 The cell distribution within the scaffolds was characterized through confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM). In brief, hOB cells (40 × 10 The capacity of scaffolds to promote calcium deposition by hOB cells was evaluated through an ARS staining method, following a protocol previously optimized by our group [ Then, the ARS adsorbed on scaffolds was quantified by eluting it with acetic acid (1 mL; 10% (v/v)) under shaking for 30 min. Thereupon, the samples were vortexed for 30 s and the liquid phase was heated at 85 °C for 10 min. Afterwards, the samples were centrifuged at 14 000 g, for 25 min and at RT, followed by neutralization of the supernatant (500 μL) with ammonium hydroxide (200 μL; 10% (v/v)). Finally, the absorbance was determined at 405 nm using a microplate reader (Biorad xMark microplate spectrophotometer). The ARS concentration was then determined using a standard curve. The ALP activity of hOB cultured in contact with 3D scaffolds was evaluated as described elsewhere [ The ALP activity was determined by incubating the samples’ supernatant (20 μL) with 60 μL of a substrate solution (0.2% The total DNA content was quantified using the Quant-iT PicoGreen Kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) as recommended by the manufacturer. Briefly, 100 μL of the PicoGreen reagent (1:200 dilution of the PicoGreen reagent in 1X TE Buffer) was incubated with an equal volume of the cell's lysate for 5 min, in the dark. Afterwards, the fluorescence was measured in a microplate reader using an excitation and emission wavelengths of 485 and 535 nm, respectively. Samples' dsDNA content was then determined by using a standard curve.  One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with the Newman-Keuls post hoc test was used for the analysis of the obtained results. A The fabrication process used to produce the TGC_irGO scaffolds is schematically represented in The suitability of the The surface morphology of the scaffolds was also characterized through the acquisition of SEM images. The TGC, TGC_GO and TGC_irGO scaffolds presented a similar architecture, macroporosity and roughness on their surface ( The chemical composition of the produced scaffolds was also characterized by FTIR analysis. The spectra of the powdered scaffolds revealed the characteristic peaks of the chemical bonds present on TCP (P After confirming the successful production of TGC_irGO scaffolds, the mechanical properties of this 3D structure were compared to those of TGC_GO and TGC scaffolds. The mechanical resistance is of paramount importance for scaffolds to maintain, replace or improve the bone tissue functions [ Therefore, the compressive strength (C Furthermore, scaffolds also displayed a higher elasticity (lower YM values) than that found in the native bone (100–2000 MPa; Scaffolds swelling capacity is essential for their application in bone regeneration. The absorption of fluids promotes the expansion of the polymeric matrix, leading to an increase of the scaffolds pore size, which in turn facilitates cellular internalization and the diffusion of nutrients and waste along the scaffolds structure. However, a continuous swelling must be avoided in order to prevent the loss of scaffolds’ mechanical integrity as well as induce compressive stress to the surrounding tissue, causing pain to the patient [ The swelling behaviour of the 3D printed scaffolds was then investigated through their incubation in PBS during 12 h ( The scaffolds surface wettability may influence the biological response of the implanted materials, affecting the protein adsorption and cell adhesion [ The results obtained revealed that TGC scaffolds exhibit a WCA value of ≈ 20°, demonstrating a super hydrophilic character. Such value is attributed to the presence of hydrophilic groups on CH and Gel backbones ( Scaffolds porosity has a remarkable effect on cells' infiltration, proliferation and growth. Moreover, the interconnected pores can facilitate the diffusion of Ca A liquid displacement method was employed to analyse the total porosity of the scaffolds ( The biodegradation profile of the scaffolds is a crucial factor for their long-term application in bone regeneration. In this regard, scaffolds’ degradation must be proportional to the new bone formation rate, without compromising the stability of the construct nor the integrity of the tissue at the injured site [ The degradation profile of the produced scaffolds in PBS containing lysozyme (an enzyme found in human serum) was then studied ( During the first days of incubation, all the scaffolds suffered an initial weight loss ( The ability of scaffolds’ surface to promote the deposition of phosphate and calcium ions in the form of hydroxyapatite crystals (Ca Thus, scaffolds biomineralization capacity was studied over a period of 21 days in SBF ( The extensive physico-chemical characterization performed in this study revealed that the TGC_irGO scaffolds present an improved wettability and mechanical properties in comparison to the TGC_GO and TGC scaffolds. Moreover, all scaffold formulations displayed a suitable porosity and swelling behaviour as well as adequate rates of minerals’ deposition and degradation profile. To characterize the cytotoxic profile of the produced scaffolds and their degradation products, an MTS assay was performed [ The results revealed that hOB cells remained viable when in contact with the scaffolds ( Furthermore, hOB cells adhesion to scaffolds surface was also analysed through the acquisition of the SEM images ( The ability of cells to be internalized into the produced 3D printed scaffolds was also analysed ( The ARS staining was performed to evaluate the matrix mineralization activity performed by hOB cells incubated with the scaffolds [ For all the produced scaffolds, the determined ARS concentration increased along time ( ALP is an important early osteogenic and biochemical marker of osteoblasts’ differentiation [ Overall, hOB cells incubated with TGC_GO and TGC_irGO scaffolds presented a higher ALP activity than those incubated with the TGC scaffolds ( Bone implants failures are prompted by bacterial infections caused by microorganisms, that induce the formation of biofilms on the surface of the implants. These biofilms can compromise the successful application and function of these devices. Moreover, bacterial infections lead to prolonged hospitalization periods, increased costs, and in extreme cases, patient death [ Therefore, the antibacterial activity of the produced scaffolds against Scaffolds displayed a more pronounced antibacterial activity against In this work, a novel method was developed to perform the The authors would like to acknowledge Professor Abílio Silva for the help with the mechanical assays. This work was supported by The following is the supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at