Monodisperse Fe3O4 nanocrystals with different size and morphology have been successfully fabricated by a facile high temperature reflow method. The presented materials were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, transmission electron microscope (TEM), selection area electron diffraction (SAED) and magnetic property measurement system (MPMS). The results showed that the as-prepared materials have face-centered cubic structures. Oleic acid plays a key role in the dispersion of Fe3O4 nanocrystals. The cubic and octahedral nanocrystals are enclosed by {100} and {111} lattice planes. The MPMS measurements show that magnetic properties are closely related to the sizes of the materials, and there is a stronger dipolar interaction between Fe3O4 nanocrystals with larger sizes. The controllable magnetic property and good dispersion endow the as-synthesized materials with great potential applications in magnetic fluid fields including sealing, medical equipment, mineral processing and other aspects.In recent years, the design and synthesis of magnetic materials with different sizes and shapes have stimulated great research interests, because the physical and chemical properties of the materials depend not only on their composition but also on their structures, sizes, and morphologies In the present work, we designed a facile approach for fabricating monodisperse Fe All the chemicals used in this experiment were of analytical grade and used as-received without any further purification. 1-Octadecene (90%) was purchased from Alfa Aesar Company. Ferric chloride hexahydrate (FeCl Iron-oleate complex can be obtained by the reaction of FeCl In a typical preparation, 2.78 g of iron-oleate, 10 mL 1-octadecene, and 0.64 mL oleic acid were mixed in the three-neck round-bottom reaction flask under flowing N The XRD patterns were collected on a powder X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku D/MAX-2500/PC) with a Cu K XRD patterns of samples prepared with different reaction conditions are shown in In order to further characterize the surface state, FTIR was used to detect the surface structures of the products. The corresponding FTIR spectra are shown in TEM and SAED were employed to examine the detailed structure and morphology of Fe In order to further confirm the morphology of the samples, the high-magnification TEM characterizations were carried out. From Magnetic measurements on all Fe From the inset of To gain insight into the magnetic behavior of the Fe The inverse curves of FC susceptibility as a function of the temperature for S1-S4 are plotted in From In summary, the present work demonstrates a facile approach to fabrication of monodisperse Fe The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from by the