To limit the adverse effect of serpentine on the flotation of pyrite, lemon yellow (LY) was used as a potential depressant for serpentine, and the depression effects and mechanisms were systematically investigated in this paper. Micro-flotation results revealed that the addition of LY could efficiently limit the detrimental effect of serpentine on pyrite flotation with a maximum increase of pyrite recovery from 14% to 96% at pH 9.0. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis indicated that LY adsorbed on serpentine surface through physical interaction, and electrostatic interaction was considered as the main driving force. Zeta potential results demonstrated that the serpentine surface charge changed from positive to negative after interacting with LY. Thus, the electrostatic attraction between pyrite and serpentine was converted to electrostatic repulsion. Adsorption measurements showed that the adsorption density of potassium butyl xanthate (PBX) on pyrite surface regained after the addition of LY in the presence of serpentine, and thus the pyrite floatability was restored.Serpentine is a stratified magnesium rich phyllosilicate that often associates with metal sulfide ore deposits as the gangue mineral [ To address the problem of the flotation separation of sulfides from serpentine and other Mg-bearing silicate minerals, polysaccharide depressants such as carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), Lemon yellow (LY) (C In this research, LY was introduced as a flotation modifier to separate pyrite from serpentine with potassium butyl xanthate (PBX) as collector. Flotation results showed its remarkable depression effect on serpentine, and the depression mechanism was analyzed through zeta potential measurements, adsorption measurements, and XPS studies. The pure mineral samples of pyrite and serpentine were obtained from Donghai, Jiangsu Province, and Yunfu, Guangdong Province of China, respectively. The samples were crushed to −1 mm using a laboratory roll crusher and grounded in an agate mortar to the designed fraction. Size fractions of -150 + 74 μm pyrite and −10 μm serpentine were collected for flotation tests, and XPS tests. The size fractions of pyrite and serpentine used in zeta potential measurements were −2 μm. Besides, the −38 μm pyrite with a BET surface area of 3.16 m Potassium butyl xanthate (PBX, Macklin Biochemical., Ltd., Shanghai, China) and methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC, Tianzhuo Flotation Reagent Co., Ltd., Jian, Jiangxi, China) were used as collector and frother in this study, respectively. LY (with purity > 99.0%) and sodium hexametaphosphate (SHMP) used in this study were purchased from Guangfu Fine Chemical Research Institute, Tianjin, China. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and hydrochloric acid (HCl) were used as pH regulators for all experiments, and both of them were obtained from Zhuzhou Flotation Reagent Co., Ltd., Hunan Province of China. All reagents used in this study were of analytical grade. Distilled water with a resistivity of 18.2 MΩ.cm at 25 ℃ was adopted for all the experiments. FTIR study of LY was performed and the result was exhibited in Flotation of single minerals was performed with a laboratory mechanical agitation flotation machine (XFGC Zeta potential measurements on pyrite and serpentine with and without the addition of LY were performed on a Coulter Delsa 440sx Zeta Potential Analyzer (Malvern, Instruments Ltd, United Kingdom). The suspension for measurement was prepared by dispersing 40 mg mineral samples into 40 mL of the KNO The adsorption of PBX on pyrite and serpentine was investigated on a UV-2001 ultraviolet spectrophotometer (Rayleigh, Beijing, China) with the absorbance at 300 nm. For each test, 1 g pure pyrite was added into 100 mL distilled water in a 250 mL Erlenmeyer flask. The suspension was stirred evenly after adjusting pH to the desired value. Then LY and PBX were added according to the reagent condition and conditioning time. After that, the suspension was centrifuged and filtered, and the filtered liquor was collected for adsorption measurements. The PBX concentration in supernatant was measured and calculated based on the standard curve of PBX which was obtained by different concentration of PBX, and the adsorbed amount of PBX on mineral surface was calculated based on the difference between the PBX initial concentration and residual concentration in the solution. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy was utilized to determine the chemical compositions of mineral samples. For each test, 1 g serpentine was added into LY solution in a 40 ml beaker to prepare the slurry. The slurry pH and the LY concentration were adjusted to the desired value according to the flotation conditions, and then the slurry was magnetically stirred for 5 min. The slurry was then centrifuged and the solid particles were rinsed 3 times by the distilled water. After which, the samples were dried in a vacuum drying oven. The XPS tests were performed on a K- Flotation studies of single minerals were performed first to investigate the effects of pulp pH, LY concentration, SHMP concentration on the flotation of pyrite-serpentine system. And the results are shown in  The effects of LY and SHMP concentration on the flotation performance of pyrite at pH 9.0 in the presence of serpentine are exhibited in Zeta potential measurements were performed on pyrite and serpentine in the absence and presence of LY. The results are shown in Adsorption measurements were conducted to detect the adsorption density of PBX on mineral surfaces under different conditions. In order to get a better understanding of the interaction mechanism of LY and serpentine, the surface characteristics of serpentine samples before and after the treatment of LY were analyzed using XPS. Results of the surface analysis are exhibited in As shown in  In the molecule structure of LY (see Based on the abovementioned analyses, the schematic illustration of the effect of LY on the separation of pyrite from serpentine at pH 9.0 is listed in The utilization of LY as a potential depressant to selectively separate pyrite from fine serpentine was systematically investigated in this paper. Based on the results of micro-flotation tests, zeta potential measurements, adsorption measurements and XPS measurements above, conclusions could be reached as follows. Fine serpentine can depress the floatability of pyrite significantly due to the serpentine slimes when using PBX as the collector. However, the floatability of pyrite was restored through using LY as the depressant. According to the zeta potential measurements and XPS measurements, LY can adsorb on serpentine surface by electrostatic interaction, and decreased the zeta potential of serpentine significantly but had a negligible influence on that of pyrite. At pH 9.0, both pyrite and serpentine were negatively charged; the electrostatic attraction between pyrite and serpentine was converted to electrostatic repulsion; and the hetero-coagulation between two minerals was broken. Adsorption measurements also showed that the presence of serpentine slimes prevented the adsorption of PBX on pyrite surface. However, the adsorption density of PBX on pyrite surface was regained with the addition of LY, thereby achieving good flotation improvement. Therefore, LY is likely to be a reagent of great significance in the separation of pyrite-serpentine system. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors acknowledge the support of the