Fast GC–MS with narrow-bore columns combined with effective sample preparation technique (QuEChERS method) was used for evaluation of various calibration approaches in pesticide residues analysis. In order to compare the performance of analyte protectants (APs) with matrix-matched standards calibration curves of selected pesticides were searched in terms of linearity of responses, repeatability of measurements and reached limit of quantifications utilizing the following calibration standards in the concentration range 1–500ngmL−1(the equivalent sample concentration 1–500μgkg−1): in neat solvent (acetonitrile) with/without addition of APs, matrix-matched standards with/without addition of APs. For APs results are in a good agreement with matrix-matched standards. To evaluate errors of determination of concentration synthetic samples at concentration level of pesticides 50ngmL−1 (50μgkg−1) were analyzed and quantified using the above given standards. For less troublesome pesticides very good estimation of concentration was obtained utilizing APs, while for more troublesome pesticides such as methidathion, malathion, phosalone and deltamethrin significant overestimation reaching up to 80% occurred. According to presented results APs can be advantegously used for “easy” pesticides determination. For “difficult” pesticides an alternative calibration approach is required for samples potentially violating MRLs. An example of real sample measurement is shown. In this paper also the use of internal standards (triphenylphosphate (TPP) and heptachlor (HEPT)) for peak areas normalization is discussed in terms of repeatability of measurements and quantitative data obtained. TPP normalization provided slightly better results than the use of absolute peak areas measurements on the contrary to HEPT.According to the status of all active pesticide substances on the European Union (EU) market A breakthrough in the field of sample preparation is the QuEChERS approach “quick, easy, cheap, effective, rugged, and safe” that was recently developed In the field of analytical separation and detection there is an ongoing development towards faster methods utilizing liquid chromatography (LC) or gas chromatography (GC) coupled to mass spectrometry (MS) Despite of great efforts in the research of GC amenable pesticide residues analysis the issues are matrix effects and mainly matrix-induced chromatographic response enhancement. When a real sample is injected, the matrix components tend to block active sites in the GC inlet and column, thus reducing losses of susceptible analytes caused by adsorption or degradation on these active sites. This phenomenon results in higher analyte signals in matrix-containing, versus matrix-free solutions Anastassiades et al. The aim of this work was to evaluate different calibration approaches based particularly on matrix-matched standardization and application of analyte protectants. In this work, fast GC–MS method in combination with QuEChERS sample preparation technique was used for the analysis of selected pesticides in non-fatty food (apple matrix) with the stress on ultra-trace concentration levels. The goal was to provide direct comparison of calibration data, such as linearity of calibration lines and LOQs, as well as to show precision and accuracy of quantitative analysis on synthetic and real samples using matrix-matched standards and APs. Standards of pesticides and internal standards (I.S.) were obtained from various sources (Bayer, Leverkusen, Germany; Dr. Ehrensdorfer, Augsburg, Germany; Cheminova, Harboore, Denmark; Ciba-Geigy, Basel, Switzerland; Shering, Kenilworth, NJ, USA; Dow AgroScience, Indianapolis, IN, USA; Agrovita, Ivanka pri Dunaji, Slovak Republic) and were of purity >96%. List of pesticides and I.S. is given in the Analyte protectants (APs) which were used for experiment: 3-ethoxy-1,2-propanediol (98%), All stock solutions were stored at −18 Magnesium sulfate (MgSO The apples with peel (samples – non-treated with pesticides; real sample) were mixed with blender Braun MX 2050 (Braun GmbH, Kronberg, Germany). In the original QuEChERS procedure For calibration seven concentration levels of pesticides were used: 1; 5; 10; 50; 100; 250 and 500 MeCN standard and matrix-matched standard solutions without APs were prepared: 925 MeCN standard and matrix-matched standard solutions with APs were prepared: 900 MeCN standard and matrix-matched standard solutions with/without APs for synthetic sample were prepared at concentration level of 50 MeCN standard and matrix-matched standard solutions with/without APs for real sample were prepared at concentration level of 10 GC–MS measurements were performed on an Agilent 6890N GC system coupled to an Agilent 5973 mass-selective detector equipped with a programmed temperature vaporizer (PTV) and an Agilent 7683 autoinjector (2004) and on an Agilent 6890N GC system coupled to an Agilent 5975 mass-selective detector equipped with a PTV and an Agilent 7683B autoinjector (2007) (Agilent, Avondale, PA, USA). MS with electron impact ionization (EI) mode (70 To evaluate suitability of APs to be routinely used in pesticide residues analytical practice, different experiments with testing calibration solutions prepared in different ways were carried out. Experiments with solutions of pesticide standards prepared in a neat solvent (MeCN) were performed for better estimation of matrix effects intensity. Experiments with matrix-matched standards were performed for the direct comparison of matrix-matched standardization (commonly used method) with a novel approach—utilization of APs. Experiments with matrix-matched standards with addition of APs were performed to evaluate the influence of combination of matrix and APs on quality of quantitative analysis, as the combination of both (matrix and APs) might have even stronger effect for analyte responses enhancement. All experiments were evaluated utilizing absolute signals – peak areas and normalized peak areas by two different I.S. – TPP When QuEChERS method is used for sample preparation residual water is present in the final MeCN extract in the ranges 2–14% In order to evaluate linearity of calibration curves utilizing different calibration standards of interest, calibration experiments were performed utilizing the following calibration standards: – calibration standards in neat acetonitrile; – calibration standards in acetonitrile with addition of APs; – matrix-matched calibration standards; – matrix-matched calibration standards with addition of APs. Calibration standards were prepared at the following concentration levels: 1, 5, 10, 50, 100, 250, and 500 In Repeatability of measurements expressed as relative standard deviations (RSDs) of peak areas measurements and normalized peak areas are presented in In In order to evaluate the trueness of quantitative analysis results utilizing different calibration standards experiments with synthetic samples were performed. Synthetic sample was a spiked blank sample extract (from apples that were not treated with any pesticides and previously their absence was proved). Synthetic sample represent a simulated real sample, but with the known concentration to check the various calibration approaches. The concentration of pesticides selected for this experiment was 5 Errors of determination of average concentration of each pesticide in percent and also maximal overestimation and underestimation values of errors were calculated for all calibration standards (from absolute peak areas and normalized peak areas to TPP and HEPT). In the case of MeCN standards with APs and quantification using absolute peak areas a significant overestimation of quantity of pesticides occurs mainly for troublesome pesticides such as malathion, methidathion, phosalone and deltamethrin. When quantification utilizing TPP is performed, overestimation of troublesome pesticides is slightly lower. Utilization of HEPT for quantification, however, results in general underestimation for almost all compounds by approximately 20%. In the case of matrix-matched standards, quantitative data are significantly better for all pesticides under study, generally with error in the range of few percent except for normalization to HEPT, where slight overestimation about 5% occurred. Similarly good results were obtained also for matrix-matched standard with addition of APs, however overestimation utilizing HEPT as I.S. is approximately 8% for the majority of compounds. In To evaluate performance of APs a real sample of apples with pesticide residues was analyzed. For quantification MeCN standard with APs, matrix-matched standard and matrix-matched standard with addition of APs were used at the concentration level 10 In this sample three pesticide residues were found: pyrimethanil, flusilazole and fluquinconazole. In Performance of APs as additives for preparation of calibration standards was evaluated by comparison with currently wide-spread used matrix-matched calibration with the set of selected pesticides utilizing fast GC–MS with narrow-bore columns and QuEChERS sample preparation method. Linearity of responses was studied in the wide ranges of concentrations from 1 to 500 Analyses of synthetic samples proved that utilization of APs for the preparation of calibration standards is suitable substitution for matrix-matched calibration standards for “easy” pesticides. Errors at studied concentration level 50 Utilization of APs and its comparison with matrix-matched calibration standards was also performed in the analysis of a real sample of an apple with pesticide residues. Determined concentrations of three less troublesome pesticides (pyrimethanil, flusilazole and fluquinconazole) residues were lower than the MRLs for baby-food. Good match between results obtained using different calibration approaches was reached. According to the obtained results the use of APs can be advantageously used for the preparation of calibration standards in pesticide residues analysis of “easy” compounds, for which fairly good agreement with matrix-matched calibration standards was obtained. In the case of more difficult pesticides the use of APs should be considered. APs might be used in multiresidues monitoring purposes also for troublesome pesticide residues and in the case of positive finding another method of quantitation should be selected for the final determination of potential MRL violation. The other studied point in this work was the use and the choice of internal standard. All data were evaluated by using absolute peak areas and normalized peak areas with two different I.S.—TPP and HEPT. TPP provided improved data in the sense of linearity, repeatability and narrower confidence and prediction bands of calibration curve in the calibration experiments, when compared with absolute peak area measurements. In the synthetic sample experiments the use of TPP provided decreased values of overestimation of polar pesticides with MeCN calibration standards with APs. On the other hand, the use HEPT significantly decreased repeatability of measurements and increased errors in the synthetic sample experiments. According to presented results, TPP can be successfully used as I.S. in pesticide residues analysis. This work was supported by the Slovak Research and Development Agency under the contract No. 20-000705 and partially supported within the framework of the Slovak Grand Agency (VEGA, project number 1/2463/05).