Background
                  Endothelial dysfunction, inflammation and active mineralization are key processes involved in cardiovascular burden in end stage renal disease (ESRD). Serum (soluble) thrombomodulin (sTM) is an established marker of endothelial injury.
               
                  Patients
                  80 patients in ESRD were recruited consecutively. Baseline distribution of sex, age, main comorbidities and Framingham score was similar. A biochemical panel including sTM, intact PTH (iPTH), interleukin-6 (IL-6), pentraxin 3 (PTX3), fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF-23), osteopontin (OPN), osteoprotegerin (OPG), osteocalcin (OC), osteonectin (ON), soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor type 2 (TNFR2), transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), vascular endothelial growth factor receptor type 2 (sVEGFR2) and stromal cell-derived factor 1α (SDF1α) was investigated in each patient. Samples obtained while establishing haemodialysis (HD) access were stained for radial artery calcifications (RACs) with Alizarin red and examined histologically.
               
                  Results
                  After adjustment for HD status, sTM showed a significant positive correlation with serum creatinine, TNFR2, OPN, HGF, SDF1α, sVEGFR2, Pi, iPTH, FGF-23, OPG, OC and ON. In forward stepwise multiple regression, serum creatinine, TNFR2, and OPN were identified as significant, independent predictors of sTM. Grades 1–3 of RACs correlated with sTM (R = 0.50, p = 0.017), while grade 3 RACs were significantly associated with higher sTM (p = 0.02) than less advanced lesions.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Among novel renal and cardiovascular biomarkers, OPN and TNFR2 are closely related to sTM. This may link endothelial damage, vascular remodeling and inflammation. Progression of RAC parallels a presumed compensatory rise in sTM, reflecting endothelial injury. sTM has an intricate role in endothelial function and potential clinical and prognostic applications.In atherosclerotic lesions, the expression of thrombomodulin (TM), a cell membrane glycoprotein, has been demonstrated on the surface of endothelium, intimal and medial smooth muscle cells (SMC) and macrophages. The expression of TM in SMC depended on lesion type and patient age Eighty patients in stage 5 CKD were consecutively recruited using a convenience sample from the Department of Nephrology, Jagiellonian University Medical College. Patients qualified for hemodialysis (HD) (n = 30) and undergoing HD (n = 50) were included. Following medical examination, blood samples were collected for the panel of laboratory investigations. In patients requiring surgical creation of arteriovenous fistula (AVF) for HD access, radial artery samples were collected for histopathological examination. Small fragments of radial artery were processed as reported previously (for details see Fasting venous blood samples were collected from patients into ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) tubes, in the morning prior to surgical AVF procedures, and stored at −70 °C. Biochemical tests were then performed using automatic biochemical analyzers: Hitachi 917 (Hitachi, Japan) and Modular P (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany). The predefined biochemical panel included: serum TM, creatinine, calcium, phosphate, intact PTH (iPTH), interleukin-6 (IL-6), pentraxin 3 (PTX3), soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor type 2 (TNF R2), hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), stromal cell-derived factor 1α (SDF1α), vascular endothelial growth factor receptor type 2 (sVEGFR2), transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF-23), osteopontin (OPN), osteoprotegerin (OPG), osteocalcin (OC), osteonectin (ON). sTM levels in platelet-poor EDTA plasma samples were measured using commercially available ELISA (Human Thrombomodulin/BDCA-3 Immunoassay-R&D Systems, Minneapolis, USA (Human CXCL12/ SDF1α Immunoassay-R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA). SDF1α levels in platelet-poor EDTA plasma samples were measured using commercially available ELISA (Human CXCL12/ SDF1α Immunoassay-R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA). The reference range for sTM is 2.86–5.31 ng/ml, mean – 4.03 ng/ml, standard deviation- 0.637 ng/ml. Endothelial injury, inflammation and mineralization markers were assessed using ELISA micro-plate immunoassays and ELX808 automatic reader (BIO-TEK® Instruments Inc., Vermont, VT, USA). The following kits were applied: OPG (BioVendor, Brno, Czech Republic); OPN, SDF1α, sVEGFR2, HGF, IL-6, TGF-β, sTNF R2, PTX3, ON (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, USA); OC (Metra/Quidel, CA, USA), FGF-23 (Immunotopics Int., San Clemente, CA, USA) The number and respective percentage of patients is reported for categories. Quantitative variables are expressed as median (lower-upper quartile) due to a lack of normal distribution for the majority of parameters. Differences between groups were assessed using the Mann-Whitney test. Right-skewed variables were log-transformed before correlation and regression analysis. We used Pearson correlation coefficient, except for the correlation between sTM and the grade of alizarin red staining (the ordinal variable) where the Spearman coefficient was used. Linear regression was used to assess whether the simple correlations of log (sTM) were independent of HD status. Multiple forward stepwise model was built to identify independent predictors of log (sTM). The tests were two-tailed and the results were considered significant at p < 0.05. We used Statistica 12.0 (StatSoft, Tulsa, OK, USA) for computations. The study is in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Bioethics Committee of the Jagiellonian University. All patients signed an informed consent for participation prior to their inclusion into the study. The patients did not differ with respect to sex, age, main comorbidities and cardiovascular risk factors. However, serum creatinine concentrations were higher among those under HD, as were the concentrations of the studied inflammatory markers, inorganic phosphate, FGF-23, OPG, OPN and OC. Of note, sTM concentrations were also significantly higher in patients treated with HD ( sTM did not differ between patients with and without diabetes (p = 0.6), hypertension (p = 0.8), hyperlipidemia (p = 0.5), as well as between smokers and non-smokers (p = 0.3). Log-transformed sTM concentrations did not correlate significantly with age (R = 0.22; p = 0.056) and log (Framingham risk score) (R = −0.12; p = 0.3). sTM positively correlated with serum creatinine, the markers of inflammation and endothelial dysfunction, and the markers of mineral and bone metabolism ( Radial artery fragments were available in 50 patients. No calcifications were detected in 20 patients (40%), while 30 patients (60%) had calcifications of various grades ( The salient finding of the present study is that inflammatory and mineralization cytokines TNFR2 and OPN independently predict sTM concentrations. Moreover, medial radial artery calcifications (RAC) closely correlate with sTM levels. To our knowledge, this is the first study to investigate the relationship between sTM and an extensive panel of novel inflammatory, tissue remodeling and mineral/bone biomarkers in the setting of pre-dialysis and HD. Previous studies reported that among other hemostatic parameters, sTM correlated with highly sensitive C-reactive protein (hsCRP) and carotid intima-media thickness, a surrogate marker of atherosclerosis, providing a potential link between coagulation abnormalities and systemic inflammation in incident atherosclerosis in CKD patients Different signalling pathways involving TNFRs are the subject of many studies, however, the exact role of TNFRs in CKD still remains unclear HGF is a pleiotropic cytokine thought to induce anti-inflammatory processes, modulate macrophage recruitment and tissue regeneration Osteopontin, a pleiotropic cytokine, is thought to promote fibrosis through inflammatory pathways associated with recurring tissue injury Expression of inflammatory and remodelling molecules, including OPN, was enhanced in a transgenic model of chronic endothelial activation through transmembrane TNF overexpression, and downregulated following sTM treatment Previous studies suggested that in CKD patients with vascular calcifications, recurrent endothelial injury leads to increase in microparticles recruiting endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs), which may be skewed into osteogenic differentiation with osteocalcin expression, and thus lead to calcification Clinical applications of sTM are emerging with an improvement of glomerulonephritis and ischemic injury in animal models Importantly, we did not find sTM to correlate with age, or Framingham CV risk score. Unexplained CV comorbidity in CKD Due to cross-sectional design we are unable to draw causal relationships between the studied markers and to formulate definite conclusions, only on the basis of the statistical analysis performed. Our study was not oriented toward a mechanistic investigation, but rather toward the evaluation of an extensive panel of biomarkers. Following this preliminary evidence, future specifically-designed studies are warranted. Our results could benefit from a larger study sample, a weakness of many cross-sectional investigations. Radial artery fragments were collected only in patients awaiting dialysis, therefore we were not able to conclude how sTM relates to RAC in patients undergoing HD. Despite histological evaluation being an advantage of this study, the correlation between morphology and biochemical assessments, should be interpreted with caution. The comparison of biochemical findings, which may not reflect localized, lesion specific microenvironments, with histological findings, which are more focused on the “micro” scale is a natural limitation, to which it is difficult to adapt methodology. Blood sampling at only one point in the study is defined by cross-sectional character, however, longitudinal confirmation of the trends described should shortly follow. Previous studies have demonstrated that sTM reflects endothelial injury. Among several novel biomarkers of kidney and cardiovascular pathology, sTM is particularly related to OPN and TNFR2 in ESRD. Whether this implicates a causal relationship between chronic TNF-mediated inflammation, vascular remodeling and injury of endothelial cells or rather reflects an overlapping of these processes in CKD, as followed indirectly through biomarkers, remains to be established. Medial calcification in radial arteries may parallel the ongoing endothelial damage, as expressed by sTM levels. Further studies should thus examine whether sTM may aid in the assessment of vascular risk associated with medial artery calcification, which often remains asymptomatic. The study is in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Bioethics Committee of the Jagiellonian University. All patients signed an informed consent for participation prior to their inclusion into the study. The manuscript has not been published elsewhere. The study was supported by unrestricted grant from the KB and KK conceived the study, were the major participants in its design, coordination, interpretation of results and statistical analysis, they also prepared draft manuscript. MG carried out histological examinations. PD performed statistical analysis. KW, DF and MK participated in the design of the study. JAL participated in data analysis and in preparation of the final manuscript version. MAK and WS participated in study design and coordination. All authors were involved in data collection, draft manuscript modifications and approved the final version of the manuscript. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.