Cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) are potential high-performance, biodegradable, and environmentally-friendly alternatives to the oil-derived chemicals currently used in mineral processing. For this purpose, the understanding of phenomena associated with interactions between CNCs and minerals is crucial. In the present study, aminated CNCs with varying crystal sizes and crystal size distributions were examined in terms of their adsorption properties on quartz and the wetting properties of quartz surfaces after CNC adsorption. CNCs with varying alkyl chain lengths were obtained from consequent periodate oxidation and reductive amination, followed by mechanical high-intensity homogenisation. The adsorption of CNCs was studied based on polyelectrolyte titration. An enhanced interaction between CNCs and the quartz surface, including decreasing CNC surface charges, was obtained. Subsequently, wetting studies of CNC-coated quartz were performed using the sessile drop method. The specific surface free energies of both the rough and smooth surfaces were obtained and compared to determine the effects of roughness on wetting properties. The results showed that smooth surfaces possess a low specific surface free energy due to the absence of surface heterogeneities. For rough surfaces, the specific surface free energy was decreased as the extended alkyl chains of adsorbed CNCs modified the wetting properties of the surface.Compared to oil-derived chemicals, bio-based chemicals have advantages such as renewability, biodegradability and low toxicity Biochemicals have considerable potential as additives in mineral processing, but the use of nanocelluloses as additives (e.g., flotation and flocculation aids) requires modified and selective functionalities Several chemical methods can be used to modify the surface characteristics of nanocelluloses. One potential method is periodate oxidation to oxidise the vicinal hydroxyl groups of cellulose at positions 2 and 3, forming aldehyde groups and simultaneously breaking the corresponding carbon–carbon bond of the glucopyranose ring to form 2,3-dialdehyde cellulose (DAC) In the present work, cellulose nanocrystals were functionalized with variable alkyl chains through consequent periodate oxidation and reductive amination, followed by individualisation of the CNCs through a mechanical homogenisation process. The interaction of CNCs with quartz surfaces was analyzed by measuring the CNC adsorption on quartz in water based on the protonation phenomena of CNCs (see Quartz from the deposit of Nilsiä, Finland, was delivered by Sibelco. The quartz was comminuted using a Retsch ball mill (PM 200) by adding 50 The chemical composition of the quartz was determined using an X-ray fluorescence spectrometer (XRF, PANalytical Axios Bleached kraft hardwood ( The synthesis of CNCs was performed in accordance with previous studies To investigate the size and morphology of CNCs using TEM (Tecnai G2 Spirit transmission electron microscope, FEI Europe, Eindhoven, the Netherlands), the experiment used carbon-coated and glow-discharged hexagonal 200 mesh copper grids (Electron Microscopy Science, USA) and uranyl acetate (98.0%, USA) purchased by Polysciences, Inc. diluted to 2 The surface charge was determined for quartz, 3 different amino-CNCs, and quartz-CNC mixtures with a pH ranging from 5 to 9. For the measurements, a particle charge detector (Mütek, PCD 03, Germany) was used by employing a titration with charge-compensating polyelectrolytes. The titrant for the negative surface charge was cationic polyelectrolyte poly-(diallyl-dimethyl-ammonium chloride) (DADMAC, BTG Mütek GmBH, Germany), and for the positive surface charge, the titrant used was anionic polyelectrolyte poly-(sodium-polyethylene-sulfonate) (PES-Na, BTG Mütek GmBH, Germany). Samples were prepared from CNCs by diluting 6 In acidic solution, the protonation reaction of amine group of CNCs is the following: The contact angles of CNC-coated quartz pellets in air were measured using water, ethylene glycol (100%, France) purchased from VWR, glycerol (>99.5%, Malaysia) from Sigma–Aldrich, diiodomethane (>98.0%, Belgium) from TCI, and α-bromonaphthalene (97.0%, France) from Sigma–Aldrich. Quartz powder (x Contact angle measurements were taken using a Krüss DSA100 sessile drop system (Germany). The instrument was equipped with a high-speed camera (360 For the evaluation of the surface free energy, the Owens, Wendt, Rabel and Kälble (OWRK) model was applied, which places the dispersive ( The indices used represent the physical states of the material (s To evaluate the effects of roughness on the contact angle, the roughness factor The geometric surface represents the ideal smooth solid surface, and the actual surface is the total solid surface with roughness taken into account. For the estimation of the actual surface, the assumption was that the particles are present as hemispheres on the solid surface and ordered in the closest possible package. The mean roughness was used as a radius of the hemispheres. A roughness factor of approximately 1.74 was obtained and the contact angle, The error bar was obtained by applying a linear fit using OriginPro 2015 software (OriginLab Corporation). The morphological properties of aminated CNCs were determined using TEM. One example of a TEM image for each CNC is shown in All CNCs possessed similar morphological dimensions when the confidence intervals of the results were taken into account. However, the tendency to form network structures with extended alkyl chain lengths complicated the evaluation of liberated individual nanocrystals, and, on the other hand, indicated a higher affinity between the nanocrystals. For further calculations, the average surface area representing 150 individual CNCs without including the alkyl group of the amine was used. The number of introduced aminated alkyl chains on CNCs was analyzed by determining the nitrogen content of the samples ( The interaction of solid surfaces and soluble compounds or particles is strongly attributed to their surface charge properties. Therefore, the surface charge distributions of CNC, quartz, and the supernatant of CNC-quartz suspensions were determined. The specific surface charge distributions of the pure substances are shown in The determination of the specific surface charge of solid states is based on two primary assumptions. First, all polycations react completely with polyanions and vice versa, which means that uncomplexed cationic or anionic groups do not coexist. This assumption can be accepted due to the very high effective binding constants of the polyelectrolyte complex formation. The second assumption relies on the adsorption of the species of interest on the fluorocarbon surface of the surface charge detector. Based on this, an electrochemical double layer is formed and compensated through the addition of a titrant solution until the isoelectric point is reached The protonation of the amine groups of CNCs occurred predominantly at low pH values, leading to specific surface charges of 43.0 The interception with the abscissa describes the situation in which the kinetics of the reaction of protonation equals the reaction of deprotonation if the thermodynamic equilibrium is reached and the pH value is equal to the The presence of charges on the surface of CNCs and quartz has a significant effect on interactions between the CNCs and the quartz surface, leading to adsorption phenomena. The average mass of adsorbed CNCs on quartz as a function of the pH value is presented in The adsorbed mass of CNCs on quartz was found to increase as a function of increasing pH value. Due to the negligible content of salts, the mass of adsorbed CNCs can be directly related to interactions between CNCs and the quartz surface. Between the CNCs, the alkyl chain length was found to correlate to the mass of adsorbed CNCs, and HAC had the strongest interaction with quartz in the neutral and alkaline pH ranges. At pH 9 especially, HAC and quartz formed precipitating agglomerates. At low pH values, CNCs were electrostatically stabilized in suspension due to the high specific surface charges. Adsorbed CNCs possessed a notably higher surface charge than quartz at pH 5, which resulted in low surface coverage due to fewer quartz adsorption sites and repulsive electrostatic forces between the CNCs. When pH increased to 6 and 7, the portion of adsorbed CNCs on the solid surface increased slightly. The enhanced adsorption might be explained by the presence of more adsorption sites on the surface of the quartz. However, the repulsive forces between the CNCs were still strong, as evidenced by high specific surface charges. At pH 9 only, the specific surface charges of CNCs were largely reduced, and adsorption phenomena occurred between all CNCs and the quartz surface. In regard to the application of CNCs in industrial processes, the complex effects of dissolved salts on adsorption behavior must be further studied. For a more detailed illustration of the effects of specific surface charges of CNCs on adsorption interaction between CNCs and quartz, the mass of adsorbed species over the degree of protonation is shown in The correlation between the mass of adsorbed CNCs and the degree of protonation was hypothesized to be independent of the alkyl chain length of CNCs. Only BAC exhibited a high adsorption tendency at pH 7 (degree of protonation 0.66). In general, the mass of adsorbed CNCs was inversely proportional to the degree of protonation. The adsorption of CNCs on the quartz surface was predominantly influenced by the degree of protonation, and thus by the ratio between protonated and deprotonated amine groups. A reduced specific surface charge was responsible for attenuated CNC–CNC interactions, and thus for enhanced CNC-quartz interactions. The occurrence of adsorption phenomena of CNCs on quartz surfaces is based on the decreasing specific surface charges of CNCs and subsequently, enhanced hydrophobic interactions. The low surface charges decrease the attractive interaction with water molecules and enhance the attraction between CNCs (hydrophobic behavior). In contrast, a high specific surface charge leads to attractive interactions between the surface charges and water molecules and repulsive interactions between individual alkyl chains (hydrophilic behavior). Based on different specific surface charges, a schematic description of the varying orientations of CNCs on the surface of quartz was hypothesized according to the development of attractive and repulsive electrostatic forces between CNCs and between CNCs and quartz ( The orientation of CNCs on the mineral surface is expected to influence mineral processes. A high specific surface charge of CNCs (low pH values) might lead to the formation of an electrostatic barrier due to strong repulsive electrostatic interactions with additional CNCs approaching the mineral surface. In addition, a high specific surface charge hinders the agglomeration of CNC-coated particles and the efficient collision between air bubbles and particles In regard to the application of CNCs in mineral flocculation or flotation processes, the effects of CNCs on surface-wetting properties is of great importance. This study measured the contact angle of different liquids on quartz pellets coated with several CNCs, after the arithmetical average roughness of the pellets was measured three times per pellet The values of quartz and α-bromonaphthalene were excluded, and thus the contact angles were referred to as zero. All liquids spread immediately over the surface of the pure quartz pellets when the droplet touched the surface, indicating that the quartz pellets possessed a highly porous structure that was well-wetted by all liquids. In contrast, CNCs were expected to form a uniform layer covering the quartz particles, which in turn reduced the porosity of the quartz. An explanation of the strong interactions between α-bromonaphthalene and CNC surfaces might be given by the chemical structure of α-bromonaphthalene, which consists of fused benzene rings and the rough and porous structure of the pellet surface. In the case of MAC, diiodomethane also spread over the surface, and no contact angle was observed. For a more detailed evaluation of the wetting properties of CNC-coated quartz, the specific surface free energy was computed by plotting the contact angles over the dispersive and polar interfacial energies of the liquids. The results are presented in In general, as the alkyl chain of CNCs lengthened, the result was a reduction of the total surface free energy. In the left-hand chart of The interaction between CNCs and the quartz surface was investigated using polyelectrolyte titration, and the wetting properties of CNC-coated quartz pellets were examined using contact angle measurements. The investigations clarified the pronounced effects on the adsorption phenomena of electrostatic interactions between CNCs and between CNCs and the mineral surface. The hypothesis was established that adsorbed CNCs with a high specific surface charge form an electrostatic barrier on the mineral surface, hindering the adhesion of additional CNCs on the mineral surface. The reduction of the specific surface charge of CNCs led to reduced electrostatic repulsive forces, and thus to an increase of the mass of adsorbed CNCs. This wettability study of CNC-coated quartz pellets demonstrated a decrease of the specific surface free energy for an extended alkyl chain length. There was a significant difference between rough surfaces and smooth surfaces in terms of the specific surface free energy. In the case of rough surfaces, the dispersive surface free energy decreased as alkyl chain length increased, and the polar surface free energy of each surface was low. Therefore, the decrease of the specific surface free energy of rough surfaces can be related to an enhanced water repellency for the extended alkyl chain length. In contrast, smooth surfaces possessed lower specific surface free energies compared to rough surfaces, and the total surface free energies of all samples were similar irrespective of alkyl chain length. This work was conducted as part of the ERA-MIN project ‘CELMIN’ supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: