Numerous studies have been conducted in the past and models have been developed to simulate ball motions in horizontal mills. Equations and computer programs have been published to calculate falling velocity of the grinding media upon impacting the mill shell (liner). However, these equations and programs are only suitable for dry mill applications.
                  To accurately simulate the impact of falling balls on the liners in wet mills, the authors have developed models to determine the ball impact location and velocity as the ball contacts the mill liner. Drag and buoyancy forces are considered when the ball submerges in the pulp inside the mill. Models can be used to enhance mill liner design and optimize the operation of horizontal wet mills such as horizontal ball mills.
                  The models are applied to calculate the falling ball impact on the metal magnetic mill liners. Various scenarios are simulated and results are used to predict the performance of magnetic mill liners in various ball mill applications.In a horizontal ball mill, particle size reduction is achieved by rubbing or impacting heavy masses in the rotating cylinder. Those masses, consisting of ore particles and grinding balls, either cascade down the surface or fall (cataract) through the free space onto the material or, under certain circumstances, onto the mill liners. Various tests and studies have been conducted in the past and models developed to simulate ball motions in the mills and calculate the ball impact load on the shells (  Almost all the tests and studies were either conducted in dry mills or based on the assumption that pulp in the mills has little influence on ball trajectories and the degree of impact the balls have on mill shells. The motion of balls in pulp is obviously different from that in air since the falling balls face significant drag force and buoyancy in the pulp. In this paper, the mathematical deduction of the falling ball motions in the pulp including these forces is presented. Models are developed to determine ball velocity and in turn, the ball impact load exerted onto the mill liners. They are used for the simulation of ball impact on the mill liners to predict the performance of metal magnetic mill liners in various scenarios. In a horizontal grinding mill, balls that contact the mill liners have the highest linear speed, and are therefore brought to the highest position, which results in the farthest ball travel distance with the highest velocity, producing the most impact on the liners. The behavior/reaction of these balls are the objects of this study (see The rotation of the mill drum creates a centrifugal force. If the peripheral speed is too high, the mill begins to act like a centrifuge and the grinding mass, including balls and ore, do not fall back but stay on the perimeter of the mill. The point where the mill becomes a centrifuge is called the “critical speed”. Ball mills and SAG mills in the mining industry normally operate at 70–80% of the critical speed. Such percentage of the critical speed is called specific speed. For the meanings of all the symbols in this paper, refer to Section When a mill operates at a speed lower than the critical speed, the ball and other mass moves with the mill at a linear velocity The ball will leave the mill wall at some point before reaching the highest point. The detachment polar angle The coordinate of the detachment point can be obtained by the following: The ball starts a projectile motion and its path can be described as Schilz ( The coordinate of the impact point can be calculated with the following equations: The discussions in Section The coordinate of point ( The horizontal velocity, vertical velocity and their combined velocity at ( The horizontal and vertical motions shall be treated separately since the forces applied to the ball are from two different directions. In the horizontal direction, the ball is subject to a single force – drag ( With the velocity Similar to the horizontal direction process, the following can be derived from Eq. From Eqs. And Also One may notice that since the ball velocity is variable, the Reynolds number and hence the drag coefficient The impact velocity can be obtained from the following: To compare the ball impact forces on the same type of liners, it can be reasonably assumed that the dwelling time is the same for all the impacts. Impact impulse can therefore be used for the comparison: In China, metal magnetic mill liners have been widely used in wet ball mills to replace the traditional hard metal mill liners ( The metal magnetic mill liners are made of ceramic magnets embedded in non-magnetic hard metal moldings. The liners can attach themselves onto the mill drum so that bolting is not required. On the liner surface, metal ball chips and magnetic minerals are attracted to form a protective layer that prevents the liner from direct contact with the grinding mass. This enables the liners to last a few times longer than the traditional hard metal mill liners. See Almost all applications have exhibited various advantages over the traditional hard metal liners, such as longer liner life, reduced power and media consumption, higher grinding efficiency, higher mill availability and more consistent performance. The applications of magnetic mill liners, however, have different results in different conditions. The applications have been very successful in mills where ball sizes of 60 According to the product development engineers and mineral process plant operators, the MMMLs can be “comfortably” used in mills of 5.03 MMMLs have been installed in mills where 90 The authors have not found any MMML used in mills where balls over 100 There are only a few cases of applications where magnetic mineral is not available. In these cases, the MMML life is approximately one third shorter than those with magnetic mineral in the pulp. The magnetic mineral particles can attach to the magnetic liner and form as part of the protective layer. Such particles can increase the acting time of the ball to liner collision and reduce ball impact on the liners. Magnetic liners have not been used in mills with a diameter larger than 5.5 Similar to traditional hard metal liners, magnetic liners are subject to grinding media, ore attrition and fall impact. For magnetic liners, the impact of falling balls is often a much more serious concern. A very strong direct impact on the liner may strike away the protection layer and cause serious wear on the metal moldings, or even break the ceramic magnets that are contained in metal enclosures. The liner life can be considerably shortened and the mill operation may therefore be affected. Only the motion of balls at the layer closest to the up-lift liner will be modeled since these balls will have the highest falling velocity and therefore, the strongest impact impulse on the liners. The ball friction effect on the liners is not discussed in this paper. The damage caused by ball friction is generally regarded as less significant than ball falling impact to the magnetic liners. Simulations are presented with several scenarios, including different ball sizes in the same size mills and same size balls in different mill sizes. Simulations also reveal the effect of pulp viscosity change to the impact velocity. The following conditions are selected for this simulation: Internal mill diameter of 5.03 The pulp density in the mill varies along the drum axial direction with the lowest at the feed end and highest at the discharge end. For a reasonable approach for the iron ore grinding, an average pulp density A pulp viscosity of 10 Other parameters include gravity acceleration 9.81 The simulation results are presented in The following conditions are selected for this simulation: Liner thickness including protective layer 76 Other parameters including pulp density Ball size of 60  If test data of the pulp viscosity is not available, the following equation suggested by Thomas ( The Reynolds number is related to the ball drag coefficient per the curve shown in The following conditions are selected for this simulation: Ball mill inner diameter 5.03 Other parameters include pulp density Two ball sizes, 60 Refer to Unlike in the dry mill, where ball impact velocity is the same for all the ball sizes, the impact velocity in a wet mill increases as the ball size increases. It is easy to understand that the liner life is considerably shorter with large balls than with smaller balls, since the impact impulse increases exponentially as ball size increases. The authors tried to create curves to make comparison between the ball impact impulse and magnetic liner life but found it is difficult. While the liner life for 60 For the same ball size in different mill sizes (Simulation 2, The impact velocity stays relatively unchanged in the mill sizes from 1.91 Due to the large drag coefficient (around 0.44 in the last falling section) of the balls in the pulp, the long falling distance in the pulp in the larger mills causes significant resistance to the ball falling, hence reducing the impact velocity. The minimum velocity of a 60 From the simulation results, one can reasonably expect that the magnetic liner life, in mills larger than 3.66 There are only a few MMML applications in the mills larger than 3.66  For 100 According to Shi et al., the pulp viscosity in the grinding mills are higher than 5 An interesting finding was observed when the role of When the Reynolds number ranges between 1.0 When the Reynolds number reaches Re  The following parameters may affect the accuracy in their applications: Level of pulp. The pulp levels used in the simulations are based on the authors’ observation and estimate. The authors expect that computer modeling using DEM and hydraulic method will provide more accurate pulp level as a basis for the impact modeling. Pulp density. Pulp viscosity. Pulp movement. The models are developed with implied assumption that the pulp is static. Pulp in the mill will have movement. While the authors believe that the influence of pulp movement on the steel ball impact velocity is insignificant, the exact influence on the accuracy of the result is not studied. The effect of magnetic field to the ball projectile motion. It is generally regarded that the protective layer consisting of ball chips and magnetic minerals is a perfect shield of magnetic field and the magnetic field of MMML will not affect the ball trajectory. The authors of this paper do not have any measured data to support that assumption. Possible energy loss when ball touches the surface of the liquid is not considered in the modeling. Though this loss is regarded as insignificant as far as the ball shape and weight range are concerned, the authors do not have adequate information to quantify such loss. Equations have been developed for simulating ball motions in the pulp in horizontal wet mills. They can be used for calculating ball impact velocity and impact location on the liners. Their applications in magnetic liner studies are presented. In a horizontal ball mill, magnetic liners are subject to ball falling impact and ball attrition. The ball falling impacts have been studied by simulating ball motions in the mill pulp. Different mill sizes and different ball sizes have been included in this study. With the given conditions for 60 It is also discovered that, for the 100 While this paper presents a tool for the analysis of ball impact on the liners and therefore to predict the magnetic liner performance in various mill applications, the results in the paper are not intended for use as a direct guideline in any specific application. Parameters such as the level of pulp, pulp density and pulp viscosity have considerable effects on the accuracy of the modeling. Readers should pay special attention in selecting such parameters in their simulation. If an accurate parameter cannot be obtained, a conservative assumption should be used.  The authors wish to thank Zach Fischer, Derek Chen, and Bian Tan of AMEC Americas Limited for their assistance during the preparation of this paper. Special thanks to Dr. F.N. Shi of JKMRC and Ian Orford of AMEC for their preliminary review and valuable comments on this paper.