Short segment fixation aims to restore spinal stability and alignment in thoracolumbar spine injuries while preserving spinal motion by decreasing the levels of spine involved in fixation. In its simplest form it applies to fixation one level above and one level below the fractured vertebra. It has proven effective with good clinical, functional and radiological results in well selected cases. However not insignificant rates of sagittal collapse and recurrence of kyphosis with or without clinical implications have also been reported. Most of the failures were attributed to lack of anterior column integrity and relatively inferior robustness of earlier posterior short segment constructs. With better understanding of fracture biomechanics, better implant designs and evolution of strategies to increase the biomechanical strengths of posterior constructs, the rates of kyphosis recurrence and implant failure have been significantly reduced. Although there is lack of robust evidence to guide a surgeon to the best approach for a particular fracture, adhering to basic biomechanical principals increases the efficacy and reliability of short segment fixation. This narrative review highlights the status of short segment fixation in dorsolumbar spine injuries with emphasis on patient selection and strategies to increase effectiveness and reduce failures of short segment fixation.The goal of operative treatment of thoracolumbar spinal fractures is to protect neurological function and to restore spinal stability and alignment. The surgical strategy chosen should correct segmental kyphotic deformity and prevent late instability and pain while permitting early ambulation and return to function. To this end, different surgical techniques such as posterior pedicle screw fixation; anterior decompression, arthrodesis and instrumentation; and combined anterior and posterior approaches have been described. As the understanding of the biomechanics of spine and the imaging modalities have improved, various classification systems of thoracolumbar injuries have been described. Short segment fixation is typically reserved for unstable burst fractures. Multiple studies have shown good results of short segment fixation in well selected cases. Most of the studies of conservative treatment of burst fractures do not involve patients with neurological deficit and a burst fracture with neurological deficit is managed by surgical methods by most surgeons. Short segment fixation can also be reliably used in flexion distraction injuries or type B injuries in non ankylosed spines. In short segment fixation, fracture reduction can be achieved by a combination of postural reduction, pre-contouring of rods and cantilever correction. A review of published studies showed that an immediate correction of kyphosis angle ranging from 6.2⁰ to 21.4 ⁰ is achieved after short segment instrumentation. The use of posterolateral fusion along with short segment instrumentation is questionable. It is not associated with improved clinical outcomes and it does not prevent kyphosis recurrence or implant failure( There have been reports of significant rates of implant failure ranging from 9 to 54% with short segment instrumentation. The mean loss of correction ranged from 0.3 Disc integrity is also thought to be a contributing factors to recurrence of kyphosis besides the vertebral body comminution. Other postulated reasons for failure have been poor implant or construct design such as a small diameter junction between screw head and shaft, in situ bending of the rod, damage to the posterior structures and stressing the screws with excessive distraction. The strategies to counter short instrumentation failure have focussed either on anterior augmentation or augmenting the biomechanical strengths of posterior construct. The strategies for increasing the biomechanical strength of posterior constructs include the use of crosslinks, addition of a supplemental hook fixation at the levels of the screws, and additional fixation with pedicle screws in the fractured vertebra. Clinical studies have also attested to the effectiveness of short segment instrumentation with screws at the intermediate or index level. Presence of a break in the pedicular wall is a contraindication to index level fixation. It is recommended to use the intermediate screw on only one side if the other side is fractured. Based on preceding discussion it would appear intuitive that anterior column support would address the issue of implant failure and recurrent kyphosis. Strategies to augment anterior column have utilised 3 approaches: Augmentation through transpedicular route Anterior approach and reconstruction Anterior reconstruction through all posterior approach. Intracorporeal bone grafting by morselized autograft, vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty with hydroxyapatite, calcium sulphate, or calcium phosphate, balloon assisted endplate reduction(BAER) are some of the techniques that have been used through transpedicular routes in addition to short segment fixation. Direct spinal cord decompression and potential for complete kyphosis correction are important advantages of anterior approach. Combined anterior posterior approaches give the best immediate and long term kyphosis correction. Anterior column support might actually serve to keep the posterior instrumentation as a short segment, particularly in the lumbar spine where it is extremely important to save motion segments( The all posterior/extracavitory approach for anterior reconstruction Short segment fixation using adjacent vertebra as fixation anchor points has been further modified to mono segment fixation or same segment short fixation. Posterior short segment instrumentation is sufficient for almost all Type A fractures and type B fractures in a non ankylosed spine. There might be a slight recurrence of kyphosis but the clinical impact is minimal. Index level screws (screw in the fractured vertebra) increases the effectiveness of short segment instrumentation and substantially decreases the implant failure rate. Anterior reconstruction is rarely indicated and if chosen a separate anterior approach helps to save levels and limit instrumentation to short segment. The future research should focus on identifying the clinical and radiological variables that impact the outcomes in management of thoracolumbar fractures. In particular the definition of instability in relation to radiological parameters need to be well defined to better identify factures needing operative treatment. There is a distinct lack of high quality evidence which would guide surgeons to decide between operative or non operative treatment particularly in burst fractures(AO type A3,A4) with neurological deficit. Rohit Jindal: Literature review, conceptualisation of article, clinical photographs, preliminary and final draft. Vinay Jasani: Literature review, conceptualisation of article , writing of final draft. Dinesh Sandal: Literature review, preliminary draft. Sudhir Kumar Garg: Editing of preliminary and final draft None.