Dense medium cyclones separate particles primarily according to their differences in density, and are used in the beneficiation of coal, iron ore, and diamonds, amongst others. The cyclone can, however, be constrained by the ore carrying capacity of the spigot, especially for ores in which a significantly large proportion of the feed particles need exit through the sinks stream. Currently, the spigot capacities used in the sizing and selection process for dense medium cyclones are based mainly on those capacities provided by the original developers of the dense medium cyclone, Dutch State Mines (DSM). Further, it is not clear which parameters, other than the spigot diameter, have an influence on the spigot capacity of dense medium cyclones.
                  The influence of the cyclone geometry and operating conditions on the spigot capacity of dense medium cyclones was investigated, and parameters of importance in this regard were identified. An empirical model that quantifies the effect of the various parameters on the spigot capacity is presented in this paper. Furthermore, the spigot capacities determined experimentally in this study are compared with those given by DSM.Dense medium cyclones separate particles primarily according to their differences in density, and have the ability to achieve sharp separations and high capacities at the same time. Typical applications of dense medium cyclones include the beneficiation of coal, iron ore, and diamonds, amongst others. A schematic diagram depicting the geometry of a cyclone is presented in A distinction needs to be made between spigot loading and spigot capacity. Spigot loading refers to any amount of ore (or slurry) flowing through the spigot per unit time, whilst spigot capacity is the maximum ore (or slurry) flow-rate through the spigot; that is, the maximum spigot loading. The spigot capacity of a dense medium cyclone has previously been illustrated to be reached at the onset of rope discharge at the sinks stream ( Similar behaviour has been reported for classification cyclones: Once a rope discharge is prevalent at the spigot of a dense medium cyclone, the spigot capacity is independent of changes in the feed ore concentrations for given cyclone geometry and set of operating conditions ( A dense medium cyclone is typically operated with a spray discharge at the spigot ( A number of mathematical expressions describing the relationship between spigot ore capacity and spigot diameter have been reported in the literature, and they are in accordance with the following relationship: In developing their mathematical expression The influence of A polyurethane cyclone with an internal body diameter of 165 mm was used to perform the laboratory test work. The experimental set-up has previously been described and illustrated in The cyclone was operated with a rope discharge for all the tests. Once the necessary variable change had been made and the cyclone had reached a ‘steady state’, flow-rates measurements were performed at both the floats and sinks streams. This was followed by taking simultaneous samples at both outlets, which were used to determine the solids composition at the floats and sinks streams. In total, 66 data sets were obtained with the 165 mm cyclone. The range of conditions tested with the 165 mm cyclone is given in The 350 mm dense medium cyclone employed during the pilot-plant scale test work had a standard DSM configuration. This cyclone was inclined at an angle of 10°. Only fine grade magnetite (95%–45 µm) was used, and silica particles with a size range of − The flow sheet of the pilot plant employed in this investigation is shown in Just as with the 165 mm cyclone, all tests were performed under roping conditions. Once roping had been achieved and the necessary operating conditions had been set, a timed sample of slurry from the sinks stream was diverted onto a vibrating screen. The washed silica particles were then collected at the end of the screen and the medium particles re-circulated back into the sump. The ore particles were then bagged and kept for drying and weighing at a later stage. Thus, only the ore flow-rate at the sinks stream was measured. This procedure was repeated for each change in the operating conditions and cyclone geometry that was made. A further 19 data sets were obtained on the 350 mm cyclone. In order to quantify the influence of the parameters investigated in this paper on spigot capacity, empirical equations relating spigot capacity with the various variables were developed. Multiple-regression procedure was repeated making use of different functional forms of the independent variables, namely: linear, power, exponential, etc. These functional forms were based on previous relationships reported in the literature, where possible. The regression tool of the The following empirical equations to predict spigot capacity, based on a 165 mm cyclone, were developed in this investigation: Inclusion of the data obtained with the 350 mm dense medium cyclone into the regression analysis yielded the following expression: The quality of fit for Eqs. A closer look at It is worth noting that the above expressions (Eqs. As expected, and consistent with literature, There are strong indications that the cyclone diameter has a significant and independent influence on  No correlation was found between barrel length, and  Intuitively, it would be expected that the capacity should increase with increasing feed pressure. Further, The relationship between spigot capacity and medium density appeared to be more complex than that of the other independent variables. A look at the density differential as Data obtained with the 350 mm cyclone showed Medium grade, which gives an indication of the particle size distribution of medium particles, was also varied in this study; however, changes in this parameter did not have a significant influence on A comparison between the spigot ore capacities obtained in this study with those by DSM is shown in The percentages given in The range of sinks ore concentrations during roping ( A number of parameters that influence the spigot capacity of a dense medium cyclone have been identified in this paper; and these are (in decreasing order of importance)   Spigot capacity can also be increased through Increasing the spigot capacity through The relationship between spigot capacity and medium density was observed to be more complex than that of the other variables. It is thought that the effect of There is a strong case for the use of large diameter cyclones because of the relatively strong, independent influence of Manufacturing of dense medium cyclones with an adjustable geometry seems to be worth considering given that the spigot capacity is determined mainly by the cyclone geometry. The necessary changes to the cyclone geometry can therefore be made to accommodate the character of the ore being treated. Further, the spigot ore capacities obtained in this study were generally more than double those given by DSM. There appears to be potential to increase the spigot capacities over those specified by DSM depending on how the cyclone performance is affected during semi-roping flow.  Barrel length (mm). Volumetric percentage of ore in the sinks during roping. Cyclone diameter (mm). Inlet diameter (mm). Vortex finder/overflow diameter (mm). Spigot/underflow diameter (mm). Feed head (D). The number of independent variables. Medium grade, expressed as mass percentage passing 45 µm. The number of observations. The maximum ore carrying capacity of the spigot or spigot ore capacity (l/h ore). The maximum slurry carrying capacity of the spigot or spigot slurry capacity (l/h slurry). The standard error of estimate (l/h). Feed medium density (kg/l). The authors would like to express their gratitude to the following for their contributions to this work:  Frank van Heerden of  Abbey Mahlangu and Kennedy Khwanda for their assistance in carrying out the tests on the 165 mm cyclone.  