Mining is among the most hazardous activities all around the world, being always accompanied with different incidents, injuries, loss of lives, and property damages. Dimension stone quarrying constitutes a big portion of mining activities in Iran owing to 1379 different quarries with twenty thousand employees. Therefore, risk assessment is an important consideration in these mines and it should be accompanied with adjustment approaches. During this study, Judging from filled out questionnaire by relevant experts, dangerous incidents of quarries were recognized and safety risk of them has been assessed. Incidents risk ranking showed that traffic accidents, cutting wire rupture and rock fall were in order of magnitude the greatest risk sources or reasons, respectively. To manage the risks, some regulations were followed to adjust safety risks. Machinery or man fall from bench crest and rock fall were the most influential incidents due to these regulations. The average safety risk of quarrying has calculated as 31.8 and 11.7 out of 100 before and after adjustment. This amount of total risk reduction (63.3%) showed the importance of risk management.Mining is a substantial economic sector in many countries in terms of both producing needed raw materials of other industries and its great role in the economy. At the other hand, dealing with many uncontrollable parameters during handling natural and intense materials makes mining one of the most hazardous part of the industry. These hazards threat men and machinery which leads to limitations in production and economy of the mine. Quarries are no exception to this rule so this study aims to perform safety risk assessment of diamond wire cutting process in Iran’s dimension stone quarries as well as employing some adjustment approaches to reduce these risks. Among different kind of mining including underground, surface and quarry, the former is notorious for its high accident rates especially in coal mining ( Surface mines have their especial incidents too which have been investigated by many researchers. Dimension stone quarrying is a hazardous branch of the mining activity insofar as it has been reported that coal mines and quarries possessed the highest rates of incidents as compared to others (   These studyings implemented different investigation approaches toward hazards and incidents in mines. Most of them, by considering number of incident in a special period of time, performed a safety performance evaluation procedure. Focusing on occupational incidents frequency and neglecting their corresponding consequences is the weakness of such approaches which is frequently used in today’s mining organizations. Some cases implemented risk in their work indirectly like some researches in coal mining which imply risk concept by assessment of severity of occupational injuries. The number of days lost as a result of an injurious incident was the proxy measure of injury severity in their study ( This study aims to offer a different approach by examining safety risk through risk assessment, rather than a safety performance evaluation. It seems that evaluation of incidents’ probability of occurrence and their damages, followed by calculation of safety risk by available mathematical formulas, provide us with a more accurate understanding of occupational safety risks. Therefore, this study intends to assess safety risk of diamond wire cutting process in Iran’s dimension stone quarries by employing this approach. This paper also demonstrates how the assessment of risk can be used to inform risk adjustments, thus making a significant contribution toward risk reduction and improved safety measurement in quarries. Dimension stone is a natural stone selected or fabricated (i.e., cut, trimmed or others) to specific shape and size like blocks and slabs ( The use of method and technology play an important role in safety and economic efficiency of dimension stone quarries. Removing major blocks from the ground and cutting them to smaller blocks are the main objectives of dimension stone exploitation. In the past, different exploitation methods including handy exploitation, plugs and wedges, cutter disks and blasting were used in quarries. A very low efficiency, high operating costs and lots of safety risks are among the disadvantages of these methods. Nowadays most dimension stone quarries, especially calcareous ones, employ diamond wire cutting and in some cases, chain saw machine in Iran and all around the world. The important point on the efficient usage of diamond wire cutting is to produce blocks at minimum cost by adjusting the effective cutting parameters adequately ( Diamond wire cutting machines have been used in marble industry since 1985. They have affected the production rate and efficiency considerably ( Calculation of incidents’ occurrence probability is not sufficient during safety evaluation of mines and incidents consequences ought to be considered as well. Both of these parameters are involved in risk management. Risk is the uncertainty and lack of awareness about the consequences of an action or incident. This consequence can lead to loss or benefit. This study evaluated the safety risk in quarries so consequences would be from harmful kinds. Risk assessment counts an important stage in every economical or industrial activity. Since mining activities are always accompanied with incidents and hazards for men and machines, assessment and prevention of likely incidents for safety risk assessment are inevitable. Safety risk, which is defined as the amount and importance of the hazard, can be calculated by means of probability of incident occurrence and the amount of consequences. The overall amount of risk can be measured by Eq. This study follows an assessment, adjustment and reassessment approach to investigate safety risk of quarries. In order to do that, firstly referring to previous researches in this area especially the work done by Using the experience of active experts of mining is one of different methods used to evaluate probability and consequences of happening incidents in quarries. To this end, 50 well known mining experts including academics, mining engineers and managers who are faced with quarrying activities in their daily life have been chosen. They have been requested to express their idea about incidence probability and consequences of each incident by filling out a questionnaire for both before and after adjustments. Quantifying data derived from these questionnaires, determines the average amount of damages and probability of occurrence for each incident which could be used in order to calculate risk through available formulas. Adjusted risk value can be calculated in the same manner too. Such approach enables us to classify incidents with respect to their corresponding safety risk. In order to evaluate the risk of incidents in quarries, at first, these incidents should be recognized. Dimension stone exploitation accompanies with various incidents. Referring to above mentioned researches in this area especially the works done in Turkey’s quarries ( Safety risk of these incidents can be controlled and reduced by the observance of some regulations and approaches. Education, expertness and observance of safety tips are important ways to prevent and reduce mining incidents. However, for every cited incident in There are different methods for evaluation of probability and consequences of happening incidents, among them is using the experience of active experts. Therefore, some questionnaires about incidence probability and consequences of all cited incidents, for both before and after adjustments, has been prepared and filled out by some experts. There are different methods for quantifying qualitative indexes; among them, using interval and rating scales that are bipolar is the most usual one. Bipolar scale is an 11 point scale which has been represented for both positive and negative indexes in Acquired qualitative data’s through the questionnaires was quantified by the bipolar scale. The representative amount of probability and consequences of each incident were determined by normal averaging ranging from 0 to 10. Then the magnitude of each incident’s risk was calculated according to Eq.   Because of numerous quarrying activities in Iran and the high rate of incidents, analysis and ranking of incidents’ risk are necessary and quite inevitable. Safety risk assessment in Iran’s quarries showed that: It seems that the evaluation of occurrence probability of incidents is not adequate, as the cutting wire rupture possessed the maximum occurrence probability but not the maximum risk. After risk ranking, it turned out that traffic accidents, cutting wire rupture and rock fall were the three greatest risk sources or reasons with risk amounts of 56, 45 and 36 before and 21, 20 and 11 after adjustment, respectively. Application of some regulations, known as risk adjustment, could reduce primary risk rates. However, this variation is not the same for all incidents so that machinery or man fall from bench crest with risk adjustment ratio of 70.4% was the most controllable incident and cutting wire rupture was the most uncontrollable incident. The total amounts of average risk were calculated as 31.8 and 11.7 before and after adjustment, respectively, with the total risk adjustment risk ratio of 63.3%, which showed the controllability of incidents’ risks as well as the importance of risk management. Introduced approaches for risk assessment in this paper can be employed for other kind of mines or even hazardous industries. The authors would like to thank all mining experts who contributed in this study and made their experiences accessible to us.