A novel method of manganese(II) extraction from sulphuric acid solutions is proposed. The method involves electrodialysis through bulk liquid membranes containing di(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid and tri-n-octylamine in 1,2-dichloroethane. The effects of the main electrodialysis parameters as well as of the composition of the liquid membranes and aqueous solutions on the manganese(II) transport rate are determined. It is demonstrated that a practically complete removal of Mn(II) from the feed solution containing 0.01mol/L of MnSO4 is achieved during 0.5–2.0h of electrodialysis. Maximum stripping degree of 88% is obtained under optimal conditions. It is shown that the liquid membranes ensure an effective one-stage extraction of manganese(II) into diluted solutions of sulphuric, nitric, hydrochloric, perchloric acids and water.A liquid membrane is a layer of an organic solvent separating two aqueous solutions. Compounds, promoting the transport of substances from one aqueous solution to another, may be dissolved in the organic phase. Liquid membranes offer a lot of advantages over conventional separation technologies, such as easy operation, low capital and operating costs, continuous operation, high selectivity, high fluxes, combination of extraction and stripping processes into a single stage, uphill transport against concentration gradients and small amounts of extractants Manganese compounds, in which manganese has various valences, are widely used in industry To concentrate and to accelerate the ion transfer through liquid ion-exchange membranes, an electric current may be used. The electric field gradient is a driving force of the membrane extraction process during electrodialysis. Liquid membranes provide greater selectivity and permeability than the solid ion-exchange membranes. Data on electrodialysis of liquid membranes are rather low in comparison with membrane extraction. One of the first works in this field was conducted by B.A. Purin The experiments were carried out in an electrodialysis cell ( The solutions of D2EHPA (technical grade, contents of the main substance ~ In D2EHPA organic solutions in the presence of TOA an ion pair is formed, which consists of an organic cation and an organic anion Manganese(II) ions are extracted by D2EHPA due to the binary extraction mechanism: The extracted complex can partially dissociate in a polar organic solvent The transport process schematically is illustrated in Manganese(II) cations are transferred by diffusion to the interface feed solution/liquid membrane and interact with the carrier. The transported compound MnA Sulphate ions interact with the amine salt at the interface liquid membrane/strip solution: At the interface feed solution/liquid membrane the reaction The extraction degree of manganese(II) is expressed as: The stripping degree is expressed as: The flux into the liquid membrane can be calculated as: The flux into the strip solution is calculated as: The current efficiency η is calculated as: It was found in the preliminary experiments that the extraction degree of manganese(II) from the feed solution into the liquid membrane was about 6.5% per hour without electric field application and the transfer of Mn The increase of the current density from 2.1 to 8.5 The duration of electrodialysis is limited as a rule by an abrupt increase of voltage in the membrane system, when 0.1 The current efficiency for manganese(II) transport is about 13% in the system with 0.01 It should be noted that the complete extraction of manganese(II) ions into the liquid membrane is accompanied by a significant rise in pH value in the feed solution from 2 to 3.3–3.5 within 40–60 The increase of manganese(II) concentration in the feed solution from 0.01 to 0.1 A sharp increase of voltage occurs within an hour of electrodialysis in the membrane systems with an initial manganese(II) concentration less than 0.04 The acidity of the feed solution has been found to influence the manganese extraction efficiency. The increase of sulphuric acid concentration in the feed solution from 1 The increase of the carrier's concentration in the liquid membrane from 10 to 40 The electrical conductivity of the membrane system is determined usually by the composition of the liquid membrane. Solutions of technical D2EHPA contain about 16% of strongly associated monoalkylphosphoric acid and have a low electrical conductivity. To use them for the electrodialysis with liquid membranes admixtures, for example, TOA has to be introduced. The increase of TOA concentration in the organic phase leads to a rise of the electrical conductivity whereas the increase of D2EHPA concentration results in an increase of the Ohmic resistance of the liquid membrane and raises the voltage of galvanostatic electrodialysis ( The increase of TOA concentration in the liquid membrane from 0.05 to 0.3 In contrast to traditional membrane extraction, the nature of mineral acid in the strip solution does not exert a considerable influence on the electrodialytic transport of metals. The transfer of manganese(II) proceeds with an approximately equal rate into 0.1 The obtained results allow to conclude that electrodialysis through liquid membranes represents an attractive alternative to supported liquid membranes for the selective removal and concentration of manganese(II) ions from diluted solutions. The electrodialysis has some advantages if compared with the supported liquid membranes. The pH gradient between the feed and strip solutions is not necessary during electrodialysis. Nature of acid in the strip solution does not exert significant influence on the transport of manganese(II) through the liquid membranes at electrodialysis. The liquid membranes containing technical di(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid and tri- The author is grateful to Mrs D. Yankovicha and Mrs S.V. Shchanitsina for assistance in the experiments and the language help.