Functionally graded materials (FGMs) incorporate gradual transitions in their microstructure and/or composition with distance. The greatest merit of FGM in the design and processing of engineering materials is to combine irreconcilable properties of material in the same component, such as fracture toughness and wear resistance. Functionally graded WC–Co composite is one of those materials. However, quantitatively characterizing the mechanical properties, especially the toughness, of graded WC–Co materials is a difficult task. In this study, using Hertzian indentation technique, the mechanical behavior of WC–Co with graded cobalt composition and WC grain size was studied and compared to those of the homogeneous materials that are similar to either the top surface or the bulk substrate material. The results of this study showed that Hertzian indentation technique is an effective way for characterizing the bilayer WC–Co hardmetals.Functionally graded materials (FGMs) are distinctively different from homogeneous materials by gradients of composition, phase distribution, porosity, texture, and related properties Recent developments in layered WC–Co have provided a novel method to design WC–Co composites with desirable combinations of mechanical strength and fracture toughness Although it is straight forward to see intuitively the advantages of the layered WC–Co, quantitatively characterizing these advantages of FGM over homogeneous materials with respect to their mechanical properties is a bit more complex. Although it is easily accepted that the outmost hard layer can provide better wear resistance than that of the substrate layer material, it is not clear how the underlying layer, which has higher fracture toughness than the outmost layer, would help improve the damage resistance of the bilayer composite. The mechanical behavior of each layer, i.e., the outmost hard layer and the underlying substrate, when integrated into the bilayer composite is also unknown. The measurement of the fracture toughness of the bilayer composite is not a straight forward matter. Conventionally, there are several methods for measuring the fracture toughness of homogeneous WC–Co material and mainly two methods are determined to apply to the WC–Co materials Hertzian contact testing with spherical indenters in normal loading on model flat-layer structures may provide an ideal starting point for understanding such relations at a fundamental level. Such testing has proven particularly powerful in identifying damage modes in ceramic materials, in both monolith and layer forms, for several decades. For example, the research works on characterization of gradient quasi-brittle ceramics with a certain layer thickness, such as Si Recently, the present authors studied the plastic deformation of WC–Co materials and showed that this simple approach can be used to characterize the mechanical behavior of WC–Co under indentation loads, and one of the measurement-brittleness indices of the composites can be correlated with the fracture toughness of the indented material In this study the Hertzian indentation technique was utilized to evaluate a bilayer WC–Co material. Indentation stress–strain curves and brittleness indices of the graded materials were measured. The mechanical behaviors of the graded WC–Co are compared to that of the homogeneous WC–Co with similar compositions. During the past decades, a wide range of processes have been developed to make the functionally graded WC–Co materials, such as PVD, CVD, plasma spraying, centrifugal casting and EPD (Electrophoretic deposition) A bilayer structure was conducted in this study. Based on the study by Fan et al. The mixture of WC, cobalt and wax powders was stacked and cold-pressed in a compacting die at 200 Hertzian indentations were made on the polished surfaces using a polycrystalline diamond (PCD) sphere with a 5.08 Measurements of contact radius “ In order to study the nature of the mechanical behavior from the subsurface sections, one particularly useful technique – split and bond specimen – was used To determine the load required to initiate quasi-plastic deformation ( In order to verify if there was a composition/properties gradient in the sintered bilayer WC–Co, the microstructure was examined by SEM, EDAX and other tests. The microstructure of sintered bilayer WC–Co is shown in Vickers indentations made at polished sections of the bilayer specimens are useful in confirming the intrinsic strength of the interfaces. As shown in After each indentation test, surface damage in the form of indentation impressions was observed using an optical microscope. When the indentation load was below a certain threshold value, the sinking type impression  Comparing indentation stress–strain curve of bilayer WC–Co with its individual homogeneous component, we find that at the same indentation strain, the indentation stress of the bilayer WC–Co is higher than that of the soft, tough substrate, but lower than that of the hard surface layer, showing a “softening” behavior. This leads us to conclude that under the indentation load, the performance of layer-graded WC–Co may be improved over its individual constituents by being harder than the substrate but tougher than the harder surface layer, which is otherwise much more brittle. The measured fracture toughness for the homogeneous hard surface layer is 11.5 In order to reveal the nature and degree of damage accumulation under the indenter, we used the split-bond samples shown in Enlarged micrograph at the interface of the bilayer component as illustrated in   Observations from From the Hertzian indentation test, two more valuable parameters can be obtained, they are the load required to initiate fracture ( Measured brittleness indices of bilayer WC–Co, homogeneous hard layer, and homogeneous soft layer are shown in One factor need to be mentioned here, which is the macroscopic residual stresses introduced by the thermal expansion mismatch between the two layers Using layer to layer powder stacking and liquid phase sintering, bilayer WC–Co material has been fabricated. The hardness gradient was measured across the hard layer and the substrate interface. No delamination was observed along the interface using either the Vickers indentation or the Hertzian indentation technique. Based on the indentation stress–strain curve, the measurement of brittleness index, and the observations of Hertzian indentation damages from the split-bond sample, it was shown that the bilayer WC–Co material exhibits traits of both the high hardness of top surface layer and the toughness from soft substrate. The results of this study demonstrate that Hertzian indentation technique is an effective method for characterizations of functionally graded WC–Co materials. Further studies are needed to establish the dependence of the Hertzian indentation behavior of graded WC–Co materials on the layer thicknesses, the mismatch of material properties between the layers, and the macroscopic residual stresses. The results of these studies will be essential for designing and manufacturing of functionally graded WC–Co materials.