Bagasse, the fibrous residue from sugar cane milling operation, was subjected to physical activation using CO2 to establish its suitability as a precursor for gold adsorption, specifically for the recovery of gold from cyanide medium. Mathematical modelling, which correlates the effects of carbon properties on the adsorption behaviour, was conducted to formulate a basis for tailor making the adsorbent for this particular application. The developed model suggests carbon properties of alkali pH, high total surface area and small pore diameters are required for optimum adsorption capacity. The optimum adsorption capacity attained by the developed carbon in this study was 227% that of the test commercial activated carbon, which exhibited an adsorption of 101mg Au/g carbon. Hence this demonstrates bagasse as a promising precursor for the manufacture of activated carbon for gold cyanide adsorption.Current practice for industrial extraction of gold from its host mineral is achieved by the hydrometallurgical route based on the use lixiviants, the most commercially important of which is cyanide. The use of cyanide has been known for a hundred years but the critical breakthrough came in the 1970s when precise methods of preparation of activated carbon was achieved ( Bagasse is one such source. This is the fibrous by-product resulting from the milling of sugar cane. During the milling season, large quantities of bagasse are generated. In Australia, this biomass is used inefficiently as fuel for the mill boilers for electricity and steam generation and a small amount is sold as animal fodder. After most milling seasons an excess quantity of bagasse remains. This excess poses various problems to the industry including costs of storage, safety hazard with spontaneous combustion and the environmental hazards associated with water run off from stored bagasse. Conversion of bagasse to activated carbon has the potential to address these issues and it represents an opportunity to generate further income for the sugar milling industry. The availability of a cheaper domestic activated carbon will also benefit local gold producers. This study aims to establish the potential of bagasse as a precursor for the preparation of activated carbon for gold cyanide complex. It was also of interest to elucidate the effect of the carbon properties on adsorption behaviour of gold cyanide. The as-received bagasse fibers from the sugar mill were first dried in 110 °C oven to reduce degradation from biological activity. To reduce the ash, fibre was treated with physical and chemical treatment. The dried fibers were separated into various size fractions using a conventional sieve-shaker. Fractions greater than 850 μm were further processed whereas fractions less than 850 μm, containing the majority of the inorganic impurities, were discarded. The +850 μm fraction was washed with dilute acid (5% v/v) to remove additional extraneous inorganic matter followed by four cycles of washing with distilled water. A single cycle lasted 10 min. The pulp was then separated and the conductivity of the supernatant analysed. Once the conductivity of the supernatant was close to that of distilled water, the wet fibers were then dried in 110 °C oven. Activation of bagasse by the physical technique involves a two-step process. Initially the fibres are carbonised followed by gasification with carbon dioxide. Activation was conducted in a fixed bed reactor, shown in The ash content, moisture content and pH of the prepared carbons were determined using ASTM tests D 2866-94, D 2867-95 and D 3838-80 respectively ( Adsorption tests were conducted using potassium gold cyanide solutions prepared from gold cyanide crystals (Johnson Matthey). A stock solution of 300 ppm gold was prepared. Bench scale adsorptions tests were conducted out using 200 ml of Au(CN) The results of this study are presented in four parts as follows: the chemical and physical characterisation of the activated carbon, assessment of the adsorption capacities of the manufactured activated carbons, mathematical modelling of the adsorption data and the effect of carbon properties on adsorption as predicted by the developed model. The physically activated bagasse were prepared at 800 °C using three impregnation ratios: (activating agent: bagasse) 1:8, 1:4 and 3:4. These were gasified using 100% CO  The chemical activating agent to bagasse ratio does not appear to affect the total surface development (see  The chemical and physical characteristics of the test commercial carbon used in this study are summarised in The adsorption capacity data used in this paper were calculated based on ash and moisture free. The adsorption capacities exhibited by physically activated bagasse are shown in Aurocyanide adsorption capacities for physically gasified bagasse increased with increasing burnoff. The adsorption capacities observed ranged between 11 and 229 mg Au/g carbon, which are comparable with the test commercial carbon (PICA G210 AS), as shown in A consistent correlation between the adsorption capacity of the carbon and each individual carbon characteristic is often difficult to obtain. As shown in In-order to clearly identify the individual role of the carbon properties, a mathematical model was constructed using a four-parameter multi-linear regression model. The model was based on the carbon pH, total surface area (TSA), pore diameter ( The model with the best fit is shown in Eq. Practice of this method has been successfully applied by The developed model has limitations in its predictability, the limitations are due to the lack of span in the data used to construct them. The exact details are summarised in This developed model was then applied at predicting the aurocyanide adsorption capacity by altering one carbon parameter at a time whilst maintaining the other two parameters constant (an average value was chosen for the constant parameters). The mathematical model was used to isolate the effect of individual activated carbon characteristic on the adsorption capacity. These relationships are shown in  Activated carbons with alkali pH are predicted to display substantially higher aurocyanide adsorption capacity, as the carbon pH is increased into alkali spectrum. This trend is consistent to the results reported by Seke ( Adsorption through electrosorption of negatively charged Au(CN)  Carbon porosity is very important parameter in the selection of activated carbon for aurocyanide adsorption. It is understood aurocyanide complex adsorbs on the microporous structure (<20 Å) of the activated carbon ( In this study bagasse was subjected to physical gasification using CO