This work addresses the problem of synthesising cost-effective batch water networks where a number of process sources along with fresh water are mixed, stored, and assigned to process sinks. In order to address the complexity of the problem, a three-stage hierarchical approach is proposed. In the first stage, global targets are identified by formulating and solving a linear transportation problem for minimum water usage, maximum water recycle, and minimum wastewater discharge. These targets are determined a priori and without commitment to the network configuration. Next, a network with minimum number of tanks is synthesised by solving a mixed-integer non-linear program. The bilinear constraints are relaxed to transform the program into a mixed-integer linear program that is globally solvable. The third stage is aimed at simplifying the network configuration by minimising the number of network inter-connections. Insights gained from the water pinch analysis are also incorporated into the approach to further reduce the water flows via the placement of water regeneration unit. A case study is solved to illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed procedure.maximum inlet impurity concentration to sink impurity concentration of source impurity concentration of storage tank total freshwater resource fed to the batch water network (tonnes) amount of flow from water resource going to sink target for minimum flow of fresh water (tonnes) water flow demand for sink water flow of source amount of flow from source amount of flow from source capacity of storage tank amount of flow from storage tank total amount of flow going to waste (tonnes) wastewater discharged from source a binary variable denotes the existence of connection between fresh water resource and water sink a binary variable denotes the existence of connection between source binary variable denotes the existence of connection between source a binary variable denotes the existence of storage a binary variable denotes the existence of connection between storage tank total number of inter-connections between water sources and storage tanks as well as the connections between storage tanks and water sinks total number of water storage tanks target for minimum number of storage tanks set of water sinks set of water sources set of storage tanks upper bounds on the piping size between freshwater resource and water sink upper bounds on the piping size between source the upper bounds on the piping size between source upper bound for the storage tank capacity upper bounds on the piping size between storage tank lower bound of variable upper bound of variable lower bound of variable upper bound of variable y Water is an important utility in industry. It is used for thermal purposes (e.g., cooling water or boiler feed water), as a raw material (as a reactant), or as a mass-separating agent (washing, stripping, liquid–liquid extraction, etc.) Due to the increasing concern about the environmental and economic issues associated with water usage and wastewater discharge, there is an escalating need to search for techniques that enable the effective usage of industrial water. To date, most of the established methodologies for wastewater minimisation have focused on continuous processes. Recently, considerable attention has also been dedicated to the synthesis of batch water networks, which is relevant for a wide spectrum of industries including pharmaceutical, specialty chemical, and food processes. The methodologies to synthesise a water network can be broadly classified into two general categories: the insight-based graphical pinch analysis and the mathematical-based optimisation techniques. The main advantage of graphical pinch analysis technique is that, the various water network targets (such as fresh water and wastewater flowrates and pinch location) are identified ahead of detailed network design. However, this technique is often limited to single-component systems. It also becomes cumbersome as the number of streams and units increases. Additionally, the graphical technique suffers from scaling problems when the compositions or flows of the various units and streams are vastly different which can skew the representation. On the other hand, mathematical-based optimisation techniques serve as a good synthesis tool in handling more complex systems, such as system with multiple contaminant problems and complex water-using processes. They are also very useful for handling operational and scheduling issues. However, the mathematical techniques do not readily provide the same insights as the graphical pinch analysis, which are typically used as guidelines by the process designer during network synthesis. Also, when the mathematical formulation is in the form of a non-convex non-linear program (NLP) or a mixed-integer non-linear program, finding the global solution may be a very challenging endeavour. Some recent trend has seen the combined use of these techniques to take the advantages of the two approaches (e.g.,  The synthesis of water network for batch processes has received far less attention than the steady-state continuous case. To overcome the limitation of the approaches of Much of the work in synthesising batch water network has been based on mathematical optimisation approaches. Examples include the work of In this paper, a new three-stage hierarchical approach is introduced for the synthesis of batch water networks. In each stage, useful targets are identified. Additionally, the level of details is increased from one stage to another while capturing insightful results from the previous stage. In the first stage, a source–sink mapping representation is set up to determine the minimum fresh water and wastewater flows prior to the commitment of network structure. This is equivalent to setting the minimum flowrate targets in the first stage of pinch analysis approach (e.g., In the latter section of the paper, the placement of water regeneration unit(s) in the overall context of the batch water network is assessed using the hybrid techniques. Through the use of a water regeneration unit, water flows are further reduced. Insights from water pinch technique are invoked by using the pinch concentration of the network to guide the placement of the regeneration unit. A literature case study is used to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed technique. Because of the hierarchical nature of the proposed approach and its computational efficiency, it can be applied effectively for large-scale problems such as the ones encountered in practice. The problem addressed in this paper can be stated as follows. Consider a certain period of operation (e.g., cycle time). During that period, the following two sets are given: A set of water sinks {SK A set of water sources {SR Also available for service is a fresh (external) water source that may be purchased to supplement the water sink requirements. It is desired to develop a systematic procedure that provides answers to the following design questions: What is the target for minimum fresh-water usage and wastewater discharge? How many storage tanks should be purchased? What are their capacities? How should the sources be allocated to the tanks? How should the stored water be allocated to the sinks? Because of the complexity of the aforementioned problem, a hierarchical solution approach is proposed. In each stage, a manageable problem will be formulated and its solution will yield very useful insights and targets that can be used for the next stage. The hierarchical approach is composed of three steps: in the first step, targets for minimum fresh water usage, minimum wastewater discharge, and maximum water recycle are identified. The next two steps are geared towards minimising the network complexity (including the water storage tanks and inter-connecting pipes). The implementation of this approach is carried out as follows: Targeting: in this stage, minimum fresh water and wastewater flow targets are determined. These targets may be implemented through various (sometimes infinite) networks. Network configuration featuring minimum number of tanks: the objective of this stage is to identify minimum number of water storage tanks and network configuration that satisfy the determined water flow targets. This stage is aimed at reducing the batch network complexity. Network simplification: this stage is intended to reduce the complexity of the batch water network by minimising the number of inter-connections. The main advantage of having a less complex network is the ease of operation and maintenance, as batch processes often encounter change in operation due to different recipe of production. Besides, a simpler network (e.g., less piping and instrumentation) also leads to reduced network cost. The following two simplifying assumptions will be used in this work: All water reuse/recycle between water sources and sinks is carried out between two consecutive batches of operation via water storage. A single key contaminant is considered. The first assumption indicates that water from source(s) can only be reused and/or recycled to water sink(s) in the subsequent batch of water-using operations via water storage tank and to avoid scheduling problems. This is to provide sufficient time for the water mixing to take place within the same batch of operation. The second assumption confines the current work to batch water network where a single impurity or a The following sections describe the design procedure including the proposed three-stage hierarchical approach.  Since the sink requirements are taken over a certain period (e.g., cycle time) without details on the time-dependent requirements over the period, it is sufficient to provide a single batch of water to the sink. Therefore, the maximum number of needed tanks is equal to the number of sinks in Step 1. The main aim for the targeting step is to determine the minimum fresh water (FW) and wastewater (WW) flow targets in the batch water network regardless of the final network structure. Since the storage tanks are not considered in this step, the formulation can deal with the problem by assigning sources directly to the sinks through mixing points (without storage tanks), as shown in This formulation is a linear program (LP) which can be globally solved to determine the target for minimum flow of fresh water. This target is referred to as Once the target for minimum water flows has been identified in the first step, we can impose another objective function to minimise the number of storage tanks while satisfying the target for minimum water flows. The superstructure for this step is that given in Other constraints of the optimisation problem in Step 2 include the following: Additionally, the target identified from Step 1 is added as a constraint: It is worth noting that the source of non-linearity in the aforementioned MINLP is the bilinear terms in Eqs. In this step, the number of connections (  Following the above-mentioned procedure, the first step in synthesising the batch water network involves the targeting of fresh water and wastewater flows. Solving the LP Eqs. To synthesise a batch water network with minimum water storage tank, Step 2 is employed by solving Eqs. Step 3 is next employed to evolve the network via the reduction of number of inter-connections between water sinks, sources and storage tanks. The inter-connections between sinks and tanks as well as from tank to sources are set to less than 20 Water regeneration is partial purification of water source to upgrade its quality for reuse or recycle purposes ( From the above description, it is clear that one should firstly identify the pinch concentration of the water network before any regeneration unit can be placed. This calls for the use of pinch targeting techniques for batch water network. One among such tools is the time-dependent water cascade analysis (TDWCA) technique, shown in One option for regeneration is to purify water source S4 from 25 to 5 Mathematical formulation in Steps 2 and 3 are solved again and the result of the mathematical model is presented in This work has presented a hierarchical procedure for the synthesis of batch water network. Instead of dealing with all the complex aspects of the network synthesis, a three-stage approach has been proposed. In the first stage, rigorous targets are determined for minimum water usage, maximum water recycle, and minimum wastewater discharge. In the second and third stages, the network configuration is evolved while maintaining structural simplicity by minimising the number of storage tanks and network inter-connections. The targets identified in the first two stages are posed as constraints in the subsequent stages. Finally, the paper has also discussed the placement of a regeneration unit within the batch water network to further reduce the fresh and wastewater flows of the network. This placement is based on insights from the water-pinch analysis. A case study has been solved to illustrate the applicability of the proposed procedure. It is recommended that future research address two important aspects of the problem. First, network capital cost which is an essential factor for optimal network design may be explicitly addressed. While both water tanks and piping contribute to this aspect, it is possible to formulate an objective function that includes these two cost items in addition to the operating cost of the network. Clearly, this approach poses a challenge in terms of the formulation and global solution of the problem. Second, regeneration placement is to be further explored. In this current work, regeneration placement is merely done by inspection. A systematic approach should be developed to incorporate water regeneration into reuse/recycle network for global optimality. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the Faculty of Petroleum and Mining Engineering Foundation of the Suez Canal University, the Research Committee New Researcher Fund (NRF 3822) of the University of Nottingham, and the Texas Hazardous Waste Research Center.