The technology of molybdenum extraction from molybdenite concentrate by using sodium chlorate has been investigated. The results show that leaching time, liquid-to-solid ratio, leaching temperature, agitation speed, sodium chlorate and hydrochloric acid concentration have significant effect; optimum process operating parameters were established as follows: time: 4 h; hydrochloric acid concentration: 20%; liquid-to-solid ratio: 10:1; temperature: 70 °C; agitation speed: 500 rpm; and the molar ratio of NaClO3 to MoS2: 3.21. Under these experimental conditions, the extraction of molybdenum is greater than 98%. The mixture of 30% triotylamine and 20% sec-Caprylic alcohol diluted kerosene oil is an effective extractant of molybdenum; the molybdenum extraction efficiencies in the examined conditions were about 99.6% under conditions of O: a ratio of 1:1, hydrochloric acid 60 g/L for 10 min at room temperature. Stripping of molybdenum to aqueous phase was efficient when 18% ammonia liquor were applied. The molybdenum stripping efficiencies in the examined conditions were about 99.5% under conditions of O: a ratio of 1:1 for 10 min at 40 °C.Molybdenite concentrate is commonly obtained as a byproduct in the treatment of copper porphyry ores in which the molybdenite is a minor constituent. The commercial route for the extraction of molybdenum from its sulphide mineral molybdenite involves roasting of the concentrate, purification of the resultant calcine, either by distillation of MoO In the past years, several mineral processes have been tested for treating the ore, such as flotation separation, gravity separation combined with flotation ( The purpose of the present work is to examine the production of ammonium molybdate from molybdenite concentrate using sodium chlorate as the oxidant. The molybdenite concentrate (Mo 41.40%, S 31.40%, Cu 2.20%, P 0.04%, Fe 3.50%, As 0.10%, CaO 0.17%, SiO2, 4.35%, Sn 0.10%) used in this study was taken from Dexing Copper Mine, Jiangxi Province, of which the particle size ranges from 10 µm to 100 µm and 80% is less than 40 µm. X-ray diffraction of the ore showed molybdenite was the major phase; minor amounts of tugarinovite (MoO The leaching experiments were conducted in a 1 L round bottom flask (Changsha, China). The slurry was agitated by a four blade impeller driven by a variable speed motor. The round bottom flask was heated by a water bath. The temperature, and agitation speed were read-out through two PID controllers. Typically, a certain amount of sodium chlorate and MoS In solvent extraction experiments, 10 ml of aqueous phase were mixed with different volumes of the extractant at room temperature. The phase contact time was set to 10 min and the mixture was then poured into separation funnel, phases disengaged within 30 s after mixing and after several minutes delaminated phases were separated and their volume was measured. Organic phases were collected (for stripping studies), and aqueous phases were analyzed for molybdenum content. The concentration of molybdenum was determined by colorimetry using thiocyanate. The effect of leaching time on molybdenum extraction was studied using a liquid-to-solid ratio 10:1 (MoS The extraction of molybdenum is also affected by leaching temperature. High molybdenum extraction may not be achieved in a short time at low temperatures whilst high temperatures have disadvantages such as higher energy. So, in our present study, a medium temperature range from 30 to 90 °C was selected and its effect on molybdenum extraction was studied.  The optimum extraction of molybdenum is also affected by acid addition, in our present study, a medium hydrochloric acid concentration range from 10% to 36% was selected and its effect on molybdenum extraction was studied. The main chemical reaction can be described by the following equation:  Agitation plays an important role in leaching processes. The results of agitation, shown in In our present study, the effect of the molar ratio of NaClO Molybdenum extraction increases from 16.3% to 98.9% when the molar ratio of NaClO The effect of liquid-to-solid ratio (mass/volume) from 5:1 to 100:1 on molybdenum extraction was studied using an initial hydrochloric acid concentration 20%, temperature 70 °C, agitation speed 500 rpm, and sodium chlorate 22 g, impact of different liquid-to-solid ratios on leaching is shown in Seen from Under above optimization experimental conditions, Leach solutions containing molybdenum was obtained, the concentration of molybdenum is 42.65 g/L, pH of leach solutions is 8. The mixture of 30% N235 and 20% sec-Caprylic alcohol diluted kerosene oil is extractant of molybdenum, the objective of this part of the study was to determine conditions for extraction of molybdenum from the leach liquor to organic phases. The extraction operation should produce organic solution of the possibly highest molybdenum concentration. The extraction of molybdenum was investigated with respect to the effects of temperature, pH and aqueous to organic ratio, it was determined that temperature did not significantly affect molybdenum extraction compared with other experimental parameters, the results of investigations into extraction of molybdenum are presented in The concentration of molybdenum in organic phases after extraction is 42.48 g/L. The stripping of molybdenum was investigated with respect to the effects of ammonia liquor concentration, by changing leaching temperature and aqueous to organic ratio, the results of investigations into stripping of molybdenum with various agents to aqueous phase are presented in From the obtained results it can be observed that stripping of molybdenum to aqueous phase was efficient when 18% ammonia liquor were applied. The molybdenum stripping efficiencies in the examined conditions were about 99.5% under conditions of O: a ratio of 1:1 for 10 min at 40 °C, The extraction chemical reaction can be described by the following equation ( The concentration of molybdenum in the solution was 47.27 g/L after the stripping, and ammonium molybdate was crystallized and precipitated with the addition of HNO After drying ammonium molybdate at 110 °C for 2 h and screening, the purity of ammonium molybdate was acquired, meeting the standard specification. The chemical reaction was described by the following equation: It is proved from the experiments that it is an effective technique of extraction from molybdenite concentrate by using sodium chlorate. The experimental results show that leaching time, liquid-to-solid ratio, leaching temperature, agitation speed, sodium chlorate and hydrochloric acid concentration have significant effect. Optimum process operating parameters were established as follows: time: 4 h; hydrochloric acid concentration: 20%; liquid-to-solid ratio: 10:1; temperature: 70 °C; agitation speed: 500 rpm, the molar ratio of NaClO The mixture of 30% N235 and 20% sec-caprylic alcohol diluted kerosene oil is an effective extractant of molybdenum, the molybdenum extraction efficiencies in the examined conditions were about 99.6% under conditions of O: a ratio of 1:1, hydrochloric acid 60 g/L for 10 min at room temperature. Stripping of molybdenum to aqueous phase was efficient when 18% ammonia liquor were applied. The molybdenum stripping efficiencies in the examined conditions were about 99.5% under conditions of O: a ratio of 1:1 for 10 min at 40 °C. The authors are thankful to the 11th Five-year Plan of national scientific and technological program of China (2007 BAB22B01).