Calcium stannate (Ca2SnO4) is a common dielectric ceramic that is generally prepared by a high-temperature solid-state method in an air atmosphere with a roasting temperature of more than 1300 °C. In this study, Ca2SnO4 was much more easily synthesized in a CO-CO2 atmosphere at a relatively low temperature of less than 1000 °C for 30 min. We comparatively investigated the formation behavior and microwave dielectric properties of Ca2SnO4 synthesized from tin dioxide (SnO2) and calcium carbonate (CaCO3) by a solid-state method in air and CO-CO2 atmospheres using X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy, inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy, and vector network analysis. The formation behavior of calcium stannate indicated that the reactions between SnO2 and CaCO3 in CO-CO2 and air atmospheres were both controlled by three-dimensional diffusion. In a CO-CO2 atmosphere, the reaction had a higher reaction rate constant (k) and lower apparent activation energy (E). In addition, Ca2SnO4 was synthesized by a low-temperature solid-state method in a CO-CO2 atmosphere. The results indicated that Ca2SnO4 ceramics had a higher dielectric constant and lower dielectric tangent loss than those synthesized by the high-temperature solid-state method in air. However, the synthesis temperature and time were reduced by more than 300 °C and 8 h, respectively.In the past few decades, alkaline earth stannates with typical perovskite crystal structure have displayed the advantages of high capacity, low potential, high sensitivity, and chemical stability, so they have been widely used as anode materials for lithium ion batteries [ The high-temperature solid-state method is the most popular industrial synthesis technique for calcium stannate (Ca Roasting of SnO In the present study, the phase conversion of SnO CaCO The roasting tests were performed in the high-temperature zone of a horizontal electric resistance furnace. An experimental schematic diagram for the roasting tests is shown in The temperature variation as a function of distance from the center of the furnace for a 4 L/min N Previous studies demonstrated that SnO The formation ratio of calcium stannate (CaSnO Inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (IRIS Intrepid II XSP, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to determine the total Sn content ( The phase constituents were identified by X-ray diffraction (XRD; D/max 2550 P C, Rigaku Co. Ltd., Japan). The microscopic morphology was observed with a scanning electron microscope (QUANTA 200, FEI, Eindhoven, Netherlands) equipped with an EDAX energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS) detector (EDAX Inc., Mahwah, NJ). The dielectric properties (relative complex permittivity,     The effect of roasting temperature on phase transformation is shown in  As seen from To clarify the difference between the formation of calcium stannate roasted in CO-CO As mentioned before, the reaction between SnO By integration of Eq. The reaction rate constant The kinetic model equations for solid-state reactions applied by other researchers are listed in The data shown in The kinetic rate constants ( On the basis of the kinetic equation [1−(1− The scanning electron microscopy micrographs of the products obtained with different roasting times and temperatures are now discussed. Sample a, b, and c were roasted at 800 °C for 30 min, 1000 °C for 30 min, and 1000 °C for 120 min, respectively, in a 15 vol% CO atmosphere. The resulting scanning electron microscopy–energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy microstructure is shown in To compare the dielectric properties of the samples roasted in different atmospheres, samples c and d were chosen. Sample d was roasted in air at 1300 °C for 600 min. As seen from Then the relative complex permittivity ( As one of the critical requirements, magnetic-dielectric materials are required to have a sufficiently low dielectric loss tangent (≤0.01) [ This study shows that Ca The Ca The authors express their heartful thanks to the