Objective
                  Although the stability of the pelvic ring primarily depends on the integrity of the posterior sacroiliac arch, lateral compression fractures with rotational instability are commonly treated by anterior fixation alone. The objective of the present study was to assess the outcome of patients with these fractures treated by posterior iliosacral screw fixation alone.
               
                  Methods
                  Patients with rotationally unstable lateral compression fractures of the pelvic ring (Young and Burgess LC I and LC II or AO/Tile B2) treated by percutaneous iliosacral fixation alone were included. Postoperative complications, need for secondary surgery, malunion, secondary fracture displacement and the time to full-weight bearing were documented.
               
                  Results
                  Twenty-five patients (13 female, 26 male; age: 56±20 years) were treated by percutaneous screw fixation (14 bilaterally, 11 unilaterally). Mean follow-up was 6±4 months, mean time to full weight bearing 9±3 weeks. Revision surgery was necessary in two patients (8%) due to nerve irritation; an additional anterior stabilisation was needed in two other patients (8%) due to secondary dislocation. Wound infection or motor weakness were not encountered, non-union of the posterior arch did not occur. Non-union of the pubic rami, however, occurred in two patients. The presence of malunion of the pubic rami did not affect the time to full weight bearing.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Percutanous iliosacral screw fixation alone is a sufficient technique for the stabilisation of rotationally unstable pelvic fractures with low rates of complications or non-unions. It allows for a minimally invasive treatment thus being a useful option in patients who do not qualify for open anterior fixation.Operative treatment of pelvic ring fractures accelerates the recurrence of undisturbed gait. In the present study we evaluated the postoperative radiographic and clinical outcome of patients with rotationally unstable lateral compression fractures of the pelvic ring treated by iliosacral screw fixation alone. Consecutive patients with rotationally unstable lateral compression fractures (Young and Burgess LC I and LC II Decision for isolated posterior fixation was made in patients with a relative contraindication (e.g. obesity, coagulopathy, previous surgery in the pubic area) who were not considered suitable for an open anterior surgical approach. Surgery was performed with the patient supine. When indicated, fracture reduction was achieved by posterior lateral compression or antero-posterior compression (opening the book). Sometimes antero-superior rotational displacement in the sagittal plane ( In fractures without comminution, threads of 32 Usually, one screw was placed in each affected side. In patients with osteopenic bone stock, two ipsilateral screws were inserted either both in S1 or in S1 and S2 each. Whenever possible, patients were mobilised with 15 Complications were evaluated based on a retrospective review of the patients’ medical records. The need for secondary surgery, the presence of neurological deficits and the time to full-weight bearing was documented. On postoperative CT scans persisting fracture rotational displacement of the posterior pelvic ring was determined and classified as described previously. On conventional follow-up X-rays (a.p., inlet/outlet) and CT scans, the incidence of secondary fracture dislocation of the posterior ring, implant failure or migration and delayed/non-union of the pubic rami were assessed. Between 12/2008 and 07/2010 25 patients (13 female, 26 male) with pelvic ring injuries type Young and Burgess LC I and LC II or AO/Tile B2 and a relative contraindication for anterior fixation as described above were treated by percutaneous screw fixation alone. Mean age of the patients was 56 Revision surgery (change/removal of one screw) due to nerve irritation was necessary in two patients (8%). Hyposensibility of L5/S1 persisted in one patient, even though it remained unclear if this was caused by the intervention or the initial trauma. Additive anterior stabilisation (plate/external fixation) was needed due to secondary dislocation in two other patients (8%). As one patient planned to become pregnant, iliosacral screws were removed after bone healing. Wound infection was not observed in the study population. Mean follow-up was 6 Postoperative posterior fracture reduction was excellent in 14 patients (61%), good in 8 (35%) and fair in 1 patient (4%). Secondary rotational displacement of the posterior pelvic ring at follow-up X-rays was <5 There is evidence that unstable pelvic ring injuries benefit from a combination of posterior and anterior stabilisation Yet, many surgeons treat pelvic ring fractures of type AO/Tile B2 Matta recommended reserving definitive anterior pelvic ring fixation mainly for patients with open book fractures. Iliosacral screws have become a common technique for minimally-invasive percutaneous posterior stabilisation There is a lack of data concerning the use of one ore two screws in only rotationally unstable fractures. In an The purpose of the present study was to determine the radiographic and clinical outcome of patients with rotationally unstable lateral compression fractures of the pelvis treated only by posterior stabilisation with percutaneous iliosacral screws. The follow-up period of the present study was merely 6 months and the number of patients followed up is rather small, when considering the complex figure of pelvic ring fractures. Yet, all patients – except the two who died during hospitalisation – were followed up until bone healing and 22/23 patients were able to bear full weight. Long-term follow-up was not aim of the study. We constricted our observation to only rotationally unstable lateral compression fractures and the results show that iliosacral screw fixation alone can yield good clinical results in these patients. The indication for isolated posterior fixation was limited to patients with obesity, coagulopathy, previous surgery in the pubic area or to patients who did not qualify for open anterior plating due to other reasons. This selection might have negatively biased the results in respect of concomitant injuries or illnesses influencing gait recovery and bone healing. For a comparison with anterior plating, there are only few studies that investigate the clinical outcome of patients showing this injury pattern. However, the observed complication rates in respect of neurological sequelae or the need for revision surgery were comparable with those of symphyseal plating reported by Sagi and Papp in 229 patients, The observed malunion rate of the pubic rami was 8%. This is in the range of previously published data In rotationally unstable fractures, secondary posterior displacement is usually caused by sagittal antero-superior rotation of the affected side under weight bearing ( Mean time to full weight bearing was 9 In summary, the results of the present study confirm the importance of restoring the integrity of the posterior arch after posttraumatic pelvic ring instability. The authors are aware, that isolated posterior screw fixation is not the standard treatment, which still is anatomic reduction of the anterior pelvic ring prior to fixation. There is no literature so far that would advocate posterior fixation of non-anatomically reduced rotationally unstable pelvic fractures in all cases. Our results show, however, that in selected cases a less invasive approach might also lead to satisfactory clinical results. Iliosacral screw fixation alone is a sufficient surgical technique for the stabilisation of rotationally unstable pelvic ring fractures with low rates of postoperative complications or non-unions. Moreover, percutaneous iliosacral screw fixation allows for a minimally invasive treatment and thus represents a useful option in patients who do not qualify for open anterior fixation. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest and disclose any financial and personal relationship with other people, or organisations, that could inappropriately influence (bias) their work, all within 3 years of the beginning the work submitted.