In this research, nanostructured tantalum nitride (TaN) thin films were deposited on 316L stainless steel substrates by reactive magnetron sputtering. The effect of nitrogen flow ratio (N2/(Ar + N2)) on the structural, mechanical and surface properties of deposited films was studied by means of XRD, SEM, Nano-indentation and AFM. The results revealed a strong correlation between the crystal structure and properties of TaN film, where the deposited film transforms from hexagonal γ-Ta2N to hexagonal ε-TaN and cubic TaN with increasing nitrogen flow ratio from 10% to 25%. In addition, it was found that increasing the nitrogen flow ratio will result in the target poisoning and lower the deposition rate, which causes the grains growth and roughening of the surface.Metal nitrides are of great interest for structural applications owing to their excellent properties As tantalum is a refractory metal with high melting point, sputtering is an attractive method to deposit tantalum and tantalum nitride films, since it can be easily scaled up from laboratory sized targets to large-scale industrial applications Sputtering process is controlled by many parameters which may affect the properties of deposited film Mechanical properties of materials at micro and nano-scale are of interest due to their unique properties associated with the small volumes Thin tantalum nitride films were deposited by reactive magnetron sputtering system using 99.999% pure argon plasma with 99.999% pure nitrogen as reactive gas. A 50 mm diameter tantalum with 99.95% purity was used as sputtering target and an austenitic 316 stainless steel disk of 30 mm diameter was applied as substrate which was well polished and cleaned, each one for 15 min, in acetone and methanol ultrasonic bath. The nominal composition of 316L SS substrate in wt% was: Cr: 17.08; Ni: 13.23; Mo: 2.91; C: 0.03; Mn: 0.83; Si: 0.96; N: 0.08; P: 0.04; S: 0.01 and Fe: balance. All specimens were sputter deposited for 15 min in a constant power of 30 W. Target to substrate distance was set to be 10 cm. The base pressure of the chamber was approximately 7 × 10 Mechanical properties of products were determined from a series of indentations on each specimen employing an indentation test system equipped with Berkovich tip. Hardness and elastic modulus of the samples were measured on the basis of force displacement curves using Oliver-Pharr equations The crystal structure of sputter deposited tantalum nitride thin films with different nitrogen concentration were studied by XRD. The XRD pattern of TaN15 film is shown in From the cross-sectional micrographs depicted in  The 3D AFM Images of deposited TaN thin films are illustrated in The surface SEM images of the specimens are presented in The nano-indentation technique was used for measuring mechanical behavior of different tantalum nitride films. The obtained force-displacement graphs are plotted in The hardness and elastic modulus of deposited films were also calculated using force-displacement curves, and their variations as a function of nitrogen concentration are plotted in According to the XRD analysis, it can be stated that the hardness and Young's modulus of TaN10 is higher than the TaN15 because of the dominant hexagonal Ta In addition, decrease in the elastic modulus can also be attributed to higher defect density of the coating. It has been reported that the Young modulus is strongly affected by the density of defects In this research the role of nitrogen flow ratio in reactive magnetron sputtering of tantalum nitride thin films was investigated and following results were achieved: Increasing the nitrogen flow ratio causes the phase structure of the films to change from γ-Ta The mentioned phase evolution results in decrease in hardness and Young's modulus, consequently. Increasing the nitrogen flow rate affects the elastic-plastic behavior of TaN films and increases the plasticity from 58% to 80%. It also causes the total work of deformation to increase from 10 nJ to 19 nJ, subsequently. Higher nitrogen flow rate in sputtering gas results in the reduction of grain size and roughness until a critical value of 20%. It has been shown that the deposition rate of the films is decreased from 82 nm/min to 40 nm/min with increasing nitrogen flow ratio from 10% to 25% due to the target poisoning and reduction in sputtering yield. Increasing nitrogen flow ratio from 20% to 25% results in high mobility of adatoms due to decreasing mean free path. Thus, the grain growth will occur and grain size varies from 34 nm to about 65 nm subsequently. Formation of some nitride compounds on the target surface due to the target poisoning results in formation of nano-particles and this makes the surface rougher and thus the mean square roughness starts to increase with increasing nitrogen flow ratio from 15% to 25%.