Spray formed ceramic rolling elements can enhance the scope of high speed anti-friction bearings. Spray forming offers distinct advantages over other manufacturing processes, in that it is possible to tailor make structural properties of the rolling element. Selection of ceramic composite material, hollowness ratio (D/d) and also post-heat treatment after spray forming will ensure the desired rolling contact performance. Alumina–titania (AT40) composite rings of different wall thicknesses (1, 2 and 3mm) were spray formed and post-heat treated at 1200, 1400, 1500 and 1600°C. observations clearly illustrate best possible performance of thinner rings with post-heat treatment at 1200°C. Performance was evaluated in terms of structure–property relationship and also rolling contact wear.Spray forming is a potentially attractive process for production of ring shaped components for gas turbine applications. Fielder et al. Spray forming of ring shaped for tribological applications such as rolling contact bearing becomes significant, especially for development of high speed bearings. For such application ceramics will be ideal materials owing to the lower density, high hardness and relatively enhanced wear resistance characteristics. Frechetle et al. Rolling contact fatigue trials have been carried out on AT40 rings of Spray formed rings of AT40 composite, were evaluated for the response to rolling contact fatigue. Both as-sprayed and post-heat treated rings were tested for rolling contact fatigue. The observations are presented in this section. Typical XRD profile indicating the phase content of powder of AT40 ceramic is illustrated in Spray formed rings were post-heat treated for possible refinement of microstructure. Typical scanning electron microscope of post-treated AT40 composite is illustrated in Typical XRD profile indicating the influence of post-heat treatment on phase content of spray formed AT40 ceramic composite rings are illustrated in In the as-sprayed condition, spray formed rings contain meta stable γ-Al Spray formed annular rings of AT40 ceramic composites were tested for rolling contact fatigue response. The tests were conducted in a laboratory fabricated roller disc type facility. The rolling contact fatigue response was evaluated in terms of wear of material. Wear of material was measured by weighing the test specimen in a precision balance at regular intervals of 0.3 million cycles. The applied (contact) stress was restricted to around 10–15% of the ultimate value, to ensure (deformation free) rolling contact. Typical rolling contact wear characteristics of AT40 composite rollers both in the as-sprayed and post-treated status are illustrated in  Spray forming of annular rings of AT40 components can function as good rolling elements. Post-heat treatment at 1200 With higher post-heat treatment temperature complex compound form, results in reduction in structural response. Thinner rings (great degree of hollowness) enhance fatigue resistance.