Flotation pre-concentration of sulphide and gold values from certain Carlin-type deposits characterised as double-refractory gold ores is quite challenging. Numerous studies conducted on these ores in many laboratories globally (including the present study) under a variety of chemical and physical conditions have merely confirmed low recovery (and poor concentrate grades) for sulphide minerals and gold, and poor separation between sulphide minerals and carbonaceous matter, even when the valuable minerals are adequately liberated. None of the traditional reasons based on liberation or the choice of chemical and physical conditions and separation strategies could provide satisfactory explanation for the observed poor separation.
                  In this study, the focus was on the role of non-sulphide gangue (NSG) minerals. It was hypothesised that specific NSG minerals have a detrimental effect on flotation recovery of gold bearing minerals and their separation selectivity. In order to test this hypothesis and delineate the effect of the various gangue minerals, a new approach was taken. This involved first isolating the various mineral components of a double-refractory gold ore from one of the Carlin-type deposits using a gravity separation technique. Then flotation experiments were performed using a mixture design on various mixtures of these isolated components under controlled conditions. The results of these mixture experiments supported the hypothesis and demonstrated, for the first time for these types of ores, that even small amounts of NSG minerals, especially carbonaceous matter and clays, had a large adverse effect on the flotation of sulphides and selectivity of separation. While it is tempting to attribute the observed effects solely to slime coating, there is no basis to do so at this stage; it is more reasonable to propose that multiple contributions exist. The results of this study provide the much-needed context and direction for further fundamental studies and for developing processing strategies.With the depletion of high-grade deposits, the minerals industry faces a significant challenge in the efficient processing of low-grade deposits with complex mineralogy. Some Carlin-type deposits present such a challenge. The recovery of gold from these deposits is quite difficult and unsatisfactory. Gold in some of these Carlin-type deposits is characterised as double-refractory gold ( Extensive mineralogical and flotation studies were conducted ( In this study, a new approach was taken to test the hypothesis regarding the adverse effect of NSG on flotation of sulphide minerals. This involved conducting studies using mineral components isolated from the ore itself. Thus, sulphides and NSG minerals were isolated from the double-refractory gold ore using gravity separation (i.e. isolate minerals without the use of chemicals) and then conducting flotation experiments using mixture designs to investigate the effect of one of more of the NSG minerals on flotation of sulphide minerals (and gold values). Such an approach has the following important advantages: (a) allows working with the real ore system and using indigenous components of the ore (rather than high-grade single minerals purchased from other sources); (b) eliminates the need to arbitrarily assume a particular mechanism by which such adverse effects manifest or that a particular gangue mineral is responsible (i.e. there is no pre-conceived notion, conclusion, or bias); and (c) provides a rational basis and a context to conduct fundamental studies. A double-refractory gold ore from one of the Carlin-type deposits was used in the test work. To minimise oxidation effects, the ore sample (<30 Mineralogical characterisation of the ore using the Mineral Liberation Analyser (MLA) – a mineralogical characterisation system based on automated scanning electron microscopy – identified 20 different minerals in the ore, but to simplify data processing for discussion purposes the modal mineralogy was grouped as shown in Flotation reagents were supplied by Cytec Industries Inc. This included collector Cytec S-10294 and a frother blend containing 75% methyl isobutyl carbonyl (MIBC) and 25% Cytec X133 (both reagents were selected based on prior ore flotation work conducted by Cytec). Sulphuric acid was also used as pH modifier. The bulk ore sample was stage-crushed to 100% minus 2 For each test, 1 A laboratory-scale M4 IsaMill™ (Xstrata Technology) was used for finer grinding to achieve a P80 of 20 Several techniques were evaluated in order to isolate the major mineral components from the ore. The laboratory-scale Mozley separator was found to be the best and the most efficient in terms of sharpness of separation and integrity of the minerals (no chemicals are used). In the Mozley separator, particles are separated based on their specific gravity. Given that the specific gravity of the sulphide minerals is quite different from that of carbonaceous matter and clays, they can be separated using this technique. Details can be found in The flow sheet used for effective separation of mineral components of the ore is shown in  A mixture design is a type of factorial experiment that is designed to show whether or not the mixture of components behaves (performs) as an additive combination of the individuals. Mixtures that do not behave (perform) additively are called either ‘synergistic’ (when the performance of the mixture is better than that expected from the simple additive effect of individual components), or ‘antagonistic’ (when the performance is worse) (  Bench-scale laboratory rougher flotation tests were performed under controlled conditions in a 0.5 To elucidate the effects of particle size, grain size and mineral association on the flotation of sulphides, flotation products were first sized using a cyclosizer into three size intervals: +20, −20, +10 and −10   The effect of carbonaceous matter and clay minerals on the grade of sulphides in the flotation concentrate is shown in Recovery of sulphides in the concentrate vs. the grade of sulphides in the feed is shown in All of the observed results of performed flotation experiments clearly demonstrated that the presence of specific non-sulphide gangue minerals (i.e. carbonaceous matter and clays), even in relatively small amounts, had a detrimental effect on the flotation recovery and grade of sulphides. The results of MLA analysis brought more explanations on the effect of non-sulphide gangue minerals on recovery of sulphides in this specific Carlin-type gold deposit. The results of isolating/separating mineral components of the Carlin-type deposit using Mozley separator and flotation experiments on various mixtures of these isolated components under controlled conditions showed that the presence of non-sulphide gangue minerals, especially carbonaceous matter and clays, even in small amounts, had an antagonistic effect on the recovery of sulphides and its separation selectivity. It is tempting to attribute these observations mainly to slime coating of gangue minerals on sulphides (as is done most often in research studies) or fine gangue particles causing reagent starvation; however, at present there is inadequate evidence to warrant such a conclusion. It is more realistic to suggest that multiple processes contribute to the sulphide flotation outcome. The results have also showed that NSG had an antagonistic effect on grade of sulphides in concentrate. With a small increase in mass proportion of carbonaceous matter and clays in the flotation feed, the grade of sulphides in concentrate decreased drastically. This could be a reflection of poor recovery and entrainment of gangue both contributing to the grade dilution. But results stated that in this specific ore, the lower grade of sulphides in flotation feeds does not necessarily cause lower recovery of sulphides in concentrate as they are not linearly correlated. The results of the flotation tests showed no direct effect of carbonates and silicates on the The purpose of this study was to investigate the reasons for the poor recovery of sulphides and gold values and separation selectivity from certain Carlin-type deposit double-refractory ore. Extensive mineralogical and flotation studies ruled out reasons such as degree of liberation, choice of reagents, and choice of experimental conditions. A new hypothesis was then pursued relating to the potential adverse effect of non-sulphide gangue (NSG) minerals on selective flotation of sulphides. In order to test this hypothesis and delineate the effect of the various gangue minerals, a new experimental methodology was applied. First, various mineral components (sulphides and NSG) of a double refractory gold ore were isolated using a gravity separation technique (with no added chemicals). Then under controlled conditions, flotation experiments were performed using a mixture design on various mixtures of these isolated components. The results of these mixture experiments provided strong support for the hypothesis and demonstrated that: Even small amounts of NSG minerals, especially carbonaceous matter and clays, had a large adverse effect on the flotation of sulphides and selectivity of separation. The antagonistic effect of NSG minerals, especially carbonaceous matter and clays, on concentrate grade was much stronger than that for recovery. The grade dilution was attributed to the increased froth stability caused by gangue minerals, and consequently increased gangue entrainment. The obtained results did not show any direct effect of carbonates and silicates on recovery of sulphide but mineralogical characterisation showed existence of fully liberated and fine-grained carbonates in the flotation feeds. The results obtained in this study have shed light on the causes for the poor flotation separation of the Carlin-type double-refractory gold ore, but the exact mechanism of the effect of non-sulphide gangue minerals on the recovery of sulphides is not known at present and requires further study. The results of this study provide the much-needed context and direction for further fundamental studies and to develop processing strategies. It is proposed that a potential strategy for improving the flotation performance of the double-refractory gold ore would be to remove the NSG minerals, particularly the carbonaceous matter and clays, using gravity separation methods prior to sulphide flotation. The authors wish to acknowledge and thank Barrick Gold Corporation for their financial support and providing the ore sample. Also, special thanks to Professor Dee Bradshaw for her support and useful advices during this study. Also thank to JKMRC pilot plant staff and MLA personnel for their help and cooperation during these experiments.