Fatigue properties of two Al-containing steels have been investigated by rotating bending fatigue tests. Results show that the fatigue limits (the fatigue strength at 107
                     cycles) were improved remarkably by plasma nitriding due to the high hardness of 1000Hv and compressive stress of 400MPa in the nitrided layer. Scanning electron microscopic observations show that after nitriding the fatigue crack initiation sites moved from the surface flaws or near-surface matrix into the AlN inclusions at around the case-core interface. Degassing treatment can increase the fatigue limit because it prevented fatigue crack initiation at AlN inclusions due to the reduced [N] contents and refined inclusion size.Plasma nitriding is a wide-spread surface hardening process utilized to improve the fatigue strength, wear resistance, and corrosion resistance of materials Two medium carbon Cr–Mo–Al steels were used as the experimental materials, which were commonly used for nitriding treatment because of the existence of strong nitride-forming elements including chromium, molybdenum, and aluminum. The chemical composition of materials was listed in Hot-forged and annealed bars of the steels were first machined into specimens for mechanical property tests, fatigue tests and the determination of residual stress as shown in Tensile tests were conducted on a WE-300 test machine. The results were listed in After fatigue tests, the fracture surface of the specimens was observed on an S-4300 type scanning electron microscope (SEM) attached with energy disperse analysis (EDAX), operating at 15 The in-depth distribution of microhardness was measured by a hardness tester for eight specimens after fractured by rotating bending fatigue test. Each of the eight specimens of the two nitriding experimental steels was machined into some flake films and was prepared for the measurement of microhardness gradients and the results of all readings were averaged. The nitrided layer has a two-phase structure, in which the thin “white layer” is present on the surface. The diffusion layer is situated below it, as shown in Figs. The hardness profiles of nitrided specimens are given in The  In cyclic loading of machine components, the effective stress acting on the specimen is the main controlling parameter and it depends strongly on the applied and residual stresses, which are extremely important for cyclic stressing in bending and or torsion. Using the principle of superposition of stresses, the combination of residual and applied stresses produces a net, effective stress distribution, which has generally a maximum value in the case/core transition zone of smooth specimen, as shown in According to the At the temperature of 1213 It is well known that the crack initiation occurs from persistent slip bands, grain boundaries or other imperfections for low and medium strength steels. If a specimen surface is machined in a very good condition, and the internal inclusions are relatively large, the fatigue crack origin would initiate at inclusions. On the other hand, if a specimen surface was machined in a rather poor condition, and the internal inclusions are relatively small, the fatigue crack origin would initiate at machining trace on the specimen surface  Based on the characteristic feature on the fracture surface such as the sizes of inclusion and internal matrix defects, the fatigue property is discussed from the viewpoint of fracture mechanics. Firstly, the stress intensity factor range at the front of inclusion and internal matrix defects, Δ In   Rotating bending fatigue tests have been carried out for medium carbon Cr–Mo–Al nitriding steels with different [N] contents. The depth of the nitrided layer of the two experimental steels is about 380–400