Introduction
                  Locally delivered, crystalline vancomycin has been suggested as a potential prophylactic measure against the development of deep and superficial surgical site infection. Clinical expectations regarding the duration and peak of drug concentration in local tissues following administration are unknown. Our goal was to develop concentration vs time curves for locally administered vancomycin powder in a high-energy, open femur fracture rat model in local tissues and to compare that data to two well performed similar, systemic administration studies.
               
                  Methods
                  After approval for animal research, 24 adult Sprague-Dawley rats sustained closed, midshaft femoral fracture under anesthesia. Fractures were caused via blunt guillotine with 750g metal rod dropped 50cm. Injured hindlimbs were surgically opened at fracture to simulate open injury and stabilized using 0.054 Kirschner wires. Vancomycin powder was administered using weight-based protocol (goal: 25mg/kg). Rats were sacrificed in groups of 4 at 4, 8, 24, 48, 72, 96h. Samples harvested included rat-tail venous blood prior to sacrifice, and femoral bone and anterior thigh soft-tissue were harvested post-mortem. High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) was performed on all samples.
               
                  Results
                  Concentration vs. time curves demonstrated that the surrounding soft-tissues demonstrated highest maximum concentration (1.5mg vancomycin/g muscle). Bone reached maximum average of 199μg vancomycin/g femur: approximately 13% of maximal soft-tissue absorption. Plasma reached maximum concentration of 1.8μg/mL plasma. All peaks at t=4h. Within 48h, average muscle vancomycin concentration dropped to 3μg/g muscle (0.2% maximum muscle concentration) and the average bone concentration dropped to 1.9μg/g femur (0.9% maximum bone concentration). Vancomycin was undetectable on all samples at 96h. Comparison to classical animal studies suggest local delivery to bone exceeds that of IV dosing for approximately 48h and may peak near concentrations of 102 multiples.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Locally administered vancomycin provides drug delivery in excess of IV dosing for approximately 48h after intervention. Exponential decay demonstrates rapid removal of drug to near undetectable levels in bone, plasma, and local soft tissue thereafter in a rat model. Local delivery may generate concentrations exceeding that achievable by steady state systemic dosing for 48h.Bone and soft tissue infections are a significant clinical problem in the world of orthopaedics. Implant related infections occur in an estimated 112,000 patients annually and cost the American health care industry over $1.2 billion annually Buchholz et al. Pharmacokinetics is defined as the study of drug absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion as a function of time The specific purpose of this study is to investigate and describe the concentration vs. time curves of locally administered vancomycin powder in a high-energy, open femur fracture model in a rat. Our specific clinical interest is to discover the duration of time that vancomycin would remain in the local tissues as well as the ultimate systemic concentrations reached with local delivery. Our secondary interest is to compare the local concentration of vancomycin in our study to the two classical, well performed, historical rat studies by Dworkin Funding for the analysis for samples was provided graciously by a LS Peery Research Grant. The LS Peery Foundation seeks to support high impact research that will pave the way to improve treatments for musculoskeletal problems that limit human function such as post-operative infection. Approval for animal testing was pursued and approved before commencement of the study by the Salt Lake City VA’s Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) protocol # ACORP 13-01. Twenty four Sprague-Dawley male rats sustained a closed, midshaft femoral fracture while under anesthesia ( Rats were sacrificed in groups of 4 at 4, 8, 24, 48, 72 and 96 HPLC was used to detect vancomycin in bone, muscle, and plasma samples as a function of time. For all tissue samples an Acclaim 120 C18 reverse phase column with 5 This is a descriptive basic science study intended to demonstrate the rate of change of concentrations after depot vancomycin administration in the setting of a femur fracture but without additional disease states for comparison. Statistical comparisons are therefore not made between rats. Historical data including the two studies in the literature describing the resultant bone concentrations of systemically delivered, steady-state vancomycin in rats The work of Dworkin All concentration versus time curves are shown in  The purpose of this study was to experimentally measure the bone, serum and soft tissue concentration of vancomycin as a function of time in a rat model simulating the scenario of local delivery into a wound involving an open femur fracture sustained via a high-energy mechanism. The most important finding of this study was that vancomycin delivery into bone exceeded historical findings for IV administration in a similar rat model for a time period of approximately 48 Efficacy of drug delivery through intravenous administration is classically described using bone:serum ratios, but this ratio is irrelevant for depot administration as the drug does not arrive from the systemic circulation. Bone penetrance is a measure that we define above that follows the same principles as bone:serum ratio, comparing the concentration of drug in target tissues to the concentration of drug introduced. Through dimensionless analysis, this method allows us to compare different routes of administration. Ultimately, this method provides us with a pathway to quantify the supposition that depot delivery can reach high initial concentration in the targeted bone and can maintain greater concentrations in bone than is possible with IV delivery for the first 48 To give context, the two historic studies measuring IV vancomycin penetrance into bone used for reference in this study documented bone:serum ratios of 0.091 and 0.075 The precise mechanism by which local vancomycin inhibits or treats acute infection remains unknown. The findings in this study suggest that any contribution from vancomycin towards the prevention of infection in its use as a prophylactic, or action against established biofilms would likely occur very rapidly after the time-zero point of administration. The initial high concentration and subsequent rapid drop of concentration in local tissues exhibited in these rats challenges the concept of using depot vancomycin alone as a treatment for infections, out of concern that drug presence would be lost rapidly. First-order kinetics describe elimination in which the rate of drug removal from tissue compartments is proportional to the concentration of the drug itself, resulting in exponential loss of drug as a function of time. Vancomycin removal from local tissues in this study demonstrates this pattern exactly and is best visualized on The concentration:time relationship established in this study is generally similar to the results of two studies employing fundamentally different models. Agarwal et al. The strengths of this study include its demonstration of the concentration curve against time of depot vancomycin delivery, the modeling of a particular tissue disease state relevant to trauma surgery, and the comparison to historical IV dosing scenarios giving the time curves in this study additional context. Our analysis should highlight the extreme difficulty of comparing efficacy of drug delivery in dissimilar pathways. We performed a mathematical “spot check” of the bone penetrance ratio by comparing direct concentrations achieved in the studies (between approximately 1–10 The primary limitation of the study is the tissue itself; conclusions drawn from rat studies are not directly transferrable to human tissue. Specifically, when considering conclusions made in animal studies involving drug concentrations, it is impossible to accurately match clinically relevant concentrations between species and we cannot comment on human dosing. This study did not investigate downstream effects of depot vancomycin including the effect on bone healing, on local vasculature or tissue quality, nor the clinical efficacy of preventing or treating infection. This is not a complete pharmacokinetic study as we do not analyze drug excretion such as urine drug concentration. We do not comment on different preparations or delivery methods. Finally, we do not compare findings from our own work but instead historical studies performed in other labs. Although the studies are well performed, they are still beyond perfect control. We minimized these issues by extracting tissue:serum concentration ratios rather than specific concentrations themselves. This study ultimately demonstrates that locally administered vancomycin reaches high initial peak concentration and maintains bone concentrations in excess of IV delivery for 48 The authors report no conflicts of interest specifically relevant to this study. Individual sources of potential conflict are as follows: Working, Frederiksen, Drew, Loc-Carrillo − no conflicts Kubiak − 3B − DePuy, DJ Orthopaedics, Tornier, Zimmer; 4 – Connextions Medical, OrthoGrid Technologies; 5 – Zimmer; 8 – Journal of Orthopaedic Trauma; 9 – Foundation of Orthopaedic Trauma Funding for this study was graciously provided by the The authors would like to acknowledge Jesse Sutton, Pharm.D, and Russell Benefield, Pharm.D, for their contributions in review and coaching through complex pharmacology concepts. Finally, we would like to thank Selene Working, PA-C, University of Utah Department of Infectious Diseases, for her contributions in discussion of this project concept.