Pelleting flocculation can be viewed as a technique that improves the sludge characteristics, which may be beneficial during the subsequent phase of solid–liquid separation. Generated flocs structures possess an appearance of nearly spherical beads with an enhanced stability.
                  The literature provides two theoretical growth models of such pellet-like flocs: (i) series and (ii) parallel system. The parallel system concerns the formation of aggregates with a high degree of structural order that is called onion-like structure. Consequently, in reported cases of pelleting flocculation this kind of internal buildup of flocs was strongly suggested. Contrary to these statements, the reasoning presented here demonstrates that the predominantly non-uniform interior structure of pellet flocs, here termed raspberry-like structure, is the result of sludge conditioning by pelleting flocculation.
                  The goal of this paper is to present and discuss the structural attributes of pellet floc aggregates in terms of internal buildup and to reorder the available literature on pelleting flocculation according to the proposed reinterpretation of the concepts of this technique.Pelleting flocculation was established in the 1970s, as a new branch of applied science called “wet pelletising engineering” ( Upon observation, three mechanisms have been found to be responsible for pelleting flocculation: (i) perikinetic flocculation (Browian motions), (ii) orthokinetic flocculation (interparticle collision due to shear forces), (iii) mechanical syneresis as the distinctive factor (  Considering the formation mode of pellet-like flocs Yusa has postulated two basic concepts of pelleting flocculation: the series system and the parallel system ( In this system orthokinetic flocculation succeeds first and random, loose and bulky flocs are produced. Thereafter decanted slurry consolidates by means of mechanical syneresis. In this case the ultimate formation process of round aggregates is conducted outside of a liquid medium. This system is supposed to be realized by, e.g., In this case, there is no time delay between orthokinetic flocculation and mechanical syneresis. The dispersed particles and random micro-flocs attach themselves to “pelleted mother flocs” and densify through mechanical syneresis at the same time. The generated agglomerates – called pellet flocs – should possess an onion-like structure. At this point we propose a slightly extended delineation of this system proved by the laboratory observations and conclusions. From the point of original definition of the parallel system ( Many authors report the realisation of the parallel model that yields pellet flocs with the onion-like structure in large scale utilities ( Considering that the most typical pelletizing reactor (i.e., fluidised-bed pellet contact clarifier, slowly blended by a paddle stirrer) is fed at one inlet point in the bottom section with fresh micro-flocs and flocculant, there is no certainty that these incoming flocs in the agitated liquid medium have the affinity to attach only to the surface of some of the “pelleted mother flocs” present in the tank, as the author(s) predicted. The probability of attachment of fresh flocs to already existing mother flocs would seem to be similar to that of the formation of new pellet flocs from several micro-flocs. Orthokinetic flocculation is a rapid destabilisation mechanism as well as a random size enlargement process; therefore, it is difficult to govern such a uniform growth mode (layer-by-layer) precisely in large scale processes. Flocculation processes run considerably faster than the transportation of micro-flocs towards distant pelleted mother flocs. Consequently, different growth scenarios are possible, e.g., random micro-flocs can create random macro-flocs, or so-called mother pelleted flocs can undergo collision and attachment both with each other and/or with micro- and macro-flocs. Later in the process, micro-flocs may be attached as single or multi-layer aggregates onto the surface of pelleted mother flocs. Accordingly, no ideal onion-like structure can be achieved with a single inlet point for flocculant and slurry. Instead, species with non-uniform interior structure occur. For this reason, the parallel model in our interpretation has been extended by the acceptance of a random conformation of flocs of any size in pellet flocs that is termed here – raspberry structure. Based on a detailed literature survey and our own conclusions, the available reports on pelleting flocculation have been reordered according to the proposed interpretation ( The somehow theoretical onion structure of pellet flocs could be obtained through the alternate contact of seeds with flocculant and primary particles as described by During the process similar to those described in the literature and reproduced by This paper presents the concept of pelleting flocculation and explains the structural differences of produced pellet flocs. The controversial point in question is the original definition of the parallel model, that assumes the uniform arrangement of particles in an agglomerate around the central seed in form of regular layers. This growth mode is possible but not viable. Since flocs formation is a random process, we postulate that pellet flocs coming from large scale applications possess rather non-uniform, so called raspberry-like structure. Because of the action of mechanical syneresis, micro and macro-flocs collide, join together and densify at the same time. Finally, both structures hold the same appearance. Consequently, we suggest that the performance mode of pelleting flocculation determines the inertial structure of pellet flocs, which is reflected in sludge characteristics (density, solid matter content) that are of importance for subsequent processing.