Product design selects materials from primary metal and material cycles and combines them into multi-material designs, in which the various materials (metals and non-metals) are complexly integrated (e.g. welded, glued, alloyed, layered). Since the quality of recyclates and the recycling rate of a product is largely affected by the design of the product it is required that tools are available that link computer aided design (CAD) software and fundamental recycling models as developed previously by the authors in order to predict recyclability of the car during the design phase. However, complex system models for the prediction of recycling rates of new cars are far too complex to be linked directly to CAD. Therefore fuzzy rule models have been developed to create the interface between the complex system models and the design tools for automobiles.
                  The quality of recyclates and hence the recycling rate of the product is largely affected by the liberation of materials during shredding, which have been connected in the design. Therefore the prediction of liberation behaviour is of crucial importance to the calculation of recycling/recovery rates. A fuzzy rule based approach is developed to describe the liberation behaviour of materials from automobiles and hence the recycling rate, linking material combinations and connections in product design with the particle composition and degree of liberation after shredding. This approach permits a description of the liberation mechanism of materials during shredding as a function of design. The heuristic rules for this were developed during extensive sampling and gathering of data from scrap samples from various shredders. This realizes a model basis for Design for Recycling.
                  The elegant simplicity of the developed fuzzy set models makes them easy to integrate into LCA tools. This ensures that such environmental models are provided with fundamental information on the end-of-life behaviour of products, which include (i) physics and thermodynamics of separation processes, (ii) the quality of recyclates as a function of physical design choices and (iii) recycling rate calculations on a statistical basis. This methodology is currently been applied by the automobile industry to ensure among others that recycling rates have the fundamental basis that challenges but also provides a solid legal basis for the calculated recycling rate of new automobiles.Materials are used in a wide range of products and applications ranging from consumer products (cars, electronics, white and brown goods, etc.) to constructions (buildings, roads) and agriculture (fertilisers), etc. The social and ecological value of the materials in these applications is not only determined by the ‘in-use value’ of these applications such as functionality, durability, safety, reduced energy consumption, aesthetics, etc. but also by the possibility of these materials to return from their original application into the resource cycle after their functional lives/use. The design of the product determines the selection of materials to be applied in these products as well as the complexity of the material combinations and interactions within this product (e.g. welded, glued, alloyed, layered, inserts, etc.). These actions directly affect the recyclability of the materials as discussed by Commercial recycling systems never create pure material streams ( The combination and connection of the materials in the product design are linked to the quality of recyclates as a function of the degree of liberation of the various particles after shredding, which is clearly depicted by The prediction of the recyclability and recoverability of products as well as their respective quality already in the design stage requires the exploration of the limits of recycling on a fundamental basis ( These predictions of the recyclate quality and the recycling/recovery rate are all a function of the liberation during the shredding of the car (or any other product) and hence the liberation classes (particle composition and degree of liberation) achieved in the liberation process. Therefore, the prediction of liberation is crucial to the prediction of the recycling/recovery rate of a product. Each product design therefore creates a new set of liberated and un-liberated particles, with a design-dependent composition and degree of liberation. This paper discusses the development of a recycling liberation model, which predicts the liberation behaviour and hence the recycling/recovery rate of products as a function of design choices, such as material combinations and connections and joint types (welding, gluing etc.). Due to the complexity of the liberation process a fuzzy rule modelling approach has been developed, which is linked to the fundamental recycling model as depicted in  The fundamental recycling optimisation models as developed by the authors capture the particle size distribution and the composition and degree of liberation of the particles after shredding by defining the different components of the car as minerals A to L (A The composition of the car after shredding, being the input to the model defined by the liberation matrix The elemental composition of the (un)liberated particles in these liberation classes is described by the composition distribution matrix From various industrial experiments and shredder plants, which all involved a large number of car wrecks that were shredded and subsequently separated, data on car composition, particle size reduction and liberation have been collected by sampling the various material flows within the shredder plants and analyzing the composition, liberation distribution and the characteristics of the un-liberated particles (  Extensive data have been collected on the occurrence of liberated and un-liberated particles related to particle size class, the particle composition (connected materials) as well as degree of liberation of these un-liberated particles ( Figs. It might be clear that the degree of liberation and the composition/quality of the particles after shredding of a design type and its parts are eventually determined by the combination of the various parameters representing the design of a product, such as the materials choices, material connections/joints and the material combinations (determining the composition matrix). Therefore, the prediction of the liberation of the materials during shredding has to take all these aspects into consideration. In order to link the liberation prediction to the CAD, the input description and defined parameters of a liberation model should match the information and parameters as provided by the CAD system. The basis for the prediction of liberation is the designed car or concept. This design will be defined in the CAD software as a list of materials and parts, their weights, including the joints used to connect the various materials in (the different parts of) the car. Since the design of the car can vary strongly, the liberation prediction models and their parameters must be set up in order to handle this adequately. Instead of dealing with every single possible combination of materials, joints used and materials connected, the design of the car has been classified into different types/classes, which properly reflect the trends in current and future car design and are therefore appropriate to deal with the range of differences in the composition of the car. This definition provides the basis for the defined liberation prediction model. The materials used in a product, as defined in the design stage, will differ in their specific recovery rate and their combinations in the product design will affect the quality of the (intermediate) recycling products and therefore the recycling rate of the car. The composition of the car (or any other product under consideration) can be derived from the CAD software as a list of materials chosen for a particular design type, product or part. The following five material input types (classes) have been defined to categorise the composition of the car ( As discussed above the liberation of the materials from the car is determined by the materials used and the connections/joints between these different materials. In order to predict the liberation behaviour of the car (or any other product under consideration) the different connection/joint types as defined in the design stage of the car (within the CAD software) have been classified on the basis of their distinctive liberation behaviour (see The liberation behaviour of the different joint/connection types has been defined based on heuristic rules (using extensive experimental data as discussed above), which link each individual joint/connection type as given in Not only the type of joints/connections itself, but also the type and amount of materials joined in these connections are of major importance in predicting not only the degree of liberation after shredding, but more important the number and type of materials still connected after shredding, which directly determines the quality of the recyclates after separation and therefore the maximum achievable recycling/recovery rate of a product. The liberation is determined by a unique set of parameters being the combination of material input type, liberation type and composition distribution type. This unique set results in one specific liberation distribution matrix ( The liberation matrix has been defined using the collected data as a starting value, however in such a way that a closed mass balance is maintained over the input and output of the shredder. Therefore, data reconciliation has been applied to create the different liberation distribution matrices The liberation prediction will lead to a unique input of the recycling optimisation model, expressed in a material input type, composition matrix and a corresponding liberation matrix. The recycling optimisation model is applied to calculate for each of these 45 combinations (for the discussed classification) a unique recycling/recovery rate as a function of the constraints on recycling/recovery as imposed by legislation (e.g. restriction on thermal processing). Many of the design variables and their relationship to liberation can only be described in an inexact manner. Whereas the composition of the car ( Different fuzzy rule models have been defined to transform a range of inputs (materials, joints and material combinations) into different crisp categories, of which the combination determines the composition and degree of liberation of the particles and streams after shredding. The unique associated liberation matrix is used to calculate a unique recycling rate by the application of the recycling system model. Hence a unique recycling rate is associated with the unique outputs of the fuzzy liberation model. Various illustrative fuzzy models are discussed below to illustrate the principles involved. Fuzzy rule modelling has been applied to classify any given (future) design expressed as a ‘list of materials’ as defined in A fuzzy variable has been defined for each of the 12 input materials ( A fuzzy model has been defined transforming the distribution of the occurrence of the various joint types shown in In this model each joint type variable ( A fuzzy rule model has been defined that predicts the composition matrix based on the occurrence and combination of the different material combination types. In the example depicted in The fuzzy rule liberation model is described as a combination of the three parameters estimated by the three fuzzy rule based models: material input type (mt liberation behaviour type (lt composition matrix type (ct As discussed above, the input to the recycling optimisation model is a combination of the liberation distribution matrix and the composition distribution matrix (being the intermediate output of the fuzzy rule liberation model). This implies that each of these sets of (mt, lt, ct) correspond to a unique recycling/recovery rate, which has been calculated using the recycling optimisation model. Therefore, the output of the fuzzy liberation model is a three-dimensional matrix with an index of mt, lt and ct, which provides a corresponding recycling/recovery rate for the fuzzy design input as defined by the fuzzy rule based models above. As discussed above, a fuzzy rule model has been defined to predict the recycling/recovery rate as a function of design choices based the rigorous recycling model. The prediction of liberation behaviour and therefore of the quality of e.g. recyclates as captured by the fuzzy rule models, provides a technology based feedback to the designer on the consequences of material combinations, connections and joints as defined in the design stage of the product. The linking of these fuzzy rule models to CAD software implies technology based Design for Recycling as depicted in The developed fuzzy rule models can be applied to link product design to complex recycling models and recycling rate calculations, hence providing the following benefits: The developed fuzzy models can link the fundamental recycling models and recycling rate calculations on a simplified basis to design tools and material choices, while still maintaining the detail knowledge (process, material, quality, etc.) as captured by the complex models. The fuzzy rule models predict (on a heuristic basis), the liberation behaviour as a function of material choices, connections and joints as defined in the product design, hence predicting the recyclate quality and recycling rate as a function the design-dependent, unique particle composition and degree of liberation after shredding. This fuzzy approach makes it possible to link fundamental recycling models to environmental life cycle assessment (LCA) tools/software in order to provide a fundamental and efficient basis for the calculations of recycling rates, prediction of quality of recyclates, process operation and recycling system architecture in these. The fuzzy models provide an efficient and easy to use fundamental/technological basis for Design for Recycling guidelines; including the influence of material combinations and connections, liberation, particle size and physical/chemical/thermodynamical process efficiency on the quality of recyclates and the maximum achievable recycling rate. The discussed approach provides fundamentally based answers to questions of crucial importance to the industry such as the magnitude of the legally required recycling rate of presently designed products, emissions of processes and end-of-life products to nature etc. This approach is being adopted by the automobile industry to ensure among others that recycling rates have the fundamental basis that challenges but also provides the legal basis for recycling legislation (