Drying operations are common in food industries. One of the main components in a drying system is the furnace. The furnace operation involves heat–mass transfer and combustion, thus it demands a complex mathematic representation. Since autoregressive methods are simple, and help to simulate rapidly a system, we model a drying furnace of olive pomace via an auto-regression with exogenous variables (ARXs) method. A neural network of radial basic functions (RBFs) defines the ARX experimental relation between the amounts of dry pomace (moisture content of 15%) used like fuel and the temperature of outlet gases. A real industrial furnace is studied to validate the proposed model, which can help to control the drying process.volume mass percentage of water content on wet basis density temperature released energy specific heat capacity at constant pressure net calorific value fuel fraction excess-air ratio measured input data measured output data ARX coefficients ARX sampling noise RBF coefficients RBF–ARX sampling noise number of input coefficients number of output coefficients input–output delay number of measures time data acquisition time interval correlation coefficient air pomace hot gases dry pomace inlet outlet integer indices: Drying is the process of removing moisture from solids. This procedure is common in food industries when water content can damage the final product quality There are also experimental methods, which can be generated rapidly, and are simpler than theoretical techniques. On the other hand, they are limited to the drying kinetic of specific agricultural products like rosemary leaves Olive oil is an important ingredient in the Mediterranean diet. This product is produced pressing olives (virgin olive oil). As a result of the previous process a semi-solid waste product (olive pomace or orujo) is produced. To extract the amount of alimentary olive oil still contained within the orujo, the pomace moisture has to be reduced via a drying process Several studies about olive pomace drying process have been realized We explain how to model an existing drying furnace using experimental data via auto-regression with exogenous variables (ARXs), which is a known method in control field The rest of the paper is arranged as follows. Section Drying olive pomace is usually carried out in rotary dryers. The wet pomace is transported through a cylinder tube where a fan sucks a flow of hot gases from a furnace. The fuel employed is dry olive pomace. The gases flow is constant (even if the inlet temperature varies), and goes into the same sense of the wet pomace that has to be dried. The drying furnace can be modelled like an open system where inlet air and fuel are inputs, and outlet hot gases and heat losses through walls are outputs The actual heat generation from biomass is a complex process. Therefore, the resulting mathematical model is also complex although boundary system information is available. In order to overcome the previous drawback, we can use a linear approximation. Linearization techniques, e.g. the method described in the next section, are well known in control applications, and can be employed to model the drying furnace. System identification techniques provide linear approximations based on input–output data acquisition. Classical methods try to capture the characteristic parameters (zeros and poles) of an assumed system model, which relates a known input signal (impulse, square, ramp, etc.) with a set of measured output data The autoregressive with exogenous variables method provides accurate linear dynamic models An adequate ARX combines a set of input variables with previous measured output variables. Let Eq. Since real systems usually have a non-linear behaviour, different scholars have studied how to extend the aforementioned methods to model non-linear situations An example of this type of procedures is the RBF–ARX model. It blends the identification capability of ARX with the approximation tools of neuronal networks with radial basic functions (RBFs). The RBF neuronal networks are adequate to non-linear cases Data required to define the models described in Section Wet pomace At the cylindrical dryer (4), K-thermocouples continuously measure the temperature of inlet and outlet combustion gases ( A Pitot tube linked to a TESTO 512 anemometer measures the output flow at different sections of the dryer chimney (7). The average of the acquired measures is the output gases flow About the pomace, we do not have a way to measure pomace weight during the process. Instead of that, we consider the mean values provided by the staff of the drying plant for the outlet pomace flow The pomace water content on wet basis (     The water content is:  We omit non-steady states in the data analysis. In order to analyze the drying furnace system two models are proposed and implemented in the well-known computational software Matlab:   The root mean square error (rmse) and the correlation coefficient ( Let Once the discrete models are ready, the dynamic continuous model is computed. Section    Regarding the difference between prediction and simulation ( Relating to ARX and RBF–ARX models, although both of them get an adequate approximation of the system behaviour, RBF–ARX provides better results (higher Finally, note that a wrong setup of the actual PID system produces that one pole is close to 1 in ARX methods give an identification procedure for olive pomace drying furnaces, which use dry pomace like fuel. We show how to predict the drying gas temperature provided by an industrial furnace (controlled by a PID regulator) fed with a known flow of dry pomace. Experimental input and output data in different times allow defining the proposed model. We verify the model via root-mean-square error and correlation coefficient ( The examples of Section RBF–ARX method simulates better the measures than ARX one, because ARX shows a retardation and instability. The approximations have few poles and zeros, and the model configurations do not affect greatly poles and zeros arrangement. The RBF–ARX models have a moderate non-linearity, and they can be used to evaluate the fuel feed PWM strategy. This work is supported by the “Junta de Andalucía”, under research grant AGR 06131, 2010, and by the University of Jaén, under research contract OB.08.02.83.