Mg–Al2O3 nanocomposite powders, with Al2O3 particles of 50nm size, were synthesized by mechanical alloying starting from a mixture of 70vol.% pure Mg and 30vol.% Al2O3 powders. A steady-state condition was obtained on milling the powder mix for about 20h, when the crystallite size of the Mg powder was about 10nm. The structural evolution during milling was monitored using scanning electron microscopy, energy dispersive spectrometry, and X-ray diffraction methods. The results showed that a mixture of Mg, Al2O3, and MgO phases were obtained on mechanical alloying. On annealing the milled powders at 600°C for 30min, a displacement reaction occurred between the Mg and Al2O3 phases, when the formation of a mixture of pure Al and MgO phases was observed. Also, a reaction occurred between the initial Mg powder and Al formed as a result of the displacement reaction, leading to the formation of Mg17Al12, Al0.58Mg0.42, and Al3Mg2 phases. Thus, the powder annealed after milling the Mg+Al2O3 powder mix for 25h consisted of Al, MgO and Al3Mg2 phases.Metal-matrix composites (MMCs) combine the high-performance of the metal matrix and the superior strength and stiffness of the ceramic reinforcement, and these find important engineering applications including automotive and aerospace If enhanced mechanical properties are desired, very small particles must be used for reinforcement. The particle type, size, morphology, volume fraction, and distribution of reinforcing particles in the metal matrix play an important and critical role in enhancing or limiting the overall properties of the composite material. Reinforcing the matrix with much smaller particles, in the submicron or nanometer-sized range, is one of the key factors in producing high-performance composites, which yield improved mechanical properties. Further, the ductility and toughness of such MMCs can be significantly improved with simultaneous increase in strength by reducing the particle size to the nanometer range, in the so-called nanocomposites Solidification processing route has been the most popular and inexpensive method for the fabrication of composites. However, it is not easy to uniformly disperse nanoscale ceramic particles in a metal matrix and clusters are formed, thus defeating the very purpose of using them. In particular, incorporating nanoparticles via the liquid metallurgy route is very difficult since wetting is so poor that even the most vigorous stirring is unable to break the agglomerates. A more effective method, especially for high volume fractions of the reinforcement, is to disperse individual nanoparticles through solid-state processing methods, e.g., mechanical alloying of a mixture of metal particles and ceramic nanoparticles. Mechanical alloying (MA) is a solid-state powder processing technique that involves repeated cold welding, fracturing, and rewelding of powder particles in a high-energy ball mill. In this process, a small quantity of the blended elemental powder mixture is loaded into a container along with the grinding media, and the whole mass is agitated at a high speed for a predetermined length of time. During the milling process, the metallic particles go through the repeated sequence of cold welding, fracturing, and rewelding. The ceramic particles are then mixed with the metallic particles during the process. The size of the composite particles also gets refined during the milling process. A balance can be achieved between the welding and fracturing after a certain time, leading to a steady-state particle size distribution. The continuous milling beyond this stage still helps to refine the grain structure and improve the uniformity of dispersion. A high degree of uniform dispersion of the reinforcement is likely to be achieved by the repeated collisions between the grinding medium and the powders. One of the disadvantages of MA is that usually it takes a long time. Because of this it is possible that the milled powder could get contaminated. However, when dealing with materials containing oxides, this should not be a serious problem. Compared to other processing techniques, MA has been shown to be a promising technique for producing high volume fraction metal matrix nanocomposites Magnesium-based metal matrix composites (MMCs) are promising materials for structural applications in the aerospace and automotive industries due to their low density, reasonably high strength, superior creep resistance, high damping capacity, and good dimensional stability Commercially available magnesium powder of 99.8% phase-purity and a mesh size of −325 from Alfa Aesar Corporation (Ward Hill, MA, USA) and 50 The milled powders were characterized for their crystal structure and microstructure. X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku X-ray diffractometer, Tokyo, Japan) patterns were recorded with Cu Kα radiation to obtain information about the number and nature of the phases. The peak width of the diffraction peaks was utilized to obtain the crystallite size of the matrix phase. A scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi-3500N), equipped with an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS), was used for elemental analysis. X-ray mapping was also carried out on the milled powders to evaluate the elemental distribution. The thermal stability of the phases in the milled powders was evaluated by annealing the milled powders for 30   From the positions and intensities of the diffraction peaks in The above exchange reaction has a large negative free energy change (Δ During milling, the particle size is reduced and clean and fresh surfaces are produced as a result of fracturing of powder particles, and the defect density is increased due to the heavy deformation involved. As a result of the combined effect of all these processes, diffusion is enhanced and consequently formation of the product phases occurs easily, i.e., the kinetics of the reaction are significantly faster.  It is also useful to notice from The Mg–Al binary system contains two solid solutions and several intermediate phases It is well known that non-equilibrium phases, including supersaturated solid solutions, metastable intermediate phases, and amorphous phases could form in mechanically alloyed powders. Thus, it is possible that the constitution of mechanically alloyed powders could differ from that of equilibrium alloys. That is, the crystal structures and lattice parameters of the phases present in mechanically alloyed powders could be different from those of the expected phases. Thus, in the annealed powder, we have a number of phases, some of which are not expected under equilibrium conditions. The fact that the alloy, even in the annealed condition, contains all the possible intermediate phases in the Mg–Al system is an indication that complete equilibration is perhaps not achieved. This is because, for any given composition, the binary alloy is expected to contain only two phases under equilibrium conditions.  Even though one assumes that the heavy deformation involved in the MA process ensures that the constituent phases are uniformly distributed in the microstructure, it can be easily confirmed whether it is so by conducting elemental mapping in the SEM.  A homogenous distribution of the Al It has been shown that MA can lead to the formation of nanocomposites with ultrafine sizes and uniform dispersion of the reinforcement particles. Such composites are expected to be stronger and perhaps even more ductile. Such a combination is particularly useful in the Mg–Al system, to improve the properties and performance of these composites. Jinling Liu would like to thank the