A series of multi-stage triaxial compression tests revealed quite chaotic reactions of water-saturated Permotriassic sandstones on changing pore water pressures. Not before focussing the various test stages with respect to occurring critical phenomena, which strike the fabric structures due to their fractal nature during any triaxial testing, eventually an approach became tractable: Pore systems with cracks and shear bands can be widened in a quasi-static way, but only up to a stability limit. Thereafter the fabric collapses with a seismogenic contraction of the pore system causing a rise of the pore water pressure. Changes of structural patterns occur as formation either of fissures up to collapse with acoustic emission, or of a rather fractal pattern of crossing shear bands generated without audible noise but with fine grit due to comminution. Dilation and contraction of the pore system are visible from overall volume changes. Both modes of pattern formation can be understood as critical phenomena of the mineral solid. Scale-independent features of these changes of fabric patterns can be transferred to the meso- and macro-scales in the field and in the lithosphere, respectively. However, questions of scale-dependent features related to cohesion should be further investigated.Changes of pore water pressure are often related causally with seismic activity in the earth's upper crust ( Rock formations in the lithosphere display patterns of scale-independent features, particularly joints and faults, so that the description as a continuum is not appropriate. They have a pore system (πορος = passage) so that spatial and temporal distributions of mechanical quantities are not differentiable or even discontinuous. Therefore, while rock is matter, it is not a material ( In his overview “Dynamics of Multiscale Earth Systems” The world stress map project WSM ( These structural features evidently concern also the permeability. Darcy permeability requires laminar flow. Even in the linear range of the Navier-Stokes equations, the flow through fractal pore systems is not laminar due to successive hydraulic bifurcations. Therefore the diffusion process of pore water, i.e. its transition to an equilibrium after a disturbance (like with a sponge under water after placing a weight on top of it) is anomalous, i.e. not only determined by Gaussian thermal oscillations. Nevertheless, we use a measure of Darcy-like permeability to compare the overall behaviour of specific samples. We state therefore hypothetically three constitutive features of sandstone by means of triaxial tests, which can be scaled up based on the fractal nature of geo-matter. Sandstone is not a continuum, but a discontinuum with non-differentiable distributions of mechanical properties; that is also valid for apparently homogenous core samples without visible cracks due to the fractal pore system. Sandstone displays scale-independent constitutive properties that may be transferred from the lab scale to local, regional or global scales, for which quasi-static and kinetic evolutions are known as slow and fast tectonics (τεκτων = builder and mover; e.g. tectonic plate movements/fault displacements). The flow of pore water (or other fluids) through tectonic pore systems cannot be captured with Darcy's law and the classical mass balance (often called continuity equation) as spatial and temporal derivatives do not exist in a classical sense with fractal distributions. The fractal nature of rock can be attributed to critical phenomena; their occurrence is typical during evolutions of fractal processes ( We argue that rock samples in triaxial devices constitute micro-tectonic analogues of lithosphere sections (field scale). In other words, using adequate laws of similarity an upscaling from micro-tectonics to macro-tectonics can be achieved by means of scale-independent constitutive features despite or just because of fractality. These are working hypotheses, which we endeavour to justify in the present paper. We explain our triaxial testing procedure by means of notions and definitions that deviate from those of material sciences (Section The triaxial testing program was carried out with fluid-saturated rock samples in a 5 MN load frame ( The stiffness of the triaxial testing system is equivalent to 2/3 the one of a steel sample (142 GPa; sample size d = 100 mm, l = 200 mm) for loading, and to roughly the same (213 GPa) for unloading. Fluid pressures were registered at the pumping devices. The axial shortening or lengthening of the sample was registered outside and inside the confining pressure vessel. The axial displacement control (feed rate) was alternatively achieved either externally at the piston or internally at the sample cylinder within the pressure vessel. The radial extension and reduction (diameter change) was measured only inside the vessel at opposite points in about half of length (= height) of the sample cylinder. In order to record changes of sample shape (axial shortening or lengthening; diameter extension or reduction) with attached measuring devices (LVDTs), moderate grain sizes of sandstone (up to 2 mm) were used in combination with sufficient sample sizes (70 mm or 100 mm diameter of core cylinders each with doubled length). Fabric changes in the multi-stage triaxial tests are indicated by axial and radial displacements during force-controlled stages or by force and pore pressure changes during displacement-controlled stages. Imposed actions lead to changes of sample shape and externally observable pressures (below named ‘overall quantities' of geometrical or fabric pressure changes). Any further displacement in the sample is interrupted if the axial force no longer increased. A force-control of the piston is stopped as soon as an acceleration of the axial displacement is registered. Intervals of the tests, which were operated up to a recordable reaction, i.e. to a change of the lateral sample shape or to a drop of the axial force, were subdivided with their controlled overall boundary conditions. Sometimes these intervals were confined by loss of control by critical phenomena. Different intervals with constant overall boundary conditions are named test stages. Sections of imposed actions with different displacement or force changes are deliberately separated from each other. These delimitations of different test stages are evidently subjective. As far as possible, measurable geometrical changes were used, viz. an increasing radial extension of the sample cylinder was preferred as an indication of a significant structural reaction on an imposed action. Only after pressure release and unwrapping of the sample, it is possible to identify a pretended change of fabric on the surface of the sample cylinder. A fabric reaction of a sample cylinder occurs if the axial servo-hydraulic control can temporarily no longer compensate for a spontaneously and rapidly progressing critical phenomenon. Conversely, with a radial servo-hydraulic control, another distribution of critical phenomena would cause a similar fabric reaction at different overall conditions. We take over Except quasi-static evolutions, determination of pore water pressures inside the pore system is impossible by means of endplate values. The latter are at best legitimate for slow test sections, but not for rapid changes of pore volume during a collapse. In our set-up, the measurement of pore water pressure is located near the sample influx, thus overall pore water pressures are no spatial averages in general. The axial force measurement takes place externally adapted to the piston or internally at contact to the sample; in both cases axial stresses calculated from them constitute overall values without being mean values in the sense of material sciences. Changes of axial force (measured at piston and below sample) and/or confining pressure occur alongside with changes of pore water pressures at the endplates, as far as a control is feasible. Correspondingly, controlled changes of pore water pressure are only feasible in quasi-static test stages, which are thus defined for triaxial tests. While the total radial pressure σ The relative changes (reduction or increase) of axial length (ΔL/L) and radius (ΔR/R) or diameter are both sample-size dependent overall values as they refer to length and radius in an arbitrary reference configuration with original amounts L and R of the sample. The measure of L is recorded inside the triaxial cell at the sample cylinder (internal length) and outside at the piston (external length). Figures in Section The arbitrary reference system (cylindrical sample) leads to subjective deformations. Negative values of ΔL/L and ΔR/R indicate reduced sample length and diameter. The chosen sample is as arbitrary as a ‘representative element' of a lithosphere section. The latter is not deformed like a continuum, but undergoes fractal tectonic dislocations, which could get visible by means of marker layers for instance in seismic sections. We used cylindrical samples of two types of sandstones (see Conventional lithological classification of the samples as well as their apparent homogenous external images are insufficient to characterize fractal properties of the pore system. For lack of X-ray-tomographies, fractal parameters of the pore system (quantification of volume or surface) could not be deduced from quantities measured within our study. We extended the usual concept of We note again that our original aim was a relation of seismicity with an injection of water on the lab scale. As we could not find clear causal relations of injection pressure variations with the fabric response of apparently similar samples, we started to evaluate features of critical phenomena. Our samples represent two different types of sandstones of Permo-Triassic age; their properties are displayed in The permeability of sandstone samples is investigated by permeability tests of BT sandstones in the triaxial device. The pore water flow occurs between the endplates during their triaxial testing at specified overall pressure conditions. The test stages with permeability tests are specified by σ̂   The evolution of permeability (k̃ Mass or volume of supplied pore water, which is required to stabilize constant pore pressure conditions at the endplate, is suited to indicate changes of the pore volume during gradual alterations of the pore system. That was observed with a pulsating and increasing change of axial fabric pressure at constant confining pressure. Differently from The pore water flow through samples at and after triaxial testing under various overall conditions demonstrate changes of fabric and pore structures that can be linked with critical phenomena. Steady total pressure conditions appeared as a reasonable overall state of samples in a triaxial test aiming to evaluate possible effects of pore water pressure changes on the solid fabric. Experiments exhibit an evolution of axial fabric pressure and radial fabric pressure or, respectively, changes of sample shape (length and/or diameter) during increase and decrease of injection pressure of pore water, controlled at the inflow to the nearly water saturated samples, which can contain minute fractions of pore gas. During controlled changes of water injection pressures either the axial and the radial fabric pressures were controlled or the axial lengths changes were suppressed. Alternatively, during controlled changes of water injection pressures together with controlled pulsating increases and decreases of overall axial and radial fabric pressures any free changes of the sample shape (changes of lengths and/or diameters) were enabled. The examples in Further experiments were carried out with slight gradual changes of overall fabric pressures and pore water pressure, keeping the total overall pressure constant for 10–20 min as far as possible with the servo-control. The resulting changes of sample length and diameter often differed at increasing and decreasing pressure changes and were not causally tractable; at best, random correlations were visible. As outlined in Section Similar reactions of the fabric are often indicated by a gradual increase of the diameter of the cylindrical sample, if the difference between axial and radial fabric pressure is modulated with rest intervals of about 10–15 min and thus gradually increased with continued steps. The sudden radial extension of the sample, indicating an overall collapse, takes place without a significant precursor ( After a synchronous increase of overall fabric pressures and pore water pressure at the endplate, a gradual decrease of the overall axial fabric pressure with persistence of radial fabric pressure and pore water pressure at one endplate leads first to an accelerating axial extension with onset of splitting. Then an increase of the overall axial fabric pressure leads to a rapid axial shortening, thereafter the axial shortening drops synchronously with the pressures. In order to avoid an overall collapse during the test with multiple splitting of the sample into discs, the deliberately synchronous reduction of all pressures in the last phase of the test impedes the destruction of the mantle of the sample ( In summary: The influence of water injection on the solid fabric is by no means unique and mono-causal. The fabric reaction appears as multi-causal and wildly random. Only close to critical points, even well below a Mohr-Coulomb limit, a (locally confined?) collapse can be triggered by a fabric change in different combinations of overall fabric and pore pressures. Triaxial tests were performed with different overall confining pressures (σ̂ Controlled changes of injection pressure at the endplate (+/- Δp̂ In summary: The evaluation ( A sequence of more than 140 triaxial tests was executed with samples of Rotliegend (BT sandstone). Injection pressure changes of pore water varied systematically together with related changes of the fabric pressure states. The controlled overall pressure modulations were recorded in respect of inelastic diameter changes only. The axial component of the overall total pressure either remained constant or was cyclically modulated. Examples of tests ( The questions are again: Is it possible to identify causal relations between steered actions and resulting reactions? How can the injection of water induce solid fabric changes in a tractable causal relation? Certainly, a credible statistical analysis of the results is not feasible due to the fractal nature of the sandstones with their wild randomness of pore systems. In most of the tests (53%), the externally visible image of the original mineral fabric of the rock cylinders remained unchanged after the first of the multiple variations of pore pressure and fabric pressures. With the aid of multi-stage triaxial compression test protocols and unrolled surface scans of the sample cylinders before and after several triaxial test stages it is demonstrable, that the structural patterns on the surface of the a sample cylinder were repeatedly converted in succeeding test stages. At the majority of all tests, no visible expansions of the pore systems (indicated by radial extension) were produced by combinations of varied injection pressures of pore water and fabric pressure changes. Only in about one of ten tests (12%), we could observe changes of sample diameter and cracks or shear bands already in first test stages, viz. after the first record of inelastic diameter change. The progression of a changing pore system is detected in the case of increasing radial (lateral) extension (compare black line in In about one third of our tests (35%) a detectable change of the mineral fabric took place only after several test stages of “imposed mechanical action”. A preliminary just as a repeated change of pore water injection pressure and varied fabric pressure conditions can enhance visible fabric reactions. However, these fabric changes occur in an unpredictable way. The development of fabric changes, detectable here as increasing lateral extension, is connected with a change of overall permeability (Section The synchronous and stepwise variation of the fabric pressure difference (i.e. stress deviator) and its gradual increase at a constant level of pore water pressure improves the chance to obtain a visible fabric reaction ( A relatively high level of difference between axial and radial fabric pressures are necessary to reach a measurable structural sample reaction, but the changes of pore water pressure are differently effective. The criticality of any distinct state of “imposed mechanical action”- as it is determinable in a triaxial device but not in a lithosphere section - may be localized by the closeness to a Mohr-Coulomb limit as a critical point (see Section In summary: A wild randomness of reactions with sample diameter changes was observed in more than 1800 changes of pore water pressure. The recorded diameter changes cannot be traced back on pore water injections as these are combined with various controlled and gradually changed overall fabric pressure conditions. Any possibly expected significant effect of pore water injection must be unexplained because of multi-causal relations in the fractal pore system. However, a sufficient difference of axial and radial fabric pressure is a suited feature to characterize a critical state (section The intricate causality of the pore water injection pressure with the evolution of the solid fabric reaction in a triaxial device is also indicated by changes of structural patterns at the cylindrical surface of sandstone samples at the end of any triaxial test stage. An inelastic change of the spatially averaged sample diameter at the end of a triaxial stage is used as an indication of a changed pattern. In addition, the beginning of a decrease of the total overall axial pressure during the displacement controlled test stages is used as an indication of an approach to a critical fabric state. This pattern transformation also implies a changed pore volume, which can be captured sometimes by pore pressure changes, and which can be determined for any test stage by volume recording of solid and fluid. The main signal for determination of the solid volume results from the axial LVDT. The measured changes of the radial diameter contribute only minimally to the recordable solid volume changes. The solid volume difference between the maximum compression and the reached critical point in any test stage is of interest in order to determine the changing pore volumes from one to the next test stage. The fluid volume changes are deduced from the volume record of the pore water pressure pump which supplies the sample at the upper endplate. Unrolled photographs exhibit fractal patterns of shear bands and cracks in various combinations. In spite of manifold multi-stage triaxial testing successions, there are only two kinds of pattern types and combinations of both displayed on the sample surfaces: Shear bands and cracks. Connecting both structural patterns of fabric appearance with respect to the changing solid volumes of the sample cylinders, then we find again two types of volume changes. The changes of the volumes of the solid and of the fluid in the five subsequent test stages were determined as the volume difference between the maximum of axial compression and the maximum of dilation at the end of each test stage. Contraction especially after the first test stage, i.e. within the 2nd test stage, dominates with the formation of open fissures, but repeated and increasing dilation occurs with the formation of shear band patterns. Less clearly appear the fluid volume changes due to imprecisions of the measurement systems, viz. the fluid volume determination at the endplate, which have influence on the quality of the volume determination. Nevertheless, the trend of volume increase or decrease of the solid from the 1st to the 5th test stages differs clearly in both types of fabric patterns.  In comparison, however, the diagrams in Both kinds of pattern formation are related to the amount of the overall total confining pressure, but also the pore water pressure level seems to be linked with the mode of fabric formation not randomly. In our testing series, the shear band pattern evolved more likely at lower pore fluid pressures, whereas fissure formation predominate in the tests at high pore fluid pressures. Detailed observations of samples after their multi-stage triaxial testing show that both types of fabric patterns occur concurrently on the surface of the same sample cylinder. Fabric patterns change irregularly in relation to test-stages and sample-space. This observation may terminate the possibilities to disentangle the evolutions with the critical phenomena.  In summary: Apparently, the orientation of the bright lines of the shear bands is approximately aligned to the orientation of the major principal stress according to the tangents of a Mohr-Coulomb envelope. The opening fissures, however, differ in their orientations and do not coincide with the shear bands. An overall loss of stability, i.e. a collapse that encompasses by definition the whole sample, occurs alongside with an initial contraction of the pore system accompanied by noise and loss of control. The spontaneous loss of overall equilibrium in the triaxial tests is related with sudden rise of pore water pressure as relatively the pore volume shrinks suddenly, but their detection by endplate measurement is not reliably possible. Other fabric changes with measurable inelastic radial extension do not represent overall collapsing samples due to the permanently effective servo-control. Therefore, we have to differentiate cases with and without loss of control at any sample reaction. In other words, the control gets lost with an overall collapse, whereas a minor collapse confined to the interior of the sample can only apparently be controlled, but precisely speaking not really be hampered. Sample reactions in triaxial testing include geometrically confined collapsing concerning as well local ranges within the sample ( With triaxial testing, the development of shear bands and fissures in a cylindrical sample is restricted by friction at the endplates. In case of displacement-control of the axial piston, a rapid sample reaction that is quicker than the displacement of the piston means a loss of control due to changes of the sample. In the case of force-control of the axial piston, a sudden decrease of the axial force due to a splitting sample cylinder that takes place quicker than the servo-controlled piston is able to move, then that also means a loss of control with an overall collapse of the sample. The interaction of sample friction at endplates, evolution of shear bands and cracks, and abilities of the servo-control apparently lead to loss of control or its absence. Transferred to the lithosphere, such losses of control are restricted to situations near the surface or near underground cavities. Employing the Mohr-Coulomb limit condition with overall fabric stress components, one can connect the first invariant (directional mean value of the fabric stress tensor, i.e. axial + radial fabric pressure/2) with the maximum difference between axial and radial fabric pressure which can be expressed by the second deviatoric invariant ( The spontaneous relative contraction of the pore system and the orientation of shear bands and cracks relative to the principal direction of fabric stress are both features, which must be evaluated in order to better understand the collapse process in triaxial tests. Comparable collapse processes in the lithosphere can take place only near a free surface. The comparison of the Mohr-Coulomb limit of four subsequent test-stages within a series of similar BT sandstone samples that were examined together shows two changes ( Despite or just due to the neutrality of the solid against pressure changes of pore fluid, the approach to critical points of the solid fabric by injection of water is intricate, because the fractality includes hydraulic aspects: There is an indirect weak dependence visible as already at the 2nd test stage the cohesion survives only at low pore water pressure. At higher pore pressure levels the cohesion reaches zero at the 2nd test stage. For the 3rd test stage there is a purely frictional behaviour without cohesion at all three levels of pore water pressure. Nevertheless, the injection pressure level of pore water is not directly or causally related to the prior test stages. Consequently, there are no simple relations for the approach of critical points by an injection of water. In summary: The Mohr-Coulomb condition is questionable for geo-matter with fractality as the principle of local action (employed for materials) is theoretically no more valid. Nevertheless, it can capture a stability limit by means of spatially averaged fabric stress with included fluctuations. The stability limit is related with an overall collapse of sandstone samples in a triaxial device, but sandstones in situ can display a collapse at the most near a surface. The Mohr-Coulomb limit must be reached for getting a collapse, but does not control the approaches to a collapse. However, the Mohr-Coulomb limit is empirically and scale-independently valid despite spatial fractality. Rock is matter and not material in a continuum. Spatial, temporal and episodic fractality is a basic property of geo-matter. Their fractal nature is due to critical phenomena and relics of the same (  We observed the generation of shear bands and cracks as well as their erasement and spontaneous dwindling in the course of subsequent test stages ( With respect to our multi-stage triaxial tests it is possible (but more likely an exception) that changes of pore water pressure, solely controlled at the inflow into the sample, lead to fabric reactions or structural changes (e.g. at least an increase of the diameter). In our multi-stage tests, critical points of the solid fabric, followed by substantial changes of the same, are only exceptionally induced by an injection of water, but the previous stress and relics of former critical phenomena played always a dominant role. Accordingly, the distribution of pore spaces and mineral bonds between grains with consequences for stresses and their fluctuations should influence the fabric reaction. In all of our experimental setups with varying overall conditions, we controlled the injection pressure of pore water invading the sample, but its effect appears as a rather chaotic evolution. Changes of injection pressure of pore water are by no means solely causative for generation of quasi-static or kinematic critical phenomena. Despite wild fluctuations, some constitutive features are apparently scale-independent: In addition to cracks and shear bands, the principle of effective stresses is a scale independent feature as well as both described critical phenomena with dilatant quasi-static or contractant kinematic evolutions. The cohesion of any rock formation is in turn a scale-dependent feature of basic significance but its role in the fractal perspective should be clarified. In particular, its role for hydraulic fracturing is not clear beyond the empirical use of this method. On the sedimentary basin scale, injection or extraction of pore fluid sometimes cause apparently seismic reactions. An indistinct coupling between pore pressures and stresses is a basis for modelling of stress-changes in boreholes and their effects within depleting petroleum reservoirs e.g. in Northern Germany ( The rudimental correlations, which can be derived from our experiments, testify critical phenomena with changes of fabric pattern that evolve with the interaction of pressures in mineral fabric and pore fluid. Changes of pore water pressure frequently accompany changes of the mineral fabric due to critical phenomena. The intricate and random interplay of pressures and structural changes eludes a reliable reservoir control with monitoring as the fractal temporal succession of data with time is not smooth enough for conventional extrapolations. The orientation-dependent and non-Darcy-like permeability of the fractal pore system additionally leads to a more intricate interaction of pore fluid and solid ( The two types of critical phenomena with experimentally resulting fabric patterns differ in their appearance and the related changes of pore volume. The generation of the pattern type “opening fissures” is connected with noise, whereas the type “shear-band” is formed without audible noise. According to this difference, one can expect in the lithosphere that the one type is seismically active with the other type having an aseismic character. These findings possibly can be linked with results of The role of the The triaxial tests are considered as The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We thank Gerd Gudehus, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, for intensive discussions, helpful explanations and abundance of patience during the development of this paper. For discussions and theoretical support we also thank our collaborating teams in the research projects 776 of DGMK and SUBI of the BMBF program GEO:N.