 This process consists of shaping the powder by means of pressure in a die or mould of prescribed shape; the compact thus formed must have sufficient green strength to allow it to be removed from the die and handled without fracture. This is an important property. After removal from the die, the compact is heated, normally in a protective atmosphere or vacuum, to a temperature usually below the melting point, such that the particles weld together and in some cases densify markedly to increase the strength. This is the step known as sintering. In some cases, especially when the sintered compact is to be subsequently rolled or extruded, isostatic compaction in a flexible mould is used. An exception to the compaction process is the production of filter elements from spherical powders, often of bronze, by what is known as loose powder sintering, in which powder is poured into a mould of the appropriate shape and sintered in the mould. Most recently shaping has embraced injection moulding and the use of polymers to lubricate the powder flow into a mould cavity. After moulding, the polymer is extracted and the powder is sintered to near full density. Increasingly, sintered billets are being made for subsequent mechanical working such as hot extrusion or rolling. These processes yield wrought material to which the name sintered parts does not apply, but the bulk of PM products are items made individually to the final shape and size. The main classes of PM products are: Engineering components, i.e. parts for machinery made by directly pressing or moulding in rigid dies of the required shape, and sintering with either no or only minor further shaping. This is the largest and most familiar class of PM product. Refractory metals. These often have melting points that are inconveniently high and/or are difficult or impossible to work in the cast state because they are brittle. This group includes tungsten, molybdenum, tantalum, and related metals. Intentionally porous materials for use as filters or as oil-retaining (self-lubricating) bearings. Composites. These may consist of two or more metals that are insoluble in each other in the solid state, but the name is generally used to signify a metal in which is dispersed one or more non-metallic ingredients such as refractory oxide, carbide, or other compound that is insoluble in the metal. These are referred to as metal matrix composites. A very important member of this group, the hardmetals, is the subject of a later section. High-duty alloys in wrought form having mechanical properties superior to those of the corresponding material made from ingot. In this category must be included certain composite materials having fine dispersions of oxide or the like designed to improve the strength, especially at elevated temperatures. In some other cases the principal reason for making wrought products from powder is that higher yields of usable material are possible. This applies to metals such as titanium alloys the scrap from which cannot readily be re-used. Magnetic materials. This very important class of sintered material is dealt with in There is a large number of possible ways of making metal powders, the principal ones used on a commercial scale for powders for PM being: Solid state reduction of a compound of the metal, commonly the oxide. This often results in a loosely caked sponge which is converted into powder by milling. Thermal decomposition of a compound of the metal. This also may yield a sponge. Electrolysis. By suitable choice of the various parameters certain metals can be deposited in a spongey or powder form. Such powders are often dendritic. In the case of iron, a dense deposit is formed which is reduced to powder by comminution. Atomisation, in which molten metal is disintegrated into small drops which are caused or allowed to solidify out of contact with each other and with any solid surface. There are many ways in which the molten droplets may be produced, the most common being to allow a stream of molten metal to fall vertically from a tundish into a chamber where it is broken up by jets of high-pressure liquid or gas. Another process now gaining in importance is centrifugal atomisation, in which droplets are flung from a rapidly rotating pool of molten metal or from a disk on to which a thin stream of metal impinges. In another process the end of a rotating bar is progressively melted and if the heating is by laser beam or plasma arc the process can be carried out in near vacuum, thus substantially eliminating the risk of contamination. This is called REP (Rotating Electrode Process) and if a plasma arc is used PREP (Plasma REP). An important feature of atomisation is that it can produce homogeneous fully pre-alloyed powders.  Rapid solidification. This means cooling molten metal at a very high rate such that on solidification an amorphous or other non-equilibrium structure results. In the case of certain aluminium alloys, for example, it is possible to hold in solution significantly higher percentages of alloying elements (see Mechanical alloying. Another way of achieving higher strength and especially retention of that strength at elevated temperatures is to include in the metal matrix a finely dispersed insoluble phase, commonly a stable oxide. Oxide Dispersion Strengthened (ODS) materials are increasingly of interest in aerospace technology, and they are of necessity made by PM. In general the performance improvement is greater the finer the particles of the dispersed phase, the mechanism being dislocation locking as in precipitation hardening. An approach near to ideal is mechanical alloying, in which a metal powder is mixed with a fine oxide powder and the mixture milled for several hours or even days usually in an attritor, during which process the oxide is beaten into the metal, the particles of which are repeatedly flattened, broken up, and reflattened while at the same time the oxide particles are broken down into progressively smaller fragments, typically less than 100 nm. Mechanically alloyed powders are generally consolidated and converted into wrought shapes. Chemical composition is the main factor that determines the properties of the finished material. One feature that is specific to powders is the oxide layer on the surface of the particles. This has an important influence of the green strength of compacts but more especially on the sintering process which depends on the formation of true metallurgical bonds between adjacent particles. In the case of metals with easily reducible oxides the level of surface oxide is determined by heating a weighed sample in hydrogen under specified conditions, cooling in hydrogen, and weighing. The reduction in weight is commonly called the loss in hydrogen or hydrogen loss. The procedure gives a misleading figure if volatile material is present, such as organic additions (pressing lubricants), moisture, or volatile metals such as zinc. The process is not applicable to metals with very stable oxides that are not reducible in this way, nor to alloys containing a high percentage of metals such as aluminium, titanium, chromium, and stainless steels. The meaning of size is complicated by the enormous variety of shape of particles which makes quantitative assessment difficult. Volume, maximum linear dimension, average dimension, cross sectional area are different measurements which can be made. A considerable range of techniques is or has been used, including among others microscopical examination, elutriation, sedimentation, light obscuring, and light scattering, but for most PM powders the process normally used is laser light scattering. Historical size analysis was based on sieving. The screen size is designated by the number of strends of wire per unit length and has been superseded by specifying the aperture size in terms of the largest sphere that will pass through it. However the older designation is still used and    Apart from dimensions which are, of course, of major importance in the manufacture of individual PM parts, the relevant properties of compacts are density and strength. Green density as it is called has a marked influence on green strength and can impact the final, i.e. sintered, density. It is determined by Archimedes principle. Green strength is the term used to indicate the strength of a compact and two standard methods are in general use for measuring it. A three point bend test on a standard compact of rectangular cross section gives the Transverse Rupture Strength—ISO 3995. A compression test on the diameter of a ring shaped compact gives the Radial Crushing Strength (  Most PM components (other than hardmetals) are sintered in continuous furnaces normally having three major zones: A pre-heating or de-waxing zone in which the lubricant is driven off. The sintering zone proper, the temperature of which is called the sintering temperature. A cooling zone normally surrounded by a water jacket. Compacts of pure metals and of fully pre-alloyed alloys shrink during sintering, the amount of shrinkage being dependent on the green density and the sintering regime, i.e. temperature and time. With mixtures of elemental powders or of alloys of different compositions, the situation is different. Diffusion effects can cause an expansion to occur initially and this feature can be used to provide mixes that neither shrink nor grow on sintering. The green density homogeneity is the major factor that determines the consistency of dimensions of the sintered component. It is in most cases the ability to produce components directly, i.e. without any subsequent machining, that provides the economic justification for making them from powder. In the case of large compacts that are intended to be subsequently wrought into sheet, rod, or wire, these factors are of little or no importance. Iron-based materials account for the bulk of PM parts and they range in composition from nearly pure iron through low alloy steels to stainless steels and high-speed steels for cutting tools, etc. It should be noted, however, that as regards low-alloy steels the compositions used differ from those of ingot-based metal. The reason for this is that alloying elements that give rise to oxide films that are stable in normal sintering atmospheres and which therefore inhibit sintering are used in low concentrations. Such elements include manganese, chromium, and silicon. Favoured compositions for sintered steels contain, in addition to carbon, one or more of the elements copper, nickel and molybdenum, the oxides of which are readily reducible by hydrogen. In addition there are compositions containing up to 0.6% of phosphorus. Sintered steels differ from wrought in strength in that the hardness, strength, and ductility depend not only on composition and state of heat-treatment, but also markedly on density (see Re-press and re-sinter. Re-press at elevated temperature. Hot forge. Sinter density.  There is a relatively limited market for structural components made of bronze, brass, or copper itself, copper usually being used for electrical applications. There is, however, a considerable market for oil-retaining bronze bearings, (porous) filter elements, art objects, and decorative hardware sintered from bronze. As regards bearings there is a conflict between the oil capacity which increases as the density decreases, and strength which increases as the density increases. The oil content normally lies between 15 and 30% by volume.  The properties of interest to users are the same as those of cast or wrought metal, but the measurement of hardness especially requires some elaboration because of the porous nature of some sintered metals. Hardness. A traditional indentor will make a larger impression and therefore record a lower hardness than that of dense metal of the same composition because the pore offer no resistance to deformation. A distinction is, therefore, made between apparent hardness as measured in a standard test, and true hardness, i.e. that of the same metal in the pore-free state. True hardness may be measured using a micro indentor and a carefully specified technique which minimises the risk of the result being falsified by the porosity. Apparent hardness is related to strength in the same way as with dense materials; true hardness is relevant to wear resistance. Strength. Strength is determined by tensile test, but because sintered parts are normally used without machining, it is rarely desirable to cut test pieces from the parts themselves. It is standard practice, therefore, to produce separate test pieces compacted to the same density as a batch of parts and to sinter them along with the batch. Impact. The presence of porosity has a very deleterious effect on impact properties and it is not common practice to measure this property when porosity is over about 5%. For components sintered to full density, standard notched Charpy tests are employed, but for porous samples the convention is to use an unnotched Charpy bar to obtain higher apparent toughness. Fatigue. In recent years there has been considerable concern over the fatigue properties of sintered ferrous alloys, since many of the applications involve components used in cyclic loading. The compositions and mechanical properties of the standard PM materials are shown in Sintered steels can be hardened and tempered in the same way as wrought steels (see Here also the porosity has a significant effect. In carburising, nitriding, and carbo-nitriding, the gas enters the pores so that for a given regime the depth of hardening is greater and the transition between case and core is much more gradual. As would be expected, these effects are more marked the greater the amount of porosity ( A process peculiar to sintered ferrous components is to heat them in superheated steam which produces a layer of magnetite, Fe Substantial tonnages of wrought metals are made by PM. The products can be divided into three classes. Metals that are difficult or impossible to produce in wrought form from ingot because of their inherent brittleness. Those of most commercial importance are tungsten, molybdenum, and the Metals containing a finely dispersed insoluble second phase. ODS materials and aluminium with a dispersion of silicon carbide have been referred to in Metals and alloys that present no great production difficulty starting from ingot, but which can be produced more economically from powder, generally because of the higher yield of finished material and/or reduction in the number of annealing and pickling steps. Superior properties can sometimes be claimed and result from the greater homogeneity and freedom from pipe defects. Of importance commercially are austenitic stainless steels and superalloys. Tungsten wire was one of the first PM products to be made on a large scale, the use being filaments for incandescent electric light bulbs, for which purpose it is still made. In order to induce in the wire a particular elongated microstructure which increases remarkably the life of the filament, a small percentage of thorium oxide was included. It is to tungsten doped in this way that the properties shown in Molybdenum is used extensively in high-temperature furnaces as heating elements, radiation shields, and structural components. The high-temperature strength can be increased by ODS. ODS platinum/rhodium used for handling molten glass has much improved creep strength as is shown in This family of alloys is used for load-bearing applications at elevated temperatures, and is especially relevant to turbine discs and blades for aircraft engines. For manufacture by PM, spherical powders produced either by gas (usually argon) atomisation or centrifugal atomisation are used. The attractions of the PM route are that it is possible to achieve a fine homogeneous structure free from pipe-related defects and segregation, and also a better yield of usable material. Superalloys owe their good strength properties to precipitation hardening by a titanium–aluminium compound, but as the temperature rises, this compound begins to go into solution and loses its effect. This puts a ceiling on the working temperature. The mechanical alloying process to produce a fine dispersion of a ceramic material—yttria is favoured—that is virtually insoluble in the metal matrix, significantly increasing the temperature at which useful strength is retained. A list of ODS superalloy compositions is given in One of the main users of copper is the electrical industry where conductivity is the primary consideration. Increasingly, power plant is required to operate at temperatures well above ambient where pure copper recrystallises and becomes very soft. Increasing the strength and recrystallisation temperature by alloying drastically reduces the conductivity. The inclusion in pure copper of a small percentage of finely dispersed aluminium oxide provides significantly better elevated temperature strength with only a small reduction in conductivity. An atomised powder of a dilute aluminium copper alloy is internally oxidised to give a very fine Al This is another soft metal whose strength can be increased by a dispersed oxide phase. In this case lead oxide is used. The chief application is to chemical plant especially for handling sulphuric acid.     Powder metallurgy has found success at full density with ferrous alloys because of the improved microstructural homogeneity, especially important with high alloy systems. Mixed powders are used to form particulate or whisker reinforced composites. A common technique is to mix the two constituents and to hot consolidate the mixture, since sintering proves difficult with the This process is not powder metallurgy in the strict sense of the term in so far as the metal is at no stage in the form of powder. However, for reasons that will be apparent the PM world has adopted it. The process involves gas atomisation of a liquid metal, but instead of allowing the droplets to solidify as powder, the spray is caused to impinge on a solid surface where the droplets are collected as a semi-solid layer which solidifies as a dense metal. This layer may be built up to any desired thickness, and by suitable choice of design of the original target, the angle of the spray, and other parameters, near-net shapes can be produced. For example if the target is a cylinder rotating horizontally and capable of being moved in a controlled manner in the axial direction, a tube of dense deposited metal is formed. The deposit has all the advantages of dense metal produced from powder, i.e. complete absence of macro-segregation and pipe-related defects. A further merit of the process is that by injecting fine refractory powder particles, i.e. by entraining them in the atomising gas stream, ODS material can be deposited. Commonly referred to as PIM (powder injection moulding), this process consists of mixing small ≤ 20µm metal powder with a thermosetting polymer material to form a plastic mass that can be injected under pressure into a mould to form the equivalent of a compact. The compact is then carefully treated by solvents and/or heat to remove the polymer and then at a higher temperature to sinter the powder. Shrinkage of the order of 15% linear occurs but this can be predicted accurately and parts with very close dimensional tolerances and of quite complex shape can be made. It is widely used process because the advantages in eliminating expensive machining operations make it viable for a number of applications. Unlike traditional powder metallurgy, the metal powder injection moulding route is followed by high temperature sintering. As a result, the sintered alloys are essentially full density, giving superior This family of PM materials consists of fine, hard, and usually brittle carbide particles bonded with a relatively tough binder phase which is normally metallic. The hard particles are generally between 1 and 5µm, but even finer grades with particles below 1 µm are now being made. The original hard phase was tungsten monocarbide (WC) and the preferred binder phase was cobalt. The name Hardmetals were originally developed as a substitute for diamond as wire drawing dies for tungsten, and they are still used for that purpose, but the largest single use today is as cutting tools and oil drilling or mining tools. It is for this application that the non-carbide alloys have been developed, but no cost effective substitute has been found for the WC/Co hardmetal where straightforward wear resistance is the primary requirement, and this includes cutting tools for non-ferrous metals and nonmetallic materials. Other such cases are wire drawing dies, dies for the compaction of metal powders for the manufacture of PM parts, rolls for metal rolling mills, and other large abrasion-resistant parts. The process for the production of hardmetal is a classic example of liquid phase sintering: a mixture of WC and cobalt powders is pressed and sintered at a temperature above the eutectic temperature. Good results require special procedures in the preparation of the powder mix. The ingredients are wet milled together to coat each carbide particle with cobalt, and to facilitate this, the cobalt powder must be extremely small. It is well known that very small powders do not flow readily, if at all, and to overcome this problem the WC/Co mixture is ‘granulated’, by which is meant the production of agglomerates. A favoured method of granulation is the spray drying of a slurry of the powder with a liquid containing also a pressing lubricant. Injection moulding is now being used to replace die compaction, because of the greater shape complexity and higher final tolerances. During sintering, the compact shrinks by as much as 50 vol% to become nearly 100% dense. The sintering temperature used in practice varies with the composition, being lowest (1400°C) when the cobalt content is high, and rising to 1600°C or higher with compositions having high proportions of the carbides of Ti, Ta, and/or Nb and low cobalt contents. In cases where it is not posible to get close to the required shape by direct pressing and sintering, the compact may be pre-sintered at a lower temperature so as Although it is usual to refer to the binder phase as being cobalt there is some mutual solubility between it and the carbide, and great care is needed to ensure that the carbon balance is maintained such that neither the brittle W/Co (eta) phase nor free graphite is formed. The toughness is affected also by the size of the carbide particles; the finer they are the harder but less shock-resistant is the final product. However, grades with carbide particle size well below 1µm are reported to combine high hardness with toughness. Although the porosity of conventionally produced hardmetal is normally low, porosity can be completely eliminated by hot isostatic pressing (HIP). Toughness is, thereby considerably increased and the possibility of the rejection of large and expensive components at a late stage of grinding or polishing no longer presents a problem. HIP is now routinely applied to a large number of hardmetal parts including indexable cutting tool tips that are a major product. Recently it has been found possible to combine HIP with the sintering stage. The parts are sintered in vacuum to a density such that the porosity is sealed, and then high pressure gas, usually argon, is introduced into the furnace. The pressure required for full densification is lower than that needed for the HIP of already sintered parts, and the new process, referred to as Sinter-HIP or Pressure-Assisted Sintering is rapidly replacing the original two-stage process of vacuum sintering followed by HIP in a separate furnace, at least for cutting tool tips. Straightforward WC/Co hardmetal appears to be the most cost-effective material for many applications where wear resistance is the primary requirement, including the machining of non-ferrous metals. Additions of e.g. TaC improve the already good wear resistance by acting as grain growth inhibitors, and are especially valuable in applications involving high temperatures. When the use is the machining of ferrous materials at high speeds, the situation is different. In addition to abrasive wear, reaction between the carbide particles and the steel results in what is known as crater wear. The substitution of more stable carbides such as those of Ta, Nb, Ti, and Hf for some or all of the WC considerably improves the cratering resistance. Wear resistance is, as would be expected, markedly influenced by the amount of binder phase as shown in  Because of the high price of cobalt and the perceived instability of the countries that produce the bulk of it, continuing efforts have been made to find alternatives. Ni, Fe, and Ni/Mo have been used successfully in certain applications, and a recent entry into the field is Ni/Cr which now appears in some commercial grades. One grade is based on TiC with MoC and a Ni/Mo binder. Good results have been reported also with intermetallic and superalloy binders, which combine conspicuous high-temperature strength with toughness. Useful results have been reported also with a nickel binder containing ruthenium, but this member of the platinum group is costly. For tools for the machining of steels the most dramatic improvement has been the development of surface coatings. An ideal tool material from the cutting point of view would be a pure, very hard, and stable compound such as one of the more stable carbides, nitrides, or oxides, were it not for the fact that they are far too brittle. However, if they are applied as a very thin layer to a sufficiently strong and tough substrate, an approximation to the best of both worlds is possible. Such coatings can be applied successfully by chemical vapour deposition (CVD) or physical vapour deposition (PVD). Titanium nitride, TiN, is widely used and gives the tool a striking gold colour. An essential requirement, of course, is that the coating adheres firmly to the substrate and this is facilitated by using multiple coatings only a few micrometres thick. Another factor in the equation is the possibility of reaction between the coating and the substrate and between the coating and the steel workpiece. In addition to nitrides, carbides, carbo-nitrides, borides, and oxides—especially alumina—are used, and as many as ten layers are applied, so the permutations are manifold. Recent additions to the range of coatings are cubic boron nitride (CBN) and diamond, but the latter is not suitable for the high-speed cutting of steel because it reacts with the steel at the high temperatures that are reached. The importance of matching the tool to the application should be emphasised. In cutting applications much is made of the improved tool life of modern throw-away inserts achieved by careful design of substrate and coating, but a more important factor from the economic point of view is the improved cutting speed that is made possible. The cost of the tool insert is a small part only of the total machining cost, and if the cutting rate can be doubled and the tool life halved in consequence, the overall efficiency may well be much greater than that of prolonging the life of the tool. Besides the traditional PM materials, largely dominated by WC-Co, iron and steel, and refractory metals, several useful and exotic materials are emerging with unique properties only available via sintering techniques. Many of these are targeted at applications such as sporting equipment, computer or electronic components, sensors and instruments, and military components. Sintering is performed at high temperatures for most of these applications to improve the density and properties. High sintering temperatures induce more rapid atomic motion, resulting in properties that rival wrought materials. Further, new compositions are possible via sintering that cannot be fabricated via alternative techniques such as casting. A good example of the latter is seen with the tungsten heavy alloys. The properties of several liquid phase sintered heavy alloys are given in A related application are for liquid phase sintered composites relates to the need for high thermal conductivity and low thermal expansion in microelectronic packaging applications. These are for heat dissipation around semiconductors where computing performance is degraded by heat. For these applications, the nickel-iron matrix phase in the heavy alloys is replaced by copper to improve thermal conductivity. If weight is not an issue, then the W–Cu composites are the best combinations of properties, but as weight becomes more of a concern then Mo–Cu and Al-based compositions are more popular. However, as illustrated in Finally, another emerging area for sintered metals is in magnetic applications. Several alloys are available, ranging from pure iron for soft magnetic uses to iron-neodymium-boron rapidly solidified materials for hard magnetic applications. 