The adsorption of thiocyanate (SCN−) from water is a challenging and urgent task. In this work, a cationic metal-organic framework [Ag-4, 4′-bipy+] [NO3
                     −] (SBN) was successfully synthesized for the highly efficient removal of SCN−. A series of characterization results show that SBN has good hydrolytic stability and thermal stability. SBN shows higher adsorption capacity (174.2 mg g−1) for SCN− than any other previous adsorbents. Kinetic study shows that adsorption equilibrium can be achieved within 10 min. SBN has good stability in the range of pH 2–10, and the adsorption capacity is immobile with the change of pH. In addition, SBN has a good selectivity for SCN− in the presence of other ions. The increased concentration of NO3
                     − during the adsorption verified that the mechanism of SBN for SCN− removal is ion exchange, which formed [Ag-4, 4′-bipy+] [SCN−] (SBS). The low Gibb's energy (ΔrG(T)) indicates that the ion exchange process is thermodynamically spontaneous. Elution experiments showed that no anions could successfully elute SCN−. This work used a metal-organic framework for the adsorption of SCN− for the first time, revealing a new method for the adsorption and immobilization of SCN− in aqueous solutions.Sodium thiocyanate (NaSCN) is an important chemical raw material, which has been utilized in a variety of industrial process such as printing, electroplating hydrometallurgy, photofinishing textile dyeing, and pesticide production [ Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are composed of organic multidentate ligands and inorganic metal ions or metal clusters [ Ag (I) is a desired metallic node for cationic MOFs construction due to its high affinity for N- and O- donors with a coordination number for two to eight [ SBN was synthesized at room temperature [ After the adsorption of SCN Synthetic materials and used materials were characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES), thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA), surface area and pore analyzer (BET) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The concentrations of SCN First, KSCN (1.67 g) was dissolved in deionized water (1 L) to prepare the stock SCN SBN was soaked in HNO Dissolution experiments were measured to study the solubility product constants of SBN and SBS. SBN or SBS (50 mg) was put into 25 mL aqueous solutions at different pH values (2−10) and soaked for 12 h. The concentrations of NO The XRD pattern of the prepared SBN is consistent with that reported in the literature [  The isothermal adsorption data were fitted according to the Langmuir model [ The adsorption kinetics of SCN The XRD patterns of the prepared SBN and used SBN were shown in The EDX spectra of SBN and SBS were also discussed ( The XPS characterization of SBN and SBS was used to further study the adsorption mechanism ( To further verify that the adsorption mechanism is ion exchange between NO The effect of pH on the adsorption of SCN We also studied the SCN To clarify the selective ion exchange process, we analysed the thermodynamic data by measuring the solubility of SBN and SBS in aqueous solutions ( In order to investigate whether SBN can effectively remove SCN In summary, we have synthesized the cationic MOF SBN, and we explored it for the removal of SCN This work was supported by The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at