Studies on the recovery of tungsten from a multi-metal tin–tungsten ore from Kreghystan were carried out by a combination of physical beneficiation and soda ash roast–aqueous leach technique. Cassiterite, wolframite and scheelite are the main valuable minerals in this ore. However, a significant amount of wolframite occurs finely disseminated in scheelite. This composite nature of mineralisation has limited the scope of using physical separation methods in generating individual concentrates of either wolframite or scheelite with economical recovery. In view of this, a combined tungsten minerals concentrate which is free of majority of other heavy mineral — cassiterite was first obtained by physical up-gradation methods and was later subjected to tungsten extraction by soda ash roast–aqueous leach technique. The effect of process variables such as: roasting time, temperature and feed-to-alkali ratio were studied. At optimum roasting and leaching conditions, about 95% of WO3 values were extracted.The chief economic minerals of tungsten are wolframite ((Fe, Mn) WO The major minerals (weight-wise) in the primary gravity pre-concentrate of the Kreghystan ore are cassiterite (38%), wolframite+scheelite (22%), tourmaline (37%) and quartz (3%). A unique feature of tungsten mineralisation here is the presence of considerable amount of wolframite finely disseminated in scheelite The soda ash roast–aqueous leach process was successfully tested on a low grade wolframite concentrate (7% and 24% WO The soda ash roast–aqueous leach extraction process consists of roasting of the mineral concentrate with a mixture of soda ash and sodium nitrate (oxidizing agent for converting W It is evident from The mineralogical composition (by weight) of the wolframite–scheelite concentrate used in the roasting studies is as follows: wolframite+scheelite 34%, cassiterite 5.6% and tourmaline 60.4%. The partial chemical analysis of the sample is: WO All the roasting experiments were carried out in a muffle furnace at a 5-g scale. The feed was mixed with a pre-determined quantity of sodium carbonate (LR grade) and fixed quantity (one third weight of sodium carbonate) of sodium nitrate (LR grade) and loaded in the furnace in a mild steel boat. The charge was allowed to react at desired temperature for a given time duration with intermittent mixing. After the reaction period, the roasted mass was air-cooled and the tungsten values were brought into solution by agitation leaching in 100 ml of hot water (353 K) for 30 min. The impeller to vessel diameter ratio is 0.6 and the stirring rate was 600 min The effect of roasting temperature, time and feed-to-carbonate ratio on the extraction of tungsten values was studied. The efficiency of the overall process was estimated by the amount of tungsten values extracted into solution. The WO  Optimisation studies on the roasting time were carried out by maintaining the roasting temperature at 823 K and feed-to-Na The effect of feed-to-sodium carbonate ratio on roasting characteristics of tungsten were carried out at constant temperature and time of 823 K and 2 h, respectively. Results are presented in The material balance for the roasting experiment carried out at optimum conditions — time duration 2 h, temperature 823 K and feed-to-sodium carbonate ratio of 1:1.5, is given in A study on the multi-metal tin–tungsten ore of Kreghystan indicated the applicability of an approach comprising of physical beneficiation and soda ash roast–aqueous leach for recovering tungsten values from a composite concentrate of wolframite and scheelite. Processing of the physically-beneficiated tungsten mineral concentrate (21.21% WO The authors express sincere thanks to M/s Jagson International, New Delhi for providing the ore sample and to Dr.C.K.Gupta, Director, Materials Group, BARC, Mumbai for the continued encouragement and keen interest in these investigations. They also express gratitude to their colleagues for chemical and petromineralogical charaterisation.