Recycling of printed circuit board (PCB) is an important subject and to which increasing attention is paid, both in treatment of waste as well as recovery of valuable material terms. Precede physical and mechanical method, a good liberation is the premise to further separation. In this study, two-step crushing process is employed, and standard sieve is applied to screen crushed material to different size fractions, moreover, the liberation situation and particles shape in different size are observed. Then metal of the PCB is separated by physical methods, including pneumatic separation, electrostatic separation and magnetic separation, and major metal contents are characterized by inductively coupled plasma emission spectrometry (ICP-AES). Results show that the metal and nonmetal particles of PCB are dissociated completely under the crush size 0.6mm; metal is mainly enriched in the four size fractions between 0.15 and 1.25mm; relatively, pneumatic separation is suitable for 0.6–0.9mm size fraction, while the electrostatic separation is suitable for three size fractions that are 0.15–0.3mm, 0.3–0.6mm and 0.9–1.25mm. The whole process that involves crushing, electrostatic and magnetic separation has formed a closed cycle that can return material and provide salable product.With the advent of information age, the e-waste whose number is rapidly growing is a serious problem for human to resolve ( With respect to physical separation of PCB, Xu et al. ( Based on the previous study ( Computer motherboards that is weight of 20 Monomer dissociation, that is to make “target components” stripped from attached other components and ensure not beyond particle size limit of separating method, between metal and nonmetal can be achieved by crushing which is a very crucial step for effective physical separation. Therefore, choosing the crushers which have cut or impact action ( In this experiment XZS-300 standard sieves in 0.074, 0.15, 0.3, 0.6, 0.9, 1.25 Then the metal of PCB was separated by physical methods, including pneumatic, electrostatic (YD31300-21FZ High voltage electrostatic separator) and magnetic separation (XZS-300 Magnetic tube), and major metal contents were characterized by Optima 2100DV ICP-AES. Pneumatic separation (air classification) is a common technique employed for the separation of particles based on their size and density ( All experiments were conducted at least three times and the analysis shows an experimental error always smaller than 5%. Mass distribution of PCB scrap obtained with electric shaker after two-stage crushing is shown in It is a prerequisite for PCB’s effective separation that they are fully dissociated between metal and nonmetal materials. Through observing shape, color, etc. of crushed material, dissociation situation of PCB can be initially determined. Selected representative observations are shown in  The existence form of crushed particles is mainly determined by the characteristics of different components in raw PCB ( Regularity can be summarized from Considering effect of different gas flow velocities on the separation, the total metal (TM) and copper (Cu) are taken as research object. Through comprehensive analysis of metal recovery (given by the ratio of valuable component weight of output to valuable components weight of feed) and separation efficiency Initially, particles in the column were in a fixed-bed or imbalance state at a relatively low gas velocity (lower than 0.70 Through analysis similar to Because the particles whose size are too small are easy to agglomerate ( Metals in PCB material is further enriched after electrostatic separation, as presented in The grade and recovery of copper are in the same trend with increasing particle size ( For material smaller than 0.3 Through magnetic separation, copper grade has been significantly improved ( As far as pneumatic separation is concerned, the change in the separation efficiency with velocity is associated with the fluidization behavior of solid particles. The density difference plays a dominant role in separation at a relatively low velocity with moderate turbulence in the bed. Particle separation decreases at first with increasing gas velocity, resulting in a decrease of separation efficiency. However, for vigorously fluidization at higher velocities, bubble-induced mixing of solids and more elutriated small metallic particles entering into the light portion are responsible for the separation efficiency increase. On the whole, the recovery is always over 90% but separation efficiency under 60% ( With respect to electrostatic separation, there are two main factors affecting result that are dissociation and charged situation. When size fraction is small (0.15–0.3 To sum up, grade can be achieved to more than 71%, which meets salable requirement, by single electrostatic or electrostatic, magnetic combined separation for material smaller than 0.9 The performed investigations showed that for the crushed PCB material in diameter that is smaller than 0.6 Relatively, pneumatic separation is suitable for 0.6–0.9 The authors acknowledge the