As a pyrometallurgist who has specialized in raw material preparation and ironmaking processes, I have always been keen on understanding iron ore, its mineralogy, and upstream processes. This has provided me with a full appreciation of the phenomena occurring during the downstream processing of iron ore, such as sintering, pelletizing, and ironmaking. Over the years, I have had many opportunities to work with mineralogists and process engineers from different iron ore producers, who have been keen to understand downstream iron ore processes. In fact this has become increasingly important at a time when the market is so demanding and competitive with a strong focus on tailoring products to better suit their end users. However, it appears there are no modern books covering the broad area of technologies used throughout the iron ore supply chain. It is this experience that motivated me to organize contributions and edit this new book on iron ore. I believe it will prove to be a valuable reference book on a subject that has not been covered in a single publication. While the iron ore industry is sometimes viewed as a simple quarrying operation, the industry is fiercely competitive internationally and has been over the years under considerable pressure to improve productivity and reduce its environmental footprint. This is particularly so for the steel industry. From 1992 to 2012, the world has seen drastic increases in iron ore production from about 925 This new book aims to provide all involved in the various stages of the iron ore supply chain, from those who initiate the development of a resource to those involved in the various end-user market areas, with information on the latest practices and expert views on the research and technology development trends. Following an introductory overview of the global iron ore industry, this book is thematically divided into the following four sections: Characterization of iron ore using advanced analytical tools. Recent advances in iron ore extraction, comminution, classification, and physical and physicochemical as well as biotechnological separation techniques. Detailed insight into iron ore agglomeration and blast furnace ironmaking technologies. Environmental issues and low-emission technologies related to iron ore production and utilization. The chapters in this book have been carefully prepared by a wide range of internationally renowned experts and summarize the current status of these areas as well as the new technologies being developed to underpin the future of the iron ore industry. Finally, I would like to thank all those who have contributed to the preparation of the book, particularly Dr. Ralph Holmes from CSIRO. I sincerely hope it becomes a valuable source of information to industry professionals and academics working in the genesis, geology, geometallurgy, exploration, mining, processing, and marketing of iron ores and those who are interested in the science and technology of ironmaking processes. January 28, 2015