Laser perforating is a new method in oil and gas wells where researchers look for an alternative to explosive methods. One of the important problems with this method is the generation of uniform and cylindrical holes at a selected pitch for enhancing the permeability of rocks. In non-moving laser perforation, the nozzle of the laser and the rock do not approach each other and due to laser convergence in a point, uniform and cylindrical holes are not created. For this reason, moving laser perforation is suggested in this research. One of the important parameters in moving laser perforation is the power of the laser that can be perforated at a specific rate. In this article we predicted the laser power for a definite rate of perforation (ROP) and then the accuracy of this prediction was evaluated to support the experiments. A pulsed Nd: YAG laser, with a pulse energy around 5.5J, pulse repetition rate of 30Hz and pulse duration of 2ms were used for rock perforation in this study. The results shows that the presented relation for perforation could reliably be used in practice. Furthermore, by knowing the rate of perforation, the required laser power for consistent drilling could be calculated.Laser perforation is a new method in oil and gas wells where the aim is to find an alternative to existing methods. The existing methods used in well perforation are not ideal because of the damage intensity and thus researchers, for decades, have made extensive attempts to come up with a new method that would cause less well damage. High powered laser beams have been widely applied in ablating or drilling materials As mentioned earlier, generating uniform holes at the selected pitch and increasing permeability due to growing micro- fractures are the main advantages of the use of laser beams in gas and oil well perforations Delivery with fiber optics over long distances. Enhanced rock ablation with thermal stress on rocks. Ability to focus on small spot sizes. Its high peak and low average power provides high intensity (W/cm In rock perforation with laser, two parameters, i.e. specific energy (SE) and rate of penetration (ROP) are the most important factors. Specific energy is the energy required to remove a unit weight of rock The rate of penetration (ROP) makes laser perforation more efficient In this study, a pulsed Nd: YAG laser, Model IQL-10, with a maximum mean laser power of 400 In this study, the test plan was performed as schematically shown in Under real perforation conditions, the head of the laser moves inside the well and penetrates into the holes. If the nozzle of the laser moves toward the sample with a velocity equal to the ROP value, the power density would be constant because of the stable defocusing distance. As a result, the ROP will be constant and the efficiency of the laser perforating will be optimum ( For this reason, when the rate of penetration is determined, the nozzle of the laser approaches the sample with the ROP. The SE can be calculated for the limestone, shale and granite, using the following fitting equation on diagrams as shown in When the ROP is given, the value of SE could be determined from Eq. In this research, the average power of the laser for ROP equal to 1.53 was calculated for three types of rocks as follows:  From the above second order equation, the possible (SE) values are calculated which are 0 and 35.43. The value of 35.43 is acceptable and is equal to SE. From Eq.  From the above second order equation the possible (SE) values are calculated which are 0 and 35.75. The value of 35.75 is acceptable and is equal to SE. From the Eq.  From the above second order equation, the possible (SE) values are calculated as 0 and 35.66. The value of 35.66 is acceptable and is equal to SE. From Eq. Similarly, the average power of the laser is calculated for shale and granite and values are represented in Then the average power of the laser is fixed to the value presented in A study of the moving perforation by the Nd:YAG laser and prediction of laser for the cylindrical hole in limestone, shale and granite has been presented. The constant parameters (a, b and c) were calculated in this paper and a moving laser perforation was performed for limestone shale and granite with ROP equal to 1.53 The authors sincerely thank S. Dadras, M.J. Hamedi and A. Chehreghani from Iranian National Center for Laser Science and Technology for their assistance during the experiments.