A comprehensive mixed-solvent electrolyte model has been applied to calculate phase equilibria and other thermodynamic properties of multicomponent solutions containing salts, acids and bases in wide concentration ranges. The model combines an excess Gibbs energy model with detailed speciation calculations. The excess Gibbs energy model consists of a long-range interaction contribution represented by the Pitzer–Debye–Hückel expression, a short-range term expressed by the UNIQUAC model and a middle-range term of a second-virial-coefficient type for specific ionic interactions. The model accurately represents the thermodynamic behavior of systems ranging from infinite dilution in water to molten salts or pure acids at temperatures from the freezing point to 300°C. It has been determined that a physically realistic treatment of speciation is important for the simultaneous representation of vapor–liquid equilibria, osmotic coefficients, solid–liquid equilibria, pH, enthalpies of dilution and heat capacities.Development of models for electrolyte systems is an important subject of research in applied thermodynamics because of the considerable role that electrolytes play in separation processes, environmental applications, production of energy sources, electrochemical processes, hydrometallurgy and other applications. Various models for electrolyte solutions have been recently reviewed by Zemaitis et al. In this study, we apply this model to multicomponent inorganic systems such as those containing two salts and water or a salt, an acid and water in wide concentration ranges that reach the limit of no water. In particular, we focus on systems that are complex because of the formation of multiple hydrated salts, double salts or the presence of eutectic points or congruently melting solid phases. Further, we examine the effect of speciation equilibria on the simultaneous representation of phase equilibria and caloric properties. In a previous paper The long-range interaction contribution is calculated from the Pitzer–Debye–Hückel formula For the short-range interaction contribution, the UNIQUAC equation To account for speciation, the chemical effects due to the formation of ion pairs and complexes are explicitly taken into account using chemical equilibria. Also, the same chemical equilibrium formalism is used to calculate solid–liquid equilibria. For this purpose, the standard-state chemical potential A similar procedure is used for enthalpy and heat capacity calculations. In the unsymmetrical normalization, the total enthalpy is expressed as The model has been extensively validated using various types of experimental data including vapor–liquid equilibria, osmotic and activity coefficients, solubility of solids, densities, heats of mixing and dilution and various speciation-related data (pH, acid dissociation constants, etc.). In this study, we report selected results obtained for systems containing water and inorganic components, which have been selected so that the available data extend from dilute aqueous solutions to pure solutes or mixtures without any water. Model parameters for two representative systems (H  One of the most important features of a thermodynamic model is its ability to predict the properties of complex, multicomponent systems using parameters derived from experimental data for simpler (usually binary) systems. To examine the predictive character of the new model, calculations have been performed for sodium and potassium phosphates. The model is also capable of reproducing solubilities in systems in which water is not the dominant solvent or is absent altogether. An example of such a system is shown in It is also of interest to analyze the effect of speciation on the computation of thermodynamic properties. In the case of systems such as H A recently developed mixed-solvent electrolyte model has been applied to calculate phase equilibria and other thermodynamic properties of multicomponent solutions containing salts, acids and bases in very wide concentration ranges. The model combines an excess Gibbs energy formulation with comprehensive speciation calculations. It accurately represents multiple properties including vapor–liquid equilibria, osmotic coefficients, solid–liquid equilibria, enthalpies of dilution, heat capacities and pH. The model is valid for aqueous systems ranging from infinite dilution to molten salts or pure acids at temperatures from the freezing point to 300 This work was supported by the Department of Energy under the Cooperative Agreement No. DE-FC02-00CH11019 and co-sponsored by Chevron, Dow Chemical, DuPont, MeadWestvaco, Materials Technology Institute, Mitsubishi Chemical, Rohm&Haas and Shell.