A three-phase dynamic mathematical model based on mass balances describing the main processes in biotrickling filtration: convection, mass transfer, diffusion, and biodegradation was calibrated and validated for the simulation of an industrial styrene-degrading biotrickling filter. The model considered the key features of the industrial operation of biotrickling filters: variable conditions of loading and intermittent irrigation. These features were included in the model switching from the mathematical description of periods with and without irrigation. Model equations were based on the mass balances describing the main processes in biotrickling filtration: convection, mass transfer, diffusion, and biodegradation. The model was calibrated with steady-state data from a laboratory biotrickling filter treating inlet loads at 13–74 g C m−3 h−1 and at empty bed residence time of 30–15 s. The model predicted the dynamic emission in the outlet of the biotrickling filter, simulating the small peaks of concentration occurring during irrigation. The validation of the model was performed using data from a pilot on-site biotrickling filter treating styrene installed in a fiber-reinforced facility. The model predicted the performance of the biotrickling filter working under high-oscillating emissions at an inlet load in a range of 5–23 g C m−3 h−1 and at an empty bed residence time of 31 s for more than 50 days, with a goodness of fit of 0.84.Styrene is one of the most widely used organic compounds because of its application as an intermediate product in industries that produce synthesized polymers and copolymers, such as polystyrene. Nevertheless, as a consequence of its physical properties (vapor pressure of 0.667 kPa at 20° C), it is classified as a volatile organic compound (VOC), and thus its emissions to the atmosphere are strictly regulated ( Industrial air emissions of any facility are characterized by fluctuating conditions of inlet concentrations and gas flow rates related to the random variations in the manufacturing processes and short off closures during weekends. Therefore, industrial BTFs can exhibit a different performance than that observed at the laboratory, and the influence of these dynamic variations on BTFs is one of the current issues of interest. Only a few studies on the pilot-industrial scale ( Researchers in the field agree that mathematical modeling is useful to improve the knowledge about bioprocesses, to understand the effect of the variations of the operational parameters, and to predict the overall performance of the system, thus avoiding the excessive consumption of time and resources ( This work aimed to apply a dynamic mathematical model to simulate the performance of an on-site BTF treating styrene emissions under oscillating inlet concentrations and operated under intermittent spraying, a common industrial protocol. The model was adapted on the basis of the one proposed by The lab-scale BTF consisted of a cylindrical column (0.144 m inner diameter, 1.63 m height) with a working packed volume of 20 L (working height: 1.23 m) coupled to an external recirculation tank with a 6 L capacity for column irrigation. The BTF was filled with polypropylene rings with a 25 mm nominal diameter and 207 m The pilot scale BTF (VOCUS The dynamic model of this study was previously applied by The gas phase flowed in a plug flow regime along the filter bed, thus neglecting axial dispersion. The adsorption of pollutants in the packing material was negligible. The packing material was completely covered by a biofilm, which was completely covered by the liquid phase. The gas–liquid interface was in equilibrium according to Henry's law. Biodegradation took place only in the biofilm. The model equations are summarized as follows ( Mass balance in the gas phase Mass balance in the liquid phase Mass balance in the biofilm During periods of irrigation, the mass balances were described as follows: styrene and oxygen from the gas phase circulate through the column by considering the convective transport. Styrene and oxygen are transferred to the liquid phase, with the mass flux at the gas–liquid interface described by the global mass transfer coefficients (K The mass transfer from liquid to biofilm of both components is a function of the specific surface area of the packing material (a), the diffusion coefficient in water (D During non-irrigation periods, the liquid phase is considered a stagnant phase without dynamic hold-up, so there is no convective transport (v The partial differential equations were 2 s-order nonlinear distributed systems. The method of lines (MOL) was applied to solve the systems by generating a uniform grid in the spatial dimensions: the height of the reactor and the biofilm thickness. For each node, the partial derivatives were replaced by finite difference approximations. The optimal discretization in terms of the result and time computing was 10 sections along the bed (11 nodes) and 20 sections in the biofilm (21 nodes). Increasing the discretization did not produced substantial variations on the model estimation. The set of differential equations was solved with the implicit integration method from MATLAB The execution of the model was implemented in MATLAB The overall gas–liquid mass transfer coefficient of styrene and the maximum growth rate were determined by the calibration of the model to the experimental data by minimizing the objective function (OF), which was defined as the sum of the norm of the deviation between the RE predicted by the model (RE The parameter estimation was conducted by a MATLAB The calibration of the dynamic model was performed with data from a styrene-degrading BTF operated at variable EBRTs and ILs ( The global gas–liquid mass transfer coefficient of styrene (K The rest of the model parameters are shown in The calibration procedure based on the minimization of the OF defined in Eq. The good agreement between the model predictions and the experimental data in the calibration step is shown in To evaluate whether the model could predict the variation in EC caused by the increase in the IL, simulations were performed for the conditions experimentally tested at an EBRT of 15 s ( Aside from modeling a satisfactorily steady-state operation, the model predicted with a high level of correspondence the continuous monitoring of the gas phase styrene concentration influenced by the cycles of irrigation on a complete day of operation ( A different behavior was observed for isopropanol under an irrigation/non-irrigation cyclic operation: a complete removal was attained during non-irrigation, while peaks of high outlet concentrations (40–50% of inlet concentrations) were observed during irrigation. The decrease in irrigation frequency from 15 min every 1.5 h to 15 min every 3 h caused a decrease in the daily average outlet concentrations from 86 to 59 mg C Nm The sensitivity of the model was evaluated comparing the relative changes in the outlet concentration by the variation of 50% of the mass transfer coefficient of styrene (K As shown in The model validation was conducted using the experimental data from the pilot BTF installed in a fiber-reinforced plastic industry that treats styrene for more than one year. The average daily data on the pilot BTF operated at a constant EBRT of 31 s and variable ILs of 5–23 g C m The model was applied using the parameters listed in The model reproduced the performance of the BTFs on both laboratory and on-site pilot scales by applying the same phenomena and using the same biofilm thickness. This did not occur during the treatment of hydrophilic compounds, in which experimental evidence supported by model predictions confirmed an excessive and uncontrolled biofilm growth on the industrial scale compared with that of the laboratory scale ( The approach considered in the development of this model, which was fitted by the calibration of only two parameters, K A dynamic model to simulate a styrene-degrading laboratory BTF was developed through a set of differential equations switching from irrigation to non-irrigation periods by implementing in a graphical user interface (GUI-MATLAB The authors acknowledge the financial support of the