The effects of cadmium concentration, temperature, time and copper concentration were investigated on cobalt removal from zinc sulfate solution by zinc dust. The results show a small amount of cadmium can increase the rate and extent of cobalt cementation. Residues after cementation were analyzed by electron probe micro-analysis (EPMA). Zn–Co and Zn–Cd alloys were found to enhance cobalt removal, whereas Zn–Cu and Cu–Cd alloys had an adverse effect on cobalt removal. To enhance cobalt removal, the Zn–Co or Zn–Cd alloys must form.Most of the world’s zinc is produced by electrowinning from zinc sulfate electrolytes. The presence of impurities in the zinc electrolyte solution is problematic for the electrowinning process. Impurities act as catalysts for hydrogen evolution, which leads to a large drop in current efficiency ( The objective of this research was to elucidate the mechanism of cobalt removal from zinc sulfate solution by zinc dust cementation in the presence of Cd Batch cementation tests were performed in a one-litre beaker. An axial-mixing type impeller agitated the solution at 1000 Residues after the cementation process were filtered, washed with distilled water, dried at room temperature and analyzed by EPMA (Shimadzu, model EPMA-1600, Japan). Purification of a synthetic solution with different concentrations of Cd According to the results presented above, a solution containing 400 In the previous sections, it has been shown that cobalt is removed effectively with the addition of 400 In order to examine the effect of copper on cobalt removal, a series of experiments were conducted under the following conditions: cadmium ion 400 Precipitates produced by zinc dust cementation at 90 Hydrogen evolution is a competitive reaction during the cementation process. Due to hydrogen formation, pH close to the zinc surface will increase, and basic zinc salts will therefore precipitate on the surface of the zinc particles. Without any activator addition, a great deal of basic zinc sulfate is formed surrounding the zinc. This has been observed by other researchers ( The basic zinc sulfate in the residue is found in a low level from the results of EPMA. Moreover, it is surrounded by zinc dust and cobalt cemented, instead of basic zinc sulfate surround zinc dust. Therefore, basic zinc sulfate cannot inhibit proceeding of cementation reaction and cobalt removal can be improved considerably. And the formation of Zn–Co and Zn–Cd alloys are observed, and are thought to be likely to enhance cobalt removal. Therefore, compared with process of cementation without the presence of Cd In the presence of cadmium and copper, it is found that zinc particles are not covered by basic zinc salts. Therefore, the cementation reaction is not inhibited. Compared with cementation by zinc dust only, the efficiency of cobalt removal enhances greatly. However, the cementation efficiency of cobalt removal in the presence of Cd  Cadmium is beneficial in terms of the final cobalt concentration, which can increase the rate and extent of cobalt cementation. It is an important consideration in purification circuits that removal cadmium completely prior to cobalt cementation, because cadmium can inhibit basic zinc sulfate to precipitates on the surface of zinc particles. However, the results in this research will bring forth the problem of comprehensive utilization sinter of cadmium. Cementation by zinc dust and without any activators addition to the solution, a great deal of basic zinc sulfate is formed and it surrounds zinc. The basic zinc salt layer formed is thought to inhibit the cementation reaction and leads to low efficiency of cobalt removal. Zn–Co and Zn–Cd alloys are thought to be likely to enhance cobalt removal. Zn–Cu and Cu–Cd alloys are thought to not to be benefit for cobalt removal.