Estimation of mill power-draw can play a critical role in economics, operation and control standpoints of the entire mineral processing plants since the cost of milling is the single biggest expense within the process. Thus, several empirical power-draw prediction models have been generated based on a combination of laboratory, pilot and full-scale measurements of different milling conditions. However, they cannot be used in industrial plants, where in full-scale operations, only not few numbers of input parameters used in those models are measured. Moreover, empirical models do not assess the relationship between input features. This investigation is going to introduce random forest (RF), as a predictive model, beside of its associated variable importance measures system, as a sensible means for variable selection, to overcome drawbacks of empirical models. Although RF as a powerful modeling tool has been used in several problem solving systems, it has not comprehensively considered in the powder technology areas. In this investigation, an industrial ball mill database from Chadormalu iron ore processing plant were used to develop a RF model and explore relationships between power-draw and other monitored operating parameters. Modeling results indicated that RF can highly improve the prediction accuracy of power-draw as compared to the regression as a typical method (R2: 0.98 vs. 0.60, respectively) and rank operational milling parameters based on their importance.In mineral processing plants, comminution circuits are the most energy consuming units; thus, determination of mill power-draw can be one of the most important factors for designing, operating and evaluating of an efficient plant As a function of these various effective variables, numerous empirical and computational methods have been derived to predict power-draw of different mills In details, curve fitting and regression are the routine methods in the mineral processing industry for capturing correlations between process features and interpreting a model Although RF as a reliable tree-based machine learning method has been used in numerous engineering problem solving, it has not appeared extensively in the mineral processing and powder technology areas To assess relationships between various measured variables and gross power-draw, the data related to one of the ball mill circuits from the Chadormalu iron ore processing plant were used. This plant is the second largest iron concentrate producer in Iran (Around 11 million (ton/year) of hematite and magnetite concentrates). The ball mill has an overflow discharge with 5.4 m diameter and 9.45 m length with 274 t/h capacity (made by Krupp Polysius Company from Germany). The speed of the mill is mainly constant (14 rpm) and there is approximately a fixed six month period of changing liners. Various parameters are monitored in this unit ( One of the main purposes for generating models can be the determination of the most effective variables among input data. This evaluation can lead to developing an accurate model and also a deeper understanding of the effectiveness of the system. In other words, identifying the most relevant factors for modeling a system is of interest in many problem-solving models rather than only predicting an output by an intelligent soft computing method (mostly by a black-box system). Moreover, this assessment is essential for many applications since the measurement of many variables consume cost and time In this context, Random Forest (RF) can offer variable importance measurement (VIM) that can be used to compare the impact of predictors for generating a model and rank them based on their importance. RF by computing VIM among variables improves the interpretability of a model for prediction of a response RF as an ensemble - multiple decision tree based method has two steps of randomization: (1) randomly generate a subset bootstrap data sample from variables to develop trees, and (2) growing each tree by using split nodes on randomly selected variables. Modeling by RF has several advantages such as low number of tuneable factors, general resistance to overfitting, auto-determination of generalized errors, scale invariance, and automatic handling of missing data For computing VIM and generating a RF predictive model, the R package was used. The reference implementation of PAI is available in the “R” software package for statistical computing which has been used in this study ( Pearson correlation (  For developing the RF model for prediction of power-draw, from the entire dataset, 70% of records are randomly applied for the training stage and the remaining 30% for the testing stage of the RF model. The training step was stopped after generation of 1000 trees (means models received the minimum error). From the database, 22 records are used to test the model (validation step). RF modeling results show that the trees can yield satisfactory predictions of the power-draw, with the correlation of determination values (R In the industrial scale of mineral processing plants, for controlling the power-draw of a tumbling mill, operators can only monitor a few numbers of effective variables, and many parameters are fixed. In this study, monthly average measurements of ball mill performance for around six years from Chadormalu iron ore processing plant as a database was used to develop a random forest model for the prediction of power-draw. Variable importance measurement of random forest indicated the ball charge and working index of ore samples are the most effective factors between monitored variables for the prediction of power-draw. Modeling results showed that random forest compares to the typical method (regression) can satisfactorily predict the power-draw by using the most effective variables in the testing stage (R