Extra-articular fractures of the distal radius with posterior displacement are typically treated with volar locking plates. However, this fixation method does not address the posterior comminution, which seems to have no impact on the final result. The purpose of this study was to determine the fate of the posterior comminution. This was a retrospective study of 22 patients over 50 years old with a distal radius fracture. A preoperative computed tomography (CT) scan was performed to evaluate the comminution. All fractures were fixed with a volar locking plate. All patients underwent a bone density scan. Patients were reviewed at 6 months post-operative to determine their clinical, radiological and functional outcomes. The CT scan was performed again to determine the fate of the comminution. At 6 months post-operative, 82% of patients had an oval metaphyseal defect. The mean volume of this defect was 1.86 mL. The contents of this defect most closely resembled fat. There was no statistical link between the defect's volume and the various parameters studied. On the other hand, the defect's density was positively related to the functional outcome and negatively related to the patients’ body mass index. Because of the compression experienced by the cancellous bone, a distal metaphyseal defect often persists after consolidation in dorsally displaced distal radius fractures. The posterior comminution is ultimately of little consequence.More than 89% of distal radius fractures are displaced dorsally. Metaphyseal comminution is related to the injury mechanism and the compressive loading during the injury event. It most often affects the posterior cortex, which is thinner and weaker than the anterior cortex The aim of this study was to evaluate the fate of the posterior comminution in extra-articular distal radius fractures. This was a retrospective study of patients over 50 years of age who suffered an extra-articular wrist fracture with posterior tilt, corresponding to stages of 23-A2 and 23-A3 in the AO classification. The diagnosis was made based on X-rays including AP and lateral views. All the included patients also underwent a preoperative CT scan to accurately classify the fracture on the AO classification, to look for associated lesions and to evaluate the degree of comminution in the posterior cortex. The comminution was characterized by its height – measured on sagittal CT slices – and its location. All fractures were fixed with a locked volar plate (VariAx 2 Distal Radius Plating System, Stryker The patient outcomes were evaluated at 6 months post-operative. We evaluated the pain at rest and during activity based on a visual analog scale, joint motion in flexion, extension, ulnar deviation, radial deviation, supination and pronation using a goniometer, grip strength using a Jamar Another set of AP and lateral X-rays were taken during this follow-up visit. These were used to assess bone healing and to look for secondary displacement. Secondary displacement was defined arbitrarily as loss of the radial slope measured on an AP view or the radial anteversion measured on a lateral view of more than 5 ° between the immediate post-operative and follow-up X-rays. All patients underwent a bone density scan within 6 months after the surgical procedure. Osteopenia (low bone mass) was defined as a A follow-up CT scan was done in all patients at 6 months post-operative. The aim of this exam was to confirm the healing of the fracture site and to determine the fate of the posterior comminution. When a distal metaphyseal defect was found, it was characterized by its volume, its density in Hounsfield units (HU) and its location relative to the articular surface. The metaphyseal defect was compared to an ellipsoid whose volume was calculated using the formula: V = 4/3 Pi a b c, where a, b and c correspond to the defect's diameter in three planes in space (height, width, thickness). The height, width and thickness of the defects were measured in a standardized and reproducible manner. The axial slices were used to measure the width and thickness, the sagittal slices were used to measure the height and thickness and the coronal slices were used to measure the height and width. This resulted in two measurements of each diameter being taken. The average of these two measurements was used to calculate the volume ( The density (in HU) was calculated on the axial slices ( The quantitative variables were summarized by their mean, standard deviation, maximum and minimum values, while the qualitative variables were summarized by percentages. The normality of the distribution of the numerical variables was analyzed using the Shapiro-Wilk test. Correlations between numerical variables were determined using Pearson's correlation test while correlations between quantitative and qualitative variables were determined using Spearman's correlation test. The height of the preoperative comminution was correlated to the 6-month outcomes of pain, range of motion, grip strength and functional scores. The volume of the metaphyseal defect was correlated to the height of the comminution, patient age, bone mass index (BMI), bone density scan results, pain levels, joint range of motion, grip strength and functional scores. Lastly, the defect's density was correlated to patient age, BMI, bone density scan results, pain levels, joint range of motion, grip strength and functional scores. The threshold for statistical significance was set at 5%. Twenty-two patients were included in the study: 3 men (14%) and 19 women (86%). The mean age at the time of the fracture was 70 years (52–89). The mean BMI was 24.0 (± 5.6; 17.6–43.1). Of the 22 fractures, 14 (64%) were in the right wrist and 8 (36%) were in the left wrist. The dominant wrist was injured in 15 patients (68%). All fractures were type 23-A3 in the AO classification, thus all had posterior comminution. The distal end of the ulna was also fractured in 17 patients (77.3%). The fracture was in the styloid in 9 patients (52.9%), base of the styloid in 6 patients (35.3%) and ulnar neck in 2 patients (11.8%). There were no intracarpal lesions. The mean height of the posterior comminution was 8.66 mm (± 1.56; 6.0–12.1) ( Thirteen patients (59%) had osteopenia and seven patients (32%) had osteoporosis at the femoral neck. Ten patients (45%) had osteopenia and three patients (14%) had osteoporosis at the lumbar spine. At 6 months post-operative, the pain level was 0.68 (0–5) at rest and 2 (0–6) during activity ( All fractures had healed at the 6-month follow-up visit. There was one case of secondary displacement, which occurred in an 88-year-old woman who had a 10° increase in the posterior tilt. On the 6-month post-operative CT scan, a distal metaphyseal defect was found in 82% of patients (18 patients) over the preoperative posterior comminution. The mean volume of this defect was 1859 mm The height of the posterior comminution and its location did not impact the pain levels, joint amplitude, grip strength or functional scores. There was no correlation between the volume of the metaphyseal defect and the height of the preoperative comminution, patient age, BMI, bone density scan results, pain levels, joint amplitude, grip strength or functional scores. The density of the defect was negatively correlated with the BMI ( Before the introduction of locking volar plates, various authors were interested in the metaphyseal defect created by bone impaction, since they were aware that maintaining the reduction requires this defect to be filled. The early studies compared cementoplasty only to conservative treatment, with cementoplasty having better outcomes In our study, one patient suffered a secondary displacement. This complication has also been reported in other published studies. Lattamann et al. reported two cases of secondary displacement (1%) in a cohort of 228 patients The degree of posterior comminution due to the initial injury event had no impact on our patients’ pain, range of motion, grip strength and functional outcomes. Nevertheless, we found that 82% of our patients had a persistent metaphyseal defect at 6 months post-operative that had a mean volume of 1.86 mL. Few studies have looked into the fate of the metaphyseal impaction created by the injury event. In a histomorphometry study, Lutz et al. showed that the volar and dorsal bone micro-architecture parameters were significantly different once bone union had been achieved We found no statistical relationship between the volume of the metaphyseal defect at 6 months post-operative and the bone density scan results. It would be logical to think that the largest defects would occur in osteoporotic patients. The bone architecture of the distal radius changes with age; in osteoporotic patients, it is responsible for a reduction in the trabecular bone The density of the metaphyseal defect was positively correlated with the functional outcomes. The highest density defects likely contained tissue resembling cancellous bone, while the lower density defects likely contained lower strength fibrous tissue. Thus, better bone regeneration seems to contribute to better functional outcomes. We did not identify any parameters that predict bone regeneration, since neither the clinical or bone density data were related to the defect's density. While we have no proof that a persistent metaphyseal defects makes the distal radius weaker, we believe that the presence of a defect should make us think carefully about removing the fracture fixation hardware. It has been shown that fracture fixation is more stable when the epiphyseal screws are placed in subchondral bone Extra-articular, dorsally displaced distal radius fractures very often occur in combination with posterior cortical comminution and crushing of the trabecular bone in the distal metaphysis of the radius. At 6 months post-operative, we found a persistent metaphyseal defect in the majority of our patients, a defect filled by low-density tissue instead of metaphyseal cancellous bone, with unknown mechanical properties. We could not identify any relationship between the degree of initial posterior comminution and the clinical and radiological outcomes at 6 months post-operative. Nevertheless, the higher the density of the metaphyseal defect, the better the functional outcome scores. None of the other criteria that we studied were correlated with the defect's density. Out study did not allow us to associate increased fragility of the distal radius with the presence of this metaphyseal defect. It would be interesting to follow the evolution of this defect over the longer term and to analyze it with histology. The authors declare that they have no competing interest.