The previous study demonstrated that bentonite had a deleterious effect on copper flotation by increasing pulp viscosity, but this deleterious effect could be mitigated by sea water (Zhang et al., 2015a). In this study, the effect of different cations, Na+, K+, Mg2+ and Ca2+ with the same anion, Cl−, on the rheology of a copper-gold ore in the presence of bentonite and copper flotation was investigated. It was found that the improvement of copper flotation in the presence of bentonite was generally dependent on the reduction of pulp viscosity by these cations. Divalent cations, Mg2+ and Ca2+, had a more significant effect on pulp viscosity and therefore copper flotation than monovalent cation, Na+, K+. These cations also interacted with bentonite, with residual cations modifying the froth property. However, this modification was less significant in copper flotation in the presence of bentonite where pulp viscosity played a critical role.With the depletion of high quality ores, an increasing amount of low quality ores that contain a high content of clay minerals have to be processed in the mining industry. However, this raises new challenges as clay minerals have deleterious effects on the flotation of valuable minerals. Industry practice in copper-gold flotation plants show that when an ore containing a high amount of clay minerals is floated at a normal solid density of about 30 Clay minerals are phyllosilicate minerals comprising silica tetrahedral (T) sheets and alumina octahedral (O) sheets joining together in certain proportions, with fine sizes less than 2 The previous study found that different clay minerals caused different issues in flotation. Increasing the proportion of bentonite led to a higher pulp viscosity that decreased the copper recovery with the reduction of froth amount ( On the other hand, saline water has been widely used in industry operation as a result of the scarcity of fresh water. In nickel flotation plants in Australia, the ionic strength of the saline water is as high as 1.8 In the previous study, A copper-gold ore with a low clay content was used as a model system and referred to as clean ore in this study. X-ray Diffraction (XRD) analysis in Potassium isoamyl xanthate (PAX) obtained from Orica, Australia Pty Ltd, was used as the collector. Plant frother, an aliphatic alcohol based mixture, was used as received. The pH value of slurry in flotation was controlled by the addition of lime. Brisbane tap water was used throughout the flotation process. The ions in tap water have a negligible effect in bentonite viscosity and flotation. Sodium chloride (NaCl), potassium chloride (KCl), magnesium chloride (MgCl Rheology measurements were carried out by an Ares rheometer (TA Instruments Ltd., U.S.), with a 42 The clean ore was crushed to a size of −2.36 The flotation procedure was the same as described in the previous study ( The previous study indicated that the presence of bentonite decreased copper flotation recovery mainly through the high pulp viscosity, with a less amount of froth generating on the top of pulp phase ( The main component of bentonite in this study is Na-montmorillonite with a 2:1 clay structure. It is characterized by negatively charged basal faces (F) and pH dependent charges of the edges (E) (  The flotation of the bentonite-ore mixture was conducted in the presence of each of the four salts. For each salt, three concentrations were selected according to the rheology measurements shown in However, discrepancies between flotation tests ( Secondly, K The combination of rheology measurements and flotation tests reveal that both monovalent and bivalent cations affect other flotation parameters apart from reducing the pulp viscosity of bentonite suspension. To understand whether the two discrepancies between rheology measurements and flotation tests were associated with the presence of bentonite, flotation of clean ore in the absence of bentonite was conducted in the presence of individual salts at 0.1 It is known that the presence of electrolytes affects froth stability and therefore mineral flotation recovery ( This study confirms the deleterious effect of bentonite on copper flotation through high pulp viscosity and the negative effect of bentonite may be mitigated by salts to reduce the pulp viscosity. This study also shows that using individual cations, Na The authors greatly acknowledge the financial support from the