Knowledge of the strength and deformability of fractured rocks is important for design, construction and stability evaluation of slopes, foundations and underground excavations in civil and mining engineering. However, laboratory tests of intact rock samples cannot provide information about the strength and deformation behaviors of fractured rock masses that include many fractures of varying sizes, orientations and locations. On the other hand, large-scale in situ tests of fractured rock masses are economically costly and often not practical in reality at present. Therefore, numerical modeling becomes necessary. Numerical predicting using discrete element methods (DEM) is a suitable approach for such modeling because of their advantages of explicit representations of both fractures system geometry and their constitutive behaviors of fractures, besides that of intact rock matrix. In this study, to generically determine the compressive strength of fractured rock masses, a series of numerical experiments were performed on two-dimensional discrete fracture network models based on the realistic geometrical and mechanical data of fracture systems from field mapping. We used the UDEC code and a numerical servo-controlled program for controlling the progressive compressive loading process to avoid sudden violent failure of the models. The two loading conditions applied are similar to the standard laboratory testing for intact rock samples in order to check possible differences caused by such loading conditions. Numerical results show that the strength of fractured rocks increases with the increasing confining pressure, and that deformation behavior of fractured rocks follows elasto-plastic model with a trend of strain hardening. The stresses and strains obtained from these numerical experiments were used to fit the well-known Mohr-Coulomb (M-C) and Hoek-Brown (H-B) failure criteria, represented by equivalent material properties defining these two criteria. The results show that both criteria can provide fair estimates of the compressive strengths for all tested numerical models. Parameters of the elastic deformability of fractured models during elastic deformation stages were also evaluated, and represented as equivalent Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio as functions of lateral confining pressure. It is the first time that such systematic numerical predicting for strength of fractured rocks was performed considering different loading conditions, with important findings for different behaviors of fractured rock masses, compared with testing intact rock samples under similar loading conditions.As is well known, natural rock masses consist of intact rock blocks separated by discontinuities such as joints, bedding planes, sheared zones, and faults. The presences of various discontinuities, the inherent complexity of their geometrical parameters, and the difficulties for estimation of their geomechanical and geometrical properties, make it difficult to measure directly mechanical properties of fractured rocks under ordinary laboratory conditions. The main reasons for such difficulties are: (1) the need for testing fractured rocks of large volumes of hundreds of cubic meters, equal to or larger than their representative elementary volume (REV); and (2) the fracture system geometry remains unknown before testing. Clearly laboratory tests are not practical and different techniques are needed for reliable predictions. Over the years, various attempts have been made to study the strength and deformability of fractured rock masses. Currently, methods available for estimating the strength and deformability of fractured rock masses fall into two broad categories, namely direct and indirect methods. Direct methods are the experimental methods in laboratory or in situ tests. Important laboratory tests on intact rock samples have been conducted and comprehensively reported in the literature. However, laboratory tests of intact rock samples cannot provide information of strength and deformation behaviors of fractured rocks, due to the existence of fractures of varying sizes, orientations and locations at larger scales. To obtain realistic results for strength and deformation behaviors of fractured rocks, large volumes of rock containing fractures should be tested at desired stress levels, which is almost impossible to be carried out in conventional laboratory facilities today, but is possible by using direct in situ field tests. However, in situ field tests are usually very difficult to control the initial and boundary (loading) conditions and are time-consuming, and economically costly. Indirect methods commonly include empirical, analytical and numerical methods. Each of these methods has its own limitations and advantages. One of the popular and simple indirect methods for estimating strength and deformability of fractured rocks is the empirical methods using the rock mass classification systems such as RQD, RMR, and Q-system, which are based on the engineering experiences obtained from the past projects. In this approach, rock mass properties are linked to a representative rock mass classification index that reflects the overall rock mass quality. The main shortcoming of this approach is that it lacks a proper mathematical platform to establish constitutive models and the associated properties of the fractured rocks, so that the second law of thermodynamics should not be violated, since complex properties of a rock mass cannot be satisfactorily represented in this method for establishing constitutive models and their associated properties concerned quantitatively with a proper mathematical logic. Analytical methods are very useful in geomechanics because they provide results that can highlight impacts of the most important issues or variables that determine the solution of a problem. Analytical methods attempt to calculate strength and deformability of fractured rocks from the strength and deformation properties of the discontinuities and of the intact rock matrix, but are applicable only with simple and regular fracture system geometry. These limitations make this approach impossible for fractured rocks containing complex fracture systems. Numerical methods can be used to calculate strength and deformability of fractured rocks with more flexibility, by representing different mechanical and geometric features of the fractures and the intact rock matrices. With almost daily improvements of efficiencies of numerical solution methods and increase of computing power, numerical modeling methods have been developed to estimate the strength and deformability of fractured rocks by using various discrete and continuum modeling methods. The FEM (finite element method) is the most widely applied numerical method for rock engineering problems ( The DEM was introduced by  The first aim of this research is to extend the original numerical platform (e.g. There are several empirical failure criteria developed for representing strength of rock masses. The M-C failure criterion and the H-B failure criterion ( The universal distinct element code, UDEC ( For simplicity, the term ‘fracture’ and ‘fractures’ are adopted as the general term for all types of discontinuities of rocks such as faults, joints, fracture zones, etc., unless specified separately. In this study, a systematic investigation was conducted using numerical experiments of typical laboratory compression tests to determine, generically, the compressive strength and deformation parameters of the fractured rock, as equivalent properties at its REV size. During loading on a numerical model of the fractured rock concerned, both rock matrix and fractures will deform or be displaced, governed by the equations of motions of the rock blocks and constitutive models, material parameters for rock matrix and fractures, and the initial and boundary conditions. At the first stage of this research, a few DFN models were generated to represent the fractured rock masses and after that, the generated geometry was used to create DEM model for the numerical experiments using the UDEC code. It should be noted that it is generally accepted that the sizes of DFN models must not be less than its REV of the models concerned. REV is defined as the minimum volume (or a range) beyond which the characteristics of the domain remain basically constant. Therefore, when the sizes of DFN models are not less than their REVs, the equivalent properties will become scale-independent. In the investigation of strength and deformability of fractured rock, the same field data from Sellafield site, as reported in Then the DFN models were used to generate DEM models with internal discretization of finite difference elements, for stress-deformation analyses. Before performing the analyses, the DFN models were regularized by deleting the isolated fractures and dead-ends, so that the resultant fractures were all connected and each fracture contributes to form two and just two opposing surfaces on two adjacent blocks. A number of general and important assumptions related to the set-up of the DEM models about rock matrix and fractures, as adopted in The numerical model was defined in a two-dimensional (2D) space for a generic study. Simulations were performed under quasi-static plane strain conditions for deformation and stress analyses, without considering effects of gravity. Fractured rock was a hard rock mass, containing rock matrix and fracture, without considering strain-softening. Rock matrix was a linear, isotropic, homo-geneous, elastic, and impermeable material. The fractures follow an ideal elasto-plastic behavior of an M-C model in the shear direction and a hyperbolic behavior (Bandis’ Law) in the normal direction. The initial aperture of fractures (without stress) was a constant. Coupled hydro-mechanical effects on the fractures were neglected in the current study. The above assumptions are based on measured data from site investigations, and are necessary for a numerical prediction for strength and deformability of fractured rocks, without attention of application to site-specific case studies. The basic information about the intact rock, the granite matrix, and mechanical properties of fractures that were used for modeling in UDEC is shown in In this study, similar to the standard compression test of small intact rock samples in laboratory, a series of numerical experiments, namely uniaxial and biaxial compression tests, were performed, following the modeling procedure (see The applied axial compressive stress loading condition was similar to that of the standard confined compression tests on axisymmetric intact rock samples, by varying confining pressures and axial loads. The axial stress loading process was controlled by a velocity monitoring scheme during simulation. The velocities (in the both Vertical and horizontal velocities (in  In order to keep a servo-controlled loading condition, a new FISH program was developed and inserted in the UDEC model to simulate a standard servo-controlled test similar to the standard servo-controlled tests of small intact rock samples in laboratory, to minimize the influence of inertial effects on the response of the model, by setting the upper and lower limits for unbalanced forces. Cyclic loading rate was kept in a range of maximum and minimum unbalanced forces in UDEC program to avoid sudden (violent) failure of the DEM models during cycles of uniaxial and biaxial compression tests. It should be noted that the equivalent strength and deformability of the fractured rock, as an equivalent continuum, were the concern of research, not the complete constitutive model of the fractured rock as an equivalent continuum under any stress paths. Therefore, the loading needs to be stopped when the peak strength of the model was reached, without model collapse or appearance of very large shear displacements along the fractures or large block motion, which will make the equivalent continuum assumption of the fractured rock invalid, and the homogenization (averaging) for equivalent parameter evaluation could not be applied.  It can be seen from Besides the axial compressive stress loading condition, another common and popular method for numerical experiments is the constant velocity boundary condition. In this context, for studying the effect of different axial loading conditions on stress–strain behaviors of fractured rock masses, numerical experiments were also performed by applying a constant velocity in the  Numerical results show a higher average axial stress under constant velocity test condition than that under constant axial stress condition. The main reason is that the higher normal stress of fractures were induced during shear under constant velocity conditions, due to the 5° dilation angle (see The M-C and H-B failure criteria were selected to be fitted for representing the equivalent strength of the fractured rock concerned, due to their wide acceptance in the international rock mechanics community. The M-C failure criterion is an empirical linear failure criterion that has been adopted for different rocks and soils. It can be expressed in a functional relation as The M-C failure criterion can be applied for both intact rocks and rock masses, with the parameter The H-B failure criterion is an empirical nonlinear failure criterion that is proposed for failure of intact rocks and rock masses. It can be expressed in terms of principal stresses ( The strength parameters of cohesion ( The curve fitting with M-C and H-B failure criteria was illustrated in The equivalent material parameters for the two criteria, derived from the fitting to the strength criteria, are given in In addition of the estimated strength envelops, the deformability parameters of fractured rock concerned, as the equivalent Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio, using the DEM models of different sizes and under different confining pressures, were calculated, as illustrated in As we can see from A systematic 2D numerical procedure to predict strength behavior and deformability parameters of fractured rocks, by using the DEM, was developed in this study for the first time, as an extension to the research performed in The DFN-DEM is a suitable and flexible numerical approach to predict the behaviors and properties of fractured rocks that cannot be obtained by conventional laboratory tests using small intact rock samples. This method provides an important extension to the comprehensive modeling procedure as developed in The axial stress loading condition with servo-controlled constant axial strain loading condition generated different stress–strain behaviors from that under constant normal stress loading conditions, with the same testing model geometry and size, due to the fact that the effect of shear dilation induced increase of normal stresses of fractured under shearing. Whether such difference may also be caused by the effects of stress concentration at fracture intersections or block rotations remains an important issue for further investigations. The results show that the model size (or scale) has a significant influence on the strength and deformation behaviors of fractured rocks if the model size is less that the properly derived REV size of the rock concerned. In this paper, the strength of fractured rocks decreases slightly with the model size up to the established REV size, after that the changes become insignificant. Also, deformability parameters of fractured rocks, including the Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio, change significantly with confining pressures. These findings, rarely reported in the literature, have significant impact on developing constitutive models of fractured rocks as equivalent continua, since the REV size, strength and deformability parameters are the three issues that must be readily understood for constitutive model development for fractured rocks whose properties have significant dependence on understanding of stress and size effect. The results show that the strength and deformation behaviors of fractured rocks are nonlinear over the concerned range of stress and are also dependent upon confining pressure. With increase of confining pressure, the strength of fractured rocks increases and deformation behavior of fractured rocks follows an elasto-plastic model with a strain hardening trend. The results show that the testing volume, loading conditions (both axial stress and velocity loading conditions) and adequate quantitative knowledge on fracture system geometry and their mechanical behaviors play a significant role for designing future physical tests for estimating the strength and deformability of fractured rocks, very different and much more challenging compared with testing intact rock samples. The mechanical behavior of the individual fractures plays a significant role in understanding the strength and deformability of fractured rocks, besides the fracture system geometry, as demonstrated by the effect of dilation angle of the research. Our model did not show strain-softening, except in one case for a model less than REV size (2 Both the M-C and H-B criteria give a fair estimate of the compressive strength of the rock concerned for almost all cases tested in this study. On the other hand, the H-B criterion is in essence a nonlinear failure envelope and is more flexible for modeling different fracture system geometries and stress conditions. The scientific originality of this paper is its extension of the mathematical platform established in The study presented is based on an assumption that the initial aperture of fractures is a constant. So, more modeling is needed to perform numerical experiments when initial aperture of fractures is not constant but correlated to fracture size. In this research, the models have not shown strain-softening, but it may occur after continued loading or change of fracture system or shape and geometry of the testing volume. By continued loading, strain-softening may occur, but it is not required at this stage of the research, since deriving a meso-scale comprehensive constitutive model of the fractured rocks is a future work. However, the subject is new, first tested by numerical modeling in this research, and needs continued investigations. Partial cracking and complete crushing of rock blocks during loading processes were not considered. This issue may affect evaluating the equivalent strength and deformability of fractured rocks to a certain extent, but may not be an important factor since the dominating factor for strength and deformation of the fractured rocks is the displacements of fractures, which is the main mechanism of the energy dissipation according to the first principle of energy minimization. In addition, this simplifying assumption was needed by the current version of the UDEC code that does not have the ability to consider block cracking, and this is an issue for future work. Coupled hydro-mechanical effects on the fractures were neglected for evaluation of strength and deformation behaviors of fractured rocks at this stage of research. Further studies are needed to study water pressure effects on strength and deformation behaviors of fractured rocks. Stochastic analysis using multi-fracture system realizations needs to be performed for a more comprehensive understanding of the uncertainty of the predicting of fractured rock behaviors. 3D investigations are necessary to eliminate the limitations caused by the assumption of 2D space under plane strain loading conditions.