Titania powders were synthesized by nonhydrolitic sol–gel process starting from titanium(IV)-chloride, titanium(IV)-isopropoxide and carbon-tetrachloride. Gelation was performed in solvothermal conditions, at 140°C or 160°C. The obtained gels were then dried and calcined at 500°C or 750°C.
                  Dry gels and powders obtained by their calcination at 500°C contained only anatase, and the degree of crystallinity increased notably on passing from the dry gels to the powders. The crystallite size of dry gels and powders obtained at 500°C increased slightly with increasing temperature of the gelation. The powder obtained at the higher gelation temperature had a larger specific surface area (52.8m2
                     g−1) and a smaller maximum pore diameter (12.3nm). When the calcination temperature was increased to 750°C, the obtained powders contained both anatase and rutile. The rutile content in the powders is related to the degree of crystallinity of the dry gels: with a lower level of dry gel crystallinity, the rutile content in the powders becomes higher, indicating that the temperature of the anatase→rutile transformation decreases with decreasing the size of anatase crystallites. The photocatalytic activity of the powders obtained by gel calcination at 500°C, tested by measuring the photocatalytic degradation of the azo dye CI Reactive orange 16, was sufficiently high and attained the photocatalytic activity of the broadly accepted commercial powder P-25 produced by Degussa. The photocatalytic activity of the powders obtained by calcination at 750°C was low, but showed a tendency to increase with higher anatase content in the powders.Titania is one of the most frequently studied and applied photocatalysts in environmental protection, such as purification, deodorization, sterilization and self-cleaning. Its semiconductor properties, chemical and biological inertness, resistance to chemical and photo-induced corrosion, ability to be activated by means of natural sources (Sun-UV irradiation) together with its non-toxicity and low price have steadily attracted the world wide attention of scientists and engineers The aim of the present study was to investigate the influence of temperature of gelation by solvothermal treatment on the structural, textural and morphological properties of nonhydrolityc sol–gel derived gels and powders obtained by gel calcination at various temperatures, as well as to test photocatalytic activity of titania powders obtained in this way. For TiO The phase composition of the dry gels and powders were determined by XRD analysis on a PHILIPS PW 1710 instrument with a curved graphite monochromator and scintillation counter. The intensity of the diffracted X-rays (CuK The weight fraction of rutile in the calcined samples was calculated using the following equation The textural parameters of the obtained TiO The photocatalytic activities of the obtained powders were established according to the results of the degree of degradation level of the azo dye CI Reactive orange 16 in aqueous solution. The adopted experimental parameters were: dye concentration, 50 The XRD patterns of dry gels G140 and G160 and titania powders P140/500, P 160/500, P 160/750 and P 140/750, are presented in The diffractograms presented in The X-ray diffractograms of the powders obtained at 750 The textural parameters of the powders obtained by gel calcination at 500 and 750 Specific surface area, total pore volume and mesopore volume of powders obtained by gel calcination at 750 The SEM micrographs of the dry gel G160 and the titania powder P160/500 are presented in From the dependency of the relative dye concentration Based on the presented results, it can be concluded that a nonhydrolytic sol–gel process coupled with solvothermal treatment may produce mesoporous nanocrystalline titania powders of narrow particle and pore size distribution and of high photocatalytic activity. The solvothermal treatment temperature, Financial support through the