This paper describes the studies on kinetics of bio-dissolution of valuable metals such as copper, nickel and cobalt from the Indian Ocean nodules using Thiobacillus ferrooxidans and Thiobacillus thiooxidans in the presence of pyrite and sulphur. The bacterial oxidation of pyrite and sulphur produces ferrous sulphate and sulphurous acid respectively which reduce Mn(IV) of the nodules to Mn(II), thereby dissolving the metals through indirect mechanism. The leaching data collected in the temperature range 293–308 K at a pH of 2 and 5% pulp density with the particle size of 300 to −75 μm, show that the dissolution of the metals follows shrinking core kinetic model. The leaching is controlled by the diffusion of the lixiviant through the product layer which is also indicated by the activation energy values.Ferromanganese nodules from ocean bed are the renewable source of non-ferrous metals such as copper, nickel, cobalt, zinc and manganese and are being considered for exploitation in India to meet the growing demand of the metals. Total reserves of the nodules are estimated to be around 2×10 Air dried sea nodule sample from Indian Ocean was obtained from National Institute of Oceanography, Goa. The sample was crushed, ground and passed through a sieve of 300 μm size. Composition of the sample was found to be 0.87% Cu, 0.96% Ni, 0.105% Co, 19.07% Mn, 7.8% Fe and 0.14% S. Pyrite containing 14.06% Fe and 6.73% S was obtained from Amjhore pyrite mines, Bihar whereas elemental sulphur was of 98% purity. Phases identified by XRD showed the presence of todorokite, birnessite and lithiophorite as the major MnO Bioleaching experiments were carried out in the conical flasks (1000 ml) clamped in an orbital motion incubator shaker at the desired temperature. The sample (25 g) was placed in the flask along with 40 ml of Tf as well as 10 ml of Tt active culture. In the sterile experiments 0.2 g/l HgCl Data on the bioleaching of metals in the presence of 2 wt.% sulphur and 10 wt.% pyrite at different temperatures are shown in The biodissolution of nickel also showed increasing trend with the rise in temperature from 293–308 K ( Various kinetic models such as chemical, diffusion and mixed control were tested. The kinetic data showed good fit to the diffusion controlled shrinking core model ( Bioleaching of the sea nodules with Tf and Tt is governed by the bacterial oxidation Biodissolution of copper, nickel and cobalt from the sea nodules with Tf and Tt is accompanied by the reduction of Mn(IV) to Mn(II) by Fe