Sodium oleate (NaOl) has been widely used as a collector for the scheelite flotation. However, low selectivity of NaOl and large amount of sodium silicate (SS) needed remain tough problems. In this study, octyl hydroxamic acid (HXMA-8) was used as an associate collector with NaOl in scheelite flotation. The flotation tests showed that a novel reagent scheme, i.e., a lower dosage of SS (300mg/L) and mixed collectors of HXMA-8+NaOl (total concentration 4.5×10−4
                     mol/L, preferred mass ratio of 1:2) achieved the selective separation of scheelite from calcite. Zeta potential measurements indicated that the depressant, SS, adsorbed more strongly on calcite surface than on scheelite surface. HXMA-8 adsorbed significantly on scheelite surface either in the absence or presence of SS by chemical bonding between oxygens of HXMA-8 and surface metal ions. NaOl also adsorbed on both mineral surfaces by chemisorption, but the adsorption on calcite surface was influenced adversely by the presence of SS.Scheelite, as an important tungsten-bearing mineral, is nowadays utilized mainly by flotation ( Moreover, hydroxamate collectors, such as benzohydroxamic acid ( Recent work showed that, octyl hydroxamic acid (HXMA-8), one kind of alkyl hydroxamic acids, can achieve the separation of fluorite from calcite and apatite with a higher selectivity compared with conventionally used oleate ( Pure scheelite crystals were obtained from Sichuan, China, and calcite from Fujian, China. XRD spectrums (showed in Chemically pure reagents were obtained from the following sources: octyl hydroxamic acid (HXMA-8, C Pure mineral flotation tests were carried out in an XFG-type flotation machine ( Zeta potential measurements were conducted at 20 Single mineral flotation tests were conducted using HXMA-8 as the single collector at pH In comparison, flotation tests using NaOl as the single collector were conducted at pH Considering the collecting power of NaOl and the selectivity of HXMA-8, flotation tests using collector mixture of HXMA-8 and NaOl were conducted to find out the preferred mass ratio of two collectors with total dosage at 3 Fixed the mass ratio of HXMA-8 and NaOl to be 1:2, the flotation behavior of scheelite and calcite was investigated using different dosages of HXMA-8, and the results are shown in The flotation behavior of scheelite and calcite using collector mixture and different dosages of SS was investigated, and the results are seen in The pulp pH on the preferred reagent combination of SS To uncover the separation mechanism of the novel reagent scheme, zeta potentials of scheelite and calcite in the absence and presence of the different reagents were measured, and the results are provided in  From The addition of SS causes a less zeta potential decrease for bare scheelite than for calcite at pH After the addition of HXMA-8, zeta potential witnesses a much larger decrease on scheelite In this work, octyl hydroxamic acid (HXMA-8) was used as an associate collector with NaOl for scheelite flotation. A novel reagent scheme, i.e., 300 Zeta potential measurements indicated that the depressant, SS, adsorbed more strongly on calcite surface by electrostatic attraction. Collector HXMA-8 adsorbed more strongly on scheelite surface than on calcite in the absence and presence of SS. The interactions of HXMA-8 and scheelite were inferred to be O This work is financially supported by the The authors want to appreciate the valuable discussions and comments by J. Brent Hiskey from University of Arizona and K. S. E. Forssberg from Luleå University of Technology.