Knowledges of aggregate stability and formation depending on soil organic carbon (SOC) and iron oxides are essential to the conservation of soil structure. In this work, the effects of SOC and different forms of iron oxides on the stability of aggregates of paddy soils were determined by applying the Le Bissonnais (LB) and extractions method by water, oxalate (OA), dithionite–citrate–bicarbonate (DCB), or hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). Two topsoils (0–20 cm) were selected based on two levels of SOC and iron oxides, high SOC (22.1 g kg−1)–low iron oxides (S1) and low SOC (8.50 g kg−1)–high iron oxides (S2) paddy soils from subtropical China. For the fast-wetting (FW) test, the percentage of 2–0.25 mm (34.0%) and >2 mm (42.2%) aggregate fractions were highest in S1 and S2, respectively. Both the soils had a >2 mm fraction that was above 60% under the slow-wetting (SW) and stirring after prewetting (WS) test. The free Fe oxide (Fe(DCB)) could increase in aggregate stability when SOC contents were low in S2. All three chemical extractions considerably decreased the >2 mm fractions (35.5–87.5%), and consequently increased the <0.053 mm fractions. The S1 soil presented the lower mean weight diameter (MWD) after DCB extractions, whereas it was no significantly different after OA or DCB extraction in S2 soil, indicating that Fe(DCB) had a greater effect on the stability of aggregates than amorphous Fe oxide (Fe(OA)) in the S1 soil, but both had the same effect for S2. The H2O2 treatment destructed>2 mm and 2–0.25 mm aggregates intensively, indicating that SOC was the major binding agent for aggregates of these sizes. The SOC was a key agent influencing soil aggregation not only in macro-aggregates (>0.25 mm) but also in micro-aggregates (0.25–0.053 mm) in the S1. The formation of aggregates in S1 was attributed to its higher content of organo-mineral complexes because the contents of SOC (3.30–11.2 g kg−1) were higher in >0.053 mm aggregates compared with S2 after H2O2 extractions. Fe oxides were the key agents for <0.25 mm aggregates formation. The MWD of the FW treatment was found to have a significant positive correlations with Fe(DCB), and MWD of the WS treatment proved significant positive correlations with SOC and Fe(OA) oxide, indicated that SOC and Fe oxides improved aggregate stability against external force collapse. This implies that the differential roles of SOC and Fe oxides in mechanisms of aggregate formation and stability in two paddy soils.Soil structure and soil aggregates are recognized to control a series of processes such as store organic carbon, reduce erosion, mediate soil aeration as well as filtrate and retain water ( The content of SOC, Fe and Al oxides, carbonates, cations and clay minerals act as binder that improve the stability of aggregates ( The interaction between SOC and aggregation has been a spate of report. For instance, there are several papers describing the role of microbial biomass-C and earthworms ( For the inorganic agents, the Fe oxides are considered as a main agents for formation of aggregate ( Paddy soils, occupying more than 26 million hectares in subtropical Asia and 13 million hectares in China, make up the world's most important Anthrosol for food production and food security ( Two paddy soils were collected from Jingzhou (S1) (latitude 30°35′28″N, longitude 112°04′33″E) and Wuhan (S2) (latitude 30°28′10′′N, longitude 114°21′21′′E) in Hubei province, China, respectively. Two study sites are humid, with a typical subtropical monsoon climate. It has long been cultivated with winter rape ( Soil pH was measured potentiometrically at 1:2.5 soil/water ratio in mass; soil organic carbon (SOC) by acid potassium-dichromate (K The basic physical and chemical properties of the two soils are summarized in The soil aggregate stability was slaked, micro-cracked and mechanical breakdowm according to Aggregate stability was expressed using the aggregate size distribution (ASD), and the mean weight diameter (MWD) in both methods. The mean weight diameter (MWD, mm) was calculated using the following relationship: To differentiate the effects of the wetting treatments, relative slaking index (RSI) and relative mechanical breakdown index (RMI) were defined as follows ( Soil samples were fractionated into different aggregate sizes after chemical extractions according to the procedure described by All data statistical analysis was performed with the SPSS 18.0 software package for Windows (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). A one-way ANOVA was used to test for significant differences among different treatments according to the Duncan's multiple range test calculations at 5% level. Pearson's correlations were used to examine the relationships between soil aggregate stability indexes and soil properties. For the FW test, the percentage of 2–0.25 mm aggregates (34.0%) was highest in the all fraction in S1 ( For the SW test, the content of >2 mm fraction was above 80% in the two soils. The aggregates size distribution of >2 mm and 2–0.25 mm between S1 and S2 are not statistically significant, but the greater percentage of aggregates >2 mm and 2–0.25 mm was found in S2. This fraction of micro-aggregates in S1 was considerably higher than in S2. The differences in silt + clay size distribution between S1 and S2 were not statistically significant, but the percentage of silt + clay fraction in S1 was greater than in S2. In general, >2 mm fragments were dominated after the WS treatment, they were 82.2% and 66.8% in S1 and S2, respectively. Meanwhile, S1 had a significantly higher percentage of >2 mm aggregates and lower percentage of 2–0.25 mm and 0.25–0.053 mm aggregates, but the opposite was found in S2. The MWD A decrease in the RSI and RMI of the aggregates implied a lower susceptibility of slaking and mechanical breakdown, respectively. The RSI value of S1 (49.4%) was significantly higher than S2 (39.9%). However, the RMI values of S1 were significantly lower than the S2. These results indicate that aggregates of the S1 and S2 were more sensitive to slaking destruction and mechanical breakdown, respectively. Following the water extraction, the size of dominant fraction was >2 mm (44.8%) in S1, followed by 2–0.25 mm (29.0%), and 0.25–0.053 mm and <0.053 mm fraction of less than 20% ( All three chemical extractions decreased the >2 mm fraction considerably, and consequently increased the silt + clay sized fractions, which agreed with the data reported by For S1, the mean weight diameter (MWD) of aggregates decreased in the order of water > OA > DCB > H For the S1 and S2 soils, the content of SOC decreased in the order DCB > OA > water > H After the four different extractions, the two soils presented the same trend of SOC distribution among aggregate size ( Among the four different extractions, the Fe The Fe Compared to amorphous Fe oxides(Fe As compared to water-extracted samples, the OA extractions decreased considerably in Fe The MWD After water extraction, the mass of the >2 mm aggregates and MWD had significant correlations with the SOC ( In S1 and S2 soils, the SOC is the main binding agent improved stability of soil aggregates and facilitate the formation of macro-aggregates. A much lower MWD after H SOC is a key agent influencing soil aggregation not only in macro-aggregates but also in micro-aggregates (0.25–0.053 mm) in S1 of high SOC. It was reported that soil organic carbon promotes the formation of micro-aggregates in Typic and Aquic Hapluduolls ( The high SOC–low iron oxides paddy soil (S1) contained much more SOC in organo-mineral complexes. The contents of SOC were higher after H The results indicate that Fe oxides were the key agents to the formation for <0.25 mm aggregates. Relative to the water treatment, the OA treatment markedly increased <0.053 mm aggregates but decreased micro-aggregates in S1 ( The aggregates were more sensitive to slaking and mechanical disruption in S1 and S2 soil, respectively. The iron oxides could increase in soil aggregate stability when SOC contents were low in S2. Soil organic carbon improved aggregate stability against mechanical disruption. The Fe We would like to acknowledge the special fund for