The anisotropic adsorption of sodium oleate (NaOL) on feldspar surfaces was investigated to elucidate the different flotation properties of feldspar particles of four different size ranges. Microflotation experiments showed that the feldspar flotation recovery of particles with sizes spanning different ranges decreased in the order 0–19>19–38>45–75>38–45μm. Zeta potential and FTIR measurements showed that NaOL was chemically adsorbed on the Al sites of the feldspar surface. The anisotropic surface energies and broken bond densities estimated by density functional theory calculations showed that, although feldspar mostly exposed (010) and (001) surfaces, only the (001) surfaces contained the Al sites needed for NaOL adsorption. The interaction energies calculated by molecular dynamics simulations confirmed the more favorable NaOL adsorption on (001) than (010) surfaces, which may represent the main cause for the anisotropic NaOL adsorption on feldspar particles of different sizes. SEM measurements showed that the main exposed surfaces on coarse and fine feldspar particles were the side (010) and basal (001) ones, respectively. A higher fraction of Al-rich (001) surfaces is exposed on fine feldspar particles, resulting in better floatability compared with coarse particles. XPS and adsorption measurements confirmed that the Al content on the feldspar surface varied with the particle size, explaining the different NaOL flotation of feldspar particles of different sizes. Therefore, the present results suggest that coarsely ground ore should be used for the separation of feldspar gangue minerals. Further improvements in the flotation separation of feldspar from associated valuable minerals can be achieved through selective comminution or grinding processes favoring the exposure of (010) surfaces.As one of the most abundant minerals in the earth’s crust, feldspar is commonly associated with other silicate minerals in pegmatitic and feldspathic sand deposits, such as quartz (SiO Because the flotation process is controlled by the chemical properties of the surfaces involved, flotation separation methods are based on the different behavior of the surfaces exposed by the minerals under study Although the effects discussed above illustrate the correlation between the properties of the exposed surfaces and the crystal structure of the mineral, the relative number and area of the exposed surfaces on crushed or ground mineral particles is closely related to the size of the particles. Numerous studies emphasized the vital role of the particle sizes and size distributions in flotation separation processes In recent years, significant advances have been made in the study of mineral-reagent interactions using molecular modeling tools In the present study, MD simulations were used to illustrate the anisotropic adsorption behavior of NaOL on different feldspar surfaces. In particular, a series of experiments and analytical techniques were applied for directly and indirectly assessing the interaction between NaOL and feldspar particles of different size fractions. The first goal is to understand the influence of the particle size on the flotation behavior of feldspar; then, we aim at determining the anisotropic surface energies and broken bond densities of feldspar, and, finally, at elucidating the relationship between particle size, anisotropic crystal structure, and adsorption of NaOL on the feldspar surface. This will clarify the origin of the different flotation response of feldspar samples with different size fractions. The results of this study are expected to support the development of improved flotation separation methods of feldspar minerals. Pure feldspar samples were obtained from the Jiajika lithium mine in the Ganzi district, Sichuan, China. The chemical composition ( Chemically pure samples of NaOL used as collectors were obtained from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd.; HCl and NaOH reagents were used to adjust the pH of the system. Ferric trichloride (FeCl For each microflotation test, 2 Zeta potentials were measured using a Zetasizer Nano ZS90 (Malvern Instrument, UK) equipped with a rectangular electrophoresis cell. The suspension was prepared by adding 30 Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra were recorded on a Spectrum One (Version BM, USA) spectrometer in the 4000–450 An Elementar liquid TOCII (German, Elementar Co.) instrument was used to measure the amount of NaOL adsorbed on feldspar particles of different size fractions. The temperature was maintained at 25 The Surface Builder module of the Material Studio (MS) 6.0 software package was used to obtain different surface slabs from the bulk unit cell of feldspar using the appropriate Miller indices. The following equation was used to calculate the density of interplanar bonds broken upon exposing a certain surface: Gradient-corrected periodic density functional theory (DFT) was employed to calculate the surface energy of feldspar crystal surfaces, using the CASTEP code implemented in MS. The Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange correlation functional was adopted to calculate the gradient-corrected exchange and correlation energies. Experimental lattice constants and positions, available from the structural database of MS, were used to model bulk feldspar structures. Taking into account computing time and accuracy requirements, the slab models of the surfaces were built using three ionic layers separated by a vacuum gap of 0.5 As in our previous studies, the simulations were carried out using the phyllosilicate component of the polymer-consistent force field (PCFF-Phyllosilicate), which has proved accurate for modeling various silicate minerals  The structure of NaOL and the initial configurations used to determine the minimum energy conformation of a NaOL molecule at the mineral surface are the same as in our previous study The relative affinity between the feldspar surface and the NaOL molecule can be quantified in terms of the interaction energy calculated as: Scanning electron microscopy (SEM, TM-1000, Hitachi, Japan) was used to examine the morphologies of feldspar particles with size fractions of 0–19 and 45–75 A Thermo Fisher Scientific K-Alpha 1063 system was used for the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements. Survey scans were obtained in a single sweep from 1350 to 0 The use of metal ions such as Fe Zeta potential measurements represent an effective way to analyze the interaction between minerals and reagents in flotation experiments. The zeta potentials of feldspar in water and in NaOL solution are presented in The zeta potential measurements thus highlight the adsorption of NaOL on the feldspar surface. FTIR experiments were carried out to further explore the underlying mechanism of these reactions. In the presence of external stresses such as those arising from crushing or grinding, mineral crystal tends to split along certain crystallographic structural directions, exposing smooth surfaces denoted as cleavage planes. The surface energy is defined as the energy required for a crystal to split into two independent surfaces along a particular crystal plane. Lower (higher) surface energies denote that it is easier (harder) for cleavage to be generated along a particular plane. The surface energies calculated by structural optimization of different feldspar surfaces are presented in Further analysis of the XRD spectra of powdered feldspar samples confirms the conclusions based on the calculated surface energies. A large amount of (0 The surface energies of a certain crystal are closely associated to the broken bond density at the surface. For example, previous studies of scheelite crystals showed that their surface energies are directly proportional to the broken bond densities at the surface The above analysis suggests that, even though the most common exposed surfaces on feldspar crystals are the (0 Previous studies interpreted the different flotation behavior of feldspar particles of different size fractions in terms of the anisotropic crystal structure of feldspar. The analysis below further explores their potential relationship. The crystal morphology of feldspar is usually tabular In order to verify our hypothesis that the number of exposed active Al sites varies with the particle size, XPS analysis was employed to explore the surface atomic composition of feldspar particles with different size fractions. As shown in To further understand the different NaOL flotation behavior of feldspar particles with different size fractions, the amount of NaOL adsorbed on the surface of feldspar particles of different sizes is shown in The flotation recoveries of feldspar particles of different size fractions were found to be related to the anisotropic adsorption of NaOL on the surface of these particles. The underling mechanism was attributed to the anisotropic crystal chemistry characteristic of feldspar. The research results will, on the one hand, provide guidance to flotation separation of feldspar from associated valuable minerals through selective comminution or grinding processes, on the other hand, be conductive to the understanding of crystal anisotropy of feldspar. Conclusions drawn from the paper are presented as follows: The flotation recoveries of feldspar particles of four size fractions decrease in the order 0–19 The authors would like to thank the