The rate of flotation and froth stability affect froth flotation performance and selectivity and strongly depend on various parameters such as the reagent adsorption, particle and bubble size, air flow rate, conditioning time, surface characteristics and elemental composition. Dynamic froth stability measurements are based on the height of froth in a froth column. In this research, the dynamic froth stability tests were performed in a modified Denver flotation cell measuring the height of the froth. The effects of particle size, conditioning time and airflow rates on the dynamic froth stability were determined in terms of maximum froth height. It was observed that there was a very strong relationship between froth stability and particle size. The dynamic froth stability also depends on conditioning time. Increase in conditioning time caused to decrease in the froth stability, solid content of concentrate and water recovery. The performance data show that the values directly depend on the amount of collector adsorbed on the solid particles. When conditioning period increased from 2 min to 6 min, sulphur content in concentrate increased from 2.46% to 3.24%, respectively. It was concluded that the degree of hydrophobicity plays important roles on both dynamic froth stability and performance values.The stability of a froth is the time of its persistence and this plays a very important role in separating minerals by froth flotation. Froth (or foam) stability is also related to froth structure and bubble size distribution ( Two methods were suggested to measure the stability of froth; firstly dynamic methods where observations are made during the formation and build up of the foam and secondly static methods where the decay of foam is observed. Several experimental techniques regarding the structure and the stability of froths and foams were described in a well organised review paper prepared by A number of factors such as particle size, the presence of surface active agents in the solution and the hydrophobicity of the solid particles, play significant roles in the stability of three phase froths. Unstable bubbles are produced in water in the absence of surface active agents. To produce a stable bubble, a frother is used which decreases the surface tension of the air–liquid interface (  The effect of solid particles on froth stabilisation is important. There is a certain amount of confusion regarding the relation between froth stability and particle stability and size.   The effect of the type of milling media and CuSO In this investigation, the effects of particle size, airflow rate and conditioning time on the dynamic froth stability were determined in terms of froth height in a modified flotation cell. The influence of the conditioning period on the solid and sulphur contents of the concentrates and water recovery was also determined. The focus of this research was the flotation of a Platinum Group Metal (PGM) ore collected from Amendelbult (Merensky reef), South Africa. The mineralogical data of the ore has been reported by The flotation experiments were carried out using Senkol 5 (a dithiophosphates) and Dowfroth 200 as collector and frother, respectively. The initial concentrations of collector and frother for all of the experiments were 15 ppm (30 g/t ore) and 20 ppm (40 g/t ore). Adsorption kinetic experiments were carried out in a 3 l Denver cell operated with a constant impeller speed of 1500 rpm and with no air input. A mixture of 1 kg of ore and distilled water were added to the cell and agitated. The collector solution was then added making the total volume up to 2 l. Samples were taken at specific time intervals up to 10 min and were filtered using a syringe and a filter holder containing a 0.2 µm pore polycarbonate membrane. The amount of reagent in filtrate was determined using the analysis technique described below, and amount of the reagent adsorbed on the solid particles was inferred. All experiments were carried out at room temperature and natural pH (9.5). Blank adsorption tests were carried out to check for adsorption of the collector to the equipment, syringe, filter holder and membrane. The dynamic froth stability experiments were conducted using the same equipment and procedure as stated in adsorption kinetic test for the collector section. The measurement cell apparatus was the same used earlier by Firstly, the distilled water was poured into the cell, to prevent the dry ore feed sticking to the bottom and walls of the cell. The water in the cell was agitated using the impeller at 1500 rpm. The 1000 g ore sample was then added quickly to the cell whilst water was being agitated. The slurry was mixed for 1 min (wetting time) and then the desired amount of the frother and collector solutions were added to the slurry, bringing the total volume of liquid to 2 l. The slurry was then conditioned for varying times specific to the individual experiment. Following the required conditioning time, the airflow was started, and set at the required flow rate. The Perspex plate was used to prevent the froth overflowing. Two series of experiments were carried out using a standard Denver laboratory flotation machine. The first series of experiments determined the effects of particle size and airflow rate on the froth height. The effects of conditioning time on the froth height were studied by a second series experiments. The particle size distributions of the solid samples were determined using a Malvern Mastersizer 2000 (Hydro 2000 MU) particle analyser, which is based on the principle of laser ensemble light scattering. The concentrations of collector in the filtered solutions were determined using a TOC (Total Organic Carbon) analyser. Samples of ore and water were analysed in the TOC analyser in order to take into account the contribution of carbon from the ore and standard solutions of the collector were also analysed to verify the TOC analyser results. The sulphur content of the feed, concentrate and tails samples from the conditioning experiments were also determined using a Leco SC32 analyser. Analyses were repeated in triplicate and averaged. All the dynamic froth stability tests were performed with the same initial solid content, mixing rate, initial loading of the frother and collector. The effects of particle size were examined by varying the milling times used during sample preparation prior to the stability experiments and the effect of aeration rate were investigated by varying the aeration rate between experiments. The milling times and aeration rates for each experiment are detailed in In order to determine the effect of particle size on froth stability, a range of samples were prepared using by grinding for different lengths of time (milling times); the four different milling times used were 40, 55, 80 and 120 min ( However, it is importantly reported that particle size distributions for the same grinding time were slightly different. As an example particle size distribution curves for 80 min grinding time are shown in A series of experiments (runs 1–12) were executed to determine the effects of particle size on froth stability. The dynamic froth stability factors ( The height of froth was recorded experimentally during each experiment as function of time. The experimental data were fitted by an exponential Eq. As reported in Firstly, This is further illustrated in Very stable froths were obtained from runs 10, 11 and 12 of the samples milled for 120 min. Finer particle contents of these samples, for example The results of the adsorption experiments are presented in The effects of conditioning time on froth stability were examined in experiments 13, 14 and 15, with initial frother and collector loadings of 20 ppm and 15 ppm, respectively, and conditioning times of 2, 4 and 6 min, respectively. The solid sample used for these three tests was milled for 55 min and homogenised for use in all conditioning time experiments, ensuring the consistent particle size distribution as tabulated in  The concentrate fractions of the conditioning time experiments, runs 13, 14 and 15, were collected after the froth level of each test reached its maximum height by removing Perspex plate. The total froth collecting time was 8 min. The solid, water and sulphur contents of each concentrate were determined.  The dynamic froth stability strongly depends on the size of particle and measurements showed that finer particles increased height of froth. Therefore increasing the milling time produced a finer feed which resulted had the effect of increasing the dynamic stability of the froth generated. Increasing the aeration had the impact of reducing froth stability in these experiments. Froth stability also depends on conditioning time used following the addition of the Senkol collector. Increases in the conditioning time caused a decrease in froth stability and solid content of concentrate, water recovery, coupled with an increase in sulphur content of the froth. These performance values directly depend on the amount of collector adsorbed on the solid particles, which is a function of the conditioning time. The findings clearly indicate that the degree of hydrophobicity resulting from the adsorption of collector is an important factor in both dynamic froth stability and the separation performance of the flotation system. The froth stability is therefore influenced by the size of particles, airflow rate, and conditioning time, in addition to the amount of initial loading of surface active agents reported in existing literature. The authors gratefully acknowledge that this study was supported by the Scientific and Technical Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK, NATO-B2) and University of Manchester, UK.