Objective
                  Occlusal curvatures in human adult dentition such as the curve of Spee, curve of Wilson and Monsons's sphere provide clinical guidance for prosthetic rehabilitation and orthodontic treatment. However, association between occlusal curvature and masticatory function is not known. The aim of this study was to investigate the association between occlusal curvature and food comminuting and food mixing ability in human young adults with permanent dentitions.
               
                  Design
                  Fifty young adults with complete dentitions (mean age, 25.0 years) participated in the study. Occlusal curvature was determined by a three-dimensional analysis of the mandibular arch according to the Broadrick flag method. Food comminuting ability was assessed using a masticatory performance test with peanuts as test food and it was scored as median particle size. Food mixing ability was assessed using a mixing ability test with a two-coloured wax cube and it was scored as mixing ability index.
               
                  Results
                  A linear regression analysis identified the sphere radius of occlusal curvature as significant predictor for both median particle size and mixing ability index after controlling for maximum bite force (P
                     <0.001). These results indicated that subjects with a flatter curvature (larger sphere) in the mandibular arch showed better food comminuting and mixing ability. Coefficient of determination (R
                     2) of occlusal curvature related to median particle size and mixing ability index was comparable to that of maximum bite force.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Occlusal curvature seems to be associated with food comminuting and mixing ability in human young adults with permanent dentitions.Occlusal curvatures are normally observed in the human adult dentition. In sagittal view, the anteroposterior curve that contacts the tips of buccal cusps of mandibular molars and canine, and appears concave, is called the curve of Spee. Clinically, these occlusal curvatures observed in subjects with complete dentition are relevant to acceptable occlusion. Mastication is a process to digest foods that includes breaking down and comminuting, mixing and kneading and transporting the food bolus into the oropharynx. To evaluate masticatory function objectively, a number of methods has been developed. Fifty subjects (mean age 25.0 years, 20–32 years) balanced for gender with completely natural dentition and Angle Class I molar relationship participated in this study. They were recruited from among the students and clinical staff of Tokyo Medical and Dental University. Subjects with severe periodontal disease, orthodontic treatment and clinical signs or symptoms of temporomandibular disorder and salivary dysfunction were excluded. Each subject received a written and oral description of the experimental procedure, and informed consent was obtained prior to enrolment into the study. All experimental procedures were approved by the Ethics Committee of Tokyo Medical and Dental University. Three-dimensional analysis was performed to determine occlusal curvature using a method validated in a previous study. Food comminuting ability was estimated with a masticatory performance test using peanuts as test food. Food mixing ability was assessed using a mixing ability test. For statistical analyses, the mixing ability indices of three trials were averaged. Maximum bite force is associated with food comminuting ability and mixing ability. In previous studies, test–retest reliability of the masticatory performance test, the mixing ability test and measurement of MBF has been examined. Intraclasss correlations coefficient for mixing ability test was 0.89, The null hypothesis tested in this study was that SR was not associated with food comminuting ability and food mixing ability. Linear regression models were constructed to test the hypothesis. In these models, median particle size and MAI were included in the model as an outcome measure, respectively. SR, MBF and gender were considered as possible predictors for median particle size and MAI. Age was not included as predictors in the model, because preliminary bivariate analysis showed that age was not significantly related to median particle size and MAI ( The distribution of SR was shown in Stepwise regression analysis identified SR and MBF as significant predictors for median particle size and MAI, respectively ( A number of factors such as tooth loss and bite force are known to be related to masticatory function. In this study, median particle size decreased and MAI increased with an increase in the SR, which indicates that subjects with flatter occlusal curvature showed greater food comminuting and mixing ability. Furthermore, stepwise regression analysis found that SR was significantly related to median particle size and MAI after controlling for MBF. These results support our hypothesis that occlusal curvature is associated with food comminuting and mixing ability independent of maximum bite force. The effect size (standardized partial regression coefficient) of SR on median particle size and MAI were close to that of MBF. Since MBF is a substantial factor associated with food comminution and food mixing, Although gender was significantly related to median particle size and MAI in bivariate analysis, it was removed from the regression model after stepwise process in selection of predictors. Taking the significant correlation between gender and MBF into consideration, gender difference in median particle size and MAI could be mediated by MBF. Similar mediation of gender effect via MBF on food comminuting and mixing ability has been observed in subjects with loss of posterior teeth. A previous study found significant gender difference in SR in Japanese young adults. Although this study suggests a relation between occlusal curvature and masticatory function, the present study employed a cross-sectional design by which true causal relations cannot be confirmed. Thus, it is not known whether food comminuting ability and food mixing ability could be changed by alteration of occlusal curvature with prosthetic rehabilitation or orthodontic treatment. This limitation should be noted when interpreting the results obtained in this study. Furthermore, this study included occlusal curvature as one of dental factor. Dentoskeletal factors such as arch width/length of mandibular arch, over jet/over bite, inclination of occlusal plane and facial pattern may be associated with occlusal curvature. Further study should include not only occlusal curvature but also these factors to provide more strong evidence about association between occlusal curvature and masticatory function. This study focused on food comminuting and mixing ability in respect of masticatory function. It has been shown that mandibular movement and masticatory muscle activity during chewing are related to food comminuting ability and food mixing ability.    The authors would like to thank Drs. K. Okano, K. Kagaya and K. Shohi for their kind assistance with data collection and analyses.