A series of coal Hardgrove grindability index (HGI) tests were performed to determine each iteration's content of the monomacerite microlithotypes vitrite (Vt) and inertite (In), the bimacerite microlithotypes clarite (Cl) and durite (Du), and the trimacerite microlithotypes duroclarite (Dc) and clarodurite (Cd). In HGI tests, larger particles are broken in grinding, the resulting daughter particles can be composed of different microlithotypes than the parent particle. Therefore, predicting the overall composition of the later iterations is complicated. A time series of the compositions values was constructed by sequencing the contents of all iteration (in different mesh sizes) by the order of iterations. Seasonal autoregressive integrated moving average (SARIMA), a widely used method of time series analysis, was employed for forecasting the final iteration's content of Vt, In, Cl, Du, Dc, and Cd. The proposed methodology was able to forecast the last iteration's composition, comparable to the actual observation.The Hardgrove grindability index (HGI), a commonly used coal quality parameter, is fundamentally a function of the inorganic and organic portions of the coal (coal type) and the degree of metamorphism (coal rank) (  In this study, we are using autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) in the evaluation of the fines-removed portion of the Autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) models, developed by Box and Jenkins ( A central feature in the development of time series models is an assumption of some form of statistical equilibrium ( The application of differencing is often used to transfer data into a stationary series. One or two orders of differencing are typically enough to prepare data for the method. The combined autoregressive-moving average model in this case [i.e. ARMA(p,q)] is referred to as ARIMA(p,d,q), in which parameter d is the differencing order. The application of ARIMA in seasonal data needs further differencing in the seasonal portion. In this case, the model is known as seasonal autoregressive integrated moving average (SARIMA); it is represented by SARIMA(p,d,q)(P,D,Q) The maceral composition of the iterative HGI fractions is fixed, meaning that all of the macerals can be accounted for either in the fine fractions removed from the procedure or in the coarser fraction passed along for further testing. However, this is not true for the microlithotypes. As larger particles are broken in grinding, the resulting daughter particles can be composed of different microlithotypes than the parent particle. For example, cleaving of vitrinite-rich vitrite, clarite, or vitrinertite from a duroclarite might move the composition of the latter particle into the clarodurite compositional range. Therefore, predicting the overall composition of the later iterations is not as simple as assuming that, for example, the 40% duroclarite in the > Seasonal autoregressive integrated moving average (SARIMA) was employed for modeling the final iteration's content of the monomacerite microlithotypes vitrite (Vt) and inertite (In), the bimacerite microlithotypes clarite (Cl) and durite (Du), and the trimacerite microlithotypes duroclarite (Dc) and clarodurite (Cd). These microlithotypes were the dominant components with average values of 24.2, 5.7, 7.7, 6.5, 39.7, and 6.0%, respectively (total of 89.8%). Natural logarithms of all microlithotypes were used in both modeling and forecasting. For example, ARIMA has been used extensively in different fields, particularly, in economics. However, the technique can be employed in modeling/forecasting any ordered numerical data set, as it constructs a linear relationship between past observations and errors with future values. Seasonal ARIMA (SARIMA) was employed in this study for prediction of the composition of ground coal samples in a series successive grinding tests. A separate SARIMA model was defined for each major component of the ground coal. Optimized parameters for all models were defined. Finally, a total of six SARIMA models were used together to predict the percentage share of each of the six major components in the final ground coal. Results of SARIMA predictions were evaluated using statistical metrics such as mean absolute percentage error (MAPE). The MAPE value of 9.3% was achieved which demonstrated suitability of the technique, as MAPE values of <