Selection of crusher required a great deal of design based on the mining plan and operation input. Selection of the best primary crusher from all of available primary crushers is a Multi-Criterion Decision Making (MCDM) problem. In this paper, the Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) method was used to selection of the best primary crusher for Golegohar Iron Mine in Iran. For this reason, gyratory, double toggle jaw, single toggle jaw, high speed roll crusher, low speed sizer, impactor, hammer mill and feeder breaker crushers were considered as alternatives and capacity, feed size, product size, rock compressive strength, abrasion index and mobility of crusher were considered as criteria. As a result of our study, the gyratory crusher was offered as the best primary crusher for the studied mine.The primary crusher selection is the key to the success of the mining, quarry or industrial mineral operation that involves the reduction in the size of rock, ore or material. The crushing equipment standard to the mineral industries has been gyratory, double toggle jaw, single toggle jaw, high speed roll, low speed sizer, impactor, hammer mill and feeder breaker. There were advantages and disadvantages for any crusher, so that the selection of suitable primary crusher is a multi-criteria decision making (MCDM) problem. Analytic hierarchy process is a well-known method for solving decision-making problems. In that method, pairwise comparisons are performed by the decision-maker (DM) and then the pairwise comparison matrix and the eigenvector are derived to specify the weights of each parameter in the problem. The weights guide the DM in choosing the superior alternative The AHP is based on the innate human ability to make sound judgments about small problems. This method was first presented by Saaty In the first step the hierarchy is structured on different levels: from the top (i.e. the overall objective), through intermediate levels (the criteria and sub criteria on which subsequent levels depend), to the lowest level (i.e. the alternatives). Weigh the criteria, sub criteria and alternatives as a function of their importance in relation to the corresponding element on the higher level. For this purpose, the AHP uses simple pair wise comparisons to determine weights and ratings so that the analyst can concentrate on just two factors at a time. Verbal judgments are then translated into a score using discrete 9-point scales; let a represent an The diagonal elements in the matrix Once the judgment matrix has been developed calculate a priority vector to weigh the elements in the matrix. This is the normalized Eigen vector of the matrix. The normalization of the geometric mean method is used to determine the importance degrees of criteria. Let Test the consistency of the importance degrees of criteria. To ensure that the evaluation of the pair-wise comparison matrix is reasonable and acceptable, a consistency check is performed. Let The consistency values for the cluster of criteria can be represented by the vector However, to avoid the inconsistency occur when using different measurement scales in the evaluation process, Saaty suggested use the maximal Eigen value In Eq. If the value of CR is below than 0.1, then the evaluation of the importance degrees of customer requirements is considered to be reasonable Determine the relative overall importance degrees of criteria. The relative overall importance of criteria is based on the overall importance degrees of criteria. To deal with the overall importance degrees of criteria, designers must evaluate important weightings from the perspective criteria. The Golegohar Iron Mine is located about 55 In gyratory crusher a conical shaped element is supported in a flared Shell or frame creating a chamber wide at a top and narrow at the bottom. The center element is caused to gyrate about its fulcrum point causing it to advance and retreat with relation to the shell. Double toggle crusher consists of a stationary and a moving jaw. The movable jaw is fixed at the top and the motion is generated through the toggle arrangement. The rock is squeezed with each motion of the moving jaw, is broken and drops by gravity to a lower position. In single toggle jaw crusher the motion is created by the eccentric shaft at the top of the jaw. The rock is squeezed with each motion of the moving jaw, is broken and drops by gravity to a lower position. The double-roll crusher, a crushing device in which breakage occurs between a pair of rolls that rotate in opposite directions, is used for crushing particles into a size range of 1–50 As a first step of the application of the AHP, decision hierarchies are developed. The first hierarchy has a three-level structure: goal, criteria and alternative. With considering primary crusher selection as goal, this structure links the desired criteria of the primary crusher selection to the primary crushers (as alternatives).In this MCDM problem, capacity, abrasive index, feed size, rock compressive strength (impact value) product size and mobility of the crushers were considered as criteria of primary crusher selection. Hierarchy structure of choosing the best primary crusher was defined as The decision makers use the linguistic variables to evaluate the importance of attributes and the ratings of alternatives with respect to various attributes. In this study, to selecting the suitable primary crusher for studied mine, in order to illustrate the idea of MCDM, we deliberately transform the existing precise values to seven-levels, linguistic variables; very low (VL), low (L), middle low (ML), middle (M), middle high (MH), high (H) and very high (VH), where VL Ratings and weights of primary crusher selection by three experts under six criteria for the eight crushers are presented in The relative overall importance of criteria based on the overall importance degrees of criteria shown in Hierarchy consistency ratio In our study, the value of calculated Hierarchy consistency ratio are lower than 0.1, similarly to the other consistency ratio, Therefore the degree of consistency is well satisfied; one could say that the weights are valid. To calculation of overall priority of the primary crushers, weigh vectors of the pair-wise comparison matrixes (from Crushing process is the first steps of any operation that involve size reduce and separate ore from ore deposit. Selection of the suitable primary crusher from all of available primary crushers is a multi-criterion decision making problem. This paper was introduced a model based on Saaty at 1980, AHP, which determine the global priority weights for different management alternatives and has examined the critical factors and benefits that affect employee performance and their influence on the organizational performance. The AHP methodology could help assess relevant criteria critically and logically and to assist in making sensible decisions. In this paper, AHP method was used to selection of the best primary crusher for Golegohar Iron Mine in Iran. It is found that the capacity is the most important factor (priority= 0.199) in primary crusher selection for the studied mine. Among the eight crushers, gyratory crusher is the most acceptable alternative for Golegohar Mine.