Neodymium–iron–boron (NdFeB) magnets are used in many applications, from small consumer electronics to future sustainable technologies, e.g., electric transportation and wind power. Rare earth elements (REEs) amount to about a third of the composition of NdFeB magnets. Given that REEs are presently considered critical and have very high supply risk, their recycling from end-of-life products has received increased attention. Magnet-containing streams are valuable secondary sources of REEs, e.g., neodymium, praseodymium, dysprosium, and terbium.
               This chapter discusses the hydrometallurgical options available for processing NdFeB magnets, whether from end-of-life applications or production residues. The need for recovering REEs from NdFeB materials and the challenges associated with this are addressed. Leaching of magnets and precipitation and solvent extraction of metal ions in the obtained leachates are discussed at length, highlighting the potential and limitations of these methods. Several steps required prior to hydrometallurgical treatment are also described, e.g., dismantling of products and hydrogen decrepitation. A literature review of the available hydrometallurgical processes to treat magnets is presented, focusing on selective and nonselective leaching, selective precipitation, solvent extraction with conventional extractants and ionic liquids, and further refining of products in solution. more than less than percentage weight total percentage weight/volume degrees Celsius micrometer(s)  for example, such as electric vehicle(s) gram, kilogram hour(s) hard disk drive(s) hybrid electric vehicle(s) kilojoule(s) molar concentration (moles per liter) minute(s) milliliter, liter neodymium–iron–boron nickel–metal–hydride aqueous-to-organic 2-ethylhexyl-2-ethylhexyl-phosphonic acid rare earth element(s) rare earth metal rotations per minute solid-to-liquid tributyl phosphate tetraoctyl digylcol amide American dollars watt, megawatt Sintered neodymium–iron–boron magnets have the highest energy density of permanent magnets Since the introduction of NdFeB magnets in the early 1980s As the name implies, neodymium is an essential constituent in NdFeB magnets. Since pure Nd Since NdFeB magnets contain significant amounts of REEs, their recycling has received a lot of attention. They are one of the most important secondary sources for neodymium and the only recycling source for dysprosium REEs are technological metals with a large variety of applications, being vital in future sustainable technologies, e.g., energy-efficient lighting, wind power generation, and electrical transportation These considerations focused attention towards securing additional supplies of REEs, e.g., exploiting new deposits and processing of secondary streams and end-of-life products containing REEs Recycling of NdFeB permanent magnets is attractive since the magnetic alloy consists of about one third REEs, which, once recovered, can be inserted back in the same production cycle or in new applications ( The magnet sector accounts for about a fifth of total REE consumption Given the recent growth of the wind power and electric transportation sectors, it is expected that the stocks will change significantly. Wind power is the fastest-growing renewable energy sector, with a capacity that has doubled every 3 years in the last decade and that is predicted to be close to two million MW in 2020 Recent evaluation of the potential yields of REEs from NdFeB recycling has been made, taking into account sector growth and product lifetimes It is clear that recycling of REEs cannot meet the primary demands in growing markets, especially given significant growth and the long lifetimes of some applications. Reduced collection rates and recycling yields negatively affect this, as well. The recycling contribution for end-of-life product collection rates of 50% and recovery yields of 75% would be around 20%. Despite this, it was reported that even limited recycling of magnets in Europe would cover the requirements of local producers A priority list for recycling of NdFeB permanent magnets was suggested by the European Rare Earths Competency Network Hard disk drives (HDDs), DVD and CD players; Automotive applications; Motors in industrial applications, e.g., servo motors from robotics; Loudspeakers; Air-conditioning compressors; Magnetic separators; Mixed electronics; Electric bicycles; Wind turbines. Ranking was made taking into account the availability of the material, collection rates, amount of material, REEs fraction in the material, ease of recovery, and the extent to which particularly scarce REEs, e.g., dysprosium, are used. HDDs presently have the biggest potential for large-scale recycling. This is because magnets in EVs and wind turbines have lower market penetration and will not be available for recycling in large amounts in the next two decades Another driving force behind the efforts to recycle NdFeB magnets is to reduce the environmental impact to produce new magnets from virgin materials. Life cycle assessment studies showed that magnet-to-magnet recycling has significantly less environmental impact than virgin magnet production In general, industrial-scale applications for recycling REEs from end-of-life products are lacking Recycling of NdFeB magnets from end-of-life products doesn’t come without challenges. Difficulties in dismantling and isolating the magnets raise questions about the economic feasibility of proposed technologies. Some products have low magnet content (<1 The construction of some products also hinders efficient collection of magnets. For HDDs, separation is not easy due to compact design, use of various types of screws, and the fact that the magnets are strongly glued in place. The nickel coating used as protection against corrosion can negatively affect the subsequent hydrometallurgical treatment. Even for large applications that use relatively high amounts of magnets, e.g., electric drive motors, separation is not always easy. In this case, the magnets do not tend to be coated but they are often embedded in the motor using epoxy resins, which hinders their collection. Several publications concluded that dismantling and labor costs are limiting factors for recycling of magnets from HDDs, especially in high-income countries The fact that EVs and wind turbines contain larger amounts of permanent magnets is encouraging from a recycling point of view. However, as mentioned in In addition to difficult isolation of the magnetic fractions, efficient metallurgical separation and refining processes for REEs are also demanding. Since REEs have similar chemical properties, their individual separation and purification implies Considerable amounts of scrap and residues are generated in the magnet production cycle, during cutting, grinding, and polishing. The residues (swarf) amount to approximately 20%–30% of the starting alloy material and it is generally recycled by manufacturers All processing options come with advantages and disadvantages and some are only applicable to certain feeds, e.g., resintering requires clean, nonoxidized NdFeB powder. Gas–solid pyrometalurgy and electroslag refining of feeds with more than one REE will lead to mixed products. This requires further processing to separate individual elements using, e.g., hydrometallurgy or molten salt electrolysis. Processing of REE-containing products in electric arc furnaces or nonferrous smelters leads to a loss of REEs in the slag phase, making their economic recovery more difficult One key advantage of hydrometallurgy is the possibility to recover individual REEs with very high purities from feeds with varying composition, in the presence of a large amount of impurities. Hydrometallurgy offers the possibility to obtain REE compounds in different chemical forms and gives less gaseous pollution compared to pyrometallurgy. Although robust, hydrometallurgical processes have disadvantages, specifically the consumption of large amounts of chemicals and generation of aqueous secondary wastes, which require adequate treatment. Implementation of hydrometallurgical methods to process magnets is simple and the processing steps are similar to those encountered in virgin mining of REEs. Parallels can be drawn between the collection/sorting of products and pretreatment to isolatate/concentrate the magnetic fraction on one side, and the mining and beneficiation of ores, respectively, on the other side. The leaching and separation of metal ions is common in both urban mining and virgin mining. However, recycling negates some downsides of virgin production of REEs. This includes environmentally detrimental aspects of mining and beneficiation, e.g., releases of radioactive thorium and uranium encountered in REEs ores Prior isolation of the magnetic fraction is desired for subsequent hydrometallurgical treatment. This is valid for small and large applications alike, e.g., consumer electronics and EVs, respectively. In Europe, collection of discarded electronic products is regulated by legislation Demagnetization facilitates easier collection of magnets and can mitigate losses due to magnetism. Since NdFeB materials are not suited to high temperatures, thermal treatment can be used to diminish their magnetic force. The process is effective at about 350°C. Nonthermal methods that operate at room temperature exist but the required equipment is expensive and cannot treat large amounts of material at the same time High-temperature demagnetization can, however, cause melting of components, e.g., plastics, glue, etc. Hydrogen decrepitation ( The Japanese group Hitachi developed technologies to separate permanent magnets from HDDs using a rotational drum EVs and HEVs contain relatively high amounts of valuable materials, being second to wind turbines when it comes to magnet content ( Isolation of permanent magnets from electric drive motors was investigated, together with their subsequent recycling The typical hydrometallurgical steps to separate the REEs from products containing NdFeB magnets are schematized in Nonselective leaching of magnets leads to a solution containing the REEs together with the other constituents, e.g., iron, boron, cobalt, etc. Selective leaching can be employed to avoid dissolution of some unwanted metals, notably iron. Regardless of the approach, separation of the REEs from the resulting leachate is required to produce solid compounds for further reuse. A comparison between precipitation and solvent extraction is given in Precipitation is the easiest hydrometallurgical route to recover dissolved REEs. Separation is, however, done as a mixed compound due to similar chemical behavior of REEs. Possible coprecipitation of impurity ions (lower product purity) and Solvent extraction and ion exchange allow for excellent intragroup separation of REEs The tetrad effect The REEs in magnets have high negative standard electrode potentials, below the hydrogen evolution line, and are strong reductants Electronic waste scrap can react violently with acids, particularly sulfuric acid. It may be difficult to control the reaction temperature due to highly exothermic interactions. Prior oxidation of the material can be carried out to mitigate this Two different leaching routes are common for NdFeB magnets: total leaching (complete dissolution of the material) and selective leaching A complete hydrometallurgical process to treat clean magnet scrap was developed by Lyman and Palmer in the early 1990s Screening of other potential leaching agents has been reported. Leaching of neodymium, iron, and boron from ground magnets was investigated with nitric, sulfuric, and hydrochloric acids and sodium hydroxide Nitric, sulfuric, and hydrochloric acid were screened for leaching NdFeB magnets isolated from electric drive motors Dissolution of magnet slurry for subsequent production of raw materials for new magnets has been studied The leaching mechanism for neodymium from scrap magnet powder with sulfuric acid was proposed Organic acids, e.g., acetic acid, also proved to be efficient for leaching iron and neodymium from ground scrap magnets The pH plays vital role in In addition to pH control, electrochemically controlled dissolution, in which magnet scrap is used as an anode, has been proposed to enhance selectivity Leaching of magnetic powder with hydrogen peroxide solution can reduce the iron content and produce REE-enriched material Sulfation, selective roasting, and water leaching of magnets have been suggested to obtain iron-free leachates Possible selective leaching of neodymium and dysprosium from waste sludge generated during magnet production was investigated using nitric, hydrochloric, and phosphoric acid, with and without addition of hydrogen peroxide Selective leaching of NdFeB material from steel and copper in scrap collected after shredding of end-of-life motors was done using 4 Attempts with a hydrogen–water gas mixture have been made to selectively oxidize neodymium in magnets, while keeping the iron in metallic form Removal of the nickel coating on demagnetized HDD voice coil motors was done with a mixture of sodium hydroxide solution and ENSTRIP EN-79B, a cyanide-free type alkaline stripper One of the easiest processes to separate and recover metal ions in magnet leachates is selective precipitation. Often, the efforts are directed towards iron and REE precipitation separation since these elements account for the bulk metal ions in solution ( Rare earths in solution can be precipitated in various forms. The REE hydroxides (REE(OH) Simple REE sulfates, REE The REE phosphates, REEPO Iron in solution can be precipitated as goethite, FeOOH, or jarosite, MFe The above processes have been studied for separation and recovery of metal ions from magnet leachates. It should be noted that precipitation separation can be a part of selective leaching, e.g., leaching of roasted magnets with hydrochloric acid at pH>2, which precipitates iron as iron hydroxide but dissolves the REEs Precipitation of fluorides, oxalates, and neodymium-sodium/neodymium-ammonium sulfate double salts from sulfuric acid leachates has been thoroughly investigated with the goal of developing a suitable process to recycle clean magnet scrap Initially developed for recycling of clean magnet scrap, the above process was successfully applied to more contaminated streams, e.g., magnetic material Precipitation separation of metal ions from hydrochloric leachates of electric drive motor magnets has been investigated Metal ions in acidic leachates of thermally treated and ground magnets were precipitated with sodium hydroxide Sulfate salt precipitation and oxalate precipitation were compared during recovery of neodymium, dysprosium, and praseodymium from hydrochloric acid leachates of shredded motors Magnetic waste sludge was leached over a short time with mixed 1 A simulated thermodynamics model led to the development of a two-step precipitation process to prepare composite powders from NdFeB slurry Selective precipitation of neodymium as phosphate was reported A hydrothermal approach, which combined leaching and precipitation in a single step, was used to recover REEs from nickel-coated sintered magnets Solvent extraction relies on the distribution of ions between two immiscible phases: an aqueous one (the magnet leachate) and an organic one. The latter consists of one or more selective extractants, often dissolved in an adequate organic diluent. The ions of interest are extracted into the organic phase. From here, they are recovered into a clean aqueous phase using a similar process called stripping. The parameter that characterizes the process is the distribution ratio, For magnet leachates, solvent extraction separation mainly targets the REEs. This method allows for recovery of REEs with very high purity (99.9% or higher) and, most importantly, individual element separation. These and the possibility for automated multistage extraction and stripping (e.g., mixer-settler countercurrent Commercial extractants, notably solvating and acidic ones, have been used to separate REEs from magnet leachates The extraction of a metal ion with a solvating extractant is described by For an acidic extractant (HA), the process can be simply described by Liberation of protons during extraction with acidic extractants can adversely affect the distribution of metal ions. For this reason, saponification of acidic extractants with sodium hydroxide is carried out The organic diluent plays an important role in the extraction process, affecting the distribution ratios and separation factors between species extracted with different or with the same extraction mechanism Tetraoctyl digylcol amide (TODGA) showed high selectivity for REEs over iron in nitrate media The efficiency and selectivity of TODGA suggested its implementation in a membrane-assisted solvent extraction system to recycle magnets Partially saponified 2-ethylhexyl-2-ethylhexyl-phosphonic acid (PC-88A) was used to separate REEs from electric drive motor magnet leachates The successful use of PC-88A to separate dysprosium from neodymium after selective leaching of magnets was reported Extraction of REEs from magnet scrap sulfate leachates with either PC-88A or D2EHPA was also reported  Tributyl phosphate (TBP) dissolved in ionic liquid tricaprylmethylammonium nitrate was used to extract praseodymium, neodymium, and dysprosium from nitric acid magnet leachates Because TBP solvates iron ions well, iron was first removed from solution as insoluble Fe(OH) Bifunctional ionic liquids, prepared using trioctylmethylammonium chloride (Aliquat 336) and Cyanex 272 and D2EHPA, were tested as potential solvents to separate neodymium and praseodymium The ionic liquid trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium chloride (Cyphos IL 101) has been successfully used to extract cobalt, copper, and manganese impurities from Ionic liquids have also been used in supported liquid membrane extraction It is widely accepted that humanity cannot rely only on virgin mining to assure the future demand of resources. Several raw materials are presently considered critical, the REEs occupying a high place on this list. About a fifth of REEs are used for the production of NdFeB permanent magnets. These magnets are essential in consumer electronics (smartphones, speakers, computers, etc.) and in future sustainable applications (wind turbines and electric drive motors). Significant amounts of REEs are discarded when these products reach end-of-life, as typical magnets contain in the range of 28–35% wt. REEs, 60–70% wt. iron, 1–2% wt. boron, and other minor metals. Recent concerns, fuelled by the REE crisis at the start of the 2010s, focused attention towards better recycling of secondary sources, including magnet production residues. While these residues are typically recycled by manufacturers, not the same can be said about magnets in end-of-life products. Their low amounts in some applications, complex product construction, and separation difficulties hinder large-scale Separation of all metals in NdFeB materials is possible using hydrometallurgy. Leaching, precipitation, and solvent extraction procedures have been extensively discussed in recent years and various potential hydrometallurgical processes have been developed. Hydrometallurgy facilitates the individual separation of REEs in magnets (praseodymium, neodymium, dysprosium, and terbium) with high efficiency and high product purity. It also allows for the recovery of other constituents, e.g., cobalt, iron, etc. One of the main challenges is the efficient separation of magnetic fractions from end-of-life products for subsequent hydrometallurgical treatment. Manual dismantling is feasible for large applications (motors and wind turbines) but availability of such streams is, and will be, somewhat limited due to their long lifespan. For small applications, e.g., HDDs, dismantling and labor costs are limiting factors for the recycling of contained magnets. Manual dismantling is not feasible for small units. Shredding can lead to losses due to breaking of magnets into coarse fragments, which stick to ferrous components and the shredder. Hydrogen decrepitation (breaking of magnets into powder upon hydrogen absorption) has been suggested to facilitate collection of magnetic powders from small appliances. Selective leaching of metals from iron, which constitutes the bulk of NdFeB magnets, is achievable by controlling the pH. This results in an REE-rich feed, which can be further processed using precipitation or solvent extraction. Alternatively, complete dissolution of magnets can be carried out and the metals of interest can be subsequently separated using the same techniques. Iron in solution can be removed using jarosite, goethite, or iron hydroxide precipitation. The REEs can be recovered via precipitation as double sulfate salts, hydroxides, or oxalates. Due to their similar chemical behavior, the REEs will precipitate together, leading to mixed compounds. Solvent extraction allows for individual separation of REEs with superior purity, both notable advantages over precipitation. Extractants such as TODGA offer excellent selectivity between iron and REEs. Acidic extractants (D2EHPA and PC-88A) can efficiently separate light and heavy REEs with very high purities by controlling the equilibrium pH during extraction. Novel ionic liquids have also been successfully used for REEs recovery. Such systems have advantages over conventional solvents, e.g., very low volatility, flame resistance, adjustable miscibility, and polarity. Since hydrometallurgy allows for separation of REEs with excellent purity and in various chemical forms, the end products can be recycled for magnet production or they can be used in new applications. While it is clear that recovery of REEs cannot entirely replace virgin mining, processing of secondary sources can partly alleviate the ever-growing demand for raw materials. This can help shift the supply–demand scale in the right direction, especially for countries which rely heavily on imports.