The present communication reports the effect of MoSi2 addition on high temperature thermal conductivity and room temperature (RT) electrical properties of TiB2. The thermal diffusivity and the thermal conductivity of the hot pressed TiB2–MoSi2 samples were measured over a range from room temperature to 1000°C using the laser-flash technique, while electrical resistivity was measured at RT using a four linear probe method. The reciprocal of thermal diffusivity of TiB2 samples exhibit linear dependence on temperature and the measured thermal conductivity of TiB2-2.5% MoSi2 composites correlate well with the theoretical predictions from Hashin’s model and Hasselman and Johnson’s model. A common observation is that the thermal conductivity of all the samples slightly increases with temperature (up to 200°C) and then decreases with further increasing temperature. It is interesting to note that both the thermal conductivity and electrical conductivity of TiB2 samples enhanced with the addition of 2.5wt.% MoSi2 sinter additive. Among all the samples, TiB2-2.5wt.% MoSi2 ceramics measured with high thermal conductivity (77W/mK) and low electrical resistivity (12μΩ-cm) at room temperature. Such an improvement in properties can be attributed to its high density and low volume fraction of porosity. On the other hand, both the thermal and electrical properties of TiB2 were adversely affected with further increasing the amount of MoSi2 (10wt.%).Titanium diboride (TiB For electrical-substrate applications, electrical industries require materials with high thermal conductivity in order to deal with heat from an ever-increasing number of electrical devices In-house processed TiB For thermal diffusivity measurements, samples of 12.2 Electrical resistivity was measured at RT using a four linear probe method using Tinsley Portable Micro Ohmmeter Type-5893 (H. Tinsley and Co., England) based upon Kelvin principle. The electrical resistivity measurements were carried out by inducing a current of 10 From  In an attempt to analyze the role of phonon scattering, the inverse of the thermal diffusivity ( In the above equation, slope The calculated specific heat data of the TiB Hasselman and Johnson As a first step, the thermal conductivity of the TiB For the thermal conductivity calculations, the thermal conductivity of TiB From the literature, it is known that crystallinity, structural discontinuities such as pores, microcracking and glassy phases; microstructural features, such as grain size, grain orientation and atomic mass differences of phases can affect the thermal conductivity of materials  Munro As mentioned earlier, for comparison purpose the thermal conductivity of various important structural ceramics are also recorded in The experimentally measured electrical resistivities and conductivities of the TiB The influence of sinter additive on the electrical properties of TiB  The present results clearly indicate that smaller amount of MoSi The electrical conductivity of TiB The authors gratefully acknowledge the cooperation of Dr. Ferhat Kara and Ms. Nurcan Calis Ackibas of Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Anadolu University, Turkey for the thermal diffusivity measurements. The authors also would like to thank the reviewers for the useful comments.