This study investigated the removal of crude oil from soil using air sparging assisted stirred tank reactors. Two surfactants (rhamnolipid and sodium dodecyl sulfate, SDS) were tested and the effects of different parameters (i.e. temperature, surfactant concentrations, washing time, volume/mass ratio) were investigated under varying washing modes namely, stirring only, air sparging only and the combination of stirring and air sparging. The results showed that SDS removed more than 80% crude oil from non-weathered soil samples, whist rhamnolipid showed similar oil removal at the third and fourth levels of the parameters tested. The oil removal ability of the seawater prepared solutions were better than those of the distilled water solutions at the first and second levels of temperature and concentration of surfactant solutions. This approach of soil washing was noted to be effective in reducing the amount of oil in soil. Therefore we suggested that a field scale test be conducted to assess the efficiency of these surfactants.The methods of flotation have been used in the area of mineral processing, where hydrophobic particles are efficiently separated by air bubbles from hydrophilic base minerals with addition of surfactants or froths (concentrate foams) ( The process of flotation relies on the differences in the wettability at solid particle-surfaces. Solid surfaces are often naturally wettable by surfactant hydrophilic moiety while surface that is non-wettable will repel surfactant hydrophobic moiety. If a surface is hydrophobic, it is also typically air attracting, and is strongly attracted to an air interface, which readily displaces water at the solid surface. Thus, in flotation process, the separation of contaminated oil from soil may also be accomplished by the selective attachment of hydrophobic oil to air bubbles (foams) and the hydrophilic particle remain in the water phase. Since most organic contaminants are naturally hydrophobic, the objective of using surfactants is to reduce the hydrophobicity of the oil phase to the point where it will be wetted by the water phase and detach itself from soil surfaces. Therefore, surfactants are used in a manner that will assist in enhancing the surface activities of the surfactant/oil/soil systems. The addition of an electrolytes in aqueous surfactant solutions is used under some circumstances to increase the efficiency of surfactants’ oil removal from soil (   In addition, alkaline chemicals, hot water or surfactant solutions have been applied in the flotation techniques to remove hydrocarbon oil from soil by In furtherance to the work of The Silvaperlo soil used for this study was supplied by Williams Sinclair Horticulture Limited, Lincoln, United Kingdom. The soil with properties shown in The GC study was conducted using the VG Quattro Tandem Mass Spectrometer using the following operating conditions: Electron impact ionisation, electron energy 70 In each investigation, soil washing was conducted with 200 The experiment was conducted to study the removal of oil from soil first with distilled water and seawater, secondly with solutions of rhamnolipid, and SDS prepared with either distilled water or seawater. The experimental plans and different parameters levels outlined in The oil in soil was determined after Absorbance of the centrifuged extract was measured at 400 Thereafter, the percent of oil removed from the soil was determined using: This study was performed with custom-built glass apparatus to the dimensions given in Method D1173-53 ( This study was carried out using a surfactant solution to soil ratio of 6:1 (volume/mass) in order to achieve an effective optimum washing condition ( The selection of surfactants was based on their origin. The rhamnolipid (microbial) used was a blend of C SDS (C The weathering of the contaminated soil was noticed to be due to evaporation and oxidation. The volatile compounds of oil were lost within the first 24 To ascertain the reduction of hydrocarbons from contaminated soil, a GC study was carried out for both the weathered and non-weathered soil samples. Results shown in Foaming of surfactants is a measure of their detergency. The surfactants that show stable foaming have a good lather when dissolved in water, thus indicating greater effectiveness in removing oil from soil. The results of the foaming studies are shown in The surfactant solutions sorption in soil was determined by measuring the surface tension of the pure surfactant solutions and the soil/surfactant solution supernatants at 20 The results of the study are also summarized in To understand the effect of air sparging (compressed air) and stirring at 480 The effects of the different parameters studied in oil removal from the soil are presented in the subsequent sections. In order to find out the oil removal effectiveness of the surfactant solutions, the results of soil washing conducted at different washing temperatures are presented in With respect to all the parameters tested, only temperature shows a direct correlation with the physical properties of oil (i.e. viscosity and density). As the oil temperature increases, viscosity reduces; this invariably will enhance the removal of oil from soil. Considering the range of temperatures tested and the viscosities of the oil, it can be deduced that oil viscosity plays a significant role in oil removal from soil. Therefore, the reduction in viscosity will lead to the mobilization of oil, which creates an avenue for its separation from soil. Flotation washing was conducted to investigate oil removal from soil by increasing the concentration of surfactant solutions form zero (distilled water alone) to 0.5%-mass. This range of solution concentrations is believed to be useful in effective oil removal from a real life contamination. The results of these studies shown in As there is no emulsion formation, three things were deduced: it is believed that the soil sample does not have silt and clay fractions that may contribute to formations of stable emulsions as noted in the work of During the washing of the weathered soil samples, the disparity in crude oil removal between SDSw and Rw may be due to the differences in their physicochemical properties such as sorption to soil and foaming. Since the weathered soil sample is concentrated with higher molecular weight of hydrocarbons, it is therefore believed that the contaminated soil is more hydrophobic. Contrasting the oil removal of SDS with rhamnolipid, effective surfactant solution will reduce the hydrophobicity of the oil phase by lowering the interfacial tension and detach oil from the soil surfaces, has less sorption to soil, and stable foaming abilities. With the generation of foams where the oil will adhere to, there is greater possibility for SDS to carry out more oil due to its greater foaming production and less sorption to soil. Experiments were performed to determine the amount of oil removed from 200 However, for the weathered samples, it can be seen that the removal of oil increases as volume of solution is increased as result of more surfactant micelles or monomers being available to interact with the oil at the interface. All the washing solutions showed a steep increase in oil removal between the volume/mass ratios of 15 and 35 and then remain constant. This gives an idea that the removal of crude oil from the weathered soil samples would be effective with 350 Oil removal was investigated at different time intervals between 5 and 30 However, the non-weathered samples showed that maximum crude oil removal could be attained within 5 The results of this study presented in The greater removal with seawater may be due to the addition of the electrolyte in the seawater which reduces the electrostatic repulsion of the surfactants. In theory, The removal of crude oil from laboratory-contaminated soil has been studied using surfactant solutions in an air sparging assisted stirred tank reactor. The conclusions derived from this study are summaries as follows: Oil removal at the different points in the reactor was approximately the same, which indicated uniform mixing. Oil removal from the non-weathered soil samples could be achieved at first and second parameter levels. Rhamnolipid that shows a loss of about 57% in soil and less foam stability showed an oil removal that was comparable to that of SDS. In generally term, SDS has oil removal greater than 80% whilst rhamnolipid showed similar oil removal at the third and fourth parameter levels tested. The oil removal was not only dependent on the physicochemical characteristics of the washing media but was relatively dependent on the effect of air sparging into reactor containing the contaminated soil. The oil removal was more significant with seawater prepared solutions in comparison with the distilled water prepared solutions at the first and second parameter levels tested. This approach of soil washing was observed to be most effective compare to our previous studies, therefore was suggested a field test to assess the efficiency of these surfactant solutions and water. The authors of this paper thank Jeneil Biosurfactant Company USA for their support and co-operation.