The development of a new organic additive based on polyacrylamide is reported for copper electrowinning (EW) and electrorefining (ER) in which a rotating cylinder electrode (RCE) is applied as a novel method of determining surface roughness. The effect of hydrodynamics of the electrolyte (Cu2+
                     =36 g/L; H2SO4
                     =160 g/L and Cl−
                     =25 mg/L) on the surface roughness of the copper deposit was first validated against the literature. The effect of the preparation of polyacrylamide (PAM) on the surface roughness was then assessed. PAM (MW 15 million Dalton) was dissolved at 50 °C in full-strength and systematically half-strength standard electrolyte and in water and alkaline solutions and dosed to the electrolyte prior to copper electrowinning for 6 h using the RCE at 50 °C. The lowest surface roughness (6.59 μm±0.49) was obtained when PAM was prepared in 16-fold diluted electrolyte giving a block copolymer hydrolysis product named ‘activated polyacrylamide’ (APAM) in this work.At commercial scale, copper electrorefining is conducted at about 62 °C The Mt. Gordon operations produced 50,000 tonnes/year of copper cathodes using a ferric ion–acid leach of chalcocite ore followed by solvent extraction and electrowinning ( In the copper electrodeposition industry, it is imperative to dose very small concentrations of additives including chloride ions to control the physical and chemical properties of the copper deposit. It is also widely recognized in the industry that the adsorption of these additives at electrode surfaces significantly influences the current-potential relationships ( Under neutral conditions non-ionic PAM is stable; but under acidic or basic conditions it undergoes hydrolysis. Moreover, the hydrolysis products under strong and weakly acidic solutions; and alkaline solutions differ (  In this work the RCE is used to electrowin copper under typical electrowinning conditions. The surface roughness of the electrowon copper is compared to that of A review of the literature on the electrodeposition of metals shows that the primary and mass transfer-limited current distribution are uniform on a RCE ( If the cathodic current density is much less than the limiting mass transfer controlled current density, the limiting diffusion current density, Mass transfer between concentric cylinders, the inner of which is rotating with an angular speed If  A RCE was locally constructed and is similar in design to that described by The RCE was polished with 1 μm and 0.25 μm diamond paste and had an initial surface roughness of 0.15 The surface roughness was collected using a Mahr Perthometer M1 with a PFM Drive Unit, (Mahr GMBH, Germany) using a 2 μm stylus tip radius. It was calibrated with its PGN-3 ( Preliminary tests were conducted to evaluate the RCE and surface roughness measurement by comparing results produced with those of  Given the hydrolysis of PAM can lead to a range of hydrolysis products and adsorption characteristics, control of the preparation of PAM (and its associated hydrolysis products) is important to achieving a smooth copper deposit surface. Thus, PAM was prepared in both acid solutions (including diluted solutions of the full-strength electrolyte) and alkaline solutions. Experiments were designed to evaluate the effect of PAM preparation media on the surface roughness of the copper deposit obtained from copper EW. The one-way ANOVA between groups was analysed using SPSS software (version 11, 2003). The PAM used in Test 4 was prepared with 16-fold diluted electrolyte (pH PAM prepared at a pH of 8.5 at 50 °C for 3 h (Test 1) produced the highest surface roughness (8.47 Tests were undertaken to determine the effect of ageing PAM in 16-fold diluted electrolyte (DE) and in full-strength electrolyte. The study in full-strength electrolyte was designed to simulate the effect of in-situ PAM hydrolysis in the EW cells. Tests were also undertaken to verify the effect of ageing of PAM in 16-fold DE at room temperature for over 24 h to determine if APAM could be stored prior to use. This test was also designed to verify whether additional ageing in the electrolyte at 50 °C following the 24 h in 16-fold DE could reduce surface roughness. Therefore, Test 9 was run with fresh APAM whilst Test 10 was run with PAM aged for 24 h at 25 °C and Test 11 was run after a further 24 h at 50 °C without adding any fresh APAM. APAM prepared at 50 °C for 3 h showed the lowest surface roughness followed by APAM prepared at 25 °C for 24 h. The surface roughness produced from Test 3 was the highest and indicated that additional hydrolysis in the electrolyte at 50 °C for 24 h increased surface roughness presumably through the formation of less adsorbent copolymers, such as imides. Tests 1 and 2 were not statistically different indicating that APAM could be prepared for up to 24 h without affecting greatly the surface roughness. However, based on the data shown in It has been shown that the surface roughness obtained with the RCE built for this testwork agrees with the results obtained by We wish to thank Mount Gordon Operations of Western Metals Copper Ltd. and to the Australian Research Council for funding this study.