In the present work, a novel hybrid FE-Meshless quadrilateral element with continuous nodal stress is developed using radial-polynomial basis functions, named as Quad4-RPIMcns. Quad4-RPIMcns can be regarded as the development of the previous FE-Meshless quadrilateral element with radial-polynomial basis functions (Quad4-RPIM) and quadrilateral element with continuous nodal stress (Quad4-CNS). Similar to Quad4-RPIM, radial-polynomial basis functions are used to construct nodal approximations of Quad4-RPIMcns in the context of partition of unity, which avoids the possible singularity problem of constructing nodal approximations. The derivative of Quad4-RPIMcns shape function is continuous at nodes. Therefore, nodal stress can be obtained without any extra operation. Quad4-RPIMcns possesses Kronecker-delta property which is a very important property to impose essential boundary conditions directly as in the FEM. The numerical tests in this paper demonstrate that Quad4-RPIMcns gives better accuracy and higher convergence rate as compared to four-node iso-parametric quadrilateral element (Quad4). Additionally, Quad4-RPIMcns seems to have higher tolerance to mesh distortion than Quad4.Due to the limitations of the human mind, it is difficult to grasp a complex system׳s behavior in one operation, thus finite element method (FEM) is implemented Due to these limitations, numerous approaches have been explored to improve FEM. As a results Meshless method as one sparking point among these promising approaches stands out. The Meshless method was first proposed by Lucy As a development of Meshless method, reproducing kernel particle method (RKPM) To capture essential boundary conditions, several methods are developed, including point interpolation method (PIM) During the last two decades, the partition of unity method (PUM) Recently, a family of smoothed finite element methods (S-FEMs) Alternatively, hybrid FE-Meshless methods The present method can be regarded as the development of FE-Meshless methods with radial basis functions The outline of this paper is as follows: Partition of unity method (PUM) provides an available approach to increase the order of global approximation without adding extra nodes The present Quad4-RPIMcns is a development of Quad4-RPIM Firstly, for node Considering a quadrilateral domain The weight functions Similar to the construction of the ‘non-conforming’ shape function for the rectangular element in the thin plate theory The weight functions of Quad4-RPIMcns have three features: (i) they satisfy the PUM condition: Various selections have been proposed to construct nodal approximations with the Kronecker-delta property, such as LSPIM Using RPIM, the nodal approximation functions When considering three or four polynomial terms, The choice and effect of numerical values of the parameters Enforcing Eq. Obviously, there are totally ( In defining the support of a given node, the In Liu and Gu The Quad4-RPIMcns global approximation Some useful properties of Quad4-RPIMcns are shown as follows: The derivatives of weight function are of zero value at the nodes, which is already discussed in Ref. The derivatives of Quad4-RPIMcns global approximation are continuous at the nodes. Based on Eq. Consider a point Substitution of Eq. Therefore, The Kronecker-delta property. Consider a 2D solid mechanics problem defined in domain By discretizing the domain It is noted that the present Quad4-RPIMcns and the node-based smoothed radial point interpolation method (NS-RPIM, or LC-RPIM originally) NS-RPIM is a Meshless method, but Quad4-RPIMcns is a hybrid FE-Meshless method based on the PUM Due to the derivatives of shape functions for Quad4-RPIMcns are continuous at the nodes, nodal stress for Quad4-RPIMcns is continues and Quad4-RPIMcns does not require extra time to smooth nodal stress. However, the continuity of nodal stress for NS-RPIM is obtained by the strain smoothing operation In the process of obtaining global stiffness matrix, NS-RPIM employs the nodal integration scheme with strain smoothing operation to perform the numerical integration, but Quad4-RPIMcns uses the same way as like in FEM to conduct the numerical integration. In other words, the numerical integration for NS-RPIM are based on smoothing cells, while Quad4-RPIMcns based on mesh. For NS-RPIM, the gradient is averaged over the smoothing domain leading to constant strain for the nodal integration. This means that the strains in the smoothing cells are not compatible in terms of satisfying the displacement–strain relations Numerical tests with the present Quad4-RPIMcns model were carried out, and results are compared to those of four-node quadrilateral element (Quad4), eight-node quadrilateral element (Quad8), and other three hybrid FE-Meshless methods, including Quad4-DNS The number of polynomial terms for the nodal approximation of the hybrid FE-Meshless methods mentioned above will be taken as three or four, and their effects in the element performance will also be studied. For the convenience of description, a FE-Meshless methods with the superscript “a” means three polynomial terms are adopted for the corresponding nodal approximation, such as Quad4-RPIMcns The physical units used in the present work are based on the international standard unit system. Here, A known problem of PUM is the linear dependence problems, which leads to the singularity of global (stiffness) matrices A cantilever beam subjected to a bending moment is used to investigate the performance of Quad4-RPIMcns on distorted meshes, as shown in In this test, the element distortion sensitivity is measured by comparing the computed tip deflection at point First, compared to Quad4-RPIMcns, the Quad8 achieve more accuracy results. The accuracy of Quad8 decreases sharply with the increasing of the distortion parameter. It is noticed that Quad8 needs adding additional nodes, which increases the size of the global stiffness matrix. Second, the results of Quad4-RPIMcns and Quad4-RPIM are similar, which are much better than Quad4, Quad4-CNS and Quad4-DNS. Third, the results of Quad4-RPIMcns A two-dimensional cantilever beam subjected to a tip-shear force with length The parameters in the computation are taken as To examine the convergence of numerical solutions in Quad4-RPIMcns, four discrete models with regular grids are constructed as shown in The present Quad4-RPIMcns gives results comparable to Quad4-RPIM, and much better results compared to Quad4 and Quad4-CNS. The convergence rates of Quad4-RPIMcns  As shown in In addition, the contours of Quad4-RPIMcns and Quad4-RPIM, which are both hybrid FEM-Meshless methods, are able to improve accuracy under regular and distorted meshes, however, they increase the bandwidth of global stiffness matrix, which leads to the increase of computational time. Therefore, it is critical to find the right balance between simulation speed and accuracy in Quad4-RPIMcns and Quad4-RPIM. The relative errors in both displacement norm As shown in To examine the convergence of numerical solutions in Quad4-RPIMcns, four discrete models with regular grids are constructed as shown in The numerical results of Quad4-RPIMcns and Quad4-RPIM are all significantly better than the results of Quad4 and Quad4-CNS. The convergence rates of Quad4-RPIMcns As shown in In this section Cook׳s skew beam is taken as an example, with all parameters and dimensions given by Cook The present Quad4-RPIMcns gives results comparable to Quad4-RPIM, and much better results compared to Quad4, Quad4-CNS, Quad4-DNS, NS-FEM-T3 and ES-FEM-T3, but slightly inferior results compared to Quad8. This test problem too shows that both Quad4-RPIMcns and Quad4-RPIM with three-term basis can give as accurate results as with four-term basis. The similar conclusions can be found in Ref. In this test, a practical test, homogeneous earth slope As seen from A novel FE-Meshless quadrilateral element with continuous nodal stress (Quad4-RPIMcns) using radial-polynomial basis functions is developed in the present work. The radial-polynomial basis functions are used to construct nodal approximation in the context of partition of unity, which avoids the singularity problem of constructing nodal approximation. The weight functions of Quad4-CNS The radial-polynomial point interpolation basis functions are used to construct the nodal approximations of Quad4-RPIMcns, therefore Kronecker-delta property can be ensured, which is a very important property to impose essential boundary conditions directly. The stress field of Quad4-RPIMcns is continuous at the nodes, therefore the nodal stress can be conveniently obtained without any extra smoothing operation. Due to the continuous stress field at nodes, the stress field of Quad4-RPIMcns is smooth when the meshes are severely distorted. However, the stress fields of Quad4 become obviously fluctuated when the meshes are distorted. Quad4-RPIMcns is free from the linear dependence problem which is the main drawback of methods based on partition of unity. The present Quad4-RPIMcns inherits the property of high convergence rates and better accuracy from PUM and hybrid FE-Meshless methods. In the convergence study, Quad4-RPIMcns presents significantly higher convergence rates and better accuracy as compared to Quad4 and Quad4-CNS with three- or four-term basis. Furthermore, compared to Quad4, Quad4-CNS and Quad4-DNS, the Quad4-RPIMcns is less sensitive to the mesh distortion, which causes extreme aliasing of the nodal stress and then reduces the overall accuracy. The accuracy of Quad4-RPIMcns is comparable to Quad4-RPIM, but the stress field of Quad4-RPIM is not continuous at the nodes. In the mesh distortion test, the performance of Quad4-RPIMcns is compared to Quad4, Quad4-CNS, Quad4-DNS, Quad4-RPIM and Quad8 on different distorted meshes with various distortion parameters. The Quad4-RPIMcns and Quad4-RPIM are always more accurate as compared to Quad4, Quad4-CNS, Quad4-DNS. The Quad4-RPIMcns and Quad4-RPIM are both less sensitive to the distorted meshes, compared to Quad4, Quad8, Quad4-CNS and Quad4-DNS. It is well known that the ‘non-conforming’ element, whose derivative is only continuous at nodes, is widely used in the problems of the Kirchhoff-Love plate and shell models. Since the derivative of Quad4-RPIMcns shape functions is continuous at nodes, it is potentially useful to solve problems of bending plate and shell models. The formulation of Quad4-RPIMcns can be easily extended to three dimensions, such as 8-node hexahedral elements. Quad4-RPIMcns possesses Kronecker-delta property and is able to apply essential boundary conditions conveniently. However, Quad4-RPIMcns only enables the correct boundary conditions at nodes, but not along all the essential boundaries, which is a demerit of the present element. This demerit also exists in other hybrid FE-Meshless elements Furthermore, similar to other hybrid FE-Meshless elements, Quad4-RPIMcns provides alternative approaches to improve accuracy of FEM without increasing the number of nodes, but it increases the bandwidth of the global stiffness matrix and increases the computational time. However, an assessment of computational efficiency (Fig. In view of the above advantages, it is worth to further study the present Quad4-RPIMcns element and apply it for other problems including dynamic problems and geometry nonlinear analyses. This study is supported by the