Shape-selective methylation of 2-methylnaphthalene (2-MN) over HZSM-5 catalysts modified by steam and tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) treatments was carried out in a fixed-bed reactor. Catalysts were characterized by XRD, NH3-TPD, BET, FT-IR spectra of pyridine adsorbed, and by adsorption of hexane and cyclohexane. The results show that the TEOS treatment can effectively passivate external active site and narrow pore mouth of catalyst, but it has less effect on the internal surface than steam modification. Hydrothermal treatment can effectively reduce both external and internal acid sites, and adjust channel of catalyst. Steam treatment can effectively increase the ratio of 2,6/2,7-DMN, but the ratio has no increasing trend on TEOS modified catalyst. So adjusting acidity property is more useful to increase the selectivity to 2,6-DMN and the ratio of 2,6/2,7-DMN than narrowing catalyst pore mouth. Tailoring acidic characteristics is more important than spatial control for distinguishing between 2,6-DMN and 2,7-DMN.Shape-selective alkylation of polycyclic hydrocarbons for preparation of symmetric intermediates such as 2,6-dialkylnaphthalene (2,6-DAN) and 4,4-dialkylbiphenyl (4,4-DABP), the important precursors for advanced polymer materials 2,6-DMN, 2,7-DMN, and 2,3-DMN are the β,β-DMN isomers among the 10 isomers of DMN, so shape selective processing can be used for synthesis of the slimmer isomer 2,6-DMN In the case of synthesis of 2,6-DMN, the most difficult issue is how to increase the ratio of 2,6/2,7-DMN. Because the boiling points of 2,6-DMN and 2,7-DMN are very similar (only 0.3 Another factor is external acid sites on catalyst particle surface. Tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS, with molecular diameter of about 0.96 In this work, we studied the effects of steam and TEOS modification on the selectivity and activity of HZSM-5 for the methylation of 2-MN with methanol, and identified the promising direction for modification towards increasing the ratio of 2,6/2,7-DMN. HZSM-5 [CBV8014 (SiO X-ray powder diffraction patterns of the samples were recorded on a Rigaku D/max-2400 using Cu Kα1 radiation. The surface area and pore volume measurements of the catalysts were conducted on a volumetric adsorption apparatus (Micromeritics ASAP 2020) at 77 Catalytic experiments were carried out in a fixed-bed flow reactor. The powder catalyst samples were pressed and ground to 20–40 mesh pellets. About 0.3   For subsequent comparison of the above two modification methods, we choose the catalyst with steaming modification at 500   The effects of the steam and TEOS modification on acidity and acidic strength distribution of the resulting catalysts were studied by the NH    The changes in adsorption of cyclohexane relative to that of hexane provide a qualitative measurement on the changes in pore mouth of catalysts. Both modified catalysts exhibit similar cyclohexane adsorption level. After the modification adsorption of cyclohexane decreases sharply, but the change of cyclohexane adsorption on HT–HZSM-5 is similar to that of hexane. On the basis of this comparative examination, it appears that there is no significant change in the size of pore mouth of HT–HZSM-5. From these two series of adsorption experiments, it can be concluded that TEOS treatment mainly serves to cover the external particle surface with SiO As can be seen from Selectivity of DMNs in the alkylation products was enhanced significantly after the modification. On the HT–HZSM-5 the selectivity to DMN increased to 64.7% (vs. 44.6% on original HZSM-5), and over SiO After the modification, SiO The stability of the activity with time on stream and ratio of 2,6/2,7-DMN for the modified and original HZSM-5 catalysts were examined at 360 We have examined the effects of steam and TEOS modification of HZSM-5 zeolite on the physico-chemical properties, and catalytic selectivity and activity for synthesis of 2,6-DMN by methylation of 2-methylnaphthalene (2-MN) with methanol. The acidity was reduced by both modifications. The TEOS modification of HZSM-5 zeolites effectively deactivates the external acid sites and also appears to slightly narrow the size of pore entrance. But it has little impact on the pore surface inside the channel of HZSM-5. The hydrothermal (steam) treatment can reduce acid sites and acidic strength on both external and internal surface and may partially or locally narrow some parts of the channel of HZSM-5. The selectivity of 2,6-DMN in the methylation of 2-MN increased while the conversion decreased by the steam and TEOS modification of HZSM-5 zeolite. The enhancement of the selectivity of 2,6-DMN on SiO Based on the characterization and reaction results, it can be concluded that adjusting the acidic property of HZSM-5 catalyst has more desirable impact on shape-selective methylation of 2-MN than optimizing pore channel and pore mouth of the catalyst. Tailoring acidic characteristics is more important than spatial control for distinguishing between 2,6-DMN and 2,7-DMN. Therefore, how to optimize acidic characteristics is a key factor for improving the ratio of 2,6-DMN to 2,7-DMN in methylation of 2-MN with methanol for the synthesis of 2,6-DMN. The project was supported by the program for New Century Excellent Talent in University (NECT-04-0268) and by the “111” project.