Carbon storage by mineralisation (CSM) is an option for CO2 emissions mitigation that has been under intensive study at Åbo Akademi (ÅA), Finland. Magnesium from silicate rocks is extracted with recoverable ammonium salts at 250–500°C. The extracted elements are separated by selective precipitation and Mg is subsequently carbonated in a pressurised fluidised bed. This work studies the applicability of the process for co-extraction of Ni, Cu, Fe and Mg from nickel ore and nickel mine waste rock (overburden). The rock samples were collected from the Hitura Nickel mine, Finland. The results show that it is possible to co-extract the listed elements and integrate CSM (by the ÅA process) with steelmaking and Ni production industries.At Åbo Akademi University (ÅA), in Finland, a process route for carbon storage by mineralisation (CSM) ( So far, the Finnish Hitura nickel mine waste (overburden) rock has been most used at ÅA (see The nickel recovery at Hitura is typically low (∼66.5%) and becomes even lower if higher nickel grade concentrates are produced ( The rock samples were crushed and ground to obtain three size fractions of 125–250 The Ni percentage in the ore (0.77–0.83  Ore 1 material (size fraction 125–250 Ore 2 material (size fraction 125–250 Ore 2 material (size fraction of 60 The overburden material (size fraction 74–125 Although Ores 1 and 2 were collected at a different time and place, the chemical analyses show, as expected, that they are very similar thus representing the same material. Therefore each sample was tested with only one of the ammonium salts. The calculation for the extraction results were based on the rock’s composition given by the ICP-OES analysis, and are shown in It was found to be possible to simultaneously extract Ni, Cu, Fe and Mg from all the tested materials. The best extraction results are summarised in Concerning Cu, the improved extraction rates with ABS (60–75% at lower temperatures) is quite significant compared to the extractions with AS (∼40% at 450 After its extraction, the selective recovery of the Ni, Cu, Fe and Mg is a challenge. Currently the ÅA process includes two precipitation stages at a pH of 6–9.5 and ∼11.5 to recover Fe and Mg as FeOOH and Mg(OH) It is possible to extract Ni, Cu and Mg by reacting Ni ore with ammonium salts while extracting Mg for subsequent CO The purpose of this work was not to replace the current Ni extraction method as the AS/ABS process does not appear to be the best route since it extracts only 1/3 of the Ni content of the ore. Nordkalk Oy Ab is acknowledged for XRF analysis; Sonja Sjöblom of ÅA Geology and Mineralogy is acknowledged for preparing the rock samples that were kindly provided by the Hitura mine (Jukka Nieminen, Belvedere Mining Oy, before that Olli-Pekka Isomäki, Hitura Mining Oy).