The alkaline decomposition of argentian ammonium jarosite in lime medium is characterized by an induction period and a conversion period in which the sulfate and ammonium ions pass to the solution whereas calcium is incorporated in the residue jointly with iron; this residue is amorphous in nature. The process is chemically controlled and the order of reaction with respect to the hydroxide concentration is 0.4; the activation energy is 70 kJ mol−1. Cyanidation of argentian ammonium jarosite in lime medium presents the same reaction rate in the range of 0–10.2 mol m−3 CN−; in this range of concentration, the cyanide process can be described, as in other jarosites, in a two-step process: a step of alkaline decomposition that controls the overall process followed by a fast step of silver complexation. For higher cyanide concentration, the order of reaction with respect to cyanide is 0.65, and kinetic models of control by chemical reaction and diffusion control through the products layer both fit well; the activation energy obtained is 29 kJ mol−1; this is indicative of a mixed control of the cyanidation process in the experimental conditions employed. The process is faster than was observed in ammonium jarosite generated in zinc hydrometallurgy (Industrial Minera México, San Luı́s Potosı́, México); it seems that the reaction rate decreases when the substitution level in the jarosite lattice increases; this behavior is similar to that observed for synthetic potassium jarosite and arsenical potassium jarosite from gossan ores (Rio Tinto, Spain) presented in a previous paper.Jarosite materials have been well described in the literature. As an example of natural jarosites, argentojarosite On the other hand, the control of sulfates, the removal of iron and a better filterability are achieved in the zinc hydrometallurgy process in which iron is precipitated as sodium or ammonium jarosite and silver is in the corresponding lattice In the 1990s, efforts have been dedicated to the studies of reactivity of natural and precipitated jarosites and also the possibilities of disposal of these materials to prevent environmental problems. In a previous paper The industrial ammonium jarosite precipitated in San Luis Potosı́ (México) contains hydronium, silver and lead in the “alkaline” site, small amounts of copper and zinc in the “iron” site and also small amounts of arsenic in the “sulfate” site; during the alkaline decomposition in NaOH medium, the process is of 1.1 order with respect to the hydroxide concentration and the activation energy is 77 kJ mol This paper includes a study of the nature and kinetics of the cyanidation of synthetic argentian ammonium jarosite in lime medium, including the alkaline decomposition of the jarosite. A comparative study of reactivity of this jarosite with respect to other jarosites and, particularly, those precipitated in zinc hydrometallurgy (San Luı́s Potosı́, México) is also presented. Synthesis of argentian ammonium jarosite was carried out in a stirred reactor (400 min The jarosite precipitate was fully characterized by chemical analysis, X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDS), electron microprobe (EPMA) and granulometric analysis. The characterization performed by XRD confirms a single-phase product. The morphology of argentian ammonium jarosite consists on spherical aggregates The chemical composition obtained is shown in Granulometric analysis by wet sieving, after one seeding, is shown in The experimental procedure used was similar to that employed in previous works The progress of the reaction was followed by taking samples of the solution throughout the experiment and testing The effect of particle size was carried out with particle families of 74–53, 53–44 and 44–37 μm. Solids obtained at different conversion values were characterized by XRD, SEM and EDS to observe their evolution. One experiment was carried out according to the following experimental conditions: 1 g jarosite of 40.5±3.5 μm at an initial volume of 1 L of 1.25 X10 Results obtained were treated according to the shrinking core model for chemical control Results obtained are shown in Chemical control model: Diffusion through product layer: According to these results, the experimental data corresponding to the alkaline decomposition of argentian ammonium jarosite in Ca(OH) The process shows an induction period with a value of XRD of the reaction products indicates the total decomposition of argentian ammonium jarosite and confirms that they are amorphous in nature as was observed in all of the jarosites studied in previous works.  These results confirm the formula of jarosite obtained by chemical analysis. During the alkaline decomposition, the sulfate and ammonium ions passed together to the solution and the residue incorporates calcium in a homogeneous form. The chemical composition seems to correspond to a definite chemical product, but amorphous in nature. Thus, the stoichiometry of the process in the conditions studied can be expressed as: The study of alkaline decomposition of argentian ammonium jarosite in Ca(OH) The effect of temperature is shown in According to the results obtained, the kinetic expression in Ca(OH) The study of cyanidation of the jarosite in Ca(OH) In the range of cyanide concentration between 0 and 10.2 mol m For higher cyanide concentration (10.2–40.8 mol m The effect of [OH The effect of temperature is shown in In  Synthesis of argentian ammonium jarosite leads to a compound with the formula: (NH The alkaline decomposition and also cyanidation present an induction period and a conversion period. In the induction period, any changes were detected in the jarosite surface. The conversion period is characterized by the liberation of sulfate and ammonium ions to the solution; during cyanidation silver also passes to the solution. The residues of alkaline decomposition and cyanidation are amorphous in nature and are formed by iron, calcium (that is incorporated in a homogeneous form) and hydroxide. In the alkaline decomposition in Ca(OH) During cyanidation in Ca(OH) During cyanidation with cyanide amounts higher than 10.2 mol m By comparing the reactivity of different jarosites, the reaction rate of cyanidation is high for synthetic potassium jarosite, is similar in both cases for argentian ammonium jarosite and natrojarosite, and is 10 times less than argentojarosite for lead jarosite. The reaction rate is negligible for arsenical potassium jarosite from gossan (Rio Tinto, Spain) and for ammonium jarosite precipitated in zinc hydrometallurgy. The reaction rate decreases when the substitution level in the jarosite lattice increases. The authors thank the CONACYT of the México Government for their finacial support. Thanks are also due to the Serveis Cientificotècnics de la Universitat de Barcelona for their assistance in this work and to Ms. Neus Romà for her assistance in the laboratory work.