The nattier-blue colloidal particles precipitated out from the sulfuric acid leach solution of stone coal were identified to be potassium alum (KAl(SO4)2
                     ·12H2O). The particles were characterized through X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and theoretical analysis with thermodynamics of ion crystallization. The results show that the particles belonged to potassium alum with micro-scale granular surfaces. The colloidal potassium alum formed with the temperature of the leaching solution cooling to 45°C. This observation could lead to 27.6% vanadium loss in the vanadium extraction process, which might be attributed to the chemical adsorption of vanadium in the form of the species of VO2+ on the potassium alum surfaces.Vanadium is an important transition metal, which has been widely used in high-quality ferrous, non-ferrous alloys and chemical industry. In China, the main vanadium resource is vanadium-bearing stone coal ( Acid leaching is currently a key process of extracting vanadium from the stone coals and other vanadium-bearing minerals ( At present there is little information on the formation of the colloidal particles in vanadium acid leach solution from stone coals, especially in terms of fundamental understanding and effect on the vanadium recovery. This work is focused on the study of the characterizations of the colloidal particles and the mechanisms of their formation and effect on vanadium recovery, as well as the thermodynamics mechanism analysis of the adsorption of vanadium species on the colloidal particles. The stone coal sample was collected from the Tongshan vanadium mine located in Hubei province, China. It was crushed and screened to obtain minus 3 The XRD pattern of the stone coal sample is depicted in The analytical purity chemical reagent including sulfuric acid from Kaifeng Dongda Chemical Reagent Technology Co., Ltd. was used. The water used in this study was distilled water. 50 X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained by using a Rigaku D/MAX-III X-ray diffraction meter (Japan) with Cu Kα radiation. A Jeol JSM-5610LV scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Japan) was used to observe the form and size of the formed colloidal particles. For SEM observation, a drop of dispersion was carefully put on pin-type mushroom specimen mounts and dried at room temperature, followed by coating with 20 The effects of sulfuric acid concentration and H Meanwhile, the residual H After the acid leaching process, the leaching solution needs to be cooled down to room temperature for meeting the requirements of the followed solvent extraction step. But it is found that some nattier-blue colloidal particles precipitated out when the leaching solution was cooled down below 45  The XRD pattern of the colloidal particles formed in the leaching solution is illustrated in Based on the ions that existed in the leaching solution, the possible reactions are shown as follows: According to the thermodynamics of the ions and species of aluminum, potassium and sulfate in aqueous solutions (  The colloidal potassium alum in the leaching solution must be removed by filtration before subsequent solvent extraction or ion exchange. In this work, the filtration was done using a vacuum suction filter device, and the colloidal dispersion and the filtrate were chemically analyzed for vanadium. The results of the analysis and the calculation for vanadium recovery in the filtrate are given in It is known that vanadium appeared in the form of V(IV) in the leaching solution obtained in this study. The various kinds of vanadium species might form in the leaching solution in the following chemical reactions ( Based on the reactions and the data given above, In our case, the pH value of leaching solution obtained by using sulfuric acid from 6 to 10 The loss of vanadium into the colloidal potassium alum might be attributed to the chemical adsorption of VO The species of VO  Colloidal potassium alum would form in the acid leaching solutions of vanadium from stone coals. It exhibited rough surfaces with many micro-scale granular structures. The formation of potassium alum was closely correlated with the temperature of the leaching solution. At a high temperature, the colloidal potassium alum would disappear. The formation of colloidal potassium alum could result in about 27.6% vanadium loss in the vanadium extraction process, which might be attributed to the chemical adsorption of vanadium in the form of VO The authors are thankful for the financial support from the