The design and operation of a new solar photoreactor prototype named Offset Multi Tubular Photoreactor (OMTP) is presented. The OMTP advances over the compound parabolic collector (CPC) photoreactor, which is one of the most efficient design for large-scale solar detoxification of water and wastewater. The OMTP design is based on a simple modification of the common CPC and included a supplementary set of tubes in the space occupied by the axes of intersection of the CPC reflective involutes. This new reactor configuration increased the irradiated reactor volume by 79% and the fluid residence time by up to 1.8-fold in comparison to the CPC, for the same solar irradiated area (footprint). The model parameters used for comparing and scaling the OMPT and CPC were β (reactor volume/total volume), α (area of absorption/total volume), αg
                      (physical area/total volume), degradation efficiency ηα
                      per unit area, and the operating volume. The total solar energy absorbed in the reactors (1.74 m2 footprint) was 15.17 W for the CPC and 21.86 W for the OMTP, which represents an overall gain of 44% for the latter. The performance of the OMTP and CPC were compared at the same value of solar exposure, β of 0.3 with optimal photocatalyst loading of 0.25 g/L titanium dioxide (TiO2 P25). The degradation efficiencies of methylene blue, dichloroacetic acid, 4-chlorophenol (120 ppm initial concentration) in the OMTP were up to 81%, 125%, 118% and 242% higher, respectively, in comparison to the CPC after 8000 J/m2 of accumulated solar energy. The OMTP should outperform the CPC in environmental and renewable energy applications of solar heterogeneous photocatalysis.The efficient utilization of renewable solar energy is essential for the development of sustainable processes for the production of clean energy, biofuels, hydrogen, for environmental clean-up, water disinfection and for the exploitation of self-cleaning surfaces. Among these processes, solar photocatalysis has attracted industrial interest as a sustainable process for the mitigation of the environmental effects associated with water pollution The CPC is essentially a tubular reactor with two highly polished, semi-involute, aluminium reflectors located at the bottom of the tube. This photoreactor is usually a static device inclined to the sun by an angle which maximize the absorption of solar light The design and optimization of the CPC photoreactor for water treatment has been performed using mathematical models that describe the incident solar radiation, the absorption and scattering of photons, the reaction kinetics, the hydrodynamics and the quantum efficiencies In this study, the conceptual design and evaluation of a new prototype of an offset multi tubular solar photoreactor (OMTP), which mitigates the limitations of the CPC and that can be adopted for industrial wastewater treatment is presented. The basic principle of this design is based on the removal of the costly CPC involute reflectors and in the introduction of a further set of tubes, which significantly increase the total reactor volume in relation to the solar footprint. The performance of the OMTP was evaluated and benchmarked against the CPC for the removal of methylene blue (MB), dichloroacetic acid (DCA), 4-chlorophenol (4-CP), and phenol in water.  The fundamental principle of this new design lies in the inclusion of (2 The design of an efficient photocatalytic reactor begins with its reactor geometry since this implicitly influences the photons paths, the optical thickness, and the optical limiting layer of the reactor For an adequate comparison of the performance of solar photoreactors under variable solar conditions, the following scaling parameters have been considered: The common water contaminants phenol, dichloroacetic acid (DCA), 4-chlorophneol (4-CP) (all 99.9% analytical grade from Merck®), and commercial-grade methylene blue (MB) typically used for kinetic studies in large-scale photocatalytic reactors The hydrodynamic performance was adjusted using the The removal of MB (10 ppm) by adsorption was evaluated with four catalyst concentrations (0.20, 0.25, 0.30, and 0.35 g/L) at natural pH (7.45 ± 0.18). The tests were done using 100 ml samples, which were continuously agitated in the dark for 4 h in conical flasks. Aliquots were collected from these every 15 min to measure the residual concentration of MB by UV–Vis spectrophotometry. The photocatalytic degradation of MB in the OMTP, at an initial concentration of 10 ppm, was evaluated at the catalyst concentrations (0.00, 0.20, 0.25, 0.30, 0.35 g/L), at a volumetric flow rate of 24 L/min and using a The reactor set-up comprised the OMTP and the water recycle system, which included a stirred tank, in which the solutions were prepared and the samples were collected, a centrifugal pump and two control valves to set the recirculation flowrate. In a typical experiment, the stirred tank was initially loaded with 29 L of tap water and the photocatalyst was added to form a slurry suspension and circulated in the reactor system for 10 min. Then, 1 L of contaminant aqueous solution, at the required concentration, was added in the reactor system and the suspension was recirculated under darkness for 30 min to establish adsorption/desorption equilibrium conditions. Then a sample was taken and the reactor was exposed to solar light at (t The results of the degradation of phenol, DCA, and 4-CP were used to compare the performance of the solar, pilot scale, OMTP and CPC photoreactors with suspended TiO The Continuous air bubbling in the recirculation stirred tank was provided to maintain the water under oxygen saturation conditions during the oxidation reaction which was carried out at the operating temperature of 33 °C ± 0.3. The effect of molecular adsorption or direct photolysis of the contaminants tested were negligible and did not directly affect the photocatalytic process as previously shown The operating procedure for the solar heterogeneous photocatalysis tests were as described for the MB with sample collected every 1600 units of accumulated energy up to 8000 J/m The formulations of the modeling equations of the OMTP and CPC reactors are based on the generalized methodology ( Both OMTP and CPC reactors were modeled as flow-through reactors with total recycling, thus, the material balance could be described as an integral-differential equation as a function of the cumulative incident solar energy The incident solar radiation The values of the absorption ( Finally, the hydrodynamic performance of the reactor was that of perfectly mixed batch reactor due to the large circulation ratio and small conversion per pass. The mass balance of the batch reactor (Eq. The optical comparison of the OMTP with respect to the CPC was quantified using the overall volumetric rate of photon absorption (OVRPA) The reactor to total volume ratio  The primary limitations of the CPC reactor are the treatment volume capacity and the area occupied by each collector module, particularly considering that large exposure areas are required to ensure the treatment of industrially relevant operating volumes From the point of view of the irradiated volume, four OMTPs are equivalent to seven CPCs, but with higher photon efficiencies than that of the latter, as discussed below. The hydraulic optimization of the reactor system shows that the energy consumption per liter of treated wastewater would be lower in the designed OMTP and that to maintain the turbulent flow with a flow rate higher than 24 g/L, a 0.30-HP magnetic pump is theoretically required, as opposed to a 0.24-HP pump for a CPC. The difference in the energy cost is compensated in treating higher volumes with efficiency increases. Moreover, the initial investment costs required for the construction of an OMTP module, although slightly higher than that of the CPC, is compensated by smaller numbers of reactor modules connected in series with the same arrangement and distribution. Overall, the cost of the construction area will be 1.8 times lower than that of the CPC. The performance of the heterogeneous photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue with suspended TiO The reaction rates of MB were the highest for accumulated energies of less than 2000 units, under optimal catalyst loading (0.25 g/L). The rate increased at lower catalyst loadings and then decreased at higher catalyst loadings (>0.25 g/L) as a result of the increase of the photon shielding effects. The photon scattering and shielding effects are a function of the optical thickness of the suspension, which in turn depend on the catalyst concentration, the optical properties of the catalyst suspension (absorption and scattering coefficients and scattering phase function) and the geometrical thickness of the suspension. The optical thickness at the higher catalyst concentration (0.35 g/L) was 2.06, while at the lower catalyst concentrations (0.2 g/L) it was 1.18. These results are consistent with previous simulation results reported in the literature However, for all four concentrations of TiO Direct photolysis of MB in the OMTP resulted in 46% degradation at an accumulated energy of 8000 J/m Heterogeneous photocatalytic degradation of phenol, DCA, and 4-CP was performed in a heterogeneous photocatalytic solar platform at the University of Cartagena, Colombia (10°25′25″ N – 75°31′31″ O) on sunny and clear days at a specific hour to ensure that environmental atmospheric conditions did not significantly affect the process. The incident solar radiation measured during the experiment period (2016) and the slopes of the linear relationship with the accumulated UV-B radiation during the treatment time is presented in The results show that for the established operating conditions, the percentages of TOC degradation favor the OMTP with respect to the CPC. The advantage of the OMTP over the CPC lies in the higher operating volume per footprint exposed to sunlight. The lower degree of phenol and 4-CP degradation in comparison to DCA, does not depend on the geometry of the reactor, but results from the highly recalcitrant intermediates that are generated during the mineralization process In contrast, the photocatalytic degradation of DCA proceeded at much higher rates compared to phenol and 4-CP, which results from the simultaneous attack by photogenerated holes (h+) and hydroxyl radicals on the dissociated dichloroacetate ions in aqueous phase Although contaminants reaction mechanisms are intrinsic to the nature of the reagent and its interaction with the photocatalyst, the rate of generation of the oxidant species is a function of the rate of photon absorption in the reactor, which in turn depends on the reactor geometry. The degradation efficiency of MB, phenol, DCA, and 4-CP, respectively, per unit area and per unit treatment volume, These results represent a fundamental contribution to the scaling processes of solar heterogeneous photocatalysis applications because higher efficiencies in the OMTP were obtained using the same physical installation area of collector (1.74 m Mathematical modeling of the photoreactor systems by combining the mass balances, the solution of the radiation balance (LVRPA), the reactor hydrodynamics and the reaction kinetics, permits the evaluation of the concentrations of contaminants as a function of the accumulated solar energy. Such model is also required for the design of solar water detoxification plants. The performance of the heterogeneous photocatalytic degradation processes in both OMTP and CPC was quantified by the solution of the photoreactor model (Eq. The determined kinetic parameters Finally, the photonic efficiencies This study has presented a new solar reactor prototype (OMTP) which addresses some of the limitations of current CPC solar reactors used in industrial wastewater treatment. The OMTP increases the total treatment volume, the wastewater residence time, decreases the footprint and simplify reactor scale-up in comparison to the CPC. This new reactor includes an additional arrangement of tubes in the space occupied by the CPC involutes. The fluid residence time in the OMPT increased by up to 1.8 times. The net solar global energy absorbed in the OMPT increased by up to 44%, which translated in MB, DCA, 4-CP and phenol degradation efficiencies up to 81%, 125%, 118% and 242% higher, respectively, in comparison to the CPC after 8000 J/m The authors are grateful to the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 