 Chemical precipitation, thermolysis, electrolysis, hydrogen reduction and melt atomization are often used for the production of powders of these metals. Basic materials are solutions, salt pulps and hydroxides; in the latter case, solid phase properties significantly influence the properties of the powder produced complicating the reproducibility of a number of its characteristics (particle size, bulk mass, surface). Among organic reagents let us note formaldehydes, alcohols, oxalic and formic acids and their salts and glycerin, and among non-organic ones hydrazine and its derivatives, borates of alkali and alkaline-earth metals, hypophosphites, Ti (III), Cr (III), V (III) salts are used most often. Organic reducers are safe, available and allow the process to be carried out at low temperatures. The produced powders have a developed surface, they are dispersed (1.0–10 μm), but gas-saturated and require a special finishing procedure. Formic acid and its salts, sodium formate in particular, are used most often. This is an available, non-toxic and easily soluble reagent. The precipitation factors depend on temperature, pH value, reagent consumption, but there is a problem of washing the powder free from sodium ions resulting in a high water consumption (up to 160–200 L per 1 kg of niello). Particle size of the produced residue is between 0.05 and 0.5 μm. Reney's method is based on producing the alloy followed by selective leaching of the less noble component by acid or alkali solutions. The produced niello of metals or their alloys have large specific surface (80–100 m Thermolysis means the thermal decomposition of metal salts (nitrates, halides, ammoniates, carbonates, formates), which form volatile products on heating. The powders produced are distinguished by a non-uniform granulometric composition, small specific surface and contamination by thermolysis products. Electrochemical methods (extraction from solutions, processing of salt pulp and hydroxides, electrolysis of wastes and recycled raw materials) are widely used in the production of noble metal powders.  A solid-phase reduction of salts and oxides of noble metals by hydrogen at 227–427°C is possible; however, the powders produced (especially palladium powders) have a tendency to hydrogen pickup and contain up to 0.1% of adsorbed hydrogen. Indices of hydrogen reduction (purity and physical properties of powder) are significantly improved when the hydrothermal method is used. The hydrothermal method is the precipitation of metals from liquid (organic) media at an elevated temperature (107–177°C). Basic methods of production are solid-phase reduction, chemical precipitation from solutions or pulp, electrolytic precipitation and electrolysis. Most silver salts are easily reduced from solution, the only limitation being their solubility. The most common compounds are silver nitrate and silver oxide. Organic reducing agents such as alcohol, sugar or aldehydes are used to manufacture silver powder from silver oxide. For example, dextrose can be used to produce a very fine silver powder: Organically precipitated silver powders have particle sizes ranging from 5 to less than 0.1 μm. However, these silver powders tend to agglomerate into aggregates 10 μm in size or larger. To avoid agglomeration, the powder can be precipitated in presence of a surfactant or de-agglomerated after the precipitation using a mechanical technique. Silver powders are produced by mixing of an acidified solution with a solution of tin (II) salts in the presence of anion type surfactants, controlled pH values and temperature. Silver powder with particles of a spherical shape is produced by atomization of silver nitrate solution and its pyrolysis. To produce submicron particles of silver and palladium, their concentrated nitrate solutions are used, aerosol forming and drop separation by size are provided, and then drying and conversion of aerosol particles to the metallic condition are performed in a reducing atmosphere at elevated temperature. Particles 7–10 μm in size are produced by evaporation of silver at 997°C with subsequent condensation in a nitrogen atmosphere. Ceramic contacts of high wear resistance are produced from silver-based compositions (Ag-oxides of cadmium, copper, zinc, tin, lead, Ag–Ni), from nitric acid solutions of appropriate composition; the metals are jointly precipitated in the form of hydrates and carbonates. Powder mixtures with a particle size of 0.1–0.4 μm are produced after separation of precipitates, their washing, drying and calcination at 397–497°C. To provide a high yield, an agglomeration is carried out; the size of produced particles is 200–400 μm. Removal of cadmium oxide proceeds during sintering of products containing cadmium oxide at A composition for the products that retain their electrical conductivity and wear resistance at low temperatures (for example, electrical contacts) and in a vacuum is produced by mechanical stirring of dispersed silver powders with additives of 2–49% of rhenium or molybdenum disulfide in water or alcohol. Silver powder is produced by processing of a solution of silver nitrate (0.05 M) and 1-hydroxy-4-methylaminophenyl sulfate in the ratio of [(C Silver powder is produced also by processing hydroxide pulp with a solution of sodium formate; the precipitate is washed by water and dried. Powder properties (specific surface, S, apparent density, ρ, median mass diameter,  The consumption of reducing agent is 1.1–2.4% of the precipitated powder mass with a content of 99.9% of Ag. I t is possible to produce silver powder by a self-propagating low temperature reaction of precipitated silver chloride with zinc. In this process, powder of  Zinc consumption is stoichiometric; the duration of process is of 15–20 min, the transformation level is close to 100%. Powder surface area is 0.8 m Silver powder is produced by atomization of a molten silver stream with gas or liquid. Average particle sizes generally are within the range 10–50 μm. The gas-atomized powder generally approaches a spherical shape, with a smooth surface, minimal porosity and a high powder density [ Spray pyrolysis technique for manufacture of silver powders is also used. This process involves the spraying of a silver nitrate solution into a flame formed by a coaxial burner. Control of the flame temperature and the spray conditions allow for the control of particle size and shape [ Spray pyrolysis produces solid, spherical, dense silver powders. An aerosol of silver nitrate solution is heated to temperatures as low as 600°C in nitrogen to decompose the silver salt and to produce a fully dense silver powder. Particle size of the powder is 5 μm and smaller. Mechanical milling is used to change the properties of silver powders including disintegration of particle aggregates, particle shape and particle surface characteristics. This process can be used for most types of silver powders with techniques such as ball milling, vibratory milling or attrition milling. A feature of these processes is that they are time-consuming and require special precautions to prevent contamination from the mill and milling medium. Various types of milling media can be used including zirconia balls (ZrO The basic raw material is Dore's alloy that contains: 87–95% of Ag; 2–14% of platinoids and gold; 1–4% of Cu; 0.06–0.01% of Ni; 0.005–0.01% of As; 0.01–0.05% of Sb; 0.1–0.2% of Fe; 0.001–0.005% of Pb; 0.002–0.01% of Se; 0.005–0.1% of Te; silver-containing materials (80–84% of Ag; 16–20% of Cu). In accordance with State Standard 28595-90, silver of three brands (CpA-1 CpA-2 and CpA-3) is used in the cells with soluble anodes (respectively 99.99, 99.98 and 99.9% of Ag). Silver is precipitated on the cathode as a loose needle-like deposit that is easily stripped from the cathode. The current efficiency in the nitrate solution is approximately 100%. The cause of electric loss is short circuits of silver dendrites and simultaneous reduction of The respective O/R potentials are 0.94; 1.01; 0.77 and 0.95 V (nhe). Therefore the concentration of the free acid is decreased. Fine silver powder is precipitated at the silver anode due to Ag The powder is produced in cells with vertical or horizontal cathodes ( Cells with horizontal location of electrodes are manufactured from plastic or ceramics and lined with acid-proof tiles. A graphite dalle (cathode) is embedded into the cell bottom. Half of the cell bottom length is splayed to provide powder deposit discharge. An anode box with the bottom made of fire bars, on which a filtration nylon material, plastic grid and some layers of anode plates are placed, is installed above the horizontal part of the cell. The current is supplied by heavy contacting leads, to which the ends of a flexible cable are soldered. Anodic contacts are manufactured of 50% Ag + 50% Au alloy, cathodic contacts are fabricated from silver.  It is possible to produce silver powder in the cells with insoluble anodes. Titanium sheets are covered by a thin platinum layer. Anode current density is twice as high in comparison with the cathode. The nitric acid concentration increases during electrolysis whereas silver ion concentration decreases. Periodically a part of the electrolyte is vented away for regeneration and removal of platinum metals and gold. Silver powder produced by electrolysis meets the following requirements: >99.9% of Ag, maximum 0.02% of Cu; 0.04% of the sum (Fe, Pb, Al, Bi), 0.001% of Fine silver powder is produced in the anodic space of the electrolyzer close to the surface of soluble silver anodes by chemical reduction with titanium (III) ions: The composition of the solution is 10% of Ti The several ways of production of electrolytic silver and silver-alloy powders are shown in Electrolysis is carried out using a silver nitrate melt based on the potassium–sodium eutectic (15–33 wt% of silver) at a temperature of 250–290°C in an open cell without additional stirring [  Production of particles 3–180 μm in size is realized by gold vaporization in an inert gas atmosphere and condensation in ethanol. Ultrafine gold powder particles are produced from the solution based on organic complexes by thermolysis of its aerosols (drops diameter is of 1–5 μm) in inert medium at temperatures higher than 497°C. Many processes for manufacturing gold powder use an aqueous solution of HAuCl Potassium sulfite or sodium sulfite can be directly added to aqueous gold chloride solution to produce spherical gold particles [ Gold powder can also be produced by mechanical comminution. Sheets of gold are reduced by rolling to produce a foil between 10 and 20 μm thick followed by beating to produce a gold foil 0.2–0.5μm thick. These foils are subjected to mechanical comminution ensuring an ultrafine gold powder production. Larger gold powders and gold flake can be manufactured by ball milling [ Chemical composition is shown in       The precipitation of platinum oxide at the interaction of H The process of reducing [PtCl The fractional conversion of the metal to powder achieves 99.9% in processing of chloro-amine compounds of platinum and palladium in sodium hydroxide solution by reducing agents (sodium formate, aluminum, hydrazine salts). Platinum niello is produced by reaction of ammonium hexachlorplatinate with a 2.5 M solution of formic acid or sodium formate at 102 ± 5°C; pH of 6.0–6.5 is supported with the help of NaOH (or NH Metallic palladium powder is formed (without reducer) in the process of boiling dichloridiamminpalladium salt in a saturated alkali solution. If this salt is treated slowly (3 hours at 102 ± 5°C) in sodium hydroxide solution and sodium formate (0–20% of stoichiometric consumption) is used as the reducer, we can get palladium niello; an increase of sodium formate consumption from 10 to 80% of stoichiometrically necessary levels results in a decrease of palladium niello specific surface from 32 to 3 m The greatest influence on the increase of the process rate is exerted by an increase of temperature, sodium formate concentration and seed consumption. The process rate decreases at high pH and especially if chloride ions are introduced. It is explained by enhanced resistance of metal chloride components to the equation: With the appearance of the metallic niello the process becomes autocatalytic. Palladium powder is produced by processing its ammonium complexes with a mixture of formic acid and its ammonium salt prepared in the following manner: (CH Cladding of powders of various metal oxides by platinum or palladium is achieved by the thermolysis method. Powders of platinum, palladium, ruthenium and iridium are precipitated from acid–salt solution by cementation with zinc, copper, magnesium, aluminum or cadmium. The powder surface area is 0.1–1.0 m Fine powders of platinum group metals are precipitated from aqueous or non-aqueous solutions of salts by radiation by election beam in doses of 10–30 mrad. Powders of platinum group metals can be precipitated by the use of carbon monoxide: There are several platinum carbonyl compounds: High carbonylchlorides are hydrolyzed to monocarbonylchloride; the latter is decomposed by interaction with water forming the platinum powder: Platinum metals may exist in chloride solutions in different ion forms according to concentration of chloride ions.  This process includes a number of subsequent transformations with complex ions of different structure as the participants. The reduction is performed from the solutions (100–120g/L of Pd; 1–2M of HCl) or H The rate of palladium precipitation decreases in the presence of organic compounds (acetone, ethanol, butane); when the organic phase concentration is increased, the fine fractions output is increased also, and practically monodispersed powder can be produced; palladium powder with particle size of 1.2–1.7 μm was produced in the system palladium salt solution + about 10% of metal; particle shape is non-equiaxed, and their structure is porous. The properties of palladium powders used for the manufacture of thin-walled ceramic capacitors are presented in Characteristic properties of palladium powders are homogeneity of phase and chemical composition, high particle size dispersity (0.3–3.5 μm), and insignificant pyrophorisity though of large specific surface (3.5–16.0 m Apparent density rises with the increase of the concentration of palladium salt and hydrochloric acid in the solution and the temperature and equals 0.8–2.8 g/cm Osmium powder is produced from platinum containing 0.6–1.0% of Os in two steps according to the scheme ‘OsO Stable forms of noble metal ions that occur in aqueous solutions are complex compounds. Thermodynamic probability of their autoclave reduction by hydrogen is rather significant; the development of the process of metal powder precipitation is determined by the kinetic parameters and occurs at less rigid parameters than the precipitation of copper, nickel and cobalt powders. The precipitation of gold from its thiosulfate, chloride and bromide complexes with 3+ charge proceeds at 57–67°C. V.V. Ipatyev (1926) was the first who showed the possibility of platinum precipitation from the chloride complex. He carried out this process at 20–30°C, Similar reactions for actual platinum metals are presented below:  In processing of acetate sulfate solutions of Rh (III), Pt (IV) and Ru (III), reduction to metal proceeded rather quickly and the process rate did not depend on the anion concentration and the ionic force of the solution. Cl The precipitation of palladium from the solution bearing 2 g/DM Iridium can be reduced only to Ir (III) during the processing of chloride solutions bearing Ir (VI) ions at 30°C. Iridium metal is precipitated from the solution (64 mg/L, 20 g/L of HCl) only at 140°C, Homogeneously sized silver powder with bulk weight of 0.3–3.0g/cm Noble metal powders can be precipitated by carbon monoxide in the interval of pH ≤ s 7.0, the temperature of 20–200°C and The key condition of alloy production is phase composition uniformity achieved by alignment of the precipitation rate of components and their joint crystallization. The most popular methods are chemical, contact displacement and electrochemical precipitation. Silver–palladium powders used, in particular, as metallized paste fillers in capacitor production have to meet the following requirements: 70% of Ag and 30% of Pd, surface of not lower than 1.5–2.3 m For their production, the basic raw material is dissolved in nitric acid, then the solution (80–100 g/L of Ag and Pd) is neutralized by alkali to pH 4.5–5.0 and the powder is precipitated by sodium formate to the residual content Σ(Pd, Ag) < lmg/L at 67–77°C. The reducer consumption is 1.5–2.0-times the stoichiometric composition. The produced powder is annealed in a reducing atmosphere and screened. Due to a developed surface (>5–7 m Powders with the average particle size of 0.6 μm were produced using hydrazine as a reducer (47–57°C, 6-times consumption of stoichiometric quantity). According to another method, the ‘silver–palladium’ composition is produced by stirring nitrate solutions (17 g/L of Ag, 3 g/L of Pd) with a reagent-precipitator (hydrazine + surfactants) at 53 ± 5°C. The surface of the produced powder is 2–7 m Pd–Cu alloy (55% of Pd) is produced from the solution of chlorides of these metals by reduction with hydrazine-sulfate. Two-three component alloys are produced by precipitation from hydroxyammonia and chloride ammonia complexes (the latter to provide the phase composition uniformity) of (NH4) A local reduction, first of all of palladium, is possible when using a pulp of salts of metals, which are constituents of the produced alloy, and its Powders of Pt–Pd alloy are produced by joint precipitation by treatment of a solution of chloride complexes of these metals with sodium formate solution: at pH < 3. The process includes: induction (1), precipitation and growth of nuclei (2); desorption and withdrawal into the solution of reaction products (3): The induction stage is the diffusion of complex ions of the metal and the reducer to the seed surface. The stage of precipitation and growth of nuclei is adsorption and an oxidation–reduction reaction: accompanied by the growth of nuclei. The stage of reaction products desorption and their diffusion into the solution. In the case of multiple crystallization, the limiting stage is diffusion of Pt (Pd) (II) compounds to crystal surfaces. With an increase in pH, a part of aqua- and hydroxo forms in the composition of metal complex ions as well as the probability of an increase in niello precipitate formation. The basic diagrams of alloy chemical precipitation are shown in The composition of the alloy of PtPd-40p brand is: Σ(Pt, Pd) > 96.5 wt% including 58–61 wt% of Pt; not more than 0.04 wt% of Cl; 0.03 wt% of Na; 0.5 wt% of moisture; 0.05–1.0 wt% of volatile matter (O This alloy is a single-phase alloy; its apparent density is of 1.4–1.9 g/cm For example, per 1 kg of PtP-90 niello precipitate produced from metal, the consumption (in kg) is the following: 2.4 of HNO In particular, this alloy is, like platinum, suitable for the metallization of pottery surfaces bearing bismuth or titanium. In the processing of ammonium complexes of platinum and palladium (pH = 12–13; 147–157°C; L:S = 2; τ = 0.5–1.0 h), the latter are precipitated fully as powder. The technique provides a quick and complete procedure with the minimum consumption of alkali and without an external reducer. The particles have a spherical form, their size is 0.3–0.4 μm and specific surface of the powder is 2–4.5 m Pt–Pd–Rh alloy is produced by thermolysis of a mixture of complex salts of [Me(NH A powder with apparent density of 0.7–1.9 g/cm Powders of palladium based compositions were produced by thermolysis of amino-oxalate complexes of [Pd(NH An isomorphic solution of platinum in palladium is precipitated by means of sodium bicarbonate from a solution bearing platinum and palladium. An alkaline medium of the obtained mixture brings about the reactions mentioned above. The larger the palladium content, the greater the process rate. Platinum is precipitated sufficiently completely at the atomic proportion Pt/Pd = (1–2)/1. The procedure is performed at 70°C, [HCl] Increasing the Cl (I) ion concentration decelerates the process, but increasing acidity accelerates it; powder particle size is of 1.8–2.7 μm. Temperature and duration are governing factors for Pt–Pd–Rh mixture precipitation: 26% of the metal was precipitated at 97°C within 3 h, 97% was precipitated in 8 h. Before platinization, the electrodes are thoroughly cleaned in a chrome mixture or by SiO After platinization, the electrodes are put into 10% solution of sulfuric acid and polarized cathodically within 5 minutes with an auxiliary platinum electrode as anode. The current strength in this case is also adjusted by gassing intensity. The adsorbed chlorine is reduced and eliminated more easily while washing as chloride ions. The electrodes are washed in running warm water and then in cold distilled water. The platinized electrodes have to be stored under a water layer as they lose wettability in air. Re-platinization is performed over 1–2 minutes. Palladium powder with a particle size of 5–15 nm is characterized by specific catalytic properties. Nanoparticles and their dendrite-shaped aggregates are produced from palladium chloride by means of cetyltrimethylammonia bromide (CTAB). The cylindrical part of the titanium rod is protected by plastic and rectangular pulses of direct current and ultrasound are supplied alternately to the electroactive disk part of the electrode. A predominant size of spherical particles (nuclei stripped from the electrode surface during ultrasound supply) is increased from 5 to 11–13 nm as the current density decreases from 130 to 80 A/m Manufacturing methods for electrolytic platinum-group powders and electrolytic platinum-group alloy powders are shown in