In present investigation, the selective removal of Al from the quasi-lattice sites of quasicrystalline alloy surface was examined in order to produce the nano-particles of metal/metal oxides within the micro-porous network. Al was selectively etched from both the as-cast as well as annealed Al63Cu25Fe12 quasicrystalline alloys through the treatment with 10 mol NaOH solution at different time interval. In the as-cast sample, higher density of porosity was observed compared to that of annealed alloy. However, dealloying specifically for 4 and 8 h yielded nano-size particles on quasicrystalline surface (of both the alloys) in which very fine particles were detected at 8 h. The increase in density and decrease in size of the nano-particles was found with dealloying duration. X-ray diffraction analysis was performed to characterize the samples. Scanning electron microscopy, transmission electron microscopy and energy dispersive X-ray analysis were carried out to investigate the surface microstructure, internal morphology and chemical composition. The chemical dealloying treatments yielded nano-particles of Cu and Fe along with their oxides on the quasicrystalline surface. Furthermore, the catalytic activity of leached quasicrystalline materials was evaluated towards degradation of non-biodegradable and hazardous methylene blue (organic dye).Random micro/nano-porous structures can be generated as a result of dealloying phenomena (similar to corrosion) which is considered to be a simple and effective approach to remove selected less noble metallic elements from the lattice sites of the alloys [ The porous metallic materials have a wide range of applications due to their structural and/or functional properties [ The aim of present work is to investigate the influence of chemical dealloying on the polished surface of the poly-grain Al–Cu–Fe QC alloy (as-cast and annealed) with 10 mol (M) NaOH aqueous solutions for different dealloying times. The final structure of QC was inspected as a function of dealloying time. Moreover, the catalytic activity of the QCs towards the degradation of methylene blue was studied using UV–Vis spectrophotometer. Overall, the present study is focused on the implications of the evolution of porosity to the structure, stability and catalytic activity. The alloy ingot with nominal composition Al The SEM micrographs of as-cast ingot form a broken alloy (natural surface of a pore) and that of the polished surface have been shown in Pentagonal dodecahedral morphology has appeared on the surface of annealed alloy as shown in It confirms from The XRD peak profile of Before and after dealloying treatment, the XRD patterns of annealed alloy are shown in It can be noticed that with the progression in the dealloying time, the XRD reflections get significantly broadened and reduction in the peak intensities of the dealloyed surfaces takes place due to the removal of metal(s) from the surface. The creation of lattice strain and reduction of crystallite size will take place during this process. Based on the XRD line broadening profile, the effective crystallite size of the as-cast and the dealloyed surfaces has been calculated. The Voigt function analysis of integral width is a rapid and powerful single line method for the assessment of the lattice strain and crystallite size of the specimen. In Voigt function analysis, the constituent Cauchy and Gaussian components can be obtained from the ratio of full width at half maximum intensity and integral breadth by taking care of the instrumental broadening. In a single line analysis, the apparent Cauchy component is related to crystallite size and Gaussian components is related to the lattice strain [   In order to check the purity and effect of the dealloying on the chemical composition of Al–Cu–Fe Methylene blue is one of the harmful organic dyes existing mostly in industrial wastewater that causes serious environmental and public health issues [ From the experimental observations, it has been found that the porous structure can be produced by selective corrosion of the desired element (Al) from the Al–Cu–Fe QC surface using 10 M NaOH solutions. Dealloying takes place only on the surface whereas beneath the dealloyed layer the QC characteristics remains preserved, which can be revealed after polishing the affected layers. Removal of Al from the surface is responsible for the formation of the porous structure. These porosities coexist with the metal and metal oxides nano-particles. TEM studies confirm the size of the nano-particles which is in order of 13–40 nm for dealloyed samples and these nano-particles are Cu, Fe, Cu  The authors declare no competing interests. The support from the