The flotation separation of chalcopyrite and pyrite was studied in the presence of sodium humate. The results of flotation tests indicated that pyrite can be selectively depressed by sodium humate, and the activity of sodium humate was strongly affected by the pH of the pulp. At high pH values, pyrite was strongly depressed by sodium humate; however, the content of chalcopyrite was not affected. Ore flotation tests were successfully conducted in the laboratory and at the Dexing Copper Mine by applying sodium humate as a pyrite depressant. By adding 40–60g/t of sodium humate to the pulp and adjusting the pH to 10–10.5 with CaO, a concentrate with a Cu content of 24% was obtained without reducing the Cu recovery rate. In addition, the dosage of CaO was reduced, and the recovery of Au, Ag and Mo in the copper concentrate was enhanced due to the reduced pH of the pulp. The zeta potential, adsorption of xanthate and contact angle of the mineral surface were measured, and the results from surface measurements indicated that there was a strong hydrophilic interaction between sodium humate and the surface of pyrite. Moreover, the results revealed that the interaction between sodium humate and chalcopyrite was weak. Infrared (IR) spectra of pyrite and sodium humate were obtained, and the results indicated that sodium humate was chemically adsorbed on the surface of pyrite.The Dexing Copper Mine is the largest porphyritic copper mine in China, and the main sulfide minerals observed at the mine are chalcopyrite and pyrite. In addition, the ore also contains Mo, Au and Ag. In industry, chalcopyrite and pyrite are recovered, and Mo, Au and Ag are enriched in the copper concentrate. When only a primary grinding stage is applied to the pulp, the copper content of the concentrate is very low (10–12%); thus, the rougher concentrate must be subjected to a second grinding stage (regrinding) in order to increase the content of Cu. Although a copper content of 24% can be attained after two grinding stages, a large amount of lime (CaO) must be added to depress the pyrite in the separation of Cu–S circuit (5–6 Organic depressants are diverse, readily available and cost-efficient materials, and they have attracted a considerable amount of attention. For instance, dextrin ( Sodium humate is the salt of humic acid and can be extracted from Leonardite. Due to its low price and excellent chemical and electrochemical properties, sodium humate has been used for a variety of different applications. For instance, sodium humate has been used as a scavenger of toxic metals in wastewater treatment, as a mud adjuster in oil drilling and as an additive in the food and fertilizer industries. Moreover, the results of the present study indicate that sodium humate can be used as a pyrite depressant in the separation of chalcopyrite and pyrite at pH values lower than usual for pyrite depression, and the amount of CaO added to the concentrate can be significantly reduced. In this paper, the floatability of chalcopyrite and pyrite in the presence of sodium humate was studied to achieve Cu–S separation in a medium with reduced alkalinity. The zeta potential, contact angles of minerals and the adsorption of xanthate on the mineral surface were measured. In addition, an infrared (IR) study was conducted to investigate the interaction of sodium humate and pyrite. Chemical grade ethyl xanthate and butyl xanthate were provided by the Zhuzhou Flotation Reagents Factory in Hunan Province. Sodium humate was obtained from the Pingxiang Dewei Humic Acid Chemical Factory of Pingxiang City (Jiangxi Province), and elemental analyzes indicated that the sodium humate contained 51.30% C, 3.74% H, 2.38% N and 42.58% O. Samples of pyrite and chalcopyrite were obtained from the Dexing Copper Mine in Jiangxi Province, China. High purity samples were hand-picked from the mine, and a chemical analysis revealed that the chalcopyrite content of the material was 95.2% and the pyrite content was 96.3%. The pyrite was dry-ground in a porcelain ball mill and dry-screened to obtain −0.09 Ore samples were obtained from the north and south hills of the Dexing Copper Mine, and the results of chemical analysis are shown in Flotation tests on single minerals were carried out in a Hallimond tube. Prior to the test, the sample was cleaned with supersonic waves, and 1.0 The ores were tested in a XFG Single-trough flotation machine at effective volumes of 0.25 The wet contact angles of the surface of pyrite and chalcopyrite were measured according to the sessile drop method, and a JY-82 goniometer-type contact angle instrument was employed. A zeta potential analyzer produced by Brookhaven Instruments Corporation was used to measure the zeta potential of the mineral surface. A dual-wavelength/double-beam recording spectrophotometer (UV-3000) was used to detect xanthate adsorption to the mineral surface at The pH of the pulp was adjusted to 9.5 with NaOH, and the effects of sodium humate on the flotation recoveries of pyrite and chalcopyrite were determined (see As shown in Ores obtained from the Dexing Copper Mine were tested to determine the optimal conditions for Cu–S separation in the presence of sodium humate. In the experiments, CaO was used to adjust the pH of the pulp. The flotation flowsheet and reagent system are shown in As shown in The results of the present study suggested that the depression of pyrite by sodium humate was more effective when the pH of the pulp was adjusted with lime (CaO), in comparison to adjustment with sodium hydroxide. Lime (CaO) has been shown to depress pyrite; thus, the mechanism of the effect of sodium humate and lime (CaO) on pyrite and chalcopyrite flotation was investigated by analyzing the concentration of free calcium oxide (CaO) in the tailing pulp in the presence and absence of sodium humate. As shown in Based on the laboratory tests, an industrial-scale test was conducted for two months at the Dashan concentrator of the Dexing Copper Mine. The tests were conducted on 30,000 Due to the results of the industrial-scale test, sodium humate is currently in use as a pyrite depressant at the Dashan concentrator of the Dexing Copper Mine. Statistical production reports indicate that the recovery of Au, Ag, and Mo increased by 0.25%, 3.22% and 10.7%, respectively. The aforementioned flotation tests indicated that (1) sodium humate is highly selective in the separation of chalcopyrite and pyrite and (2) the activity of sodium humate is enhanced when CaO is used to adjust the pH. In this study, the zeta potential, contact angle and adsorption of xanthate on the surface of the minerals were measured to determine the effects of sodium humate, and the IR spectra of sodium humate and pyrite were obtained to investigate their interactions. Sodium humate (NaA) dissociates in solution and exists as an anion (A As shown in A comparison of curves 1 and 3 revealed that the zeta potential of pyrite in the absence of sodium humate was greater when CaO was used to adjust the pH of the medium, suggesting that cations such as CaOH As shown in  The hydrophilicity–hydrophobicity of minerals, which is associated with floatability, can be assessed by measuring the contact angles of the minerals. Larger contact angles indicate that a mineral is hydrophobic, and smaller contact angles indicate stronger hydrophilicity. As shown in As shown in  The results of the present study suggested that sodium humate can be used as a pyrite depressant for Cu–S flotation separation in alkaline medium. Flotation tests conducted on ores and an industrial-scale test performed at the Dexing Copper Mine indicated that a concentrate with a Cu content of 24% was obtained without reducing the Cu recovery rate by the addition of sodium humate and the recovery of Au, Ag and Mo was also enhanced. Results from surface measurements suggested that the hydrophobicity and adsorption of xanthate on the surface of pyrite decreased significantly due to the addition of sodium humate. IR spectra of sodium humate and pyrite revealed that the depressing effect of sodium humate can be attributed to the chemical adsorption of sodium humate on the surface of pyrite.