This investigation was performed with samples from a lead–zinc sulphide deposit aiming at studying the influence of the dispersion degree of the particles in the pulp on lead and zinc flotation. Samples of ore and also of the minerals sphalerite, galena, pyrite, and dolomite were selected for the experiments. Nine types of dispersing agents and six blends among them were employed.
                  A set of three dispersing agents was selected for the lead flotation and another set of three was chosen for zinc flotation. The criteria for the reagents selection were: high dispersion degree for galena and low for the other species, high dispersion degree for sphalerite and low for the other species, low dispersion degree for pyrite and high for the other species, and high dispersion degree for all species.
                  Lead flotation experiments were performed under three conditions aiming at verifying the influence of the dispersing agent, of the pH, and of sodium carbonate. The zinc flotation tests were carried out at pH 10.5, modulated with lime.
                  The use of dispersing agents in lead flotation did not improve the overall efficiency of the circuit for, despite improving the lead metallurgical recovery, they increase significantly the zinc losses in the lead concentrate.
                  Sodium carbonate presented a low dispersion degree and did not affect the lead flotation results when compared with those achieved at natural pH and at pH 9.8 modulated with lime.
                  Two dispersing agents were particularly effective in zinc flotation: dispersant 3223, a sodium polyacrylate, and sodium hexametaphosphate. Both reagents significantly enhanced zinc recovery without impairing the concentrate quality.Votorantim Metais operates an underground mine in Paracatu, MG, Brazil, producing 1 The correlation between the dispersion degree of the particles in the pulp and flotation performance is well known in iron ores cationic reverse flotation, where quartz particles must be disperse and selective flocculation of iron oxides is desirable and actually occurs. The system under investigation is much more complex regarding either mineralogy or flotation stages requirements. In the lead circuit, the dispersion of galena particles is essential. The aggregation of the other minerals (sphalerite, pyrite, and dolomite), that are expected to report to the tailings, may even improve the selectivity of the stage. The same approach applies to the zinc circuit: sphalerite particles must be disperse and aggregation of pyrite and dolomite might favour the rejection of these species to the tailings. Many decades of investigation were necessary in order that some correlations between dispersion and flotation performance in iron ores reverse cationic flotation were established ( The flotation of silicate zinc minerals, willemite and hemimorphite, relies on adequate dispersion of the ore particles in the pulp. Highly disperse pulps eliminate the need for desliming, but no direct correlation between dispersion and flotation is observed. The most effective dispersants not always lead to the best flotation performances This study aims at addressing the dispersion degree of the particles in a lead–zinc sulphide ore pulp as a tool for better understanding the flotation behaviour. Desliming preceding flotation is an industrial practice established over 60 years ago, introduced in the USBM process for the iron ores cationic reverse flotation ( The theoretical aspects of ultrafine particles aggregation and dispersion are addressed by the DLVO theory, independently developed by the Russians Derjaguin and Landau and the Dutch Vervey and Overbeek, in the last century forties decade. After 50 years the classical DLVO theory was reviewed, incorporating structural forces suggested by The concepts of the X-DLVO theory apply to the flotation process ( There is an interrelation between dispersion and depressant action in systems involving mineral pulps. Among dispersing/depressant inorganic agents, polyphosphates play a special role, and among organic species low molecular weight acrylate polymers deserve special attention.    Galena depression is achieved with dextrins (     The reagents used as dispersants were: sodium hexametaphosphate designated as HMP, commercial sodium silicatate (SiO Blends of dispersants were also tested: 50% Na Mineral samples as pure as possible were collected in the mine by the geology team: galena (Zn 0.75%, Pb 81.98%, Fe 0.33%), sphalerite (Zn 59.99%, Pb 1.70%, Fe 2.04%), pyrite (Zn 0.15%, Pb 0.21%, Fe 26.49%), and dolomite, the major gangue mineral (Zn 0.34%, Pb 0.13%, Fe 2.80%). A sample of the ore was collected in the concentrator, at the feed point of the lead flotation circuit, to be used in the dispersion experiments. The metallic elements content of this sample was Zn 4.36%, Pb 1.82%, Fe 4.10%. The dispersion degree determinations procedure is described next. Each mineral sample (ground to −150 The dispersion degree was calculated as: A laboratory flotation machine supplied with an automatic froth removal system was used in the flotation tests. The sample for the laboratory flotation tests was collected at the industrial grinding circuit feed point, Fractions weighing 1400 Reagents for galena flotation (Na The tailings from the galena flotation were conditioned with copper sulphate (300 In the flotation experiments results, dispersant dosage zero g/t refers to the standard test in the absence of dispersant.   Duplicated sedimentation experiments were performed with five mineral fractions, using nine individual or blended dispersing agents, at three addition levels, yielding a total of 450 tests. Dispersion degrees (DD) below 15% were considered as low, between 15% and 30% medium, and figures above 30% were treated as a high dispersion degree. For each mineral fraction sets of four dispersing agents (individual or combination) were selected as representative of reagents yielding higher and lower dispersion degrees, respectively. Considering the 1500 Ore high DD: 3223 Ore low DD: Na Sphalerite high DD: Dispersol = 3223 = HMP Sphalerite low DD: Na Galena high DD: 3223 Galena low DD: Na Pyrite high DD: Dispersol Pyrite low DD: 3223 Dolomite high DD: Dispersol = 3223 = HMP = 7220 Dolomite low DD: Na Dispersion degrees in the presence of the reagents selected for the flotation experiments, at 1500 Based on information on the dispersion behaviour of the ore and its components, provided by the sedimentation experiments, four criteria were established for the selection of reagents to be used in the laboratory flotation experiments: Lead flotation: reagent yielding high dispersion degree for galena and low dispersion degree for the other minerals and ore; sodium silicate was selected, even being just a medium dispersant for pyrite. Zinc flotation: reagent yielding high dispersion degree for sphalerite and low dispersion degree for the other minerals and ore; a blend of sodium silicate and sodium metasilicate was selected for meeting all the required conditions. Lead and zinc flotation: reagent yielding low dispersion degree for pyrite and high dispersion degree for the other minerals and ore; dispersant 3223 was selected for sharply meeting the required conditions. Lead and zinc flotation: reagent yielding high dispersion degree for all the minerals and ore; sodium hexametaphosphate was selected for sharply meeting the required conditions. Galena flotation results, designated as lead flotation, in the presence of sodium polyacrylate (reagent 3223) are presented in Unacceptable losses of zinc in the lead concentrate were observed, with consequent drop in lead grade. Lead recovery was not affected. The reagent seems to activate sphalerite flotation even in copper sulphate absence. Galena flotation results in the presence of sodium hexametaphosphate are presented in Comparing with the standard test (0 Galena flotation results in the presence of sodium silicate are presented in The reagent not only decreases lead grade and recovery in the concentrate, but also increases sharply zinc losses. The activation of sphalerite by dispersants may be explained by the fact that disperse fine galena particles are prone to surface oxidation and, thus releasing Pb It is worthwhile stressing that the lead feed grades in the three sets of experiments were different due to fluctuations in the ROM, resulting in different results for the standard test (absence of dispersant). The experiments with sodium hexametaphosphate were performed with lead feed grade 2.1%, a figure similar to that of the sequence in the presence of sodium silicate (2.2% Pb). Both sequences yielded similar results for the standard test. The standard test in the presence of polyacrylate was carried out with a richer sample (3.6% Pb), producing higher concentrate lead grade and recovery. A final comment on dispersants effect on lead flotation is that none of them enhanced this stage performance. Nevertheless, the dispersion studies provided a relevant technological information. Sodium carbonate does not have any dispersing effect towards either individual minerals or the ore. Bench scale experiments were performed with the less expensive reagent hydrated lime substituting for soda ash as pH modulator in the lead circuit. Laboratory experiments indicated also that lead flotation is possible at natural pH. A successful plant trial conducted to the incorporation of lime to the concentrator plant practice. Sphalerite flotation results, designated as zinc flotation, in the presence of sodium polyacrylate (reagent 3223) are presented in Sphalerite flotation results in sodium hexametaphosphate presence are presented in Sphalerite flotation results in the presence of a sodium silicate and metasilicate blend are illustrated in Zinc feed grade in the sequence with the sodium silicate and metasilicate blend was different from that of the tests in the presence of sodium polyacrylate and sodium hexametaphosphate. The dispersants use in the lead flotation stage did not improve the overall circuit efficiency. Despite enhancing the lead recovery, the reagents caused unacceptable zinc losses in the lead concentrate. Lead flotation either at natural pH or pH 9.8 modified with sodium carbonate or lime presented similar results. A technological consequence of the low sodium carbonate dispersing ability was the use of lime substituting for the more expensive sodium carbonate as pH modifier in the industrial circuit. The use of both, the sodium polyacrylate 3223 and the inorganic dispersant sodium hexametaphosphate, increased significantly the zinc recovery, keeping low the lead content in the zinc concentrate and not interfering with the iron content in this product. The authors are grateful to Fapemig and CNPq for the financial support.