In this study, the performance of a conventional anaerobic baffled reactor (ABR) and a novel configuration of hybrid ABR for the treatment of thin stillage was evaluated. The hybrid ABR achieved the chemical oxygen demand (COD) removal, sulfate removal and methane yield of 97–94%, 94–97% and 294–310 mL CH4 g−1 CODremoved, respectively at organic loading rate (OLR) of 1–3.5 kg COD m−3 d−1. On the other hand, the value of COD and sulfate removal and methane yield for the conventional ABR were 75–94%, 67–76% and 140–240 mL CH4 g−1 CODremoved, respectively at OLR range of 1.1–1.8 kg COD m−3 d−1. The enhanced performance and robustness of the novel ABR was demonstrated to be the result of incorporation of solid/liquid/gas separators into the configuration of the conventional ABR, leading to reduced biomass washout, higher solid retention time and significantly improved phase separation.Bioethanol is the most widely used biofuel, which is mainly produced from sugar based crops such as corn and sugarcane ( Alternative technologies for thin stillage treatment such as anaerobic digestion have been proposed for the removal of organic materials and improving the energy balance of the process, given that the biogas produced, presents an alternate energy source for the plant ( Anaerobic baffled reactor (ABR), which is a compartmentalized reactor and thus can foster optimal environmental conditions for methanogenic and acidogenic bacteria in a two-phase system ( Conventional ABR has not been applied and evaluated for anaerobic digestion of thin stillage to the best of our knowledge, and its performance and operation has yet to be explored. The low biomass growth rate and high biomass washout are the main problems of conventional ABR ( The corn thin stillage was obtained from IGPC Ethanol Inc. (Aylmer, ON, Canada). After collection, the thin stillage sample was stored in a refrigerator at 4⁰C to avoid degradation. Physical and chemical characteristics of the thin stillage used in this study were characterized by a number of different analysis methods. The elemental analysis (K, Ca, Mg, S, Zn, Mn, Fe, Cu, Al and Na) of the thin stillage was conducted at the Minerals Engineering Center at Dalhousie University (Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada) using inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) in which the samples were diluted into 5% nitric acid prior to measurement. COD, biological oxygen demand (BOD), total solids (TS), volatile solids (VS), total suspended solids (TSS), and volatile suspended solids (VSS) analyses were based on Standard Methods ( The COD of feed was adjusted by diluting thin stillage with tap water. Souring due to the accumulation of volatile fatty acids (VFAs) often leads to process failure ( A lab scale ABR was operated with a total and working volume of 40 L and 27.5 L, respectively ( An initial run was performed in the conventional ABR ( The OLR of the system was increased stepwise from 0.75 to 1.8 kg COD m To overcome the challenges, the conventional ABR configuration ( During the operation of ABR, the characteristics of liquid samples from each compartment and effluent of reactor such as COD, sulfate, total nitrogen, total phosphorus and ammonia were measured using HACH analysis kit, and UV–vis spectrophotometer (DR6000, HACH). Moreover, the pH of samples was measured by VWR symphony pH meter. The values of VFA and alkalinity of samples were determined using titration ( The struvite crystals were collected from ABR effluent and elemental analysis for Mg and phosphorus was performed using ICP-OES at the Minerals Engineering Center at Dalhousie University (Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada). Then, the struvite crystals were dissolved in deionized water and the total nitrogen content was measured with the HACH test kit. For determining the biomass washout, the samples were collected from the effluent of reactor. Also, the sludge samples for each compartment were collected from the top, middle and bottom of sludge blanket to measure the biomass concentration. The VSS test for both biomass washout and biomass concentration was performed according to standard method ( For determining the sludge microbial population, samples of sludge were collected from each compartment of ABR during the operation of hybrid ABR at the OLR of 3.5 kg COD m Amplicon fragments are PCR-amplified from the DNA in duplicate using different dilutions (1:1 and 1:10) using the high-fidelity Phusion polymerase. A single round of PCR is performed applying “fusion primers” (Illumina adaptors + indices + specific regions) targeting the 16S V6-V8 (Bacteria/Archaea; ∼440–450 bp) regions. PCR products are verified using Invitrogen 96-well E-gel and then purified and normalized by the SequalPrep 96-well Plate Kit (Invitrogen). For making one library 380 samples are pooled and then quantified fluorometrically. Pooled samples were run on an Illumina MiSeq using 300 + 300 bp paired-end V3 chemistry. For bioinformatics Analyses, the Microbiome Helper standard operating procedure ( The produced biogas from different compartments of the ABR was collected in 25 L Tedlar® gas bags for a time period of 18 h and was measured using water displacement method (  As indicated in The biomass concentration in each compartment at different depths of the bioreactor was measured at various OLRs during the operation of the bioreactor. The values presented in In this study, the formation of granules was promoted by gradual increase of OLR. Biogas production and liquid upflow velocity also promote formation of granular sludge ( The size of sludge granules in all compartments increased in response to increasing the OLR from 1 to 3.5 kg COD m Sludge washout from one compartment to the other is a significant challenge in ABR, which was the main motivation for the new design. The microbial population depends on the environmental condition in each compartment as well as feedstock ( The microbial communities of bacteria and archaea at phylum and class level in the four compartments of hybrid ABR are shown in The dominant classes of archaea in the microbial population in the 1st compartment were Maintaining pH at the desired level for the optimum activity of microorganisms is essential for an optimum anaerobic digestion process ( The VFA concentration in the 1st and 4th compartment at different OLRs and configurations/stages is shown in  The difference of the VFA concentration in 1st and 2nd compartment was 71 and 492 mg L The profiles of VFAs in different compartments of hybrid ABR at various OLRs are shown in The COD removal efficiency in different configurations/stages is depicted in The COD removal and biogas production rate in each compartment for hybrid ABR is shown in The biogas production rate and methane yield for different OLRs at various configuration/stages is given in Configuration of a digester greatly influences the highest achievable organic loading rate, the extent of removal efficiency and biogas production yield as well as energy consumption rate. The anaerobic fluidized bed reactor (AFBR) was able to handle the highest OLR of thin stillage (29 kg COD m In the case of anaerobic sequencing batch reactor (ASBR), the reactor achieved the COD removal efficiency and methane yield of 90% and 0.254 L CH The COD removal efficiency and methane yield in the present study (hybrid ABR) are within the range of reported values in the literature for anaerobic digestion of thin stillage, however, the influent COD is lower than other studies due to filtration and dilution of thin stillage with tap water in this study. In the other studies, addition of trace element and dilution is applied as pretreatment of thin stillage. The OLRs applied in this study is not the maximum achievable OLR since the objective of this study was to investigate the treatability of thin stillage in a conventional and hybrid ABR and compare their performance with respect to phase separation, SRT, COD and sulfate removal and biogas production. Those parameters reveal the robustness and stability of the hybrid ABR since OLR is not a comprehensive indicator of reactor performance. Unlike other digesters mentioned above, ABR configuration can provide the phase separation which causes increased protection against toxic materials and fluctuations in pH and temperature ( Regarding the application of ABR for various feedstocks, the range of OLR and COD removal efficiency was 6–20 kg COD m Furthermore, the thin stillage was filtered in this study to reduce solids content and prevent clogging the system. However, various solid concentration in wastewaters for treatment in ABRs are reported in the literature (8–24 g/L total solid) ( The sulfate removal efficiency in different configurations/stages is presented in The anaerobic digestion of thin stillage is not able to reduce the nutrient in thin stillage efficiently ( A novel ABR was developed and its performance was compared with the conventional ABR for bioenergy production from thin stillage. The significantly improved robustness and performance of the novel ABR was attributed to the enhanced phase separation, reduced washout and increased SRT. The hybrid ABR was very efficient in the treatment of thin stillage and achieved high COD and sulfate removal efficiency. Future research must focus on the optimization of reactor with respect to highest achievable OLR and investigating the effect of hydraulic retention time and recycle ratio. Due to the biogas production and the geometry of the 45 degree baffle, there would be mixing beneath the baffle. The extent of mixing, however should be investigated through trace study and CFD simulation. As a future plan, the hydrodynamics and mixing condition will be investigated through CFD simulation. This research was funded by Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: