Industrial classifier performance is evaluated in terms of size efficiency curve. Normally, the shape parameters of the efficiency curve, namely, sharpness index, cut size and by-pass fraction are obtained from the established empirical relationships involving design and process variables. A transformation of the feed size distribution through thus obtained efficiency curve simulates the coarse and fine product size distributions. This paper derives analytical expressions for product size distributions in terms of incomplete gamma function by considering the feed size distribution and efficiency curve defined in terms of Gates–Gaudin–Schumann (GGS) and Plitt functions respectively. The approach allows the simulation of product size distributions from parameters of GGS and Plitt functions.passing particle size, μm cut size, μm mean particle size of size modulus of GGS function, μm actual efficiency curve in terms of particle size corrected efficiency curve in terms of particle size feed distribution in density form feed distribution in terms of cumulative percent passing form a function of particle size defined in Eq. a constant defined in Eq. sharpness index distribution modulus of GGS function fine stream size distribution in density form fine stream size distribution in cumulative percent passing form by-pass fraction solid flow-split to coarse stream coarse stream size distribution in cumulative percent passing form gamma function Modeling of classifier performance involves the efficiency curve that represents the probability of particles in a specified size class reporting to one of the product streams and more commonly to the coarse stream. Typically, the three parameters—sharpness index, cut size and by-pass fraction represent the efficiency curve using a functional form. These parameters are evaluated for a plant operation through the established empirical relations. For example, Plitt model and Nageswararao model for hydrocyclone describe the relationships between efficiency parameters and operating and design variables ( In the following section, by considering the feed distribution in terms of Gates–Gaudin–Schumann (GGS) function and the efficiency function in terms of Plitt equation, convenient analytical expressions for product size distributions are developed. Efficiency curve describes recovery of particles to the coarse stream.  The discrete density function for classifier overflow, Eq. Eq. On similar lines, an analytical expression for coarse stream size distribution can be derived. The cumulative percent passing form of coarse stream size distribution can be represented as Further simplification of Eq. The proposed analytical expressions for classifier product size distributions have been validated with a few sets of data taken from the works of The proposed approach defines feed and product distributions as continuous functions of particle size. The formulation brings out explicitly the effect of feed parameters namely distribution modulus, The ability of Eqs. The flow-split of solid particles to the coarse stream can be calculated by integrating the denominator of Eq. Analytical expressions for classifier product size distributions are developed in terms of GGS and Plitt function parameters. The representations are validated with a few sets of experimental data from literature. The ability to fit these analytical expressions depends on how well the feed is defined in terms of GGS function. It is shown that the evaluation of finer product distribution is independent of by-pass fraction. The author acknowledges Prof. Mathai Joseph, Executive Director, TRDDC for his encouragement and for providing management support.