Air-dense medium fluidized beds for separating 50–6 mm coal have been used successfully in commercial applications in China. In this study, the authors studied magnetically stabilized fluidized beds for separating fine coal (6–1 mm). The magnetic stabilization enhances the separation by preventing back mixing of the feed solids. This paper discusses the principle of coal separation in magnetically stabilized fluidized beds, the experimental system, and the separation results.The quantities of coal being separated and the levels of separation required are increasing while the quality of raw coals is decreasing. Although coal is currently cleaned with the minimum of size reduction, fine particle processing, recovery, and tailings disposal are major problems. Furthermore, adequate water resources are not always available. For example, two-thirds of China's coal are located in arid areas. Hence, dry separation provides an alternative approach. Of the dry separation methods available, air-dense medium fluidized beds have been used to separate 50–6 mm coal efficiently (Chen, 1998). However, the bubbles in the air-dense medium fluidized beds especially worsen fine coal separation. Therefore, the lower size limit of the feed material is high. For the sake of overcoming this problem, the authors studied magnetically stabilized fluidized beds of air and magnetic particles (MSFB) for fine coal separation (Fan, 2000). The MSFB has good fluidization characteristics Based on studying many fluidization media, the authors chose the magnetic pearls recovered from coal-fired power plant cinder. The magnetic pearls are mainly composed of Fe The size distributions of three kinds of magnetic pearls are tabulated in The real density and bulk density of the magnetic pearls are shown in The magnetic characteristic of the magnetic pearls is important for magnetic stabilized fluidized beds. The specific magnetization susceptibility ( A graphical comparison of fixed bed, magnetically stabilized fluidized bed, and bubbling bed is shown in  The maximum expansion rate of a magnetically stabilized fluidized bed is much higher than that of the common fluidized bed. The authors think that this is mostly because of the arrangement of magnetic particles in chains following the field lines. The principle of solids separation is based on the pseudo fluid properties of a magnetically stabilized fluidized bed forming an uniform and stable gas–solid suspended substance. The density of a magnetically stabilized fluidized bed of magnetic pearls and coal fines (1–0 mm) is After fine coal is introduced into the magnetically stabilized fluidized bed, the light and heavy coal particles are separated by density difference according to Archimedes principle. The fine coal with the density lower than The experimental system is shown in In order to avoid the component parts of the fluidized bed disturbing the magnetic field, fluidization was carried out in a vessel made up of non-magnetic materials including the interconnecting pipes, screws and nuts. The fluidization vessel had an inside diameter of 100 mm, an effective height of 300 mm and was fitted with a stainless steel sintered distributor plate. The fluidized bed is placed in the center of electromagnet coils. The electromagnet coils were wound with 1.5-mm diameter enamel insulated wire, each 100 mm in height, 180 mm inside diameter and 900 circles. The magnetic field could be adjusted by changing both the number (1–3) of coils in operation and the electric current. The authors have conducted many experiments to separate fine coal (6–1 mm) by density difference in a magnetically stabilized bed. Here, 6–1 mm coal was separated, because 50–6 mm coal can be efficiently separated in common air-dense medium fluidized beds, and the 1–0 mm coal can be separated more efficiently by triboelectric static technology. Zouxian magnetic pearls (size range shown in The efficiency of separation can be represented by the Ecart probable ( The density at which 50% of the particles report to sinks is known as the effective density of separation, which is 1516 kg/m Magnetic pearls from coal-fired power plant cinder provide cheap and effective dense medium solids suitable for dry coal separation. The magnetic pearls magnetically stabilized fluidized bed can be used for the dry separation of 6–1 mm coal according to density difference. The experimental results reported here show that the separation efficiency is high. The authors would like to thank the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars and the National Natural Science Foundation of China for financing the project (No. 50025411 and No. 59974030).