Egg yolk-derived phosvitin phosphopeptides (PPPs) are considered to have a huge potential in nutraceutical and cosmetic industries for their high Ca2+ binding capacity and antioxidant activity. This work aimed to obtain information on effect of fertilization on conformation of phosvitin (PSV) and bioactivities of PPPs. After 12days of incubation, a significant decrease was seen in phosphorus content of PSV. The conformational and thermal analyses indicated that PSV underwent a conformational change during incubation, and the PSV on day 12 possessed a much more unfolded structure. Correspondingly, the PPPs derived from fertilized egg PSV exhibited stronger Ca2+ binding capacity (18.4ppm at 600mg/L) and antioxidant activities against DPPH radical, hydroxyl radical and lipid peroxidation than that of PPPs from unfertilized egg PSV. These results suggested that fertilized egg could be explored as a potential source of bioactive phosphopeptides.Recently, the bioactive peptides derived from food sources have received much more attention for their safer and milder activities ( In the egg yolk, phosvitin (PSV) is a principal phosphoprotein containing nearly 10% phosphorus ( Actually, the biological functions of phosvitin phosphopeptides (PPPs) prepared by tryptic hydrolysis have been greatly investigated ( Fertilized egg is a traditional dietary supplement in China and Southeast Asia. It has been considered to contribute to the immune function enhancement, especially for the pregnant women and elderly people ( The objectives of the present study were to (1) research the conformational change of PSV after fertilization and (2) determine the Ca Unfertilized and fertilized eggs were obtained from a local producer (Zudai Poultry Co., Wuxi, Jiangsu, China). Fertilized eggs were obtained on days 6 and 12 of incubation. All animal protocols in this study adhered to the Egg yolk PSV was isolated according to the method of In order to prepare dephosphorylated PSV (DPSV), partial dephosphorylation of PSV was performed by the method of The phosphorus content was determined by the molybdenum blue method according to the method of Circular dichroism (CD) spectra were used to determine the secondary structures of PSV. The CD spectra were scanned at the far UV range (250–190 Surface hydrophobicity ( Zeta-potential of PSV was measured according to Thermal properties of PSV were analyzed by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and thermo gravimetric analysis (TGA). DSC was carried out according to The proteolytic digests of PSV were prepared according to the method of Degree of hydrolysis (DH) was determined by using the pH-stat method according to the method of The analysis was performed basically according to the method of DPPH radical scavenging activity (RSA) was measured according to the method described by The hydroxyl radicals scavenging activity was measured with an electron spin resonance (ESR) spectrometer. 200 The lipid peroxidation inhibition activity of the PPPs was measured in a linoleic acid emulsion system according to the method described by The experiments were run in triplicate. The results are expressed as the mean In this work, phosphorus contents in PSV on days 0 (unfertilized), 6, 12, and DPSV were measured. As shown in PSV contains a high phosphorus content (nearly 10%) ( As shown in The result suggested that the dephosphorylation might induce the structural transformation from Surface hydrophobicity ( The increase in surface hydrophobicity of DPSV was because many hydrophilic phosphate groups have been removed during dephosphorylation ( The determination of zeta-potential could provide some important information on protein conformation ( The increase in negative charges of PSV day 12 might be due to the increase in hydrophobic amino acid side chains exposed. This trend was in agreement with the result of surface hydrophobicity ( In order to investigate the effect of fertilization on thermal properties of PSV, DSC and TGA analysis were carried out. Thermal profiles from DSC and TGA were shown in The denaturation temperature and enthalpy are the main parameters of DSC profile. As shown in As seen in In order to prepare PPPs, different PSV samples were reacted with trypsin at Now we all know that the limited enzymatic susceptibility of PSV is a major drawback to produce PPPs. In order to enhance the bioavailability of PSV, partial dephosphorylation was processed before tryptic hydrolysis ( The Ca Generally, phosphopeptides contain clusters of phosphoserines, which could bind calcium and other minerals, and thus prevent calcium from being precipitation ( Osteoporosis In this study, antioxidant activity of PPPs was evaluated against DPPH radicals, hydroxyl radicals and lipid peroxidation. As seen in As phosphopeptides could bind ionic iron, which was a strong catalyst of lipid oxidation, they exhibited high antioxidant activity against linoleic acid autoxidation ( During chick embryonic development, an effective antioxidant system is essential to protect embryo from attack by oxygen tensions ( Nowadays, the inhibition of oxidative reactions and free radicals formation are believed to play an important role in human health ( The conformational change of egg yolk PSV after fertilization and the biological activities of PPPs were investigated. During incubation period, a decrease in phosphorus content of PSV was observed. And the PSV underwent a conformational change with increasing incubation time, which made PSV more susceptible to enzyme attack. Correspondingly, the PPPs derived from fertilized egg exhibited a higher Ca This work was supported by National “Twelfth Five-Year” Plan for Science & Technology Support of China (Nos. 2012BAD37B06), the Doctor Candidate Foundation of Jiangnan University (JUDCF13005), and the graduate student innovation project of Jiangsu province (CXLX13_751).