Nanosized tungsten powder was synthesized by a thermal plasma process using ammonium paratungstate (APT) as the precursor. The injected precursor was vaporized in the plasma flame and the subsequent reduction of the vaporized precursor produced nanosized tungsten powder. The effects of H2 concentration, plasma torch power, and the flow rate of plasma gas on the product properties were investigated and particle size was determined. From the results, nanosized tungsten powder of particle size less than 50nm was obtained by the thermal plasma process.Tungsten is used in the production of numerous end use items. It is widely used for high temperature applications such as filaments in light bulbs, cathodes in high power lamps, and rocket nozzles in space crafts. Tungsten is also used in the manufacturing of superalloys and catalysts (hydrodesulfurization and hydrodenitrogenation) The manufacture of tungsten metal powder is a critical step in tungsten metal and alloy production, since the powder properties significantly affect the subsequent operations, such as pressing and sintering. Nanoscale tungsten powder promises to yield very hard, strong, and wear resistant materials via the press-sinter route. A small particle size changes the response during sintering, requiring lower temperatures and shorter times to attain dense but small grain size structures The main sources of tungsten are the high grade concentrates of wolframite and scheelite ores. Tungsten metal powder is produced from these minerals typically through the intermediate product of ammonium paratungstate (APT). In a subsequent process, tungsten oxides are obtained from APT by calcination in an oxygen bearing atmosphere between 560 Recently, an innovative plasma processing technique has been developed for the preparation of nanosized powders by vapor phase reaction In this work, the thermal plasma process was applied to produce nanosized tungsten powder using ammonium paratungstate (APT) as the precursor. Various processing parameters were tested to optimize the process for the production of nanosized tungsten powder. The effects of experimental variables such as H Ammonium paratungstate (99.9%) was used as the precursor and hydrogen (99.9%) was used as the reducing agent. Argon (99.9%) was used as the plasma gas. Argon was also separately passed through the powder feeder as the carrier gas as well as to keep the atmosphere in the container inert. Before delivering precursor into plasma flame, the reactor was heated by the plasma flame generated until its temperature reached a steady level. A mixture of Ar and H The decomposition of APT was examined by thermogravimetry (TG, Shimadzu TGA 50). The product was analyzed by XRD (Siemens D 5000) and the morphology and particle size analyses were done by TEM (Tecnai F30 TEM). The tungsten powder was analyzed using analytical scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Topcon sm-300) equipped with energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDS) allowing visualization of the distribution of elements. The grain size of the synthesized powder was calculated from the XRD pattern using the Scherrer equation APT was used as received and its particle size ranged from 10 Tungsten powder was produced by the addition of H From the results thus obtained for the direct reduction of APT, the thermal plasma process conducted in this work showed a considerable promise compared with other conventional processes, owing to the high temperature generated by the plasma flame to rapidly volatilize the APT powder and the rapid quenching of the product to yield nanosized W powder. Other factors that significantly affect the W formation were explored further, as described below. Experiments were conducted to evaluate the effect of the H To evaluate the effect of plasma torch power, experiments were conducted by varying it from 10 The particle size of W obtained at the plasma torch power of 13 To determine the effect of plasma gas flow rate, experiments were performed by varying the plasma gas flow rate from 29 The powder obtained by the thermal plasma process was subjected to hydrogen heat treatment to convert the minor amounts of WO Nanosized tungsten powder was obtained from APT by the chemical vapor synthesis (CVS) process in a thermal plasma reactor. The grain size of tungsten was less than 25 The authors extend special thanks to Prof. Patrick R. Taylor of Colorado School of Mines for his help with the selection, design and initial operation of the plasma reactor system. The authors are grateful to Dr. Young-Ugk Kim of Samsung SDI Co. Ltd. for his help with the analysis of powders. Thanks also go to Mr. Robert W. Byrnes of the University of Utah for his competent work with the design and repair of the experimental facilities.