The production of pure TiO2 gains a lot of interest because of its use in white pigment, ink and cosmetics as well as precursor for Ti metal production. Although titanium oxide is commonly distributed in accessory minerals in hard rocks and sediments (rutile, anatase and brookite), ores with high amounts of TiO2-phases are not common. Important minable Ti ore often contains FeTi oxides like ilmenite or pseudorutile. A current processing route to produce high purity TiO2 out of these phases involves a hydrometallurgical step with concentrated sulfuric acid that is applied at high temperatures to leach preconcentrated iron containing Ti-ore. To overcome this energy intense current technology a novel method, called TiMAG-process has been developed at IFAD over the last few years. This process uses nascent hydrogen generated by the reaction of a base metal like Al with diluted H2SO4 at moderate temperatures together with ilmenite concentrate in a specific milling and leaching process aiming a reduction of Ti4+ to Ti3+. Recent investigations reveal, that mineralogical and chemical properties of FeTi oxide concentrates can distinctively influence their leaching, changing the transfer rate of Ti into the liquid phase under identical process conditions between 50 and 80%. Two major facts have been identified and will be discussed in this paper based on tests with FeTi oxide samples from India and Mozambique revealing some different physico-chemical properties.A large number of commercial and proposed processes for providing TiO The recovery processes of TiO The reason for the application of pyrometallurgical pretreatment for the production of high purity synthetic TiO FeTiO Titanium dioxide can be prepared by digestion of the Ti-rich slag with sulfuric acid followed by ammonia hydrolysis of titanyl sulfate. The TiO Alternatively, a direct leaching process for Fe The iron/titanium separation is carried out after reduction of Fe The influence of the dissolution behavior of refractory oxide compounds by mechanical activation in the attritors, centrifugal and vibratory mills has been known since the 1940s ( In the last years a novel hydrometallurgical processing route for iron-containing titanium minerals (TiMAG) has been developed at IFAD ( By weakening the crystal structure of Fe With this new approach, it is possible for the first time to completely dissolve iron-containing titanium minerals with dilute acid at low temperature under normal atmospheric pressure. Subsequently iron and the added metal can be dissolved and precipitated in the form of easily separable sulfates at lower temperatures. After filtration a relatively pure TiO Based on these results, in a subsequent project questions should be answered, how the mineralogical composition (e.g. ratio ilmenite/pseudorutile), the stability of the crystals or grains and the presence of redox sensitive elements, which might be reduced by H The tests of the current study, carried out with two different ilmenite concentrates indeed have shown that the efficiency of the process seems to be strongly dependent on some specific factors. While tests on relatively pure ilmenite from India revealed a good Ti-recovery of around 80% under specific settings new tests with a Fe Contents of spurious elements like Mn Crystallinity and grain morphology Mineralogical composition of the Fe These tests had been carried out aiming to find out relevant factors for upscaling the TiMAG process and applying it to a larger variety of typical Fe For the evaluation of the TiMAG process two different Fe The bulk phase determination was caarried out with powder X-Ray diffraction (XRD) using a Panalytical X'Pert Powder diffractometer equipped with a Co X-Ray tube. To carry out the spatially resolved particle measurements a Cameca SXFIVE FE (Field Emission) electron probe (EPMA), equipped with 5 wave length dispersive (WDX) spectrometers was used. For optimal detection sensitivity the acceleration voltage was set 25 kV at 40 nA. The elements Mg, Ti, Cr, Mn, and Fe were analyzed using Kα lines. The reference standards were provided by ( For the milling of Fe The amount of 5 wt%, of Al-powder has been chosen for all experiments in one-step-milling processes, though this amount will not be efficient for a complete stoichiometric reaction. The reason for that setting is that a use of higher amounts of introduced Al-powder will foster the exothermic reaction in the mill and the subsequent leaching process. Tests with 8 wt% of Al did cause already milling problems, the milled mixture was reactive in contact with oxygen and would reach a temperature of up to 100 °C during leaching and caused premature hydrolysis. Nevertheless it already can be deduced from the results of the carried out tests, which reactions will appear. A possibility to raise the reaction rate could lie in a multistage milling process, adding Al-powder into several stages and in different setting up of leaching stages. Two milled concentrates hereafter called Fe  The XRD patterns of untreated (original) Fe In the leach residue of both milled concentrates pseudorutile could be detected, although in untreated Fe The BSE(Z) micrographs in Point analysis with EPMA ( In addition single grains were analyzed with respect to their Mn-content before and after leaching. While the sample Fe The Fe While the maximum Ti-recovery of Fe Leaching percentages increase with increasing milling time where the maximum percentages were achieved for both mixtures after a milling time of 60 min.  The most suitable solids concentration Fe For further experiments on leaching of Fe This is, what has to be expected if the main driving force is the reduction of Ti Reaction of Fe The amount of feeding material per charge to the milling process has a strong influence on the strain on material and the generation of agglomerates during milling and subsequently affects the leaching results. The strong effect of milling charge on Ti-recovery indicates, that the Fe The differences in Ti-recovery between both Fe A distinct difference between both materials is the amount of pseudorutile and the bulk Mn concentration. Pseudorutile (Fe Therefore it can be assumed that the amount of trivalent cations (Fe The analysis of single grains with EPMA confirms, that the Fe/Ti-oxides can be divided into two groups, one with a higher composition of ilmenite and a second with a higher composition of pseudorutile. These two groups are occurring in both materials. However, XRD proves, that the amount of the pseudorutile component in Fe The higher Mn concentration in the grains of Fe In addition to the fact that the crystallinity of Fe Since the compositions with respect to the relevant components would vary with ores, the minimum requirement of the stoichiometric ratio would be different from ore to ore. Thus the described results are specific to the two tested ores. Nevertheless they show effects that should be proven when treating different materials in further investigations to broaden the knowledge for a wider range of applications. The investigation of the two Fe The authors would like to express their gratitude to the