Liz Nickels leafs through past issues of Metal Powder Report to find out what was happening in the PM industry of the past.We reported the sad news that MPIF founder Kempton H Roll had passed away, age 92 ( He attended Carnegie Institute of Technology and graduated from Yale University in 1945 with a degree in metallurgical engineering and served in the Pacific during World War II as a bomb disposal officer with the US Navy. Roll wrote extensively about the technology of powder metallurgy (PM) and received the prestigious Powder Metallurgy Pioneer Award in 1992 and the Distinguished Service to Powder Metallurgy Award in 1988, both from MPIF. In 2007, to honor his lifetime accomplishments, MPIF created the Kempton H. Roll PM Lifetime Achievement Award which is presented every four years, the most recent being William F Jandeska Jr, the president of Midwest Metallurgical Ltd and project manager for the Center for Powder Metallurgy Technology, in 2016. What may be the largest titanium deposit was discovered by David Lowell, president of CIC Resources in Alto Parana, a location around about 100 km from Paraguay’s capital Ciudad del Este. According to the company, the deposit is in an area the size of London and reserves could total 21 billion tonnes of ore. In 2017 Uranium Energy Corp announced it had acquires Paraguay’s CIC Resources, including the titanium project, then at the exploration stage. More recently, specialty minerals company Mineral Technology LLC has reportedly developed a metallurgical recovery process of titanium from the deposit. The magazine was ‘put through the redesign mill’ according to editor Caroline Edser. ‘After ten years with basically the same design we decided MPR was due for a fresh new look. While the organization and content of the magazine remain broadly the same, the style has been completely updated.’ We also published a report authored by Randall M German and Robert G Cornwall, which predicted that the global market for powder injection molding (PIM) could triple by 2010, reaching a projected US$2–2.4 billion worldwide. This followed existing growth data, which estimated that the commercial value of the PIM parts market worldwide exceeded US$700 million in the year 2000, up almost 16% on 1999. According to a Research and Markets report a smaller growth of just over 10% is expected during the forecast period of 2019–2024. ‘Metal injection molding (MIM) now dominates the PIM industry, accounting for about two-thirds of PIM component manufacturers globally, and the majority of the sales and profits,’ the report said.