In order to obtain an efficient phase change material (PCM), emerging montmorillonite/stearic acid (Mt/SA) microcapsules containing SA core with Mt shell were designed and prepared via self-assembly of Mt in the SA emulsion. The Mt/SA microcapsules were coated with SiO2 from the hydrolysis and polycondensation of TEOS to enhance the structure stability. The microstructure, thermal properties and reliability of Mt/SA microcapsules were investigated via scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). The Mt/SA microcapsules presented sphere-like particles and had a size distribution from 10 to 30μm. The freezing latent heat of the Mt/SA microcapsules was 118J/g at 52.3°C. The energy storage rate of the Mt/SA microcapsules was faster compared to SA. The Mt/SA microcapsules had excellent structural stability, high energy storage capacity and stable energy storage and release performances. The energy storage performances of the Mt/SA microcapsules were superior to the Mt/SA composites prepared via vacuum impregnation. Excellent energy storage reliability and capability of the Mt/SA microcapsules have advantages for solar energy storage fields.Over the past few decades, the growing consumption of fossil fuels has brought about a heavy energy crisis and environmental pollution ( In recent years, varieties of PCM were utilized for latent heat thermal energy storage (LHTES) ( Microencapsulation applied in the thermal energy storage is wrapping the PCM with shell materials, which could contain more phase change compounds compared with the impregnation method. The common shell materials are mainly polymers, such as polyethylene ( In this study, the montmorillonite/stearic acid microcapsules (Mt/SA microcapsules) containing stearic acid core with montmorillonite shell were first designed and prepared via self-assembly of Mt in the SA emulsion. The microstructure, property and reliability of the Mt/SA microcapsules were investigated. Moreover, the thermal storage and release performances of Mt/SA microcapsules were tested and compared with Mt/SA composites prepared via vacuum impregnation. Montmorillonite (Mt) used was unmodified Na-montmorillonite from Zhejiang, China. The main chemical compositions of Mt included (wt.%): SiO For comparison, Mt/SA composites were obtained by absorbing SA into Mt via vacuum impregnation. 3.00 X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed using a DX-2700 X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation ( To evaluate the energy storage performance of the samples, the samples were placed in the test tube, and then it was kept at 80 The thermal stability of Mt/SA microcapsules was evaluated via 100 thermal cycles. Each thermal cycle comprised a melting and freezing of Mt/SA microcapsules. Mt/SA microcapsules were placed in a test tube at 90 The typical reflection at 1.2 In the FTIR spectrum of Mt ( In the spectrum of Mt/SA composite ( Mt/SA microcapsule suspensions were examined by an optical microscope ( The general morphologies of Mt, Mt/SA microcapsules and composites were investigated by SEM. Mt particles exhibited a lamellar morphology and possessed smooth surface without contamination ( Thermal properties of samples were measured via the DSC thermal analysis ( The phase change latent heats of Mt/SA microcapsules and composites were less than that of SA. The melting and freezing latent heats of were 110 and 118 The thermal properties of the Mt/SA microcapsules were compared with various PCMs in the literatures ( The temperature curves of the storage and release processes varied with time ( The thermal stability of the Mt/SA microcapsules was evaluated by property comparison ( From the DSC curves ( Based on the experiment results, the synthetic process and the interfaces of Mt/SA microcapsules and thermal conduction pathway in Mt/SA microcapsules were schematically depicted ( The montmorillonite/stearic acid (Mt/SA) microcapsules were prepared via self-assembly of Mt in the SA emulsion. The self-assembly of Mt on SA droplet surface by hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions formed the core-shell structure containing SA core with Mt shell. The SiO This work was supported by the