Energy conservation has emerged as the most prudent means of deferring capacity expansion of utility generation and power delivery infrastructure. This is particularly critical in the era of climate change coupled with erratic fuel prices and poor security of supplies. The dilemma, however, is the potential negative impact that conservation programs can have on the sustainable operation of utilities through lost revenues. For example, in South Africa the power utility Eskom recently (January 2010) requested for a 35% tariff increase (per annum for 3years). Their stated goal was to raise capital for new power generation plant and delivery infrastructure through the sale of energy. This problem has been identified in much of the developed world particularly over the past 20years. Various tariff models to decouple utility profitability from increased sales volumes have been proposed and legislated. Each solution, however, has advantages and shortcomings and their viability is often context dependent. In this paper a number of models that have been tried elsewhere are discussed. The author then suggests options that might be suitable for South Africa.Economic development has traditionally been linked to increased energy and material consumption. Power utilities constitute some of the major components of national economies. Like other businesses, utilities traditionally modeled their viability largely through maximizing of sales volumes. A well-managed utility has always been one that kept expanding the capacity to meet increasing consumer demand. The consequences of this model are now well documented. Sustainable development requires that economies grow but with low energy consumption per GDP. The challenge therefore is to decouple economic growth from increasing energy consumption. But how does one simultaneously promote energy conservation while not undermining a utility's revenue base? This is a dilemma that has puzzled regulatory authorities and utilities particularly over the past quarter of a century or so, especially in the USA ( Power tariffs in South Africa were historically based on a century-old British model that considered a complex array of factors. These include, among others, utility fixed asset value, historical and anticipated economic activity, impact of weather factors, existing and anticipated consumer base and a number of additional coefficients. In South Africa the utility (Eskom) goes before the National Energy Regulator of South Africa (NERSA) with projected costs and sales volumes. NERSA then proceeds to determine what rates the utility ought to charge its customers to cover those costs at what the regulator may regard to be a reasonable rate of return. This is the cost plus approach. There are also a number of other models. Guidelines are often legislated. The South African Electricity Regulation Act ( The dominant status of traditional monopoly utilities such as South Africa's Eskom has meant that they are best placed as the prime drivers of energy conservation programs if any credible level of success could be expected. But the dilemma has always been that the success of energy conservation programs could present a potential to hurt a utility's business through lost revenue. This paper examines the dilemma of energy conservation and utility revenue in the context of South Africa's electricity supply industry. A few models that have been tried elsewhere to address the problem are cited and suggestions are made as to what might be adoptable in South Africa. In South Africa the country's utility Eskom has, in recent years, been a very active player on the conservation front. The utility has operated a multi-pronged program that has included industry targeted DSM (demand side management) programs as well as financial incentives to fund motor efficiency research and efficient motor uptake in the industry ( Undoubtedly this is a very commendable effort on Eskom's part. However, in the absence of a well-coordinated over-arching government drive for energy efficiency, the sustainability of a program managed by a utility that has no control over the rest of the economy becomes questionable. Moreover these campaigns were largely initiated during a period that was marked by shortfalls in Eskom's generation capacity, which started with isolated failures in 2005. At the dawn of 2008 Eskom had a confirmed capacity shortfall of just over 10% and a regime of scheduled blackouts had to be enforced. It is therefore reasonable to assume that Eskom's conservation programs could have been motivated by a desire to meet capacity shortfalls in the short term rather than a fundamental paradigm shift from the traditional model. In fact while household and commercial power supplies had largely stabilized by the fourth quarter of 2008 through distributed open cycle gas turbines, Eskom continued to operate through a regime of interruptible power supply, by shutting down large industry through bilateral arrangements. One such arrangement is a special Eskom/Industry partner's program that is dubbed Power buyback and demand-market participation (DMP) ( In the wake of the generation shortfall Eskom embarked on an ambitious financial drive to fund a planned new capacity of coal power plant and transmission infrastructure that is expected to begin coming online by 2014. A series of applications have been submitted by the utility to Eskom has a history of stranded assets whereby the utility was forced to mothball several generation plants as a result of over-planning. Having been idle for decades these plants have subsequently become unserviceable and now require new capital injection before they can come online. Therefore the question that one is tempted to ask is whether in the face of such large capacity expansion and mounting overheads the utility would have the capacity (and will) to sustain their energy conservation spirit into the future. South African municipal authorities are responsible for the distribution of electricity and water within their jurisdictions. In the majority of cases they purchase their power from Eskom at wholesale prices and in turn resell to their consumer at a markup. The markup forms a part of their fiscal revenue. One notable observation is that these local authorities have hardly featured in any energy conservation drives and one cannot help but suspect that this could have been advised by a fear of revenue loss. The City of Cape Town, for example, has long drafted a proposed ambitious bylaw ( Decoupling of utility revenue from sales volumes is a desirable model for consumer tariffs ( Economically efficient electricity pricing is fundamental in ensuring sustainable energy efficiency program. But its importance is often under-estimated. There is, however, increasing recognition that in order to expect utilities to support the deployment of energy efficiency programs, something ought to be done to address their financial concerns. As a result, several authorities particularly in the US have been re-examining utility regulations and policies. In a 2007 report to Congress, the US Department of Energy (USDOE) listed rate design (tariff modeling) among the top 10 recommended mechanisms for enhancing energy efficiency ( As mentioned earlier, attempts to decouple utility profits from sales volumes have frequently encountered implementation challenges. In order to address these challenges several new models emerged. One such model involves an estimate or target of the per capita electricity consumption set by the Regulatory Authority. In other words the Regulator sets a maximum number of energy units that the utility is allowed to sell in a given year. It is estimated that having sold that number of units at a predetermined tariff the utility would break even. If the consumer base should use less than the estimate then the utility gets compensation that is equivalent to the shortfall in sales. However, if the utility should over supply then it only gets paid a maximum that was estimated by the Regulator. A model along similar lines is illustrated in the Californian case below. In California legislation enacted in 2001 included the following: “The Commission (California Public Utilities Commission or CPUC) shall ensure that errors in estimates of demand elasticity or sales do not result in material over or under-collections of the electrical corporations” ( A different model was adopted in Oregon State (  RPC decoupling involves the coupling of revenues to the number of customers by allowing the utility to recover a fixed amount of money per customer. The mechanism offers an incentive to a utility to meet customer energy services at the lowest cost. The utility profit is the difference between the allowed revenues and fixed costs incurred by the utility. On the other hand the statistical recoupling model seeks to minimize charges by letting the utility retain the risks associated with weather, economic growth (or the lack of) as well as customer growth as they were under the conditions that existed immediately before the adoption of the new model. The model largely uses statistical analysis of historical data that is deemed to have affected sales. All the three models removed the main utility concern namely the utility net—lost revenue disincentive. They also allowed them to recover the increased variable costs associated with sales growth while removing the incentive to promote indiscriminate consumption of energy. The authors, however, concede that each model had a shortcoming. The simple RPC compensated utilities for increased number of consumers but not for increased sales per customer due to economic growth. On the other hand the SR compensated utilities for load growth that resulted from economic growth but not for “undifferentiated” growth in the load. Detractors also further argued that since the RPC paid a fixed amount per customer there was a likelihood that the utility could develop a tendency to discourage the growth in the number of large customers whose cost of service that was above average. There is, however, no record of such an occurrence. In another effort In 2005 the South African Department of Minerals and Energy (DME) (now Department of Energy, DOE) published the Energy Efficiency Strategy ( In the meantime Eskom initiated a different set of programs ( One of the shortcomings of the Eskom programs was the lack of a mechanism to monitor the impact of the interventions. This was quite apparent in a keynote address by the Eskom Systems Operation and Planning Manager ( In November 2009 Eskom applied for tariff increases of 35% a year over the three-year second multi-year price determination (MYPD2) time frame. The initial request was a yearly increase of 45% ( On February 24, 2010, NERSA approved a nominal Eskom power tariff increase of 24.8% effective from April 1, 2010. Subsequent increases of 25.8% and 25.9% for 2011–2012 and 2012–2013, respectively, were also announced. Fundamentally, Eskom's most immediate goal is to raise capital for an estimated 10 On NERSA's part the regulator recognizes that energy efficiency and demand side management (EEDSM) does impact on the profitability of Eskom. In their 2004 regulatory policy document, section 4.9.7 Revenue Loss due to EEDSM states the following: “Mechanisms to compensate the REDs (Regional Energy Distributors) for net revenue loss due to EEDSM will be investigated and adopted by the NER in line with the regulatory regime” ( There are specific budget allocations of R5.4 In terms of energy efficiency this author has inquired from NERSA as to what would happen if Eskom sold more than the allocated energy units in a given year. NERSA responded, “We have penalties in place for under performance or over recovery on energy efficiency section.” However, looking at At the consumer level some effort has been made to discourage energy inefficiency through an increasing tariff block system. Under the system high-energy consuming households will pay a higher average charge per kilowatt-hour. It is a well known fact that power transmission losses increase with increased consumer load. This is particularly important for the Eskom grid which runs for thousands of kilometers to distant load centers such as Cape Town. Therefore distributed (and consumer based) generation constitutes an important energy efficiency component by cutting down on these losses and ought not to be treated in isolation. This author suggests additional alternatives in the form of incentives such as the creation of a legal framework to include net-metering for grid connected household generation such as PV. This would invite consumers as utility partners to look at tariff increases as possible opportunities for investment rather than perennial drains on their inelastic incomes. It has also been shown that consumers who engage in their own energy generation improve on their overall energy usage habits ( In a presentation by NERSA, Currently EEDSM only covers activities of utilities and not independent service providers. Additionally since there is no adequate mechanism for compensating municipal utilities for revenue loss the program is aimed mainly at load shape modifying activities such as reduced peak demand but not reducing the total energy consumed. In the case of Eskom for example the expenditure based on the EEDSM project plan was included in their recent tariff application to NERSA. But with the new proposal still requiring that the independent energy efficiency service providers submit their proposals to Eskom a potential deterrent to the participation of the private investor in the electricity supply sector remains in place. President Zuma's remark that, “Eskom cannot continue to be a player and a referee,” echoed a sentiment across the South African electricity industry stakeholder community and clearly underscores this problem ( In the new era of unpredictable fuel prices, erratic security of supply and climate change it is imperative that concerted efforts are made to conserve energy. The dominant status of traditional monopoly utilities such as South Africa's Eskom has meant that they are best placed as the prime drivers of energy conservation programs. However, concerns by utilities that energy conservation programs could negatively affect their financial sustainability are well founded and ought to be addressed if any success is to be expected. Several authorities, particularly in the US, have historically tackled the problem differently and with different outcomes. The primary aim is to decouple a utility's profits from sales volumes without tampering consumer incentive to conserve. There is, however, no universal consensus as to the exact model that must be used. In this paper a number of models have been highlighted. It has been shown that each model has certain advantages as well as shortcomings and the most suitable model would depend on a particular socio-economic context. In South Africa government policy supports energy efficiency and efforts are underway to devise appropriate tools for implementation. The country is, however, under severe capacity constraints and is currently caught between the imperative to conserve electric energy and the urgent need to raise capital for construction of new generator plant and infrastructure. It is also unfortunate that Eskom's medium term demand projections do not include the impacts of EEDSM and therefore energy efficiency is not depicted as constituting increased generation capacity. EEDSM is particularly effective when applied at the consumer end as it results in savings through deferred generation and transmission capacity. Additionally the timelines are drastically reduced from the traditional 7–10