Fine particle flotation is carried out in a flotation column with a 19-channel ceramic membrane sparger. The microbubble generation is controlled by the shear flow in the membrane channels. Bubbles in the flotation column are photographed via a high speed video camera. Gas holdup and quartz recovery is investigated under different operating conditions. Gas holdup in the flotation column firstly increases and then decreases with the increase in superficial gas velocity. Similar trend in gas holdup is also found by increasing cross flow velocity. Larger particle concentration in the feed results in smaller gas holdup, while the gas holdup positively changes with collector concentration. The quartz recovery is strongly influenced by gas holdup and bubble size. Similarly, the recovery firstly increases and then decreases when increasing superficial gas velocity and cross flow velocity. The collector concentration plays a more obvious role in flotation recovery at high superficial gas velocity.Froth flotation has been successfully used for separating or concentrating minerals and other particulate materials, which is achieved based on different surface hydrophobicity of particles. The particles with a typical range between 20 μm and 150 μm can be effectively beneficiated by froth flotation The flotation efficiency of fine particles has been enhanced by the use of microbubbles or nanobubbles to increase the bubble-particle collision and attachment probability. Santana et al. A variety of microbubble generation methods have been developed for fine particle flotation, e.g., electroflotation, dissolved-air flotation, hydrodynamic cavitation and dispersed-air flotation. Electroflotation (or electrolytic flotation) has good controllability of bubble size, but low throughput and high energy consumption make it suitable for small-scale applications Porous ceramic membranes are increasingly being used in a broad range of separation processes. The cross flow filtration mode is usually operated in ceramic membrane modules. Cross flow on the membrane surface continually sweeps away particles to reduce the flux-decline, which just meets the desire for shear flow on porous surface. The main shapes of ceramic membrane elements from several manufacturers are round and hexagonal with various channel diameters. A multi-channel configuration provides a larger membrane packing density than a single tubular element of the same length The objective of this study is to investigate the flotation performance of microbubbles controlled by the shear flow on large area membrane. The multi-channel ceramic membrane is used as the gas sparger in the flotation system. Microbubbles can be controlled by the shear flow in the channels. The performance of the membrane sparger is first compared with that of a Venturi tube. The effect of different operating conditions on gas holdup and flotation recovery is investigated.  Quartz, a primary gangue mineral, coexists with a variety of minerals Gas holdup directly determines the quantity of floating minerals attached to the bubbles. Differential pressure method is used to measure the gas holdup at the upper part of the flotation column. Gas holdup ( The steps of the flotation process are as follows: firstly, 100 g quartz sample is added into a conditioning tank with 10 L water, and the slurry is stirred for 5 min at 200 rpm. Then, N, N-Dimethyldodecylamine is added into the tank and stirred again for 5 min. After that, the slurry feed is pumped into the column in a batch mode. Then, microbubbles start to be generated. As the microbubbles enter the column, the slurry level rises gradually. When the froth is formed in the top, we begin to collect the concentrate and tailing samples. The froth collection lasts for 2 min. The collected quartz particles are filtered, dried and weighed for recovery calculation. The comparison of gas holdup between Venturi tube and membrane sparger is presented in For the membrane sparger and the Venturi tube, gas holdup is increased by increasing superficial gas velocity and cross flow velocity, but the membrane sparger gives much larger increase in gas holdup than the Venturi tube. The 19-channel membrane sparger provide large area (0.12 m In Gas holdup, one of the important hydrodynamic parameters, significantly affects the flotation performance. It is mainly determined by operating parameters such as superficial gas velocity and reagent concentration From The effect of cross flow velocity in a membrane channel on gas holdup is shown in The histograms of gas holdup with solid particle concentration at different superficial gas velocities are presented in The effect of collector concentration on gas holdup is shown in  It is reported that flotation rate constant is proportional to bubble surface area flux  The effect of collector concentration on quartz recovery is shown in A flotation column is combined with a multi-channel ceramic membrane sparger to prepare a large number of microbubbles for fine quartz flotation. Compared with a Venturi tube, the ceramic membrane sparger has larger gas holdup and recovery of fine quartz particle. This is attributed to strong fluid shear in the ceramic membrane channels and large porous area for gas dispersion. Gas holdup firstly increases and then declines with the increase in superficial gas velocity, and similar trend is also observed for the effect of cross flow velocity. At high superficial gas velocity and cross flow velocity, bubble coalescence plays a role in the formation of large bubbles, resulting in the reduction of gas holdup. Gas holdup is inversely changed with the increase in particle concentration, while it can be enlarged at large collector concentration. For the quartz flotation recovery, there are optimal values of superficial gas velocity and cross flow velocity. The larger collector concentration plays a better role in improving recovery when high superficial gas velocity is used. The financial supports from