The Laboratory of Metallurgy of the National Technical University of Athens has developed and patented a novel integrated hydrometallurgical method, suitable to treat low-grade nickel oxide ores efficiently and economically. It involves heap leaching of the ore by dilute sulphuric acid at ambient temperature, purification of the leach liquor and recovery of nickel and cobalt by electrowinning. A typical composition of the pregnant solution produced from heap leaching is the following: Ni2+
                     =5g/L, Co2+
                     =0.3g/L, Fe3+
                     =23.0g/L, Al3+
                     =6.0g/L, Cr3+
                     =1.0g/L, Mn2+
                     =1g/L and Mg2+
                     =8g/L. The proposed hydrometallurgical process for nickel recovery from real sulphate heap leach liquors consists of the following six (6) unit operations:
                        
                           (1)
                           Removal of iron, aluminium and chromium, as easily filterable crystalline basic sulphate salts of the jarosite–alunite type, at atmospheric pressure, by chemical precipitation at pH: 3.5 and 95°C.
                        
                        
                           (2)
                           Cobalt, manganese and magnesium extraction over nickel by Cyanex 272 at pH: 5.5, T: 40°C, with 20% extractant concentration and stripping of the loaded organic phase at T: 40°C with diluted H2SO4 (4M).
                        
                        
                           (3)
                           Nickel concentration by solvent extraction using Cyanex 272 at pH: 7.5, T: 40°C, with 10% extractant concentration and stripping of the loaded organic phase by nickel spent electrolyte (55.45g/L Ni) at T: 40°C with diluted H2SO4 (2M).
                        
                        
                           (4)
                           Nickel electrowinning from sulphate solutions, using stainless steel as cathode and Pb–8%Sb as anode. The pH of the electrolyte (10g/L H3BO3, 75.95g/L Ni2+ and 130g/L Na2SO4) was adjusted at 3.5 and at 60°C, while the current density was kept constant at 20mA/cm2.
                        
                        
                           (5)
                           Cobalt and manganese extraction over magnesium by Cyanex 302 at pH: (5.0), T: 40°C, with 20% extractant concentration and stripping of the loaded organic phase at T: 40°C with diluted H2SO4 (1M).
                        
                        
                           (6)
                           Removal of magnesium by chemical precipitation (as brucite), using Ca(OH)2 as neutralizing agent, at atmospheric pressure, pH=10 and 25°C.Removal of iron, aluminium and chromium, as easily filterable crystalline basic sulphate salts of the jarosite–alunite type, at atmospheric pressure, by chemical precipitation at pH: 3.5 and 95 Cobalt, manganese and magnesium extraction over nickel by Cyanex 272 at pH: 5.5, Nickel concentration by solvent extraction using Cyanex 272 at pH: 7.5, Nickel electrowinning from sulphate solutions, using stainless steel as cathode and Pb–8%Sb as anode. The pH of the electrolyte (10 Cobalt and manganese extraction over magnesium by Cyanex 302 at pH: (5.0), Removal of magnesium by chemical precipitation (as brucite), using Ca(OH) About 60% of the current worldwide production of nickel is derived from sulphide ores and the rest comes from nickel laterites ( Nickel laterite ores can be broadly characterised as dry-land (e.g. deposits found in Greece, Albania, Western Australia) or tropical (e.g. deposits found in Cuba, New Caledonia, Brazil) ( Greece is the only EU country with extensive but low-grade nickel laterites. They mainly occur as limonitic laterites and, to a lesser extent, as serpentinic laterites. Nickeliferous limonite is comprised of nickel bearing ferric oxides in deposits formed from ultrabasic rocks. The Greek laterites are unique in the world in that they are sedimentary and have originated by transport and sedimentation of laterite-derived material, generated by weathering of ultramafic rocks ( The Greek limonitic laterites have been exploited to produce ferronickel via a pyrometallurgical route. This involves pre-reduction of the ore in rotary kilns, reduction smelting in electric furnaces, and upgrading of the raw ferronickel in a converter to the final 20–25% Ni grade ( The bulk of the work on sulphuric acid leaching of laterites concerns pressure leaching. However, because of the problems encountered during commissioning and operation of the modern Australian plants (Murrin Murrin, Cawse and Bulong), atmospheric pressure leaching has recently received much closer consideration ( The world mineral industry is experiencing an unprecedented interest in nickel–cobalt extraction from laterite ores through acid leaching. However, the proposed purification-down stream processes differ substantially. In particular, quite different strategies for the separation of impurities such as zinc, copper and, more particularly, manganese from nickel and cobalt are used by each project. The Laboratory of Metallurgy of the National Technical University of Athens has developed and patented a novel integrated hydrometallurgical method, suitable to treat low-grade nickel oxide ores efficiently and economically ( This paper describes a hydrometallurgical process for nickel recovery, by electrowinning, from purified sulphate heap liquors ( The loaded Cyanex 272 organic phase is then stripped by diluted sulphuric acid. Subsequently, cobalt and manganese are extracted from magnesium by Cyanex 302. The loaded with cobalt and manganese organic phase is stripped by diluted sulphuric acid. The resulting solution contains only magnesium, which must also be removed in order for the purified barren solution to be recycled to the heap leaching stage. Magnesium can be removed by hydrolytic precipitation, as easily filterable crystalline precipitate, at ambient temperature, using calcium hydroxide as a neutralizing agent. The combined stream of cobalt and manganese, after stripping the loaded Cyanex 302, can be treated with diluted NaOH for Co and Mn precipitation as hydroxides. After re-leaching the mixed precipitate with ammonia/ammonium carbonate solution, the manganese remains in the residue. Cobalt can be electrowon or precipitated. The leach liquor, which was used during experimentation, had been produced by heap leaching of Greek nickel oxide ore with dilute sulphuric acid (1 Metal ions concentration was determined by atomic absorption spectrophotometer (Perkin Elmer 4100). The analysis of Fe (Fe The produced precipitates as well as the nickel cathodes were mineralogically analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD), using a Bruker D8-Focus diffractometer with nickel-filtered CuKα1 radiation (=1.5405 Their morphology was also examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a Jeol 6380LV Scanning Electron Microscope. Experimental conditions involved 15 In the first stage, iron, aluminium and chromium were removed as basic sulphate salts of the jarosite–alunite type by chemical precipitation. The runs were conducted in a 5 The extractant Cyanex 272, registered by Cyanamid Canada, was kindly supplied by the Holland branch of the company, Cytec Holland. The reactive component C  The extractant Cyanex 302 was also supplied by the Cytec Holland. The reactive component is C  All batch experiments were conducted in a 500-mL five-necked, round bottomed split reactor, which was fitted with a glass stirrer, a vapour condenser, a thermometer and a pH electrode. The two phases (organic and aqueous) were contacted by rapid stirring and the pH was controlled by small additions of 5 The electrolytic cell was a 1000 Magnesium was removed by chemical precipitation in order to allow the recycling of the purified barren solution in the leaching stage. The precipitation of gypsum/brucite mixed precipitate was carried out in 5 In the framework of the ‘‘HEap Leach LAteriteS’’ (HELLAS), a new process of leach liquors purification was invented relating to the removal of iron, aluminium and chromium, as the existing methods were not satisfactory. The process relates to the precipitation of the above metals as crystalline, easily filterable chemical precipitates of the jarosite/alunite type, at atmospheric pressure without alkali addition ( The jarosite–alunite group of isostructural minerals is described by the general formula M(Fe The X-ray diffraction data of the above mixed precipitate, after drying at 110 Scanning electron microscopy with X-ray energy dispersive analysis (EDS) was performed to gain further knowledge of the mineralogical species contained in the mixed precipitate and their morphology. The evaluation was carried out by secondary and backscattered electrons (BSE) mode. The jarosite–alunite particles appeared as spherical fine-grained particles, dispersed among crystals of bassannite. As shown in The application of the Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP) test ( After the removal of iron, aluminium and chromium, as easily filterable crystalline basic sulphate salts of the jarosite–alunite type, by chemical precipitation, the leach liquor contains 0.33 The factors studied and their levels for cobalt, manganese and magnesium extraction over nickel and for nickel concentration by Cyanex 272, as well as for cobalt and manganese extraction over magnesium by Cyanex 302, are shown in On the basis of conclusions drawn from preliminary experiments, the variables and levels chosen to study the stripping of cobalt, manganese and magnesium from the loaded Cyanex 272 organic phase, the stripping of nickel from the loaded Cyanex 272 by nickel spent electrolyte, as well as the stripping of cobalt and manganese from the loaded Cyanex 302, are given in According to the results of As Cyanex 272 proved to be an efficient extractant for the simultaneous extraction of cobalt and magnesium in the presence of nickel from sulphate solutions, a McCabe–Thiele diagram was constructed for Co As the The data presented in The McCabe–Thiele diagram for nickel stripping, by synthetic nickel spent electrolyte (55.45 Cobalt and manganese could be extracted in the organic phase by Cyanex 302, in the presence of magnesium ( Cobalt and manganese were efficiently stripped from the loaded Cyanex 302 by diluted sulphuric acid ( The operating conditions for the simultaneous extraction of cobalt manganese and magnesium, from nickel sulphate solution, by Cyanex 272, as well as their stripping by diluted sulphuric acid were: Solvent: 20% (v/v) Cyanex 272 in Exxsol D-80 with 5%TBP Aqueous phase: 0.33 Extraction stages: 3 Stripping stages: 3 Temperature: 40 Strip feed: Diluted sulphuric acid (H Flow rate (mL/min) At those conditions, cobalt, manganese and magnesium extraction by Cyanex 272, in the presence of Ni The corresponding operating conditions for the extraction of cobalt and manganese, from magnesium sulphate solution, by Cyanex 302, as well as for cobalt and manganese stripping by diluted sulphuric acid were: Solvent: 20% (v/v) Cyanex 302 in Exxsol D-80 with 5%TBP Aqueous phase: 1.31 Extraction stages: 2 Stripping stages: 2 Temperature: 40 Strip feed: Diluted sulphuric acid (H2SO4: 0.5 Flow rate (mL/min): aqueous feed: 20.57; solvent feed: 10.29; strip feed: 5.15 At those conditions, cobalt and manganese extraction by Cyanex 302, in the presence of Mg The operating conditions for the extraction-concentration of nickel from sulphate solution by Cyanex 272, as well as nickel stripping by nickel spent electrolyte acid, were: Solvent: 10% (v/v) Cyanex 272 in Exxsol D-80 with 5%TBP Aqueous phase: 3.6 Extraction stages: 2 Stripping stages: 3 Temperature: 40 Strip feed: Ni2+ spent electrolyte (55.45 Flow rate (mL/min): aqueous feed: 20.57; solvent feed: 8.57; strip feed: 3.57 At those conditions, nickel extraction by Cyanex 272 reached 99.5%. Nickel stripping by nickel spent electrolyte reached 99.4% (75.95 As it was mentioned above the electrolyte contained 10 The orientation of the nickel deposits was examined using XRD analysis and a typical pattern is given in The surface morphology of the deposits was examined by scanning electron microscopy. Under the experimental conditions applied, the chemical precipitation of magnesium with the use of Ca(OH) The above solid product, which was crystalline and easily filterable, was natural white and it presented good properties (particle size, whiteness, specific surface BET, oil adsorption, solubility in water, specific conductivity, pH, weight loss at 105 Based on the data presented in this paper, a complete hydrometallurgical process for nickel recovery, by electrowinning, from real sulphate heap leach liquors, is suggested. The process comprises of several stages. The conclusions from the testwork for each stage are presented below: Iron, aluminium and chromium were precipitated by 99.9%, 98.9% and 99.1%, respectively at 95 Cobalt, manganese and magnesium were extracted over nickel by Cyanex 272. The loaded with cobalt, manganese and magnesium organic phase was stripped with diluted sulphuric acid. Nickel concentration was carried out by solvent extraction. The loaded with nickel Cyanex 272 was stripped with nickel spent electrolyte in order to produce a solution suitable for nickel electrowinning. Nickel electrowinning was carried out at constant current density of 20 Cobalt and manganese were extracted over magnesium by Cyanex 302. The loaded with cobalt and manganese organic phase was stripped with diluted sulphuric acid. Magnesium was removed by chemical precipitation, at ambient temperature, as mixed precipitate composed of well-crystallized gypsum (CaSO