Homogenization piles are largely used in the mining industry for variability reduction in the head grades of the ore feeding the processing plants. Various methods are used when designing homogenization piles, and most fail to incorporate the in situ grade variability that is intrinsic to the mineral deposit. The methodology proposed here combines longitudinal piles and geostatistical simulations to emulate the in situ variability as well as the reclaimed pile grade variability. A blending/homogenization simulator for longitudinal stockpiles has been developed, where the input to the algorithm consists of the pre-defined mining sequence, and has been applied to several simulated scenarios of the mineral deposit. This sequence is re-arranged by the algorithm, which selects the blocks that will form the pile of each simulated block model, and simulates the operation of the stacking and reclaiming equipment. The output sequence of the algorithm reflects the quality fluctuation of the grade after the blending/homogenization and reclamation. Using this methodology one can evaluate, within a certain time period, the expected grade variability for various pile sizes as well as the internal grade variability when a given pile is reclaimed. Results from a case study at two large iron mines operated by Vale S.A. proved the usefulness and functionality of the method. It is demonstrated that the rate of variability decreases as the pile size increases. It is also demonstrated that the internal grade variability decreases for a given pile size, when the number of layers in the pile is increased.Blending and homogenization piles can be used as part of a quality control system to reduce ore grade variability in the material fed into a processing plant. For this system to perform properly, a measure of the quality and variability of the material forming the piles is required, taking into account the economic, geometric and statistical parameters. The characteristics of the mined ore may vary according to the heterogeneity of its constituents. This The optimization of the homogenization system is given by the geometric features of the pile (width and length), which allows the standard deviation of the grades feeding the processing plant to be satisfied. It is required to find a pile model that suits both the dimension of the storage yard design/equipment (economic aspect) and with an acceptable grade variability (process aspect). Some previous examples involving blending and homogenization piles can be found in In this paper we report the results of a study developed for two iron ore deposits located in the Iron Quadrangle in Brazil. The deposits are part of the Vargem Grande complex and are operated by Vale S.A. The aim is to investigate the One of the most relevant parameters to be controlled in an iron mine is the silica content in the product. This parameter was chosen as it exhibits an erratic behavior (high variability) which needs to be kept under strict control below a maximum limit. The principles of geostatistical simulation were originally presented by The simulation of an attribute Z using turning bands conditioned to the original data is performed in two stages both in the Gaussian space. The final generated values are back-transformed to the original variable space. In the first stage a non-conditional simulation is run providing a Gaussian simulated value at every grid node reproducing the covariance model of these data. Next, the values obtained at each grid node are conditioned to the Gaussian data using Eq. More details on the method are presented in A 3D grade block model was built using the TBA, where the algorithm generates multiple equiprobable scenarios for the spatial distribution of the grades of SiO The steps involved are: generation of multiple equiprobable 3D models using the TBA for both deposits; sequencing the simulated 3D block model according to the 2004 production schedule used at each mine; emulating the feeding of the homogenization piles (combining the blocks mined at the two mines); calculate the variability among the piles for a given selected pile size for each 3D simulated grade block model; calculate the variability during the reclamation of each pile formed (variance of the grades of each slice reclaimed). To implement the algorithm, which emulates the homogenization piles, some considerations are necessary: the model is based upon the configurations used for longitudinal piles; the geometry of half cones at the edges of the piles is not considered; stacking of the material is performed along both directions of the moving stacker; the stacking and reclaiming rates of the ore are constant while the equipment is moving; the material is reclaimed perpendicular to the major axis of the pile; the reclaimer cuts one meter thick slices on each pass; segregation of the material was disregarded in the pile; the particles within a mined block are infinitely small as compared to the total mass of the block. According to (i), the algorithm can emulate chevron, windrow and chevron-windrow homogenization piles. For the sake of simplification, the volume of a pile is approximated by a triangular prism, which is schematically illustrated in The effects on the results by the simplifications of the algorithm are reported in For the calculations, it is mandatory that the database contains the mass and volume of each block. Assigning coordinates to each block ( The blocks selected to form a given pile have their grades simulated by the TBA. Each block grade differs from another, and also differs from the global mean of the blocks calculated for the entire year of 2004. By grouping various blocks and forming a pile, the average grade of each pile is closer to the global annual mean when compared to the grade of each individual block within the pile. This phenomenon of variance reduction is well known among geostatisticians and it is referred to as the volume–variance relationship ( Other aspects controlling the fluctuation of the average grades from multiple piles are: the larger the pile size — the smaller the variance of the average grade of each pile around the yearly mean grade; as a consequence, an extremely large pile that is (hypothetically) perfectly homogenized, having being formed by blocks mined during a certain period, will have zero variance around the mean grade of this mining period (in theory). However, the larger the pile — the better the blending process (since the mean grade of the pile will approach the mean grade of the analyzed period) will be; and from an operational perspective, problems tend to grow in difficulty as the size of the equipment involved increases. The “optimal” pile size is the minimum size which will deliver the ore to the plant with grades varying within a pre-determined and acceptable grade interval. In order for the algorithm to calculate the inter-pile grade variability, it is necessary to consider the following parameters: Initial mass: this is the smallest size of the homogenization pile tested. The adopted value must be greater than the lowest mass (from one block for instance) in the input file. Increase of mass: indicates the difference between the sizes of the piles analyzed. The value of this parameter must be greater than the lowest mass of the input file, and less than the sum of the mass of all blocks included in the input file. Final mass: this is the largest pile mass to be analyzed. The adopted value must be less than the sum of the masses of all blocks comprising the input file. The first step is to calculate the reduction of variability. To find the acceptable grade interval we need to calculate a weighted mean using all blocks from the first geostatistical simulation, according to: Next, we need to calculate the weighted mean grade of each pile (for the same simulation) according to: For each pile formed, the squared difference between the pile grade and mean grade of one selected simulation (T Most commercial agreements used in the iron ore mining industry establish limits for the chemical species associated with the contaminants. Mine planning and mine sequencing aims to keep contaminants within specified limits (blending the run-of-mine materials from multiple mine faces or benches). The benefits of using homogenization piles include the possible use of blocks previously considered inappropriate (waste) in the sequence of mining without penalty (by delivering ore grades within accorded specifications). The algorithm has a function called “Locate” which allows us to spatially identify blocks within a given homogenization pile to determine if their grade content is outside these specifications. A homogenization pile is considered out of specification when its grade range (minimum and maximum) does not include the expected (contracted) grade. This function allows the detection of piles whose values exceed the allowed tolerable range, and maps the blocks forming these specific piles. This information can be used to redefine a mining sequencing in order to meet targeted grades. This process requires the input file with X, Y and Z coordinates for each mined block forming the lot and produces a report containing: identification of the pile with grades out of the allowed range; mass of the pile; grade of the pile out of specification; coordinates X, Y and Z for the first block in the pile; number of blocks forming the pile. There are two situations where a pile can have a grade beyond the specification limits. The first case is where the band of uncertainty is above the maximum acceptable grade, and the algorithm will return the lowest simulated grade of the pile (used to control the contaminant grades). In the second case, the band of uncertainty is below the minimum acceptable grade and the algorithm returns the highest simulated grade of pile (applied to control ore grades). In homogenization piles each layer can be regarded as a stratum. When a complete slice of equal thickness is cut from the pile it includes all strata in correct ratio and thus the between-strata variance is eliminated from the variance of the lot mean. Only the within-stratum variances have to be considered. The question is: how this within strata variance can be calculated without sampling the grades feeding the pile? This means if there is not a mine already in operation how could the answer to the previous question be answered. Note, we have no access to the grades feeding the blending system. The first step when calculating the number of blocks required to form the homogenization pile is to obtain the degree of homogenization within the pile, as well as the weighted mean of its contents, using Eq. The algorithm is based upon the assumption that the stacker travels at a constant speed, and the discharge flow remains the same along the whole pass when a layer is formed. The ratio between these two values (speed and discharge) should be specified by the user along with its unit (m Conditional geostatistical simulations (TBA) had been applied to generate 50 equiprobable scenarios of SiO  Combining the block sequence from the two mines provide the grades that will feed the blending piles. This is displayed as a time series in Checking the fluctuation of the grades plotted in To emulate how the homogenization piles can reduce the variability, a simulation process was defined with the following parameters: initial pile mass of 30 final pile mass of 270 increments of mass between piles tested: 20 All 50 simulated block models were passed through the emulation algorithm. Using the block grades for each of the 50 simulated models (each curve relates to a simulated grade model), Note from   To illustrate the problem, let us assume that the acceptable range for silica composition in the ore is between 0% and 5% (these values were arbitrarily chosen in order to properly illustrate the algorithm). Any pile whose possible grade interval does not include the specification grade is marked (as in number of the pile in time sequence; expected mass of the pile to be formed; real mass of the pile formed; grade that escapes specifications (out of the band defined in this example being between 0% and 5% silica); coordinates X, Y and Z of the first lot of the pile; number of lots which form the pile.  Despite other piles being above the upper limit of the band of uncertainty (5%), it is possible (probable) that the grades of these piles are actually within the established limits. The probability of exceeding this limit can be calculated, and a risk factor defined. At this specific mining site, where the case study was developed, a homogenization pile of approximately 200 To analyze the internal variability of the grades within each one of the homogenization piles, the process was emulated for a different number of layers. The following parameters were used: a total mass of the homogenization pile of 210 the volume of material discharged by the stacker along each meter of its trajectory is 4.5 bulking factor of the material: 1.3; angle of repose for the material: 35°; width of the pile base: 38 initial number of layers: 1; increasing steps in the number of layers: 5; final number of layers: 150. For this analysis, the pile emulator mimics the heterogeneity distribution, Although we had set the algorithm to calculate the reclaimed variability for up to 150 layers, it was noticed that at 51 layers the variability had asymptotically reached its minimum. Theoretically, an infinitely good blending effect can be achieved by increasing the number of layers N, although in a practical situation this ideal may not be economical. As the number of layers increases, the correlation in material quality and variability between adjacent layers also increases until a point is reached where any further increase in N is completely offset ( In this case study, after 35 layers the gain in reduction of variability is not significant, however by increasing the number of layers, the length of the stack can be reduced considerably. Thus, an adequate solution would be the use of equipment with a higher flow discharge to form 210 The operation of a homogenization system brings different gains in reducing variability of the grades of SiO The largest reduction in variability in a homogenization system is associated with an increase in the mass of the pile (inter-pile grade variability). However, the number of layers should also be considered in the formation of a homogenization pile, as a pile with a high mass but not properly formed will not bring the expected reduction in variability (even a reduction of inter-pile variability could not be obtained). The effect of homogenization is best obtained by using the greatest number of pile layers, keeping in mind that after a certain number of layers, the reduction in variability is practically nil. The model presented in this study is innovative since it can predict a reduction of variability in the ore used to feed the processing plant, as well as its expected level of uncertainty, using as an input to a geostatistically simulated grade model which reproduces the characteristics of the mineral deposit. The