With over 50years of research in granulation technology, however more research is required to elucidate this widely applicable technology. Wetting phenomena could influence redistribution of individual ingredients within a granule according their solubility and also could affect the drying processes. Binder selection for a particular system is quite often empirical and dependent on the skills and experience of the formulator. Hand squeeze test was and still the main way for determination of wet granulation end point, but it is subjected to individual variation. It depends mainly on operator experience, so it is not possible to be validated. Literature reveals a variety of advanced monitoring techniques following up different wet massing stages. Torque measurement has been proved to be the most reliable control method as its tight relation to mass resistance. Many reports showed successful applications of mixing torque rheometer (MTR) for monitoring the wet massing procedure and scale up in addition to some preformulation applications. MTR as a new approach allows formulators to select a liquid addition range where the granule growth behavior is more predictable.Owing to their wide variation in physicochemical and mechanical properties, pharmaceutical powders frequently exhibit poor flowability and compactability ( Granulation is applicable in a wide variety of industries including mineral processing, agricultural products, detergents, pharmaceuticals, foodstuffs and chemicals. In the chemical industry alone it has been estimated that over 60% of products are manufactured as particulates ( With over 50 Wet granulation is a way for size enlargement which involves any process whereby small particles are agglomerated into larger, relatively permanent structures with the aid of liquid binder. The wet granulation process must generally achieve the desired granule properties intended for specific purposes ( Generally four mechanisms are included in granulation mechanisms, as primarily shown by Granule voidage is an expression indicating free spaces between granules while porosity indicating the voidage inside the granule itself ( According to saturation state of interparticle voidage with liquid binder, different states of wet massing might exist. The primary pores filling have been defined as pendular state (single bridges). Upon further saturation results in an interparticle force, indicated as funicular (partially complete filling with single bridges) followed by capillary state (nearly complete filling with multiple bridges) at which saturation is about 80–100%. Loss of wet mass torque is achieved when over wetting arise and is known as drop phase. Granule growth starts when there is coalescence of existing granules as well as the layering of fine powder onto previously formed nuclei or granules. As granules grow by coalescence, they are simultaneously compacted by consolidation mechanisms, which in turn reduce internal granule voidage and/or porosity ( One of the most important parameters affecting granule characteristics and size distribution is binder viscosity. Variation of binder viscosity could be achieved by either formulation changes (e.g., the type or concentration of binder) or by changes in operating temperature. Binders are polymers which act as the glue connecting particles together which may be natural polymers, synthetic polymers, or sugars. Binder selection for a particular system is quite often empirical and dependent on the skills and experience of the formulator. Type and concentration of binder system are the main variables controlling the desired product quality such as granule friability, tablet friability, hardness, disintegration time, and the drug dissolution rate ( Spreading efficiency of binder solution between solid particles is the main controlling factor in wetting and granulation. Some publications showed that dense non-friable granules are produced when the spreading coefficient of binder over substrate is positive while negative spreading coefficient leads to the formation of porous granules ( It has been shown that polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) is more efficient than hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC) due to the lower work of cohesion and adhesion of the latter. It could be also attributed to the better adhesion of PVP especially to hydrophilic surfaces ( Solid particles collision occurs mainly during mixing or compaction while they are subjected to the shearing force due to agitation ( The granulating solvent is one of the most important variables which could significantly change granule properties. This change may be due to inherited excipient properties such as solubility and wettability, as well as the mechanism of granule consolidation. Recent federal specifications concerning the pharmaceutical industry permit only water, alcoholic or hydroalcoholic solvent systems. Alcoholic PVP solution Lactose granulations was shown to produce lactose granules with higher porosity and friability compared to those prepared using water as a granulating solvent ( Drug or excipient particle size can affect granule strength, porosity, and consolidation rate granulation. Formation of stronger granules was achieved when smaller particles with higher surface areas were used that may be due to availability of more contact points between colliding particles ( Solubility of the solid fraction of formulation in the granulating solvent can significantly affect the granules’ characteristics. Changing the formulation composition of water-soluble excipient can potentially alter the granules’ properties. Solubility of the solid excipient in the granulating solvent was found to decrease the solvent requirement and produced granules of uniform particle size distribution with reduced friability ( Using PVP solution as granulating agent, it has been found that addition of microcrystalline cellulose (MCC) as insoluble excipient to a lactose-based formulation led to increase in solvent requirement and produced larger granules ( Degree of drug solubility in the binder solution could affect its distribution in different granule size fractions. It was found that drugs with high solubility in the binder solution exhibited migration during drying process leading to higher drug concentration at the outer granular surfaces. High drug concentrations in fines relative to larger granules will appear with subsequent processing due to abrasion and crusts’ detachments ( Hand squeeze test ( The agglomerate growth in wet granulation processes depend mainly on rheology of the wet powder mass, as an adequate consistency is necessary for a controllable coalescence and growth of smaller agglomerates into larger agglomerates. Literature reveals a variety of advanced monitoring techniques following up wet massing stages. Some of them are electrical methods such as ammeters which depend on power consumption and electrical conductivity ( Torque measurement has been proved ( The rheological changes during the wet massing of microcrystalline cellulose (MCC) were successfully monitored using the MTR ( Two different parameters are measured using the mixer torque rheometer ( Evaluation of binder physical properties to predict the influence of the binder on the granulation process and final granule properties were developed to elucidate the detailed molecular interactions. This evaluation is of prime importance to achieve accurate control of the wet granulation process. MTR as a preformulation tool has been successfully used to follow up the changes in rheological behavior which occur when change from one binder solutions to another comparing results to water ( Binder–substrate interactions under influence of binder physical properties have been used successfully to explain the observed rheological behavior. Comparing the predicted and observed data was a way to investigate solid–liquid interactions and governing the rheological behavior during wet massing aiming to predict final product performance ( Using MTR has been as a tool for predicting agglomeration properties of wet masses in other mixers. The amount of liquid binder added at the maximum torque was found to be comparable with that found for the optimum production of pellets by spheronization ( Some publications showed the use of MTR to examine the effect of mixing time on the wet mass rheology ( Literature reveals many reports about the successful applications of MTR for monitoring the wet massing procedure (water content optimization). The water content in the formulation has to be tightly controlled for adequate pellet size uniformity ( In some cases, water is used entirely as the binder liquid or in most cases as binder solvent. Over estimating the optimum binder ratio will lead to higher water content in the formulation, which resulted in larger agglomerates ( Agglomerate growth by coalescence depends on the plasticity and deformability of the wet mass, in other words, the rheological properties of the mass. Because the torque of a rotating blades or impellers depends on the rheological properties of the mass and its resistance, there is generally supposed to be a correlation between change in torque (ΔTq) and agglomerate growth. The use of ΔTq for endpoint control is assumed, therefore, to be also suitable for different formulations and for other types of fluidized bed rotor granulators, as well as mixer granulators ( MTR was used to test the torque profile of a model formulation as a function of water addition levels to understand whether the granule growth behavior is consistent with the liquid saturation states (  The rheological properties of a range of model and typical pharmaceutical wet massed systems were monitored using MTR ( A commercial mixer torque rheometer has been used to investigate the effect of blade orientation on the two contra-rotating shafts ( Formulators have recognized for many years that mixing time is a critical factor in the granulation process. This has become particularly important with the new generation of high shear mixers that are now available where the variation of a few seconds in mixing time can make the difference between a useable granule and an unusable overworked wet mass. The MTR could be used to estimate the optimum mixing time for wet massing as well as to examine the effect of mixing time on the rheology of wet masses. The rheological behavior of the wet masses of silicified MCC (Prosolv) and plain MCC was studied as a function of mixing time using MTR ( Although A strong correlation was observed between the torque parameters of MCC grades and the properties of their pellets (flow, friability, bulk and tapped densities) formed with 30 and 35% (w/w) water ( In recent study ( As mentioned previously, microcrystalline cellulose (MCC) is undoubtedly the most widely used excipient in pellet production by extrusion–spheronization. Its capacity to retain very large quantities of water internally means that wet masses made with MCCs have rheological properties that are very suitable for extrusion–spheronization. However, drug release from MCC extrusion–spheronization pellets is for some drugs very slow, particularly for drugs with low water solubility ( It has been shown that mixtures of MCC with sorbitol (up to 50%) or mannitol (up to 80%) are suitable for hydrochlorothiazide pelletization and accelerated drug release ( MTR was used to investigate the rheological behavior of wet granulations with different concentrations of drug, binder, and water ( The rheological behavior of wet powder masses is known to be influenced by physico-chemical and mechanical properties of the substrate being wet massed and excipient variability; therefore, rheological characterization of the wet masses has become increasingly necessary for excipient evaluation. Recently MTR has gained popularity in characterizing the behavior of powder materials used for wet granulation and other specialized applications, such as pelletization by extrusion–spheronization. Several studies investigating the effect of excipient source variation ( A powder rheometer has been used to study the properties of wet powder masses and the results have been compared to the mixer torque rheometer (MTR) ( The rheological properties of silicified microcrystalline cellulose (Prosolv 50) were compared with those of standard grades of microcrystalline cellulose (Emcocel 50 and Avicel PH 101) ( Lactose was melt agglomerated in a mixer torque rheometer with different polyethylene glycol (PEG) grades as meltable binder ( The rheological properties of binary mixtures of two batches of lactose of median particle size 41.5 and 62.3 Binders are adhesives that are added to solid dosage formulations. The primary role of binders is to provide the cohesiveness essential for the bonding of the solid particles under compaction to form a tablet. In a wet-granulation and pelletization processes, binders promote size enlargement to produce granules and thus improve flowability of the blend during the manufacturing process ( The MTR can be used to examine the role of various material parameters such as: binder concentration, viscosity and work of adhesion. MTR curves were used to study the influence of binder characteristics during wet granulation inside the high shear mixer ( Scale-up is generally defined as the process of increasing the batch size. Scale-up of a process can also be viewed as a procedure for applying the same process to different output volumes (  Two different types of microcrystalline cellulose, differing only in bulk density, were used as model excipient ( MTR was employed to evaluate the granulating solvents used (water, isopropanol, and 1:1 v/v mixture of both) based on the wet mass consistency. This study was carried out to investigate the effect of high shear mixer (HSM) granulation process parameters and scale-up on wet mass consistency and granulation characteristics of β-cyclodextrin (βCD) and ibuprofen ( The use of torque measurements to control production of pellets in a rotary processor has been investigated previously ( Mixing torque rheometry has strongly replaced hand squeeze test for end point determination of wet granulation. MTR is a valuable tool for preformulation evaluation and scale up of wet granulation products. Evaluation of binder and solid excipient in addition to the source variations are now possible using MTR. Different phases of solid–liquid interaction monitored using MTR facilitated an advanced control of wet massing.