Tetrahedrite, Cu12Sb4S13, can be an interesting and important resource of copper, antimony or other non-ferrous metals as is evident from its chemical formula. In spite of the high content of antimony in tetrahedrite, this mineral is not currently processed by pyrometallurgical methods mainly due to environmental concerns. A hydrometallurgical method as an alternative is therefore more convenient. This paper presents the results of an experimental investigation of tetrahedrite leaching in HCl solutions using ozone as an oxidising agent. Ozone was supplied by blowing gas through the pulp. A tetrahedrite concentrate from Maria mine in Rožňava, Slovakia was used for the experiments. The investigated parameters were HCl concentration, concentrate particle size, liquid to solid phase ratio (L/S) and ozone concentration in the gas.Tetrahedrite is a complex sulphide, which can be represented by the chemical formula Cu Several ways for tetrahedrite treatment have been proposed. High temperature methods such as chlorinating or reducing roasting, cyclone melting, have not been commercialised to date due to the presence of antimony. Separation of antimony and copper is difficult. This is one of the reasons why hydrometallurgical methods have been recently investigated as a potentially viable alternative for recovering metal values from tetrahedrite. To this date, there is only a limited number of papers dedicated to tetrahedrite leaching in aqueous medium, although Various modifications of tetrahedrite leaching process were proposed by Alkaline leaching of tetrahedrite concentrate ( Acidic leaching also showed that copper passes into the solution from which it can be recovered. However, these methods have so far been limited to laboratory applications due to low metal recoveries and complications with the accompanying elements. It is rather difficult to process tetrahedrite by pyrometallurgical methods in order to separate copper, but the hydrometallurgical route seems to be promising. According to the large stability of tetrahedrite, it is necessary to use a strong oxidising agent. This agent should be environmentally friendly and low-cost. Ozone might be such an agent as the one that oxidises almost all the metals and their compounds. From the thermodynamic study, it follows that copper in acid solution will be leached from tetrahedrite only by oxidation if the value of redox potential is above 0.4 V in this system. Oxidation potential of ozone is +2.07 V, which means that ozone meets this condition; hence, copper will be transformed into the soluble form. The aim of this study is to verify the effect of leaching agent concentration, the effect of the amount of concentrate used in leaching, the effect of concentrate particle size and the effect of ozone amount on copper and antimony recovery during leaching. Tetrahedrite concentrate from Maria mine, Rožňava, Eastern Slovakia was used for leaching experiments. The grain fraction was −100 +80 μm, −80 +60 μm, −60 +40 μm and −40 μm. The content of main elements in concentrate is shown in Tetrahedrite and chalcopyrite or chalcostibite and a little amount of silicon oxide were determined by X-ray diffraction phase analysis as the prevailing minerals. The concentrate was screened into several fractions with different particle size. These fractions were washed in distilled water. By washing, the weathered particles of tetrahedrite were removed from the surface. If non-washed concentrate had been used, the kinetic curves would have been distorted. As a leaching agent, 500 ml of aqueous HCl solutions with concentrations between 0.1 and 1 M were used in each experiment. A 3-g solid sample was used. Experimental time was 360 min. Ozonizer provided a constant amount of ozone during the whole experiment depending on the oxygen flow-rate. The amount of non-reacted ozone was continuously analysed by an ozone analyser located after the reactor. The pulp was mixed by bubbling gas through the system. At selected times 5 ml of liquid sample was removed from the liquid in order to determine copper and antimony concentrations by AAS method. Experiments were performed in a laboratory apparatus, which is schematically represented in From experiments for determination of the optimum concentration of the leaching agent shown in In a similar way, the kinetic curves of antimony leaching from tetrahedrite shown in Leaching of tetrahedrite in HCl solutions may be described by reactions ( As the thermodynamic data for tetrahedrite are not available in accessible sources, it is not possible to define values of standard Gibbs energy changes for reactions The feasibility of reactions comprising antimony compounds according to These data suggest that the formation of antimony oxide is feasible and that the highest probability of precipitated compound belongs to Sb     It is evident that the behaviour of these two elements is very different. Copper extraction is growing with time at any flow rate of ozone, whereas after 3 h of leaching rate the recovery of antimony abruptly decreases. After this time, the process rapidly slows down or it is even brought to a standstill. This is clearly documented by the dependencies of metal extraction on the ozone flow rate for copper, presented in This can be explained either by the oxidation of soluble antimony compound to solid oxide, that may precipitate from the solution according to reactions The amount of ozone in gas increases when oxygen flow rate through the ozonizer grows. That leads us to another interpretation of the results. At higher ozone amounts, the gas flow rate was higher (80 l/min as compared to 40 l/m), which means that the liquid–solid contact was more intense as a result of more vigorous mixing of the pulp. Leaching of tetrahedrite in the presence of ozone has not been investigated to this date. Therefore, the scope of this work was to study this possibility and to find optimum parameters of tetrahedrite leaching in HCl solution with the additions of ozone. In the studied range of HCl concentrations, the highest efficiency of copper extraction was obtained in 0.5 M HCl, whereas in the case of antimony it was 0.75 M HCl. Particle size of tetrahedrite has significant influence on copper and antimony extraction from tetrahedrite. The highest copper extraction was reached when leaching fraction −40 μm. The effect of particle size on antimony extraction was less significant mainly due to hindering or even stopping the whole process which was caused probably either by the precipitation of insoluble antimony compounds from the solution or by the formation of a passivation layer at the surface of the solid particles. This interpretation is supported by variations of metal recoveries with the amount of ozone present in the gas. Metal extractions increased with the increasing amount of ozone in the gas. More research has to be done in order to gain more information about the whole process. Investigation of other parameters affecting the leaching will continue in future. This work was supported by the grant agency VEGA (grant no. 1/9379/02).