Nano-comminution has successfully brought nanoparticle formulations of poorly soluble drugs to our daily life. The key for the successful nano-comminution of a drug is the choice of a proper polymeric steric stabilizer. To systematically elucidate the rationale of stabilizer selection, two types of helical amino acid copolymers, relatively hydrophilic and hydrophobic copolymers, were used in nano-comminution. The hydrophilic copolymers had lysine as their major component. The addition of relatively hydrophobic leucine and phenylalanine to them could not make significant changes in particle size. However, when a small amount of hydrophilic glutamic acid or lysine was added into elastin-like hydrophobic copolymers of valine, glycine, and proline, significant composition dependence was found. Therefore, specific interactions between the functional groups of polymers and drug surfaces seem to be important for successful nano-comminution. The stimuli responsive behavior of the hydrophobic copolymer induced the temperature dependence of particle size.The use of drug nanoparticles has opened novel oral solid formulation opportunities for poorly water-soluble drugs ( A decrease in particle size resulted in an increase in Gibbs free energy by increasing the extra ‘subdivision potential’ term, which is mainly related to the increase in surface energy ( Ionic or steric stabilizations are the common mechanisms to stabilize the surface of hydrophobic drugs ( The selection of a proper stabilizer is not straightforward. The selection process has been developed only by trial and error. The previous results show that a drug requires a specific stabilizer ( In the previous report, we developed a type of amino acid copolymer as a new class of materials for the stabilization of nanocrystals ( The previous study used only one type of drug and four amino acids ( Various poorly soluble drugs ( The amino acid copolymers were synthesized following the method described in our previous report ( The elastin-like polymers (ELPs) were (GVGVP) Drug particles were mixed in a 30 A Horiba Laser Light Scattering Particle Size Analyzer LA-910 was used to measure the particle size of drug (refractive index The amino acid copolymers used in this study are composed of phenylalanine (F), leucine (L), lysine (K), glutamic acid (E), glycine (G), valine (V), and proline (P). The polymers can be categorized into two types, i.e., one relatively hydrophilic polymers (mainly K with a small mol. fraction of F or L (<22%)), and the other relatively hydrophobic copolymers (mainly G, V, and P). Although the typical polymers used for nano-comminution had been relatively hydrophobic or amphiphilic, the relatively hydrophilic copolymers of K and F (or L) were able to stabilize naproxen nanoparticles in our previous study (  The change in the content of hydrophilic amino acid (change in lysine content) does not seem to produce significant change in the volume-averaged particle size. Our previous report on the nano-comminution of naproxen using amino acid copolymers showed that an increase in lysine content slightly reduced the particle size reduction ability ( The presence of L instead of F reduces the effectiveness of nano-comminution in the cases of digitoxin and nifedipin, but it is hard to decide whether the trend is meaningful. The phenyl group in F might be more helpful in stabilizing the surface of digitoxin and nifedipin. The overall results of If the use of a hydrophilic amino acid polymer is successful for nano-comminution, the use of the other extreme polymer such as ELP might not be successful. The nano-comminution experiments using ELPs were performed at different temperatures. This is because the polymers are known to be temperature responsive. They have critical temperatures (inverse transition temperature, Tt) above which their chain structures become more regular, and adopt spiral triple helix structures (  In the cases of ELP-V, the decrease of particle size with an increase in temperature does not precisely reflect the existence of a critical temperature (ca. 37 The particle sizes in The particle sizes in The differences in the amounts of adsorbed polymers might be influenced by the difference in molecular weight, since ELP-E and ELP-K are 14 or 21 It could be conjectured that the hydrophobic moiety of an amino acid copolymer provides a driving force for chain adsorption onto the hydrophobic surface of drugs. This is why the amphiphilic nature of polymeric stabilizers has been considered to be beneficial ( When only ELP-V and ELP-I are compared (two ELPs having no polar side functional groups), more hydrophobic ELP-I performed better. As temperature increases, the polymers undergo phase separation (Tt transition), resulting in an increase in their hydrophobicity. This increase in hydrophobicity induces more particle size reduction in nano-comminution ( An interesting and important result was obtained when ELP-K was mixed with ELP-E by 1:1 molar ratio. It has been known that the mixture of ELP-K and ELP-E produced an ionic complex due to the structural complexation between the amine and carboxylic acid functional groups ( It might be good to mention that the effect of temperature is not directly related with the hydrophobicity of polymers. An increase in temperature will increase the hydrophobicity of ELP, but the chain structure and flexibility of ELP changes too. The chain becomes more structured above the critical inverse temperature (Tt), which is not helpful for steric stabilization.  The difference in particle size was relatively discernable only in the cases of ibuprofen. The melting temperature of ibuprofen was 79.8 The particle size results of itraconazole in Comminution cannot infinitely reduce the particle size of drugs, since it is related with the fracture characteristics of a material ( In this study, the cases of both the relatively hydrophilic and hydrophobic copolymers were successful. The smallest particle size results came from the systems of relatively hydrophobic polymers having a small amount of carboxyl or amine functional groups. An increase in the hydrophobicity of polymer by changing monomer composition or increasing processing temperature could not dramatically alter particle size. However, the addition of a small amount of carboxyl or amine functional groups into relatively hydrophobic ELPs generated dramatic effects in particle size reduction. All the drugs used in this experiment have polar functional groups that can interact with the polar functional groups of polymer chains (  Poorly water-soluble drugs were processed into nanoparticles in presence of amino acid copolymers. The stabilization ability of amino acid copolymers was greatly dependent on the type of drugs. Both hydrophilic polymers (polylysine and its copolymers) and relatively hydrophobic polymers (elastin-like polymers) could serve as the proper stabilizers for nano-comminution. The existence of polar functional groups in polymer chains (hydrophilic amino acids) was critical for successful nano-comminution. The specific interactions of polymer chains with drug crystal surfaces seemed to improve steric stabilization efficiency. The particle sizes of nanosuspensions processed with ELP-V and ELP-I had temperature dependence, but the other ELPs having a small amount of lysine and glutamic acid did not have significant temperature dependence. These results show the possible use of amino acid copolymers for nano-comminution and their requirement to be successful stabilizers, which can provide a basis for the future preparation of intelligent drug delivery systems using protein or peptide stabilizers. This work was supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF) grant funded by the