Background
                  Non-operative treatment for impacted femoral neck fractures is a now rarely used strategy whose indications are controversial. No outcome predictors have been convincingly identified, in part due to the small sizes of available studies. We conducted a large retrospective study with the following objectives: (1) to evaluate the percentage of patients older than 65 years of age with non-operatively treated Garden I femoral neck fractures who experience secondary displacement, (2) to identify predictors of secondary displacement, and (3) to determine the frequency of non-operative treatment failure due to any cause and requiring joint replacement surgery.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  Non-operative treatment is reliable in patients older than 65 years of age with Garden I femoral neck fractures.
               
                  Material and methods
                  Approval was obtained from the French data protection authority to conduct a retrospective observational study of information in the Marseille university hospitals database. Consecutive patients who were older than 65 years of age at traumatology department admission for Garden I femoral neck fractures managed non-operatively between January 2007 and December 2017 were included. Non-operative treatment consisted in a walking test on day 1 followed by radiographs on days 2, 7, 14, 21, and 45 and after 3 and 12 months. Patients with secondary displacement underwent hip arthroplasty. Demographic data, cognitive performance, and radiological parameters were collected for each patient. We evaluated the rates of secondary displacement avascular necrosis, and non-union.
               
                  Results
                  We included 298 patients with a mean age of 82 years (range, 65–101). Mean follow-up was 5±3 years. Secondary displacement occurred in 91 (30%) patients, at a mean of 16 days (range 2–45 days) after the fracture. Avascular necrosis of the femoral head developed in 13 (4.3%) patients and non-union in 11 (3.7%) patients. Secondary displacement was significantly associated with hypnotic treatment (OR, 4.1; 95%CI, 2.2–7.5; p
                     =0.039), institutionalisation (OR, 6.7; 95%CI, 3.1–14.8; p
                     =0.028), a history of repeated falls (OR, 13.5; 95%CI, 6.3–8.4; p
                     <0.0001), having three or more comorbidities (OR, 3.2; 95%CI, 1.7–5.8; p
                     =0.046), and having dementia (OR, 3.5; 95%CI, 1.7–6.9; p
                     =0.0003). Secondary displacement occurred in 18 (12%) of the 151 community-dwelling patients with normal cognition and no history of repeated falls compared to 37 (75%) of the 50 institutionalised patients with dementia.
               
                  Discussion
                  Non-operative treatment was effective in 196 (66%) of 298 patients with Garden I femoral neck fractures. Significant risk factors for secondary displacement were dementia, institutionalisation, hypnotic treatment, multiple comorbidities, and a history of repeated falls. Of 151 community-dwelling patients with normal cognition and no repeated falls, 133 (88%) achieved a full recovery with non-operative treatment alone.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  IV, retrospective cohort study.Garden I fractures ( Despite an abundant literature, no consensus exists regarding the optimal management of Garden I hip fractures. Treatment strategies include non-operative management, internal fixation, and arthroplasty. Non-operative treatment has been proven effective in some cases of impacted fractures. Failure of non-operative treatment may require secondary arthroplasty. A 2017 study by Reina et al. We conducted a large retrospective study with the following objectives: to evaluate the percentage of patients older than 65 years of age with non-operatively treated Garden I femoral neck fractures who experience secondary displacement; to identify predictors of secondary displacement; to determine the frequency of non-operative treatment failure due to any cause and requiring joint replacement surgery. The working hypothesis was that non-operative treatment is reliable in patients older than 65 years of age with Garden I femoral neck fractures. A multicentre retrospective cohort study was conducted in consecutive patients older than 65 years of age who were admitted to traumatology departments in the university hospital network in Marseille, France, between January 2007 and December 2017 and who received non-operative management of a true Garden I femoral neck fracture. Approval was first obtained from the French data protection authority ( Inclusion criteria were age older than 65 years; true, initially impacted, Garden I femoral neck fracture visible on antero-posterior and lateral pelvic radiographs; and non-operative management. Exclusion criteria were age younger than 65 years at the time of the fracture; pathological fracture; non-displaced Garden II or displaced Garden, III or IV fracture; pertrochanteric or subtrochanteric fracture; and peri-prosthetic fracture. We included the 298 patients who met all the inclusion criteria and none of the exclusion criteria. Non-operative management involved early ambulation in a walking frame to decrease weight-bearing on the affected side and a walking test on the day after the fracture (day 1) conducted by a physiotherapist under medical supervision. Follow-up radiographs consisting of an antero-posterior view of the pelvis and antero-posterior and lateral views of the affected hip were scheduled on days 2, 7, 14, 21, and 45; after 3 and 12 months; and annually thereafter ( For each patient, we recorded the following information from the electronic patient files in the hospital databases: age, sex, body mass index, institutionalisation at the time of the fall, use of hypnotic agents, comorbidities, and the Parker score ( The primary outcome measure was the occurrence of secondary displacement during follow-up. The secondary outcome measures were time to secondary displacement, hospital stay length, type of surgery, and morbidity and mortality associated with secondary displacement. Arthroplasty during follow-up was recorded as a marker for failure of non-operative management due to any cause (avascular necrosis, pain, or non-union). We compared the groups with and without secondary displacement (primary outcome measure). Distribution of each variable was assessed to guide the choice between parametric and non-parametric tests for comparing quantitative and qualitative criteria. Kaplan-Meier curves were plotted to assess survival without delayed surgery for any reason and for secondary displacement. There were no missing data. A multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed to identify predictors of secondary displacement. First, univariate analyses were done to identify variables whose distribution differed between the groups with and without displacement, with Over the 11-year study period, 298 patients met our selection criteria, including 245 (86%) women. Mean age was 81.5 years (range, 65-101 years) and 183 (61%) patients were older than 80 years. Mean follow-up was 5 Secondary displacement occurred in 91 (30%) patients, at a mean of 16 days (range, 2–45 days) after the fracture, and was consistently managed by arthroplasty. Times to secondary displacement were as follows: ≤ Avascular necrosis of the femoral head occurred in 13 (4.3%) patients. Surgery was required in 11 (3.7%) patients for non-union or pain. Mean hospital stay length was 8 days (range, 2–34 days) overall, 7 days (range, 2–20 days) in the group without secondary displacement, and 13 days (range, 5–34 days) in the group with secondary displacement. Of our 298 patients, 26 (9%) died during follow-up, at a mean of 19 months (range, 0.3–96 months) after the fracture. Mean 5-year survival without secondary surgery (for any cause) was 70% Age, sex, and body mass index were not significantly associated with secondary displacement. Six factors were significantly associated with secondary displacement, namely, institutionalisation, dementia, use of hypnotics, a history of falls, three or more comorbidities, and a smaller angle of valgus displacement ( The multivariate logistic regression analysis identified five factors independently associated with a higher risk of secondary displacement ( Of the 50 institutionalised patients with dementia, 37 (75%) experienced secondary displacement. In contrast, of the 151 self-sufficient community-dwelling patients without repeated falls or cognitive disorders, only 18 (12%) experienced secondary displacement. To date, no consensus exists about the optimal management of Garden I fractures. Available treatment options include arthroplasty, internal fixation, and non-operative treatment. Fixation using three percutaneously inserted screws is another alternative to arthroplasty that decreases the risk of secondary displacement while allowing early ambulation. However, a secondary displacement rate of 5.4% has been reported with this technique In previous studies, the proportion of patients with secondary displacement ranged from 20% A 2002 study by Raaymakers Our retrospective cohort design was a hybrid of an epidemiological study and a descriptive analysis. We therefore obtained data over a short period in a specific population. Furthermore, our study relied entirely on the Garden classification, which has a number of limitations, as pointed out by Van Embden et al. Non-operative treatment alone provided a full recovery in about 70% of elderly patients with Garden I fractures followed up for a mean of 5 years. Dementia, institutionalisation, hypnotic agent use, multiple comorbidities, and a history of repealed falls were associated with a higher risk of secondary displacement. Awareness of these criteria can help to select patients for non-operative treatment: thus, among self-sufficient community-dwelling patients with no history of repeated falls, only 14% experienced secondary displacement. None of the authors has any conflicts of interest to declare in relation to this work. Delphine Amsellem declares he has no competing interest. Sébastien Parratte is an educational consultant for Zimmer, Adler, Arthrex, and Newclip. Xavier Flecher is an educational consultant for Zimmer and Adler. Matthieu Ollivier is an educational consultant for Stryker, Arthrex, and Newclip. Jean-Noel Argenson is a consultant for Symbios, Zimmer, and Adler and receives royalties from Symbios and Zimmer. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. Delphine Amsellem and Matthieu Ollivier conceived the project, designed the protocol, processed the study data, performed the statistical analysis, and wrote the manuscript. Sébastien Parratte, Jean-Noel Argenson, and Xavier Flecher revised the manuscript for important intellectual content.