Aluminium metal has been hydrolysed at 100 °C to synthesize boehmite. Gelatinous and dry boehmite were used to prepare stable sol. In the case of gelatinous boehmite, sol was prepared by peptizing and in the case of dry boehmite an ultrasonic bath was used to prepare the sol. Gelation was carried out by heating on a hot plate, which resulted in sol–gel processed powder. For sol–gel processed boehmite the θ→α transformation occurred at 1078 °C and for the as prepared boehmite the same occurred at 1206 °C. Sol–gel processed powder could be transformed to α alumina completely, when calcined at 1000 °C for 1 h.Boehmite or pseudo boehmite is usually prepared by using various intermediate aluminium compounds such as, aluminium alkoxides Although aluminium metal has been used for the synthesis of alumina by several investigators by various methods such as, Hydrothermal oxidation British Alcan high-purity (as received) aluminium metal was used as a starting material. The other chemicals used for the synthesis were of A.R. Grade. Aluminium pellets or large pieces cut from an ingot were cleaned thoroughly with dilute hydrochloric acid and later these were amalgamated and then the pellets were washed several times with deionized, hot water and finally transferred to boiling deionized water. The pellets were removed after sufficient amount of boehmite was collected. The following methods were attempted to prepare stable sols: Gelatinous boehmite prepared by hot water hydrolysis was dipersed in 100 ml (1:1) HNO Dry boehmite powder was added to 100 ml of (1:1) HNO The sol prepared by Method A was aged at room temperature in a glass beaker for about 10 h to allow the bayerite particles to settle down. Later the clear sol was decanted to another beaker and then water was evaporated on a hot plate. Due to the rapid evaporation of water, gel cracked and crumbled. After drying the gel, the resulting coarse gel particles were manually crushed in an agate mortar for half an hour. For phase identification Phillips PW 1710 X-ray diffractometer was used. Thermal analyses were carried out using a Stanton Redcroft TG 750/770 system and a Dupont 9900 DTA/DSC model. A Jeol-100S TEM was used to determine the size and shape of the boehmite powders. The specific surface area of the powders were determined by using Quantasorb Jr. surface area analyser working on the BET principle. The XRD pattern of boehmite which was synthesized by hot water hydrolysis at 100 °C and then immediately dried is shown in Gelatinous boehmite, when peptized by ageing at 80 °C and stirring, resulted in translucent, bluish tinged, stable sol. Coarser particles and unreacted aluminium particles settle down. A sol thus prepared had about 4% solid content. Dispersibilty of dry boehmite powder was poor and it was necessary to use ultrasonic bath to prepare a stable sol. The appearance of the sol was similar to the sol prepared, by using gelatinous boehmite. The sol–gel processed powder was analysed using DTA and DSC and the results are discussed as follows: DSC patterns of as prepared boehmite and sol–gel processed powders are shown in DTA patterns of as prepared boehmite and sol–gel processed powder are shown in Rajendran The specific surface area of as prepared boehmite is 260 m Fine, sol–gel processed powder when calcined at 1000 °C for 1 h, completely transformed to α-alumina  Dilute, stable boehmite sol with a solid content of 4% can be prepared from gelatinous boehmite. As prepared, dry, pseudo boehmite powder has a very large surface area of 260 m α alumina can be prepared by calcining sol–gel processed boehmite at 1000 °C for 1 h; whereas complete conversion did not occur when as prepared boehmite was calcined at the same temperature and for the same duration. This article is based on the first author's PhD thesis work. He thanks the faculty and staff at the Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay and Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Bombay for the support provided during the PhD work.