The investigation was aimed at developing a new electrochemical process for recovery of nickel, cobalt and cadmium mainly present in the form of hydroxides in Ni–Cd batteries, in view to obtain, a solid residue composed of metal nickel and carbon, a pure cadmium-free solution of metal salts and metal cadmium. This process relies upon coupling leaching of the metal hydroxides by electrogenerated protons to electrodeposition in a single divided cell. The feasibility of the technique has been first demonstrated in a lab cell operated in batch mode: cadmium-free solution of nickel and cobalt cations could effectively be produced at the end of the 5-h run, with nearly complete leaching of the hydroxides and a current efficiency of the cathode near 73%: occurrence of side hydrogen evolution at the cathode reduced the efficiency during the last hour of the treatment because of insufficient amounts of Cd2+ cations. In a second test, the waste (called black mass) was added at regular intervals, in view to allowing more regular transfer rates of Cd2+ species to the cathode chamber. The more even profiles of concentrations allowed avoiding depletion of this cation, which resulted in higher current efficiency in cadmium deposition. The efficiency of fed-batch mode is finally discussed in relation to the compromise to be found between purity of the cadmium-free solution and current efficiency of cadmium.World production of batteries and accumulators amounts to several billion units per year. Batteries such as Ni–Cd ones have been part of the most used systems in recent decades. However, the two metal species contained in significant quantities in these manufactured products are highly toxic ( As a matter of fact European regulations ( In recent years, numerous studies on the treatment and recycling of batteries and accumulators by hydrometallurgical processes have been performed. Hydrometallurgy has the advantage of working at low temperature since use of aqueous solutions generates little waste gas, unlike pyrometallurgical processes ( Leaching is often the key step of hydrometallurgical processes. It consists in dissolving the maximum amount of recoverable components, if possible with a high selectivity for easier downstream separation operation. Leaching of Ni–Cd black mass is often carried out in sulfuric media ( The large number of steps required in hydrometallurgical processes led to investigate more simple ones, for instance those combining electroassisted leaching (called electroleaching in this paper) and electrodeposition of metal species. In the existing literature, very few studies deal with the above combined operations led in a single cell. A pioneering investigation dealt with the extraction of nickel from sulfide ores rich in iron e.g. violarite FeNi The present work is aimed at investigating separation and recovery of cadmium and nickel from the Ni–Cd black mass: the waste mainly in the form of metal hydroxides dissolves upon production of protons at the anode together with oxygen. The cations generated can be transported to the cathode chamber through an inert separator ( The active powder in Ni–Cd batteries contains different mineralogical forms, namely hydroxides, oxyhydroxides and metals. During the charge of the battery, nickel hydroxide Ni(OH) and cadmium hydroxide is reduced to cadmium metal at the negative electrode: The waste has been obtained by manually dismantling of nickel–cadmium batteries (SANYO Cadnica KR 7000F, 1.2 Before starting with electroleaching and electrodeposition experiments, the Ni–Cd batteries and their active material were characterized and the speciation of cadmium and nickel was achieved ( The detailed description of the laboratory cell is given in a previous paper ( The separator was a filter press cloth (PP289, Mortelecque) woven with polypropylene fibers. The cloth was used because of its appreciable permeability near 20–30 The electrodes were 52  Then, protons generated by water oxidation react with the active powder. Metal hydroxides and oxyhydroxide are leached after the following reactions: Metals are oxidized according to The resulting cations ( The selective reduction of The reduction reaction of nickel can also be considered, together with side hydrogen evolution Although nickel deposition would be expected at less cathodic potentials than cadmium deposition, cadmium is deposited selectively. Various studies have reported on the anomalous deposition: mechanism of nickel deposition is actually complex involving adsorbed species at the cathode surface depending on pH ( In each compartment, a sulfuric acid solution has been used as anolyte and catholyte to avoid the precipitation of metal hydroxides. The separator inserted in the cell could prevent passage of the solid into the cathode compartment, so that the cadmium deposit formed at the cathode does not contain solid particles of the active powder. An inert polymeric cloth acted as the separator, allowing passage of the metal cations produced in the anode chamber to the cathodic compartment for possible deposition. Too compact clothes have been shown to hinder the overall processes as the transport of metal cations through the separator is in such cases the rate-determining step (    The speciation of both metals in active powder, leaching residue and cadmium deposit was performed with an operating procedure described elsewhere ( XRD analysis was carried out using a D8 Advance Bruker diffractometer with Cu (Kα) (λ  Leaching yield Leaching yield (LY) expressing the efficiency of the leaching step, was calculated as follows: where Deposition yield Deposition yield (DY) corresponds to the ratio of the cadmium amount reduced Current efficiency Current efficiency (CE) of cadmium deposition is the ratio of the mass amount of cadmium actually deposited experimentally at the cathode with charge Q over the mass amount of cadmium that could be theoretically deposited where F is the Faraday's constant, The various yields presented above were always calculated over the whole time period of the experiments. Transference numbers Current is applied to allow both proton production at the anode and cadmium deposition at the cathode. Besides, the current density in the cell corresponds to the algebraic sum of the specific flows of all ionic species, weighed by charge numbers z where | The overall current in the cell corresponds to a part to the transport of metal cations from the anode to the cathode. Because the process is aimed at enabling the transport of cations to the cathode for possible separation of metal species by cadmium deposition, the transference number of the metal cations in the cathode chamber can appear as a criterion of performance in such processes, in addition to the above criteria. Transference numbers of the various species have been calculated along the runs from the experimental data. In particular, the experimental concentration profiles of the three metal cations and of the acidic species made it possible to calculate the corresponding values of concentrations of H Moreover, in the present case, for the sake of simplicity and because the discussion on transference numbers has been mainly for qualitative and comparative purpose, values for λ For all tests the current density was fixed at 350 Twenty grams of the reconstituted active powder and 170 At the end of the run, the remaining solid (leaching residue) and liquid fractions were collected. The deposit was removed from the aluminum substrate. The whole analytical procedure is described in The configuration of the cell and the composition of the electrolytes were the same as in The mole number of cadmium, nickel, cobalt and protons over time in each compartment is presented in  During the first 2  Throughout the experiment, the mole number of Cd The leaching yields are calculated for the three metals. Nickel is leached at 53.5% because metallic nickel does not solubilize in this acidity conditions: leaching degree of nickel hydroxide could attain 96%. Cobalt and cadmium are leached respectively at 100% and 98.9%. The residual solid in the anode chamber weights 3.3 The solid deposit obtained at the cathode with a weight near 13.9 Composition of the electrolytes at the beginning and at the end of the run is given in  The efficiency of cadmium and nickel cation separation by combined electroleaching and electrodeposition of cadmium has been demonstrated in the previous section. However, operating conditions has to be improved in view to more efficient cadmium deposition: for this purpose, concentration of the electroactive cation has to be large enough in the cathode chamber throughout the run. Sequenced introduction of the black mass is performed accordingly: after introduction of 10 The mole numbers of cadmium, nickel, cobalt and proton over time in each compartment are presented in During the first half hour, the Cd In the cathode chamber, the observed sharp decrease in the mole amount of Cd To conclude, the progressive depletion of Cd The leaching yield of cadmium attains 97%, being in the same order of magnitude as for the non-sequenced treatment. For nickel and cobalt, the leaching yields are 45% and 91.5% respectively. The weight loss of the active material is about 81% and the residual solid weights about 5.8 The cadmium purity of the 16.2 Although with slightly changed values of the concentrations of metal cations ( Transference numbers of the various species in anodic chamber reflect to some extent the concentration profiles shown in As expressed above, regular introduction of the active powder in the anode chamber allows more even behavior of the two electrolytic parts of the cell, as exemplified by Besides, The objective of this study was to develop a new electrochemical process for recovery of nickel, cobalt and cadmium present in the Ni–Cd batteries in an electrochemical process, in view to obtaining: a solid residue containing only metal nickel and carbon pure cadmium-free solution of metal salts metal cadmium of an acceptable quality. The feasibility of the technique has been first demonstrated in batch mode: the nickel content of solid residue was multiplied by 7, whereas a cadmium-free solution of nickel and cobalt sulfates could be effectively obtained at the end of the run. In addition, the solution recovered from the anode chamber could be recycled as the catholyte for further runs. In spite of the fair performance observed, the process performance is hindered by occurrence of hydrogen evolution at the cathode during the last hour of the treatment because of insufficient amounts of Cd More generally the strategy of solid introduction in the anode chamber has to be optimized, taking into account the rates of the various processes involved, and we clearly shown that sustained feeding can be successfully applied in cases that all the components of the solid powder have comparable leaching rates, to avoid accumulation of unreacted solids in the anode chamber along time. The main advantages of this technology are the following: The three required unit operations (leaching, S/L separation, electrolysis) are performed in a single cell. Storage of concentrated sulphuric acid is not necessary because the reagent is generated by electrochemical way. Acidic leaching is carried out under soft conditions compared with the hydrometallurgical treatment usually performed, allowing in addition the recovery of a solid residue containing metal nickel. Conventional processes are operated in batch-mode. In the present case, it is possible to imagine a continuous process. The study of this last point is in progress with two main problems to be solved, namely (i) addition of active matter into the anodic compartment and (ii) recovery at regular intervals of cadmium deposit from the cathodic chamber to prevent formation of cadmium dendrites. The concentrations of nickel and cadmium ions in the various samples collected have been determined directly by AAS. C From its definition, C The equation of electroneutrality is written as follows: The equilibrium dissociation constant of HSO Algebraic rearrangement of Eqs. and From Eq. with Thus, for each value of time considered, the concentration of sulfate is calculated from the experimental values and using relations (A7) and (A8). Then, the concentrations of HSO