The HPGR is properly regarded as one of the most important recent developments in the field of size reduction. This success is mainly associated to its improved energy efficiency, grinding capacity, lower sensitivity to grindability variations and higher metal recovery in downstream processes compared with conventional grinding technologies such as ball mills and cone crushers. It comprises two counter-rotating rolls mounted on a sturdy frame, one of which is allowed to float and is positioned using hydraulic springs. Comminution in the HPGR is largely determined by the pressure exerted on the bed of particles by the hydraulic system. The paper describes how the coupling of the multi-body dynamic simulation with the discrete element method can be effectively used to describe the performance of the HPGR. The model considers important variables, including the HPGR rolls geometry and design, the hydraulic spring system start-up parameters and the material loading response, to describe key operational outputs as material throughput, operating gap and roller pressure distribution. The preliminary version of the model has been used to demonstrate qualitatively the effect of material properties on the operating gap, the pressure and the energy consumption of a laboratory-scale HPGR. Predictions using the model have been compared to those from phenomenological models, showing good agreement, but also limitations in the DEM approach with the current simple particle replacement model to predict the working gap at high initial nitrogen pressures.Compared to the more traditional crushing and grinding technologies, many of which in use for more than a century, High Pressure Grinding Rolls (HPGR) may be regarded as a recent development, given its patent from the 1980s by Professor Klaus Schönert ( The High Pressure Grinding Rolls comprises a pair of counter-rotating rolls mounted in a sturdy frame ( In the machine the feed material is compressed between two counter-rotating rolls, in which one of the rollers rotates on a fixed axis while the other is allowed to move horizontally. The moveable roll is forced up against the material by a hydraulic oil cylinder system. Depending on the manufacturer, this oil pressure transmits, either through two or four pistons, the grinding force over the cross-section of the diameter of the rolls where the bed of particles is formed. The amount of material in the gap, or compression zone, may be manipulated to a limited degree to result in optimum operating conditions, but generally, it is a characteristic of the feed ore, the roll diameter and its surface characteristics ( Simulation is a very powerful tool for both improving comminution equipment design and operation, since it allows comparing what-if scenarios with no cost associated with physical prototypes or with loss of production, respectively. Evidently, the usefulness of these simulations depends on the fidelity of the mathematical models of the unit operations. In spite of being a comparatively young technology, a number of worthwhile attempts ( Important advances in modeling of size reduction operations have been made in recent years using the discrete element method (DEM) ( The piston and die press provides a convenient and versatile tool for the study and analysis of the absorption, dissipation and utilization of grinding energy, size spectra of the ground products and virtual cessation of further size reduction at high pressures. Several studies have been made to study compression of particle beds in a piston-and-die press using DEM ( When the bulk material properties change as result of contact between the particles and the equipment, such as particle attrition and breakage in comminution processes, then the dynamic response of the equipment must be accounted for as it affects the efficacy of the simulation using DEM. Multi-body dynamics (MBD) simulation of comminution equipment requires application of transient loading to the equipment components in order to predict the machine kinematics, which changes according to the loading characteristics. In the case of the HPGR, the aperture between the rolls or working gap is a key variable that defines its operation but it is not directly controllable, since it is an outcome of the interaction between the particle bed and the setting of the hydraulic system. This type of coupling has been implemented in Metso's DEM simulator ( The work presents a preliminary model of the HPGR using a custom model of its floating roll using the Dynamics Coupling Interface of the commercial EDEM® software. It demonstrates that it is able to provide insights into the equipment dynamics, yielding working gaps and pressures within the particle bed compressive that vary during operation. In order to model the HPGR performance using DEM it was necessary to consider the different operational and geometrical settings, besides the material response. As such, two models needed to be implemented to describe the various interrelationships: the floating roll dynamic model and the material compression model. The general scheme of the model, identifying its inputs and outputs, besides each of its components, is presented in After the simulation processes, the analyst module of the EDEM® simulator allows estimation of the throughput by adding the mass of material that crosses a control volume (geometry bin) in a unit of time. The power for each roll was calculated using the expression: The detailed description of HPGR geometrical parameters, including the diameter, width and surface type of the rolls, is very important for the correct modeling of the pressure profile in the compression zone. The operational parameters such as the roll velocity, the feed rate and the feed particle distribution, are important to describe the throughput, the product particle distribution and the power consumption of the HPGR. In the present work a laboratory-scale HPGR was simulated ( The dynamic model describes the rotation and the translation in the x direction ( The hydraulic spring model was implemented in C In each time step, the routine calculates forces from the hydraulic spring system using information provided by EDEM® with the updated velocity and position of the roller. In addition, EDEM® provides the resultant forces The hydraulic spring system in the HPGR is comprised of three main components: the hydraulic cylinder, the nitrogen accumulator and the hydraulic fluid. The component parameters are related to the elasticity coefficient In order to simulate the HPGR performance it is necessary to appropriately describe the compressive response and the energy absorption of the bed of particles when loaded by the compressive rotating rolls. For the DEM HPGR simulations two different models were used ( The unbreakable spheres with Hertz Mindlin contact model is the standard particle model available in the EDEM® simulation software, which allows representing the deformation profile of the compressed bed considering the partial overlap between the rigid spherical particles. The particle replacement sphere model with a modified Hertz Mindlin contact model is a custom model implemented in C The individual and contact material parameters used in the simulations are listed in  EDEM® post processing tools allows the qualitative analysis of different features of the HPGR operation, including the velocity of the particles across the rolls and the particle mass concentration between the rolls ( In predicting the HPGR throughput, the key variable of the model is the operational gap. Empirical and phenomenological models ( It has been long recognized that the pressure exerted on the bed of particles in the HPGR is not uniform along the length of the rolls. In order to study this effect simulations considering both particle models have been conducted. A comparison of the axial force profiles obtained using the different models is presented in A comparison of the material compression models is also presented in In order to demonstrate the sensitivity of the coupled HPGR DEM model to variations in material characteristics, simulations of the lab-scale HPGR equipped with smooth rolls were carried out using the unbreakable sphere model. This is illustrated in Additional dynamic responses are also shown in An additional simulation was conducted to investigate the dynamic response of the HPGR to variable feed size. In the figures it is evident that the model predicts significant scatter in the instantaneous values of forces, gaps and power during the course of the operation. It is likely that such scatter is larger than that found in practice. In order to analyze if such scatter could be reduced by increasing the damping of the system, the coefficient The compression of the nitrogen gas in the HPGR accumulator ( The main advantage of the HPGR DEM model is the possibility it offers of varying a wide range of machine and operational parameters. Finally, Phenomenological models of the HPGR (   Another key relationship of interest in scale-up of HPGRs is the one between the dimensionless gap and the specific grinding force.   The energy consumption is one of the most important performance variables for the modeling and scale up of the HPGR industrial units.  A preliminary model that couples DEM simulation using the particle replacement model and multi-body dynamics (MBD) response of the moving roll during operation has been proposed to describe operation of the HPGR. It allows direct input of the main variables in the hydraulic system, that is, accumulator pressures and volumes, to describe dynamically the response of the machine, in particular the working gap variation with feed characteristics. Very good agreement has been found between predictions of throughput using the DEM HPGR simulation and outputs of the model proposed by Although preliminary, the model demonstrates that, after further refinement, calibration and validation, it can become a valuable tool for improving design and scale-up of industrial HPGRs. The authors would like to thank the support from the Brazilian agencies CNPq and CAPES to this investigation. The support of DEM Solutions, through the Academic Partner Program is deeply acknowledged. In addition to that, the close collaboration with DEM Solutions personnel, in particular Mr. Juan Pérez-Prim, made this work possible.