Gas outbursts are sudden, violent blowouts of coal and gas from the solid coal seam into a mine entry. These dangerous incidents have occurred in most coal producing countries, although they have been relatively rare in the U.S., probably due to better mining conditions. Factors affecting the likelihood of a gas outburst are the gassiness and depth of the seam, stress fields in the rock mass, characteristics of the coal such as the permeability, the rate of mining advance, and local geologic structures like faults or clay veins. The most probable location for an outburst is at the working face where the gas pressure gradient, the main driving force, is steepest. Draining gas through boreholes drilled into the seam helps to prevent gas outbursts.
               This report will highlight the conditions that make a gas outburst likely and the methods used to reduce the chance of an outburst. It will also examine the differences between gas outbursts and coal mine bumps (also called bursts), which are the far more common stress-failure mode in U.S. coal mines.A gas outburst is a sudden, violent blowout of coal and gas from a coal mine working face, leaving a cavity ahead or to a side of the face. Thousands of gas outbursts have occurred around the world, resulting in hundreds of fatalities. For the U.S., gas outbursts have been relatively rare, probably due to a combination of shallower coalbeds with less structural stress, lower gas pressures, and more permeable coal that allows coalbed gas adjacent to the face to drain off more quickly.  high gas content, corresponding to high gas pressures; low permeability, which ensures a steep pressure gradient close to the mine workings; high stress fields in the rock mass found when the overburden is great; structurally weak coal with a well-developed microcrack structure that has the ability to desorb gas rapidly; a mining method accessing unmined portions of the coalbed, such as longwall gateroad development; and geological anomalies, such as fault zones, clay veins, or igneous intrusions. With so many factors contributing to gas outbursts, it is difficult to identify the most important, but two of the more significant have to be gas pressure (gas content) and coalbed permeability. Lower permeability coals at high pressure will be more outburst-prone because of their steeper pressure gradient close to the face. This combination of high pressure and low permeability is shown in The gas pressure deep in this seam was about 4.5 Recent research on the origin of gas outbursts has suggested that factors related to the coal may also be critical. For example, Pressure relief techniques reduce the ability of the immediate face to store the energy necessary for gas outbursts. Fracturing of the immediate face ensures that both high gas pressures and structural stress conditions do not exist for the next cut. The structural stress and higher pressure gas is shifted away from the face and deeper into the coalbed where it is less of a threat. One relief technique involves the drilling of large diameter boreholes, typically 10 In the U.S., the Mid-Continent Resources Dutch Creek Mine near Redstone, CO, used volley firing In Australia, drainage holes, 9.6 The criterion for adequate drainage is a sufficiently lowered gas content. For example, Bulli seam mines in Australia operate under a “Section 63” notice, which prohibits the mining of coal that contains gas at contents above a specified threshold value. Such notices were applied following a fatal gas outburst in 1994. Draining gas to lower the coalbed gas content below the threshold value has successfully prevented gas outbursts. Threshold values fall into the range of roughly 7–10 As more is learned about the various kinds of bursts, the terminology has changed.   Gas outbursts will only occur where a steep gas pressure gradient, such as that shown in Almost all U.S. coal bumps have occurred in two areas. In the east, along a northeast trend from the Harlan coalfield in Kentucky to the Beckley coalfield of West Virginia and, in the west, within the Wasatch Plateau and Book Cliffs in Utah and the Carbondale and Somerset coalfields of Colorado. In a report by  The importance of constraint to elevated levels of stress within coal pillars has been discussed by As is noted from the discussions above, the dividing line between a coal bump and an outburst is not always sharp. In general, there are several conditions that are shared between bumps and outburst. The most notable are high vertical stress conditions and constraint of the coal, most probably provided by the character of the contact between the coal and the roof and floor strata ( The U.S. mines with the most significant gas outburst problems were operated by Mid-Continent Resources from the late 1950s to the mid-1980s. The Dutch Creek Mine had its first major explosion on December 28, 1965. A combination gas and coal dust explosion fatally injured nine miners ( A similar, an equally, deadly event occurred at the Dutch Creek Mine in 1981. In this disaster a massive blowout of gas and coal occurred in a two-entry development section about 2 Gas outbursts are a serious safety issue in coal mining worldwide. In the U.S., they have been relatively rare, largely because of the shallow mining depths and the permeable nature of many U.S. coalbeds. However, as deeper U.S. coalbeds are extracted in the future, there is a potential for this hazard to become more significant. It is therefore important that health and safety research continue to focus on this issue so that appropriate controls can be developed in anticipation of increased gas outburst frequency and intensity.