The objective of the present research was to use two different bacterial cultures in continuous tank bioleaching circuits and to use this knowledge for mathematical modeling of the chalcopyrite bioleaching kinetic. Using three different particle size distributions (PSD) with the indices (d80) of 45, 32 and 16 µm of a chalcopyrite concentrate from the main Iranian copper processing plant and two types of bacteria, one and two-step continuous tests were performed in stirred tanks. In the first phase, tests were performed at 50 ± 2 °C using moderate thermophilic bacteria. The second part consisted of two-step continuous tests at 50 ± 2 °C using moderate thermophilic bacteria in the first reactor and extremely thermophilic bacteria at 65 ± 2 °C in the second reactor. The results of one-step continuous tests indicated that the highest rate of copper dissolution (5.21 g/l·day) resulted from test using feed with d80 = 16 µm. The Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FE-SEM) analysis of bioleaching residue indicated that the surface of particles was mostly covered with secondary layers. The Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) analysis of the formed layer revealed high concentrations of iron, sulfur and a certain amount of potassium. The results of two-step tests showed that under the specified conditions of this study, about 95% of copper was leached and transferred to solution. The analysis of FE-SEM and EDS residue indicated that the particle surface activity at this stage was higher than that of a single-step system probably due to the high temperature of the reaction medium (50 °C for the first reactor and 65 °C for the second reactor) and the presence of Oxidation-Reduction Potential (ORP) of solution in the range between 360 and 480 mV, Ag/AgCl. The results of the mathematical modeling for predicting the PSD of existing particles in the one -step reactor indicated that the maximum rate of size reduction kinetics was related to the first five days. The maximum difference between the experimental and predicted results was 19%. In case of two-step system, the reduction in particle size between the first and fifth days was significantly more than the next days. From the results of this study, it can be pointed out that firstly the two-steps bioleaching of chalcopyrite concentrate is more effective than the one-step and the reduction of particle size distribution can be predicted using the presented mathematical modeling.Copper production reached from 16.6 million metric tons in 2012 to 22.6 million metric tons at the end of 2017 due to the high economic growth in developing countries ( All these studies conclude that the main challenging problem in bioleaching of chalcopyrite concentrate is the low rate of copper extraction. The studies indicate formation of a passivating film on the surface during dissolution, which prevents direct contact between the solution and the mineral and limits the electrochemical transport required for the dissolution mechanism to act. ( Although a large number of researches have been investigated about continuous bioleaching of chalcopyrite considering some operational factors such as: retention time, temperature, solid loading, etc. ( It is generally accepted that chalcopyrite dissolves under the oxidative action of ferric ions and the attack action of protons via a polysulfide mechanism. The decomposition of chalcopyrite caused by microbial leaching can be represented by Eqs. Ferric ion consumption (r Acid consumption (r Acid consumption and ferric ion generation (r Acid generation (r Acid generation (r In a heterogeneous dissolution reaction sequence, mass transfer of reactants first takes place from the bulk fluid to the external surface of the particle. The reactants then diffuse from the external surface into and through the pores within the particle, with reaction taking place only on the catalytic surface of the pores. A schematic representation of this two-step diffusion process is shown in We assume a particle with radius R that species A (here is ferric ion) as it enters, leaves, and reacts in a spherical shell of inner radius r and outer radius Doing mole balance of reactant at steady state, the governing differential equation for concentration profile ( If the entire surface were exposed to the concentration at the external surface of the particle, At steady state, the net flow of reactant (Fe According to chalcopyrite dissolution reaction in ferric medium, 4 mol of Fe For a multi-particle system (in terms of particle size distribution) needs specific considerations. If N In the bioleaching process, the particle size varies from The number of particles as In this equation, k Therefore, considering the input feed size to the reactor, Eq. In this study, the copper concentrate used in all the tests was obtained from Sarcheshmeh Copper Complex, Rafsanjan, Iran. Modal analysis of the sample ( A mixed culture of moderately thermophilic bacteria composed mainly of To study the bioleaching of the concentrate in the continuous system using moderately thermophilic microorganisms, three samples with PSDs with (d80) of 45, 32 and 16 It should be noted that a bacterial adaptation process has showed that moderately thermophilic species had a maximum growth rate up to 8% (W/V) for solution density and extremely thermophiles up to 5% (W/V). The adaptation conditions as well as process economics limited the arrangement of use of these bacterial strains in the CSTRs. In other words, we could not use moderately thermophiles in both reactors due to low kinetics as well as extremely thermophiles for both reactors due to process economic and low capacity. All the continuous experiments were preceded by a discontinuous stage designed to adapt the culture to the test conditions. Once each reactor was inoculated, metal concentration in solution, pH, redox potential and bacterial population were measured. The continuous feed was started once the optimum culture growth was attained. The duration of continuous experiments should be at least the residence time of a discontinuous process, since the system requires a time equal to the residence time to evacuate all metals accumulated during the discontinuous stage. In fact, it is during the second stage that the system functions in continuous mode according to the experimental conditions. The feeding flow was adjusted using a peristaltic pump (PD 5206, Heidolph, Germany). The solution pH and ORP were daily recorded. In all leaching tests, samples of solution were taken on a daily basis for pH and redox potential (Ag/AgCl reference, 3540 pH&Conductivity Meter, JENWAY, United Kingdom) and for copper concentration measurements. Soluble copper was determined by Atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) (AA240, Varian BV, Australia). In addition to using a glass condenser for decreasing water evaporation, the loss of water due to evaporation was compensated by adding sterile distilled water (ASTM E1357-90), if needed. At the end of the operation, the solid residue of bioleaching operations was sampled for detailed surface characterizations.  As shown in Regarding the final amount of Cu concentration, as the EDS analysis shows, the rest of the chalcopyrite copper was probably locked within pyrite particles which remained intact due to the reduced diffusion rates. A closer examination of the surface of the particles in the residue indicated that a series of microscopic pores and cavities were formed on the surface (   As expected, the highest amount of copper dissolution rate can be achieved with a potential range of 360–480 mV, decreasing the pH of the solution and high specific surface of particles ( As illustrated, the highest solution potential in the second reactor was 394 mV. The low relative solution potential in the second reactor is justified by the sensitivity of extremely thermophilic microorganisms to shear stress caused by solid particles. As displayed in As such, fitting the data obtained from the PSD function In the two-step continuous system, the changes in the chalcopyrite dissolution rate at the final output of the system is the function the reactor temperature, average retention time, and PSD of the output of the first one. Therefore, the following equation can be used to predict the copper extraction in the output: The size changes in the sample used in the continuous test follows the Rosin-Rammler function. Thus, the equation for the size distribution function of the concentrate, f(d In the two-step continuous bioreactors, the output of the first reactor was fed to the second one. Given that the size distribution of the output is varying with time, the size distribution in the output of the second reactor was narrower than the previous steps by considering the two stages of dissolution at different rates.  The results of one-step continuous tests indicated that the highest extraction of copper was for 16 µm (89%). The FE-SEM analysis of bioleaching residue indicated that the surface of particles was mostly covered with secondary layers. Further, the EDS analysis of the formed layer revealed high concentrations of iron, sulfur and a certain amount of potassium. Certain amounts of copper were observed in the particle surface in addition to iron and sulfur. Furthermore, due to the dissolution of 89% copper in concentrate at 16 µm, the remaining part was locked with pyrite (degree of liberation = 90%). The results of two-step, continuous bioleaching showed that 94.5% copper (19.2 g/l) was extracted under specified conditions, probably due to the high temperature of the reaction medium (50 and 65 °C for the first and second reactor, respectively) and solution potential in the standard range (360–480 mV, Ag/AgCl), the particle surface activity at this stage was higher than that of a single-step bioreactor (the FE-SEM and EDS analyses). Copper concentration profile showed that the dissolution rate of copper in the days 2–8 was equal to 4.32 (g/l·day). 78.3% copper extraction until the eighth day which was 5.2% higher, compared to the one-step system. Based on the PSD-t modeling results in predicting the existing particle size distribution in the one-step reactor, the maximum rate of size reduction was related to the first five days, while the size reduction continued at a lower rate from day 5 to the end. Error analysis showed that the highest error rate between the data obtained from the experimental results and the output of the proposed model was 19%. In the one-step system, the particle size reduction for days 1–5 was more noticeable than the next days.  The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest. This work was supported by the