This paper examines an Australian garnieritic-type ore and changes in phase composition and morphology caused by heating in argon at 400–1000°C using XRF, XRD, DTA/TG, SEM/EDS and BET analyses. The mineral phases detected by XRD in the original ore include chlorite, talc, hematite and quartz. Traces of iron silicate, Fe–Cr spinel and monoxide phase (predominantly manganese oxide) were observed by EDS. Nickel was detected in chlorite, talc, iron silicate and monoxide phase. Heat treatment at 400–500°C did not change XRD patterns. At 600°C, dehydroxylation of the brucitic phase of chlorite occurred. Chlorite was converted into olivine (forsterite) and enstatite at 600–800°C. Upon heating to 900–1000°C, talc was also converted into olivine and enstatite. Ni-bearing phases after heat treatment at 800–850°C were forsterite, enstatite, talc, iron silicate and monoxide.Laterite ores have complex composition and mineralogy; they contain iron, magnesium, aluminium, silicon, nickel and other elements. They are generally formed in hot and wet tropical areas from intensive and long-term weathering of the underlying parent rock and are rusty-red owing to high content of iron oxide. The production of nickel from laterite ores has accounted for more than 40% of total nickel production, and share of this production is expected to rise ( Garnierite is a general name for hydrous nickel-magnesium silicates. It forms as result of lateritic weathering of ultramafic rocks. Garnierite is a mixture of two or more minerals such as serpentine, talc, sepiolite, or chlorite ( Unlike nickel sulphide ores, laterite ores are difficult to upgrade ( The ore tested in this study was garnieritic laterite ore powder with size 53–200 Calcination of the powder ore was studied in isothermal experiments under argon atmosphere (high purity, >99.99%) using a horizontal tube furnace. The experimental setup is schematically shown in Calcination of laterite ore was also tested in the temperature-programmed experiments using thermogravimetric analysis (TG) and differential thermal analysis (DTA) (PerkinElmer STA 6000) with heating rate of 10 The original ore and samples after the calcination experiments were characterised by Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersion spectroscopy (SEM/EDS) analyses. Phase changes during roasting of the ore were identified using Philips X’pert Multipurpose X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. For all the measurements, an automatic divergence slit, a 1° anti-scatter slit, and soller slits were employed. The scanning was performed with the step of 0.053°, the scan step time of 200 SEM/EDS analyses were done using a Hitachi S 3400-I SEM equipped with Bruker Quantax 400 EDS. The instrument was operated at a 20 Phase changes in a series of 1 Weight loss with temperature change in the process of heating a sample of laterite ore in nitrogen in the temperature-programmed DTA/TG experiment are presented in The effect of calcination on porosity and surface area of laterite ore was studied using a multi-point Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method with nitrogen physisorption (experimental error was 0.1–0.2 Formation of mesopores (8–9 The morphology and composition of mineral phases in the original and calcined garnierite ore at 600 and 850 Calcination at 600 Heat treatment at 850 XRD, BET, and DTA/TG analyses of laterite ore revealed a significant change in mineralogy between 600 and 700 SEM/EDS analysis identified chlorite, talc, iron silicate and manganese oxide as nickel bearing minerals in this garnierite ore. This analysis confirmed conversion of chlorite between 600 and 850 This research was supported under Australian Research Council’s Discovery Projects funding scheme (Project Number DP1094880). Jun Yang is also grateful to CSIRO for a scholarship.