Radioisotopic geochronology applied to the high-resolution calibration of Earth history requires a set of synthetic and natural reference materials for both 40Ar/39Ar and U-Pb techniques that permit both inter-laboratory and inter-technique comparisons. The sanidine- and zircon-bearing Carboniferous Fire Clay tonstein provides a potential natural Paleozoic reference for these two widely used radioisotopic systems. Here we report results for both radioisotopic systems, examining the suitability of this tonstein as a geochronologic reference. Sanidine crystals from the Fire Clay and co-irradiated monitors from eight irradiation positions were divided into eleven 40Ar/39Ar experiments. Single-grain sanidine 40Ar/39Ar analyses (n = 263) of the simplest 9 experiments have internal 2σ uncertainties at the ±1 Myr level (±0.3%), with a range of dates between ~315 and ~317 Ma (~1% precision), similar to the observed dispersion in the Fish Canyon sanidine monitor dates. Forty-one U-Pb analyses by the CA-ID-TIMS method on carefully selected single Fire Clay tonstein zircons have produced 206Pb/238U dates with an average 2σ precision of ±0.23 Myr (0.14%). Our Fire Clay preferred mean 40Ar/39Ar date of 315.36 ± 0.10 Ma (±1.10 Ma: fully propagated 2σ uncertainty, relative to a Fish Canyon age of 28.201 Ma) is consistent with our weighted mean 206Pb/238U zircon date of 314.629 ± 0.039 Ma (±0.35 Ma: fully propagated 2σ uncertainty; n = 27). The good single-crystal reproducibility of the sanidine data and the overall consistency between the two chronometers suggest that the tonstein holds promise as a Paleozoic age reference material.As geochronometers become increasingly more precise we are presented with the issue of age inaccuracy stemming from bias between chronometers and laboratories. In order to achieve the EARTHTIME initiative's goal of accurate and precise sequencing of geologic events at the 0.1% level, the  The Pennsylvanian Fire Clay tonstein is a kaolinized volcanic air-fall ash bed that covers a minimum of 37,000 km Because of its significance as a stratigraphic marker bed, the Fire Clay tonstein has been particularly well-mapped and studied (e.g., Previous Early U-Pb geochronology from the Fire Clay tonstein involved analysis of multi-grain (103–145 mg) fractions of untreated zircon by the ID-TIMS method, each based on a different tonstein sample from West Virginia, Virginia, Tennessee and Kentucky. These analyses produced highly discordant U-Pb results due to the widespread presence of xenocrystic components; the four samples defined a roughly linear array with concordia intercepts at 344 ± 35 Ma and 1224 ± 150 Ma (MSWD = 15). The results did not allow any meaningful comparison between U-Pb and the Three samples (RH1, RV5 and RS1) were collected from the Fire Clay tonstein within close proximity to the locations of samples RH and RV (Kentucky) and RS (West Virginia) of After disaggregation, sanidines were concentrated with heavy liquids, sieved to size fraction >250 μm, and hand-picked under a binocular microscope. Most sanidines are subhedral (e.g., Zircon crystals were concentrated with high-density liquids and hand-picked under a binocular microscope based on their crystal habit and morphology. Zircons from the Fire Clay tonstein range from equant to highly elongate prismatic crystals with length-to-width ratios as high as 10:1 ( Sanidines were irradiated in three separate batches (irradiations numbered 29, 32, 34), each with a 10-hour duration in the Cd lined facility (CLICIT) at the Oregon State University Reactor. Each irradiation included several stacked irradiation disks, identified by appended letter (for example 29B; Fig. A.1). Fish Canyon sanidines were co-irradiated with other crystals in each pit (Tables Irradiated samples were analyzed using the fully automated Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory (LDEO) AGES VG-5400 noble gas mass spectrometer. Individual crystals were fused using a CO Crystals were fused at the following laser power levels within three experiment types: total fusion, 2-step cleaning and step heating spectrum. Most crystals underwent total fusion at a power of 7 W. Smaller group of crystal underwent cleaning by 2-step heating with low-power steps at 0.1 W for all single crystals (A steps), followed by 7 W fusions for the same crystals (B steps). When successful, this cleaning yields A-steps with low radiogenic Ar (low   Reported uncertainties are of three types: (1) analytical without J-values that can only be compared to co-irradiated monitor standard analyses from the same irradiation pit. These uncertainties allow direct comparison of the spread of individual dates for tonstein and monitor grains, and are calculated without the uncertainty associated with the weighted mean J-value for the corresponding irradiation pit and without irradiation parameters uncertainties; (2) analytical uncertainties that incorporate the J-value uncertainty, and allow comparison to any Both J-values and weighted-mean-date calculations excluded some analyses. Statistical exclusion of analyses was based on two filters available in the MassSpec program: (1) “best contiguous group” (BCG) selects the largest contiguous group that has a mean square weighted deviation (MSWD) value within the 95% confidence interval for the respective group size and (2) “nMAD” deletes analyses that have median absolute deviations about the median beyond the cutoff n. When MSWD probability was <0.05, BCG filter was applied. Both 1.5MAD/2MAD filters were noted. In all cases when BCG filter applied, either the same eliminations were selected by 2MAD filter, or the calculated ages obtained with BCG and 2MAD filters had different eliminations but overlapped within 2σ. Both MSWD probabilities, before and after elimination, are listed in Both J-values and weighted-mean-date calculations excluded some analyses. Statistical exclusion of analyses was based on two filters available in the MassSpec program: (1) “best contiguous group” (BCG) selects the largest contiguous group that has a mean square weighted deviation (MSWD) value within the 95% confidence interval for the respective group size and (2) “nMAD” deletes analyses that have median absolute deviations about the median beyond the cutoff n. When MSWD probability was <0.05, BCG filter was applied. Both 1.5MAD/2MAD filters were noted. In all cases when BCG filter applied, either the same eliminations were selected by 2MAD filter, or the calculated ages obtained with BCG and 2MAD filters had different eliminations but overlapped within 2σ. Both MSWD probabilities, before and after elimination, are listed in Table A.2, as well as exclusion criteria specific to individual analyses such as high Ca/K ratio and low % radiogenic Zircons selected for U-Pb analysis were pre-treated by a chemical abrasion technique modified after Both Pb and U were loaded together onto degassed zone-refined Re single filaments with a silica gel-H Single-crystal sanidine Single-crystal sanidine The nine experiments presented here ( The nine experiments presented here ( Six experiments are excluded from age calculation for two different reasons. Two experiments of Fire Clay crystals treated with weak HF prior to analyses, still had residual kaolinite coating on some crystals. A subset of those crystals was subjected to additional cleaning by 2-step heating (rows 20–21 of Table A.1; The other four excluded experiments are monitors Taylor Creek sanidine and GA1550 biotite (rows 19, 22, 23 of Table A.1) and RH1 step heating experiment of 19 steps (Fig. A.5F). These experiments suffered analytical issues expressed as noticeable trends of Weighted mean dates from 8 Fire Clay Possible experimental causes for the observed spread are differences in sample preparation, analytical bias as described in Analytical bias such as correlated individual ages with signal strength for some experiments ( We suspect that the observed scatter is If our hypothesis is correct, we would expect that the least scattering of ages occurs when no or little vertical separation between Fire Clay and Fish Canyon grains exists and most scattering occurs for pits with the largest lengths of separations, as indeed we observe in In light of this accuracy issue, only the irradiation pits with none/small grains separating the tonstein from Fish Canyon grains (and probably no/little in-pit vertical neutron flux gradient) are considered for the age calculation. Our preferred age of 315.36 ± 0.55 (±0.17%, 1σ total uncertainty) Ma is the arithmetic mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM) for N = 4, from the 4 irradiation pits where in-pit vertical neutron flux gradients cannot compromise the results ( Forty-one single zircon grains were analyzed from sample RH1. Complete U-Pb data with their 2σ uncertainties are listed in Forty-one single zircon grains were analyzed from sample RH1. Complete U-Pb data with their 2σ uncertainties are listed in Table A.4. The total amount of radiogenic Pb in the analyses ranged from 125 pg to 20 pg and that of U from 2.4 ng to 240 pg. The sample date representing the age of deposition of the tonstein is derived from the weighted mean The sample date representing the age of deposition of the tonstein is derived from the weighted mean   As discussed in Our new U-Pb age of 314.629 ± 0.35 Ma (2σ total uncertainty) for the Fire Clay tonstein is based on a cluster of 27 single, chemically abraded, zircon analyses, for which all scatter in data can be reasonably explained by analytical dispersion. This date overlaps with a single, air-abraded, Fire Clay zircon date reported by The new U-Pb age overlaps within total uncertainty with our preferred Biostratigraphic constraints based on cephalopods and brachiopods from the marine strata below and above the Fire Clay bed allow correlation of this unit to the Westphalian B or Bolsovian substage (Middle Pennsylvanian Series) of western Europe ( Calibrating Earth history is an important task that underpins many disciplines within the Earth and planetary sciences. Obtaining accurate and precise radioisotopic ages requires not only rigorous attention to the analytical methodologies, but carefully designed experiments and well-characterized standards in order to explore systematic biases between geochronometers and laboratories. Sanidine from the Fire Clay tonstein shows remarkably consistent individual Contribution from the late Sam Bowring was instrumental to this project. He provided U-Pb laboratory support, as well as ideas and motivation in line with his overarching strive for better intercalibration of geochronologic techniques that he pursued throughout much of his career. Careful reviews by K. Kuiper and an anonymous reviewer greatly improved the manuscript. Thanks to J. Crowley for preliminary U-Pb analyses of zircons from samples RH1 and RV5 at MIT. Funding for fieldwork and initial The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.  Supplementary data include details of the following: Summary of all