In the context of climate change, the amount of carbon allocated to soil, particularly fresh litter, is predicted to increase with terrestrial ecosystem productivity, and may alter soil carbon storage capacities.
                  In this study we performed a 1-year litter-manipulation experiment to examine how soil CO2 efflux was altered by the amount of fresh litter. Three treatments were applied: litter exclusion (E), control (C, natural amount: 486gm−2) and litter addition (A, twice the natural amount: 972gm−2).
                  Litter decomposition rate was not affected by fresh litter amount. However, the addition or exclusion of fresh litter quickly increased or decreased total soil CO2 efflux (F
                     S) significantly, but the relative contribution of fresh litter to total soil respiration remained unchanged between the C and A treatments, as determined by laboratory measurements. Variation in F
                     S among treatments was not related to modification of its temperature sensitivity which was not affected by fresh litter amount (Q
                     10: 3.5 for E, 3.2 for C, 3.6 for A). While litter exclusion was the main cause of the F
                     S decrease in the E treatment, only 68% of F
                     S was directly attributable to litter addition in the A treatment. The remaining 32% of F
                     S in the A treatment was related to a real priming effect that appeared to be a long-lasting phenomenon. This priming effect lasting over 1 year may be related to a continuous release of organic compounds from litter to soil because of the progressive decomposition of leaf litter. Q
                     10 estimates and isotopic data lead to the hypothesis that the priming effect corresponded to the activation of the whole soil system.
                  As a consequence, the increase in ecosystem productivity may lead, via an increase in the amount of litter, to an increase in carbon turnover in soil. Further labelling experiments involving high-frequency carbon stable isotope measurements of CO2 efflux would help to clarify the relative importance of bulk soil and rhizosphere in the priming effect.In the context of climate change, the importance of the litter compartment as a carbon source for total soil CO The quantity of fresh litter remains an important factor affecting soil carbon cycling. Long-term litter-manipulation experiments performed In parallel with CO In this study, we performed an The experiment took place in Barbeau National Forest (CARBOEUROPE IP network site [Cluster_FR1, Site FR-Fon]; 48°29′N, 02°47′E; 60 The soil was a gleyic luvisol ( A 17.6 The experimental area was divided into 12 adjoining plots (each 1.2 The three treatments were: litter exclusion (E), natural conditions, Every measurement described in the following was performed monthly from May 2006 to March 2007, except for litter mass loss which was measured every 2 months. Carbon isotopic composition is expressed in ‰ relative to the Pee Dee Belemnite standard. During litter deposition, 12 litter bags (mesh size: 1  During To determine the role of litter in the modification of total soil CO Soil and litter samples were collected monthly in every plot according to the treatment. The soil sample consisted of three randomly taken soil cores (0–10 Litter samples were also composite samples constituted of three samples randomly taken in each C and A plots. Litter samples per plot corresponded to About 1.5  The isotopic ratio of total soil-respired CO The same system was used to measure For each field session, measured variables were averaged per treatment as arithmetical means, excepted The standard error of the mean was calculated as follows: Non parametric paired tests (Friedman repeated measures one-way analysis of variance on ranks, cited as RMANOVA; and Wilcoxon's test for paired samples on ranks) were used to check for differences between the three treatments. Significance level was set at 5%. All statistical analyses were performed using Statistica software (Statsoft Inc., Tulsa, USA). The results of assessments carried out on the plots prior to the start of the experiment are reported in Additionally, the isotopic composition of soil organic C was significantly different from that of the fresh litter used for the experiment ( Soil temperature ( In both C and A plots, an exponential decay function well fitted the data for litter dry mass loss with time ( Fresh litter amount had a significant impact on To determine whether the significant variation in total soil CO Laboratory measurements of fresh litter CO Heterotrophic CO Litter treatment did not significantly affect Exclusion or addition of fresh litter did not affect Like During the experiment, soil temperature and soil water content (SWC) were not modified by the treatment. A similar observation had been previously reported for soil temperature ( Temporal variations in Modifications of soil activity, and then of In accordance with the definition provided by Priming effect phenomena have been previously reported in laboratory studies ( Temporal variation in isotopic data can also be informative. The isotopic values were in the range of those reported in the literature for Litter manipulation showed that soil CO The authors acknowledge the “Office National des Forêts” for facilitating experimental work in Barbeau forest. They also thank Jean-Yves Pontailler and Laurent Vanbostal for their support during the field experiment in Barbeau forest. The authors are grateful to Xavier Raynaud for valuable discussions and the anonymous referees for valuable comments on the manuscript. This work was supported by the Authors also acknowledge the ‘Métabolisme-Métabolome’ platform of the IFR87 and RISOE National Laboratory for the isotopic facilities and Caroline Lelarge, and Per Ambus (Plant Biology and Biogeochemistry Department, Risø National Laboratory, Roskilde, Denmark) for organic matter isotopic analyses.