The mechanical properties of highly porous (90% porosity) poly(l-lactide) (PLLA), poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL) and poly(l-lactide/ε-caprolactone) (PLCL) were investigated. Young's modulus of non-porous PLLA, PCL and PLCL dropped from 2263.4, 183.7 and 5.7MPa to 16.8, 1.0 and 1.0MPa, respectively, for their ~90% porous counterparts. Elongation at break of PCL decreased noticeably with porosity fraction while PLCL maintained a highly elastomeric character and strain recovery capacity even in the presence of pores.
                  Inorganic bioactive particles (hydroxyapatite or bioglass) were added to confer bioactivity to the aforementioned synthetic bioresorbable polymers, and their effect on the mechanical properties was also investigated. Addition of 15vol.% of inorganic bioactive particles increased the Young's modulus of highly porous PLLA from 16.2 to ~30MPa. On the contrary, the difference between Young's modulus of filled and unfilled PCL and PLCL scaffolds was not statistically significant.
                  Finally, an in vitro study of the cytocompatibility and adhesion of adipose derived stem cells (ADSCs) was conducted. The observed viability and excellent adhesion of these cells to both porous and non-porous templates indicate that the employed materials can be good candidates for application in tissue engineering.Tissue engineering is defined as an interdisciplinary field that applies the principles of engineering and life sciences for the development of biological substitutes that restore, maintain or improve tissue functions Among the numerous materials available for the fabrication of scaffolds, synthetic bioresorbable polyesters – such as polylactides and polylactones – have attracted a great deal of attention for use in tissue engineering because of their biodegradability, biocompatibility and easily controlled (tunable) properties. While poly( The aforementioned (co)polyesters, however, do not possess the necessary specific bioactive abilities to induce adequate proliferation and differentiation of cells. Therefore, addition of phosphate or silicate based bioactive fillers is being considered as a strategy to impart bioactivity to bioresorbable synthetic polymers in the regeneration of hard and soft tissues In bone tissue engineering, incorporation of a biocompatible and bioresorbable polymer to bioactive glass or hydroxyapatite scaffolds has been proposed as a method for improving the toughness of the ceramic scaffolds While bioactive ceramics have been thoroughly considered for bone repair, little attention has been paid to their application in the regeneration of soft tissues. Recent works This study focuses on the mechanical properties of highly porous PLLA, PCL and PLCL scaffolds. The mechanical properties were measured by means of tensile tests and the effect of the porosity and bioactive particles content were evaluated using the Gibson–Ashby In addition, an PLLA of a weight-average molecular weight (M The 45S5 Bioglass® particles were kindly supplied by Novabone® (US). The composition of Bioglass® (in wt.%) was 45.0% SiO The hydroxyapatite sintered powder was purchased from Plasma Biotal Limited (UK) and its main components (in wt.%) were 55% CaO and 41% P Porous scaffolds were prepared by a solvent casting/particulate leaching method described elsewhere Morphology of the scaffolds was studied via scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (HITACHI S-4800). Samples were fractured after being frozen in liquid nitrogen. To make them conductive, they were coated with a 150 Porosity of scaffolds was calculated according to Eq. The glass transition and crystallinity behavior of samples were analyzed by DSC measurements conducted with a TA Instruments DSC Q-200. Samples (5–10 The bioactive particle content in composite samples was determined by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA-Q50, TA Instruments) in platinum pans, with nitrogen flux of 60 Mechanical properties of the dumbbell-shaped samples were measured by means of tensile tests with an Instron 5565 testing machine following ISO 527-2 (ISO 527-2/5A/1). In order to compare the results of the present study with those reported in previous investigations Primary cultures of human adipose-derived stem cells (ADSCs) were kindly supplied by Histocell S.L. Cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium with high-glucose (DMEM For To assess the short-term cytotoxicity of the developed polymers, ISO/EN 10993 part 5 guidelines were used: medium extraction with a 24 The adhesion and morphology of ADSCs were assessed by SEM. Before cell seeding, all porous scaffolds and non-porous films were sterilized by ethylene oxide gas and pre-wetted with standard culture medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) during 24  Tensile stress–strain curves of non-porous PLLA, PCL and PLCL and their 90% porous counterparts are shown in Gibson & Ashby This trend has been reported by other authors for glassy materials with a linear elastic behavior at small strains, for example poly( The behavior of PLCL could not be described by Eq. Thermal characterization of highly porous scaffolds (PLLA5, PCL5 and PLCL5) loaded with hydroxyapatite or bioglass was conducted by DSC and TGA. According to DSC results, PLLA and PCL were semicrystalline polymers and presented degrees of crystallinity (X As demonstrated by TGA, whereas the incorporation of hydroxyapatite had negligible effect on the degradation temperatures (T Morphology of hydroxyapatite and bioglass filled porous samples was analyzed by SEM.  As an illustration, σ Statistically significant differences were not observed between the σ To predict the Young's modulus of the porous scaffolds filled with hydroxyapatite or bioglass particles, a combination of the Gibson & Ashby model (Eq.  For PCL, the addition of hydroxyapatite or bioglass particles had little effect on the Young's modulus, which stayed almost constant at around 1  Referring to the cytotoxicity and cell viability, after incubating ADSCs with non-porous film extracts the cell response to the negative and positive control materials was as expected in all tests, confirming the validity of the assay. ADSCs cultured with each of the extracts tested have metabolic activities similar to those obtained by cells grown in standard culture medium or negative control; thus, they were able to incorporate and metabolize MTT, showing high viability and normal proliferation activity. We can confirm that the leachables released from the tested materials can be considered as non-cytotoxic. As can be seen in Cell seeding assessment and morphological evaluation were determined by SEM. We observed that ADSCs spread out homogenously on the surface and were able to colonize the inner regions of the scaffolds, denoting that all materials are valid substrates for cell adhesion.  In the case of the porous PCL scaffold filled with hydroxyapatite particles (  The porous PLCL scaffold also provided a good biological support for adhesion and cell integration. As can be seen in The final image is the porous PLCL loaded with bioglass. In All the above observations clearly demonstrate that ADSCs grew suitably on both porous and non-porous polymeric biomaterials. In this work, the mechanical behavior of highly porous PLLA, PCL and PLCL scaffolds was investigated. The highly porous structure of the scaffolds with well-interconnected pores is suitable for application in tissue engineering. However, the presence of pores led to an important reduction in the mechanical properties of the samples. The relationship between the porosity and the Young's modulus can be fitted using the Gibson–Ashby approach for the PLLA and PCL samples, and an Incorporation of hydroxyapatite or bioglass modified the tensile properties of the studied bioresorbable polymers. In this sense, Young's modulus of PLLA scaffolds increased from 16.2 MTT assays concluded that the studied materials were not cytotoxic for ADSCs. In addition, SEM observations revealed an excellent adhesion of the ADSCs on both porous and non-porous samples. These results demonstrate that the polymeric materials employed in this work may be valid candidates for their application in tissue engineering. The authors are grateful for funds from the