This paper presents the influence of sodium silicate modulus on iron ore flotation with sodium oleate collector. Bench flotation tests were performed at pH7 with actual iron ore from Quadrilátero Ferrífero, Brazil, with 42.8% Fe and 37.2% SiO2. Iron recovery averaged above 90% and the Fe contents in the concentrate were above 55%. The highest values of Fe grade and lowest of SiO2 were obtained with low levels of pulp density and sodium silicate dosage and with high level of sodium oleate. Increase of sodium silicate modulus had a small influence on response variables.Factors such as mineralogy, Fe and SiO In iron oxide (hematite, magnetite, and goethite) flotation, its maximum recovery with the collector sodium oleate is achieved at the neutral pH value ( Soluble sodium silicate or water glass is the most widely used dispersant of slime in wet mineral processing. It is also very frequently used as depressant in nonmetallic flotation such as phosphate flotation in order to depress siliceous gangue and carbonates ( This paper presents the influence of sodium silicate modulus on iron ore flotation with sodium oleate collector. Bench flotation tests were performed at pH The iron ore received in laboratory (200.7 The desliming process consisted of the following steps. First, the iron ore pulp density of 15 The chemical compositions and loss on ignition (LOI) of iron ore from Quadrilátero Ferrífero, Brazil, used in bench flotation tests are presented in The minerals identified in the iron ore sample studied were hematite (He), goethite (Go), and quartz (Qz), which is in accordance with the chemical composition presented in The P The reagents used in the bench flotation tests were commercial sodium silicate of modus 1, 2.26, and 3.33 as depressants ( For bench flotation tests, 1% sodium oleate (wt/v) and 5% sodium silicate (wt/v) were prepared. The sodium oleate solution (1% wt/v) was prepared by dilution of 1 The software Minitab 15 was used to plan the factorial experiment design of the bench flotation tests and to analyse the variable responses, Fe recovery, Fe and SiO The bench flotation tests were performed in a CIMAG cell at pH  In general, Fe recoveries were highest (above 90% mean) for all sodium silicates tested. Fe grades were highest for low levels of the factors pulp density and sodium silicate dosage, and at high level of sodium oleate dosage. The SiO The mean Fe recoveries were between 93.8% (SS2.26) to 95.2% (SS3.33). The results with SS1, SS2.26 and SS3.33 are in accordance with those of  Based on the results of bench flotation tests of an actual sample of iron ore that was observed, iron recoveries were above 90% and Fe contents were above 55% in the concentrate for all sodium silicate tested. In general, the highest Fe grade and the lowest SiO The financial support by the