 I heard about Abraham’s pioneering work in the field of hydrometallurgy in the early 1970’s and this was the start of a 30-year friendship. 1970–73 was an exciting time for all of us working at the frontiers of ion exchange technology, particularly in areas relevant to the recovery, separation and purification of uranium and the platinum group metals. NIM was then leading research and development into advances in solvent extraction and ion exchange technology at a time of immense growth and prosperity in the uranium, and precious metals industry. Abraham Warshawsky came to this field of endeavour as a young organic/polymer chemist full of novel ideas for the synthesis of specialist ion exchangers and extractants. He was one of that rare breed of scientists who was enthused by practical applications of core chemistry and fundamentals and their application to challenging problems of industrial relevance. His innovative development of selective polymeric ion exchange resins for the recovery of platinum group metals at NIM had a profound effect on his career. It led him to devote much of his later studies to the pursuit of novel approaches to the synthesis of chelating polymers for a wide range of practical applications ranging from inorganic analysis to the recovery and refining of precious metals. Abraham Warshawsky did not confine himself to a single specialism and his researches crossed many boundaries. He had the ability to collaborate extensively with his colleagues at The Weizmann Institute and a wide range of contemporaries across the four quarters of the globe. This enabled him to make major contributions to the fields of liquid extraction-indeed he pioneered research on solvent impregnated resins in the 1970’s – a topic that has seen a resurgence of interest at the present time. He published widely in the fields of polymer synthesis, membrane science, metal-polymer microdispersions, catalysis and in recent years moved the frontiers of polymer technology into a medical and biochemical context. He was a prolific author of quality papers in the scientific literature. A quick glance at the “Web of Science” shows that in the period 1982–2001 he had published in over 40 different learned journals – a testament to the diversity of his work. He was a consistent contributor to this journal, having published over 25 papers on a wide range of hot topics. Of course, he served the journal with distinction as co-Editor-in-Chief from 1991–95 and carried on the fine tradition of his predecessors. He was generous with his time and effort and co-organised the 3rd and 8th “Polymers in Organic Chemistry” Conferences in Israel in 1986 and 1998 respectively. All who attended these meetings will remember his energy and enthusiasm and his pride in hosting the international gathering in his beloved country. He will also be remembered for the many topical talks he gave at numerous Gordon Conferences in the USA. Abraham Warshawsky was a brilliant scientist and above all a warm-hearted, modest family orientated person. His untimely death came at the height of his career and has robbed us of his further contributions to the field of reactive and functional polymers. He will be greatly missed by his colleagues at The Weizmann Institute of Science, his scientific friends and collaborators throughout the world and of course by his family.   30 November 2001