Bone remodeling is a fundamental process by which the mammalian skeleton tissue is continuously renewed to maintain the structural, biochemical and biomechanical integrity of bone and to support its role in mineral homeostasis. The process of bone remodeling is achieved by the cooperative and sequential work of groups of functionally and morphologically distinct cells, termed basic multicellular units (BMUs) or bone remodeling units (BRUs). Changes in the population and/or activities in any component of the BMUs disrupt the harmony of the cellular efforts and leads to changes in bone mass and strength. The cellular activities of bone remodeling units vary within and among the different bones of the skeleton and this variation changes with age, underlying the mechanism of age-related bone loss. This chapter reviews current concepts of bone remodeling with respect to its cellular mechanism, physiological functions, and anatomic variation in cellular behavior. Bone remodeling takes place on bone surfaces and is achieved by multicellular units, BMUs Activation is the term used to describe the process of converting a resting bone surface into a remodeling surface. In the human adult skeleton, a new BRU is activated about every ten seconds Osteoclasts affix themselves to the bone matrix through integrins such as ανβ3 During this phase, the resorption lacuna is occupied by mononuclear cells, including monocytes, osteocytes that were liberated from bone by osteoclasts and pre-osteoblasts that are being recruited to couple the resorption phase with the formation phase (see Osteoblasts are recruited and differentiate from mesenchymal precursors. There is a gradient of differentiation as the osteoblastic precursors reach the bone surface to refill the resorption cavity and the osteoblast phenotype becomes fully expressed ( As bone formation continues, osteoblasts that have reached the end of their synthetic activity embed themselves in the matrix, becoming osteocytes (see Osteoblasts suffer one of three fates during and at the end of the bone formation phase of the remodeling cycle: many become incorporated into the matrix they formed and differentiate into osteocytes; some convert into lining cells on the bone surface at the termination of formation; and the remainder die by apoptosis. Bone lining cells were once thought to serve primarily to regulate the flow of ions into and out of the bone extracellular fluid serving as the blood–bone barrier. It has recently been appreciated that, under certain circumstances, for example, stimulation by PTH or mechanical force, bone lining cells can revert back to functional osteoblasts The end result of a completed remodeling cycle by a BRU is the production of a new osteon ( The primary functions of bone remodeling are presumed to be maintenance of the mechanical competence of bone by continuously replacing fatigued bone with new, mechanically sound bone and to preserve mineral homeostasis by continuously mobilizing the skeletal stores of calcium and phosphorus to the circulation. It has also been suggested that there must be other, as yet known functions or reasons why the human skeleton undergoes such extensive remodeling Like all load-bearing structural materials, the skeleton is subjected to fatigue damage as it ages and undergoes repetitive mechanical challenges. Older bone displays increased mineralization density as secondary mineralization continues and the water content diminishes, which causes the matrix to become more brittle The skeleton is the greatest repository of mineral ions, such as Ca, Mg and P, in the human body and plays an important role in mineral homeostasis by coordinated interplay with the intestine, the site of net ionic absorption, and the kidney, the site of net ionic excretion. Long-term mineral homeostasis is achieved by the BRUs, which mobilize skeletal mineral to blood during bone resorption and return the mineral back to the skeleton during bone formation. However, at least two other mechanisms allow the skeleton to participate in mineral homeostasis: the blood–bone barrier maintained by the bone lining cells and the percolation of bone extracellular fluid through osteocyte lacuno-canalicular network. In the regulation of calcium homeostasis, a fall in serum Ca The involvement of the skeleton in phosphate homeostasis is achieved in a similar manner. A fall in plasma phosphate concentration stimulates 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D production in the kidney which, in addition to increasing phosphate absorption from gut, stimulates bone remodeling to mobilize phosphate from the skeleton. Clearly, phosphate cannot be withdrawn from the skeleton without being accompanied by calcium and vice versa. However, the unnecessary increase in calcium or phosphate, respectively, can be compensated by the enhanced renal excretion of calcium or phosphate. As discussed earlier in the chapter, minerals are transferred into bone during the formation phase of the remodeling cycle. Because bone formation is usually tightly coupled with bone resorption, bone remodeling does not generally lead to a net transfer of mineral to or from the blood in the long run. However, an increase in remodeling rate does transiently mobilize significant amounts of mineral into the blood, because it takes a much longer time for newly formed bone to reach the same mineral content as that removed during bone resorption The bone turnover rate varies substantially within and among the different bones of the skeleton. It has often been asserted that cancellous bone has higher turnover than cortical bone Differences in cellular activity in BRUs among the anatomic subdivisions within the bone determines the net difference between the volume of bone removed and replaced by each BRU. In the Haversian or intracortical envelope, the net bone balance is slightly negative, particularly in the inner half of the cortex, which leads to a decrease in the radial rate of closure of osteons The net bone balance on each envelope provides a BRU-based explanation for the long-established facts concerning the changes in three-dimensional geometry of bones as a function of age There have been relatively few assessments of the regional variation in bone remodeling and turnover throughout the skeleton. Some attention has been given to the relationship between the standard biopsy site in the iliac crest and other skeletal sites