The paper presents the architecture of a submerged arc furnace process model. It utilises the robust and simplistic solving capabilities of a time dependent, dynamic modelling by employing flowrate and composition data. Next, it employs continuously updated electrical data in order to optimise the model’s predictive ability, with zero-order hold elements enforced on flowrate and composition data until these variables are resampled. The addition of a set of fundamentally derived variables generated through the online use of a vectorised, look-up table, is also proposed. Such a look-up table is created offline by utilising computational fluid dynamic (CFD) modelling techniques. Promising results indicate that this pragmatic methodology allows an intermediate version of this model to reasonably predict the metallurgy of the subsequent tap within the inherent accuracy of the data. The model is being tested on industrial data.A submerged arc furnace is a very complex system in both physical and chemical aspects. It involves multi-phase, high temperature reduction reactions, energy conversion and distribution from electric power through arcs and conduction. Many of the interrelated physical, chemical and dynamic aspects are still not very well understood. Submerged arc furnaces have the interesting property that the electrical side of the furnace can be measured and controlled very well, but that one cannot characterise the particulate feed or define the distributed properties of the process very accurately. To better understand and control these furnaces one has to combine electrical and metallurgical aspects in such a way that both aspects are taken care of in the most optimal way. Whereas very sampling periods allow the electrical side to be well controlled in a feedback way, it is owing to larger, distributed sampling periods of material and its changing properties in the furnace, that the metallurgy can only really be controlled effectively in a feedforward way ( A big and ongoing challenge, therefore, lies in exploiting the thoroughly accurate and readily available electrical knowledge in such a way as to cast a predictive light on the dynamic path of the process between tap events. With the assistance of computational fluid dynamic techniques, it will be shown that such a venture cannot only optimise the predictive ability of the derived models, but can also provide much needed assistance in understanding of the furnace process. In this study, a process model will be developed by using a combination of dynamic modelling and CFD techniques. The process is the large-scale production of phosphorus at Thermphos International, The Netherlands. The main reaction as defined by the Wohler process ( Gravity delivers the feed, consisting of pelletised and sintered apatite, coke and silica, to the furnace through 10, evenly distributed feed chutes ensuring constant burden volume. The gaseous product leaves the furnace through two symmetrically spaced outlet vents situated above the ferrophosphorus tap hole in the roof of the furnace. The ferrophosphorus is tapped off, usually once per day. Slag, however, is continuously tapped through two alternating, water-cooled tapping holes located 400 The slag stream is sampled every 2 Data pertaining to Furnace 1 at ThermPhos International from 1 January 2003 to 30 May 2005 were collected and reconciled. This was done in order to achieve mass balance closure. The gaseous product stream is poorly monitored and through reconciliation, the P A distinction was made between flowrates of compounds, composition data and electrical data.    In this section the architecture of a submerged arc furnace process model is presented. The last term, A fundamental reason for the conception of the above-mentioned model structure is the continuing fluctuation of the furnace between a flowrate-driven state, a composition(thermodynamic)-driven state and a stochastic state. In the next section this will be shown. In any search for supplementary feedforward, predictive submerged arc furnace control it is difficult to create sufficiently accurate and practically useful predictive, first principle metallurgical models. One proven approach is to develop dynamic transfer function models based on reconciled plant data, as well as simplistic, yet representative thermodynamic equilibrium prediction models with the help of artificial intelligence techniques. This method resulted in equilibrium autoregressive moving average models with exogenous variables (Equilib-ARMAX) successfully tested on bath type furnace process data ( In a determination, current input data are used to model current output data. The variables shown in To validate the use of linear techniques and confirm that the data does not have a large degree of non-linearity, non-linear techniques were also utilised to model the data. For all non-linear modelling A visual representation of the influence of all the variables on the output can be seen in In this section the prediction ability of the data is investigated. In a prediction, current input data are used to model output data of one sampling period in the future. This was done by exploring the linear, as well as non-linear prediction ability of the data. A autoregressive type transfer function with exogenous input variables (ARX) was used to predict the P The testing results can be seen in A possible reason for this is inability of the existing variables to explain the variance in the output variable effectively. It is exactly this need that is addressed by the creation of derived CFD variables through the use of offline, CFD simulations that is discussed in Section An actual process constraint is also partly responsible of the poor predictive performance of the model: There are 8 Only four variables (P, Mn, Cr and Ti in the ferrophosphorus) showed significant process history to warrant the inclusion of its values from a sampling period in the past ( Electrical data, on the other hand, are constantly measured and recorded. In order to illustrate the potential predictive improvement that continuously electrical updated data can add to the dynamic model (as expressed in Eq.  Such an addition of averaged electrical data (Δ Arrows in All the variables listed in  The non-linear, prediction models provided remarkably similar results than the linear, prediction models. A visual representation of the influence of the selected variables on the output can be seen in     Data collected from reduction experiments on Thermphos International reactants (  The influence of electrical data changes on the furnace conditions will be simulated. All resulting data stemming from multiple, offline CFD simulations will be vectorised, thereby creating a look-up table with a set of derived variables. The variables will include e.g. gaseous product velocity, burden pressure drop, slag and ferrophosphorus temperatures and the characteristics (height, thickness, shape) of the reaction zone. The vectorisation process is schematically explained in A phosphorus producing, submerged arc furnace is continuously fluctuating between the flowrate-driven state, composition(thermodynamic)-driven state and stochastic state. This was proven in Section An approach to modelling of the phosphorus submerged arc furnace process was presented and expressed mathematically in Eq. Derived variables, The authors would like to thank Thermphos International, The Netherlands, for their financial support and the positive and continuing interest they have shown in this project.