Several empirical studies show that the size of an economy affects the number of fields where it is technologically active (technological variety). In this paper I “quantify” the relationship between the countries’ economic size and technological variety by using European patent data. Thus, technological variety can be distinguished from technological intensity. I find that technological variety accounts for about 40% of the higher number of patent applications made by larger and richer economies. However, the size/variety relationship is more robust than the wealth/variety relationship. The empirical results regarding technological activity resemble those on international trade and may be interpreted combining different theories.The technological specialization of countries has been frequently investigated by economists of distinct fields of research. The availability of data about international patenting and aggregate R&D expenditure means that the historical evolution of specialization in technology can be traced within several countries. Many studies in this area regard the relationship between the countries’ economic performance (for example in terms of GDP or GDP per capita) and technological diversification. A well established result of all these studies is a positive relationship between the size of economies and the degree of technological diversification. This confirms the results obtained by international empirical economists: smaller countries are more open to foreign trade, and they are forced to specialize in exports because their national productive capacity does not allow them to cover all industries uniformly. Thus, an inverse relationship has been highlighted between the size of a country and the variety of its exports. For example, The term “size” is used differently by various authors, either the In order to answer this question, in this paper I use the key concept of technological Another motivation of the present study is to extend the size/variety analysis to a higher number of countries. All previous studies considered sub-samples of countries. Finally, the paper compares the results in terms of technological variety to the empirical findings regarding variety in production and international trade. Recent empirical studies quantified the role of product variety in explaining the greater exports of larger and richer countries. Since this branch of literature inspired the determination of technological variety in the present paper, I can interpret the empirical results taking into account the theories that link the structure of technological activity to the patterns of foreign trade flows. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section I present the possible theoretical predictions about the relationship between the size of economies and the intensity/variety of technological activity. In this section I briefly describe the possible theoretical predictions about the relationship between technological variety and the size of economies. These hypotheses consist of simple general correlations between macroeconomic characteristics of countries and the structure of innovative activity, but they may be incorporated in the broader literature that explores the linkages between technology, structure of internal production and international trade that are discussed in the fourth section. In the course of the analysis, countries will be the unit of analysis. Thus, for example, the degree of technological variety is related to activities performed by firms which locate within national borders (while the expression “technological diversification” is usually adopted by the firm level). Although this approach presents some problems (caused, for example, by the innovative activity performed by multinational firms), it is frequently adopted by researchers and experts of technological specialization. In addition, investigating the patterns of innovation at the country level is justified by the emergence of the “national systems of innovation”, a phenomenon described, among others, by On the one hand, investments in R&D are risky. Therefore, options theory suggests that a country (and its firms) should diversify its investments in order to mitigate the risk. On the other hand, economies of scale may induce a country to concentrate its resources in a limited number of technological areas, to exploit such economies. In addition, the theory of comparative advantages suggests that countries have different initial resource endowments which are necessary to undertake R&D investments, thus they may prefer to focus their innovative efforts where those endowments are higher. These qualitative considerations imply that large economies (in terms of GDP and population), endowed with higher resources, may spread and diversify their investments across many technological fields, and still be able to meet the minimum efficient scale for obtaining excellence in all these fields. In contrast, small countries face more constraints and thus they need to use their resources in few technological areas. Of course, this does not mean that small countries will concentrate the innovative efforts in the same areas. In particular, In addition, large countries have a greater domestic market and a demand effect may induce large economies to spread their innovations in many sectors. In fact, a large domestic market means more consumers with highly heterogeneous preferences, in relation to both final and intermediate goods. This may create an incentive for national firms to invest more in innovation, in order to create higher product differentiation when the innovations are introduced in the markets. Therefore, larger countries should be characterized by greater innovative efforts both within each field (the “intensity” of technological activity) and across different fields (the “variety” of technological activity). Moreover, large countries have a higher number of large companies that are technologically active and that diversify their investments in R&D, and this should be reflected in a higher degree of technological variety at the country level. The empirical analysis may show which factors are more important in explaining the greater patenting activity of large economies. Another possible hypothesis is that the effect of the increasing availability of resources on technological variety is higher in less advanced economies. This is because poor countries need to “look into” many technological fields to find where it is possible to compete at an international level, by exploiting economies of scale through the specialization in some technological areas. This “static” hypothesis is consistent with the “evolution” of technological specialization described, for example, by The empirical analysis of this paper is based on the use of patent statistics as a proxy for profiles of countries in terms of technological size and variety. Patent statistics may not be totally reliable as indicators of technological activity. In fact, some patents are important and revolutionary for technological progress, while others are not indicative at all: the quality of patents is difficult to ascertain, unless one conducts specific analyses on patent citations and renewals. Important inventions are not necessarily always patented, but some of them nevertheless become innovations. Finally, the propensity to patent varies across firms, industries and countries. In spite of all these drawbacks, patent statistics provide a very detailed indicator for studying the patterns of technological variety. Thus, they are a unique data source on innovation activity (for a review about these themes see I use patent data drawn from the EPO official statistics and thus I consider international patenting in a third geographic area: the European Union. Previous empirical studies have generally used USPTO data, regarding the patents in force within US. Effectively, given the size of the market and the technological development of the US, the invention patented in the US are expected to have a prominent influence on the economic and technological activity of the rest of the world. However, the European market has now a considerable size and can represent a good reference point. In addition, using European statistics means that foreign patenting for I chose a single year both for the sake of methodological simplicity, and because it is reasonable to assume that the positive relationship between economic size and technological variety holds in a single year, since it has been proved to be historically stable ( The main cross-section analysis regards patent applications made in 2002, sorted by country and technological field ( The analysis of patent data is slightly different with respect to previous work on technological specialization. Previous studies employed various indexes to characterize the extent of specialization of a country in a technological field. For example, Moreover, while previous work defined technological diversification as the opposite phenomenon of technological specialization (or concentration), I use a different approach. The number of technological fields where a country is active reveals its technological variety: the higher the fields, the greater the variety. When a country presents patent applications in few technological fields, this does not mean that its “specialization” is higher, but only that its technological variety is low. To sum up, I assume that economic size is positively associated with technological size. Most importantly, I suppose that this association is due to both In order to quantify these effects, I use the following methodology, which is inspired by the studies of international economics about export variety (see One could object that this method of decomposition leads to overstate the technological variety. For example, if country A has only one patent in each of 31 technical units and 1000 patents in the last 32nd technical unit, it would have the highest extensive margin (32), while its technology is effectively highly concentrated in the last technical unit. However, though country A does specialize in the last technological field, it also has the ability to spread its technological activity in all fields. In other words, the technological activity of country A is characterized by high specialization, and also by great variety. However, the influence of extensive margin would be overstated, “in aggregate”, if there were several countries with a great technological variety and also with a highly skewed distribution of patents across classes (that is, if there were many countries similar to country A). Is this a characteristic of the sample? The following graph reports, for each patenting country in 2002, the number of technical units with at least one patent application (extensive margin), and the coefficient of variation (CV) of patent applications across technical units.  I have considered all countries that presented at least one patent application to the EPO in 2002.  The first row shows that larger economies in terms of GDP and population patent more. For example, countries with twice the population deposit 35% higher patents. In addition, the elasticity of patents with respect to the GDP per capita is very high. The second and third rows show how these effects may be attributed to intensive and extensive margins. The extensive margin accounts for around 40% of higher patent applications of larger and richer countries. Therefore, larger and richer economies patent more, and this occurs, for about 40%, because of higher technological variety (the indication of each margin's percentage contribution to overall patent applications may not be particularly meaningful when the coefficients are not significantly different from zero). The positive relationship between population and patents, already considered “weak” by However, previous works focused on advanced countries, so it is important to investigate how the findings reported in  These results may be affected by the patenting activity of European countries. European firms may have a higher incentive to obtain a patent that is in force within the European Union. Since many European countries present a high income per capita, the effect of macroeconomic variables on the margins under review may be overestimated. However, the set of rich European countries is not much representative today: the European Union comprises 25 countries, some of which are economically small or have a rather low income per capita. Finally, it is important to note that the method of classification may affect the results in terms of the percentage contribution of the extensive (intensive) margin. In fact, if it were possible to have more disaggregated technical units, the extensive margin would probably play a more important role in the pooled sample. Although I have used a high level of aggregation, the extensive margin does play a prominent role, because it explains almost the half of additional patent applications of larger countries. This consideration is important when one compares the results of distinct empirical studies (see next section). The concept of product variety has been the focus of recent empirical studies in the fields of both technological innovation and international trade. It may therefore be helpful to link the principal results together. Broadly speaking, most economics scholars recognize the existence of a strong relationship between technological innovation and the export specialization patterns of different countries. Empirical research found an indirect confirmation of the relationship between technological intensity and comparative advantage, and in other cases, that the outcomes of R&D activity may drive foreign trade flows. These studies focused mainly on the US economy ( These theories highlight the possibility of national knowledge spillovers and the importance of a country's size in terms of favoring and increasing such effects. Knowledge spillovers may also emerge at an international level. When this happens, the larger the economic integration of countries, the greater the knowledge spillovers will be ( The relationship between foreign trade and technological innovation was explored in detail by The negative effects of international trade on technological innovation are higher when the technological gap between large and small countries is large. Finally, this effect is greater when the nature of knowledge spillovers is, for the most part, national. These results were obtained, as is usual in the theory of international trade, by considering the two poles of total isolation and total integration of a country in relation to trade and/or technology. Nevertheless, they confirm that history and initial conditions may significantly affect the relationship between innovation and trade. For instance, when knowledge spillovers emerge at a national level, initial conditions will play a fundamental role in explaining the patterns of trade and the rate of growth of innovation. On the other hand, if international knowledge spillovers dominate, factor endowments and the initial structure of exports will have less importance. The combination of these theories provides a more complete interpretation of the observations reported in this paper. Large (and rich) countries present more patents because a greater capital stock enables them to engage in R&D in more fields, but also because their firms invest more in each technological field, in order to build and maintain competitive advantages in terms of innovative products. Higher variety and quality of products enable large countries to establish and increase the competitive advantage at an international level, when we assume that international trade is free, though not completely. From a quantitative point of view, it may be useful to consider the results of In conclusion, current research cannot establish whether carrying out R&D in given sectors produces systematically comparative advantages that in turn lead to certain patterns of export specialization. Neither can it ascertain whether export specialization (caused by particular resource endowments or by historical and cultural factors) determines the structure of a country's innovative efforts. As to the order of causality, theoretical and empirical studies do not provide conclusive results. However, it seems quite clear that technological variety and trade variety increase, in a similar way, with the size and wealth of nations. Both in technology and trade, the size of economies affects the mechanisms that shape the degree of variety, i.e., the capacity to be active in several and distinct economic fields. Since economics scholars relaxed the assumption of perfectly competitive markets and homogeneous products, economies of scale and product differentiation drastically change our way of thinking about the relationship between macroeconomic variables, foreign trade flows, and innovation. Of course, the economic dimension of a country is not the only element to consider when explaining the differences in technological and trade variety, as claimed by scholars belonging to the evolutionary area. Cultural features are also important, as well as the adoption of specific technological policies. Despite this, although industrial and technological policy may induce firms to devote their technological efforts to a particular sector and create competitive advantages at a global level, the influence of economic size on technological variety remains significant and capable of overwhelming other important factors. This paper has quantified the role of technological variety in the higher patenting activity of larger economies. The methodology adopted to obtain this result differs from that used in other studies that analyze the degree of technological diversification in countries and/or firms. Broadly speaking, the positive relationship between economic size and technological variety is confirmed for more countries than those considered in previous analyses. If we consider the pooled sample, the cross-section analysis shows that technological variety accounts for about 40% of additional patent applications of larger and richer economies. Therefore, technological variety has a crucial role in explaining the different overall technological dimensions. In the subset of poorest countries, technological variety is important in explaining the additional patent applications of larger economies. On the other hand, the GDP per capita has not much explanatory power in poorest countries. These findings regarding technological variety reassert those of First, the analysis is static in nature, because it consists of simple cross-sections regarding the patent activity of the countries in the sample. From the point of view of the “quantitative” stability of the results, multiple observations in different years (and regarding both patent applications and registrations) confirm that the technological variety does not vary too much across the sample. However, a more important objection is that the technological variety of a country may (qualitatively) vary if one analyses, each year, “which” technological fields are concerned by patenting activity. In other words, my analysis does not consider the possibility that a country's innovative efforts might radically change their destination in the very short run. This aspect is particularly important especially in small and less advanced countries, which are forced to explore the spectrum of technological opportunities to emerge in the global market. Another reason for being careful about the main findings is that it is tacitly assumed that the intensity and variety of technological activity are I wish to thank two anonymous referees for their helpful comments. The list of technical units used by the EPO and the countries that have applied for patents in 2002 are listed in