Instead of using chemical-reducing agents to facilitate the reduction and dissolution of manganese and iron oxide in the ocean nodule, electrochemical reduction based on two approaches, namely, cathodic polarization and galvanic interaction, can also be considered as attractive alternatives. Galvanic leaching of ocean nodules in the presence of pyrite and pyrolusite for complete recovery of Cu, Ni and Co has been discussed. The key for successful and efficient dissolution of copper, nickel and cobalt from ocean nodules depends on prior reduction of the manganese and ferric oxides with which the above valuable nonferrous metals are interlocked. Polarization studies using a slurry electrode system indicated that maximum dissolution of iron and manganese due to electrochemical reduction occurred at negative DC potentials of −600 mV (SCE) and −1400 mV (SCE). The present work is also relevant to galvanic bioleaching of ocean nodules using autotrophic microorganisms, such as Thiobacillus ferrooxidans and T. thiooxidans, which resulted in significant dissolution of copper, nickel and cobalt at the expense of microbiologically generated acids. Various electrochemical and biochemical mechanisms are outlined and the electroleaching and galvanic processes so developed are shown to yield almost complete dissolution of all metal values.Due to progressive depletion of land-based mineral resources and to meet the country's requirements, it has become imperative to harness the immense potential of ocean manganese nodules to recover strategic metals such as copper, nickel and cobalt. Galvanic interactions among different minerals are well-known phenomena, and based on electrochemical concepts, many galvanic leaching systems either for metal sulphide or sulphide–sulphide have been reported Electroleaching of base metal sulphides has been reported by Ocean nodule samples were collected from the Indian Ocean by the National Institute of Oceanography, Goa. The sample was air-dried, ground and sieved to obtain the −200 and +300 mesh fraction. The chemical composition of the ocean nodule sample is given in Strains of Chemical leaching, galvanic leaching as well as bioleaching experiments in the absence of applied potentials were carried out in 500-ml Erlenmeyer flasks using −200 and +300 mesh size fraction of the ocean nodule at 2% pulp density in the desired media and kept for shaking on a rotary shaker at 160 rpm at room temperature. Galvanic leaching and bioleaching experiments were carried out in the presence of pyrite and pyrolusite in different ratios of mixing. The electrochemical cell setup used in the electroleaching studies is schematically represented in A Pt mesh electrode (WE) submerged into compartment (A) containing the mineral slurry served as the working electrode which was separated by inserting into a fritted Pyrex glass of cylindrical cross-section (B) in which a Pt foil auxiliary electrode was introduced. Compartment (C) containing an SCE electrode immersed in saturated KCl solution served as reference electrode connected through a Luggin capillary. Before carrying out the experiment, an agar KCl-bridge was made to prevent the intermixing of slurry with the electrolyte. The mineral slurry was kept under constant agitation using a magnetic stirrer. Desired potentials were applied using an EG&G model 362 potentiostat and 365 current booster. All electroleaching and electrobioleaching experiments were carried out in the above electrochemical cell setup using −200 and +300 mesh size fraction of ocean nodule sample at 2% pulp density at 30 °C. Electroleaching experiments were also carried out with ocean nodule sample as a function of potential to establish maximum dissolution behavior. The desired potential was applied in subsequent detailed leaching studies in the presence and absence of bacteria. At periodic intervals, solution samples were withdrawn from the flasks and the concentration of all metal values (Cu, Ni, Co, Mn and Fe) was analysed using ICP spectrophotometer. Bacterial cell numbers were estimated by direct microscopic count using a Petroff-Hausser counter. Results are reported with ±1% of accuracy. Before discussing the cathodic polarization behavior of the ocean nodule, it is essential to understand its mineralogical composition. The ocean nodule samples are essentially composite mixtures of oxides/hydroxides of manganese and iron oxides in which oxides of copper, nickel and cobalt are interlocked. X-ray diffraction and mineralogical analysis indicated the presence of todorokite, manganite, birsenite, goethite, maghemite and hematite as the manganese and iron minerals in the nodule sample. Prior reduction of manganic and ferric oxides is, therefore, a prerequisite to liberate the associated nonferrous metal values before any significant acid dissolution can be achieved. Chemical dissolution behavior of the ocean nodule sample in 1 M H Prior or simultaneous reduction of manganese and iron oxides holds the key for the liberation and dissolution of associated nonferrous metal values such as copper, nickel and cobalt. Reducing agents, such as SO Instead of using chemical-reducing agents to facilitate the reduction and dissolution of manganese and iron oxide in the ocean nodule, electrochemical reduction based on two approaches, namely, cathodic polarization and galvanic interaction, can also be considered as attractive alternatives. Electrodissolution of the ocean nodule sample at different applied DC cathodic potentials exhibits two maxima peaks Reductive dissolution of manganic and ferric oxides present in the ocean nodule is facilitated under the above applied cathodic potentials according to the following reactions: The role of the galvanic interaction in sulphide mineral dissolution has been well documented The role of added pyrite in the leaching of the ocean nodule in 1 M H MnO Galvanic interactions between MnO MnO Simultaneous dissolution of manganese and other nonferrous metals from the ocean nodule in an acid medium can occur, and the rate of such galvanically and chemically induced dissolution reactions depends on the surface area ratios of various mineral constituents, intimacy and duration of contacts as well as the presence of oxygen and other oxidants and redox couples such as ferric/ferrous. In any galvanic combinations involving MnO The presence of FeS In the above galvanic couple, MnO It has been observed that while metal values such as nickel and copper can be relatively easily leached out in the acid (since these metals are mostly in liberated state and also possibly occur in the adsorbed state on the manganiferrous oxides), manganese and cobalt cannot thus be easily extracted as they occur in the oxides of higher oxidation states (MnO Besides chemical leaching, biodissolution of ocean manganese nodules also needs to be examined. The role of bacterial activity in the form of metabolic products and cells on the galvanic effects observed in the added presence of pyrite and pyrolusite is illustrated in  Metabolites are extracellular products which were produced by microorganisms due to their metabolic activity, and their pH is in acidic range below 0.5. Acidic bacterial metabolites contain sulphurous and sulphuric acid and reductive intermediates of sulphur oxidation. Reductive intermediates of sulphur oxidation, sulphurous and sulphuric acid, which are biologically produced from elemental sulphur due to bacterial oxidation, effectively reduce manganic and iron oxides in the nodule releasing the interlocked metals. Results of electrobioleaching of the ocean nodule in the presence of bacterial metabolites are shown in Electrobioleaching is a combination of bioleaching and electroleaching involving biochemical, electrochemical and chemical factors contributing towards the complete reduction of manganic and iron oxides in the ocean nodule. Probable mechanisms in electrobioleaching in the presence of Direct electrolytic reduction of manganic and iron oxides at the expense of microbiologically produced acid and growing cells. Production of acids (H Production of reducing agents such as thiosulphate and tetrathionate. Electrolytic effect on bacterial growth and activity. The following major conclusions can be made based on this study. (a) Electroleaching of ocean nodules at applied cathodic potentials provides sufficient reducing conditions to effectively reduce manganic and ferric oxides, facilitating easy acid dissolution of interlocked nonferrous metal values such as copper, nickel and cobalt. (b) Electroleaching of an ocean nodule slurry in sulphuric acid medium at an applied potential of −600 mV (or lower) was found to result in complete dissolution of the associated nonferrous metals such as copper, nickel and cobalt. (c) Reductive dissolution of the manganic and ferric oxides at applied cathodic reduction potentials is proposed to be the major mechanism behind the liberation and release of interlocked nonferrous metal values. (d) Efficient dissolution of the valuable metals Cu, Ni, Co, Fe and Mn has been achieved from the ocean nodule in the presence of pyrite in 1 M H (e) Complete recovery of valuable metals from ocean nodule could be achieved in the presence of pyrite at the expense of acidic metabolite of (f) There is an increase in the dissolution of valuable metals such as Cu, Ni, Co, Fe and Mn in the added presence of pyrolusite in 1 M H (g) Complete dissolution of nonferrous metals such as copper, nickel and cobalt from the ocean nodule could be achieved through electrobioleaching in the presence of