This paper describes initial work into the production of coke from high volatile bituminous coal using microwave energy. A series of batch experiments were carried out using an 8kW multimode microwave to heat 300g of a UK high volatile bituminous coal, sized at −3mm, at different treatment times of 10, 25 and 70min. Devolatilisation started after 1min of heating and was complete within 5min. Subsequent heating yielded no further volatiles and the power was maintained to prolong the coking process. Characterization of each product was carried out using thermogravimetric analysis, microscopy and dielectric property measurement in order to investigate the impact of residence time and provide a comparison with coke material produced using conventional methods. The measured characteristics of each sample became increasingly similar to those of two conventional cokes as treatment time was increased.Although references to coke making go back as far as 371 B.C., it has been claimed that the first coke was made by Baron Von Braunschweig in Germany in the 16th century Clearly the ideal scenario for coke making would be a system that does not need to run continuously but could be turned on and off to meet demand and that could coke a wider range of coals possibly without the need for blending. The use of microwaves to manufacture coke would present a potential step change in methodology with several potential benefits. Publications exist which discuss methods of microwaving coal to make coke although most of the literature appears in the form of patent applications The aim of the work described in this paper was to examine the potential of using microwave energy for the production of a coke with properties comparable to that of conventionally made coke. Microwave energy was generated using a variable power (3–15 The properties of the samples made during microwave treatment were compared with two commercial coke samples prepared using conventional coking methods. These are referred to as Coke 1 and Coke 2. Coke 2 was of a slightly higher grade than Coke 1. The proximate analysis of the coal, and two reference cokes are given in Samples of treated material and initial coal were prepared in blocks using a liquid resin (Estratil 2195, provided by Cray Valley Ltd Spain) mixed with methyl-ethyl-ketone (50% w/w). Polished blocks were examined under a polarized-light microscope with ×32 magnification oil-immersion objective and ×10 magnification eyepiece. A Zeiss AxioCam was attached to the microscope to capture digital images of the surface texture. Maximum reflectance, There are several methods for determining the reactivity of coal and coal derived materials The dielectric properties of the various samples were measured using the cavity perturbation method. More specifically the dielectric constant (or real permittivity Cavity perturbation methods have been widely used and are well suited to characterizing low loss samples. This method does not require samples with smooth surfaces, which is an advantage when dealing with powdered samples and also it eliminates surface mismatch problems that can arise in co-axial probe techniques. A sample of powdered coal approximately 12 The coal which is a UK high volatile bituminous coal was found to contain approximately 85   The sample treated for 70  The However, with 8 As stated in the previous section, it is probably the moisture and –OH bonds present in the coal matrix, that are the most responsive to microwaves and cause the initial heating of the sample Based on the above findings described in the literature, it is possible that the apparent maxima in the dielectric constant with the 25 It is apparent that characteristics of the coal and coke material are all connected. For example the increase in PT and BT with heating correlates to changes in the dielectric properties of the samples. The initial experiments appear to show some very positive results. The degree of anisotropy, the intrinsic reactivity and dielectric properties of the sample heated for 70 The time taken to generate the graphitized coke like material with highly anisotropic appearance is surprisingly short (under 2 The coke was made with a low grade coal (high volatile UK bituminous) which would be unsuitable for use in a traditional coke making plant, indicating a potential new method for coke production. Further work is needed to investigate the impact of power input during treatment and the relationship between treatment time and power setting. If it is possible to use low rank coal to manufacture metallurgical coke then the economics of coke making would be radically affected. Work in this area is being continued.