A new physical method, namely boiling treatment, was developed to aid flotation separation of acrylonitrile–butadiene–styrene (ABS) and polystyrene (PS) plastics. Boiling treatment was shown to be effective in producing a hydrophilic surface on ABS plastic. Fourier Transform Infrared analysis was conducted to investigate the mechanism of boiling treatment of ABS. Surface rearrangement of polymer may be responsible for surface change of boiling treated ABS, and the selective influence of boiling treatment on the floatability of boiling treated plastics may be attributed to the difference in the molecular mobility of polymer chains. The effects of flotation time, frother concentration and particle size on flotation behavior of simple plastic were investigated. Based on flotation behavior of simple plastic, flotation separation of boiling treatment ABS and PS with different particle sizes was achieved efficiently. The purity of ABS and PS was up to 99.78% and 95.80%, respectively; the recovery of ABS and PS was up to 95.81% and 99.82%, respectively. Boiling treatment promotes the industrial application of plastics flotation and facilitates plastic recycling.Plastics have been one of the most widely used materials in our daily life and industrial production due to their properties of low cost, light weight, hygiene, strength and design adaptability ( Separation of plastic wastes into individual types with high purity products demanded by reprocessing is difficult owing to contaminations, aging and additives in plastics as well as similar properties of plastics. A number of promising technologies for separation of plastics were investigated such as hydrocyclone ( The use of froth flotation for plastic separation is particularly challenging because of the similarity in the surface properties of the materials. All plastics have naturally hydrophobic surfaces and will readily float with the aid of air bubbles. The selected treatment is necessary to render at least one plastic hydrophilic, which can be achieved by the addition of reagents that react with the surface layer of the plastic ( Physical modification techniques provide potential alternative methods for selectively wetting plastic surfaces. Physical treatments make plastic surface hydrophilic through introducing oxygen-containing functional groups (including hydroxyls, carbonyls and carboxyls) at the surface of plastics ( Polymer materials show a surface rearrangement in response to environmental change, and elevated temperatures facilitate molecular rearrangement of polymers. Based on that, a new physical method, namely boiling treatment, was developed to aid flotation separation of acrylonitrile–butadiene–styrene (ABS) and polystyrene (PS) plastics. The influence of treatment time, flotation time, frother and particle sizes on flotation behavior of plastics was investigated, and flotation separation of boiling treated ABS and PS was obtained efficiently. Samples of ABS and PS waste plastics, obtained from a waste plastics market (Miluo, Hunan Province, China), were from municipal wastes. The samples were crushed using a plastics cutting mill (SCP-180-2, Cixi Yinbao Plastics Machinery Co., Ltd.). The sieve size fractions used in this study were 3.2–4.0 The plastic samples were soaked in water for 2 The flotation experiments were conducted using a self-designed flotation column with a height of 170 The characterization of the functional groups of ABS samples was carried out by Fourier Transform Infrared (FT-IR) analysis using a Nicolet Avatar 360 FT-IR spectrometer (Nicolet Magua Corporation, USA). Flotation experiments of boiling treated ABS and PS samples were conducted under experimental conditions of flotation time (6 It is well-known that polymers show a surface rearrangement in response to environmental change. The outermost surface is enriched with hydrophobic segments under dry conditions and is replaced with hydrophilic ones when the surface is exposed to water, and the surface rearrangement is reversible. Surface rearrangement of polymers was confirmed by a series of measurements such as contact angle measurement, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and transmission electron microscopy ( FT-IR was conducted to investigate the effects of boiling treatment on ABS surface. As shown in The explanation for the selective influence of boiling treatment on the floatability of boiling treated plastics may be attributed to the difference in the molecular mobility of polymer chains ( It was found that flotation time played an important role in flotation separation of plastic mixtures. Flotation experiments were conducted under conditions of boiling time (40  The addition of frother produces a narrow distribution and fine bubble size, and terpilenol supports the bubble production and stability. In the self-designed column, there were a few unstable and larger bubbles without frother, and the flotation rate of PS was 70.01% and ABS particles did not float ( Particle size shows significant impacts on the wetting action of plastics. Flotation experiments with different particle sizes were conducted to investigate the effect of particle size on flotation behavior. Flotation tests were carried out under experimental conditions of boiling time (70 The influence of flotation time on separation efficiency of ABS and PS mixtures was studied first. The post-consumer ABS and PS plastics with particle size of 2.5–3.2 Based on the above results, flotation separation of boiling treated ABS and PS plastics with different particle sizes was conducted under conditions of boiling time (80 Based on above results, boiling treatment can be employed for flotation separation of waste plastics. One advantage of the technique is that the use of chemical reagents in the flotation step is minimized, reducing the requirement for water treatment of plant effluent ( Boiling treatment made ABS surface hydrophilic selectively; the flotation rate of ABS decreased significantly with increasing boiling time and dropped to about 4.2% when boiling time was 80 Boiling treatment was employed for flotation separation of ABS and PS plastics, and effects of flotation time, frother concentration and particle size on flotation behavior of simple plastic were investigated. The influence of flotation time on flotation separation of ABS and PS mixtures demonstrated that recovery and purity of 100.00% could be obtained, and there was a little difference in the flotation behavior of simple plastic and plastic mixtures since ABS and PS particles interacted with each other during boiling treatment and flotation process. Flotation separation of boiling treatment ABS and PS with different particle sizes was achieved. The purity of PS and ABS is more than 89.22% and 95.16%, respectively, and the recovery of PS and ABS is more than 95.34% and 87.33%, respectively. Boiling treatment can be employed for flotation separation of waste plastics, and it promotes the industrial application of plastics flotation. This study was supported by the