The deep mineralized bodies of the Italian Serrenti-Furtei gold-bearing deposit, located in southern Sardinia, contain substantial amounts of enargite-luzonite and pyrite with subordinate tennantite, covellite, chalcopyrite and arsenopirite. The gold, which occurs as grains of between a few tens of micrometres and submicron size, is not amenable to direct cyanidation. These ores are beneficiated by bulk flotation using sulphydryl collectors and the resulting concentrates are then pyrometallurgically processed to produce gold and copper. However, the concentrates contain significant amounts of arsenic, severely reducing their market value; the abatement of this highly toxic metal in the flue gas to comply with stringent emission limits, increases processing costs significantly.
                  In order to reduce the arsenic content in the concentrates and hence the penalties incurred, we carried out an investigation on enargite leaching using sodium hypochlorite to selectively dissolve the arsenic.
                  By suitably adjusting the main influencing variables, leaching was found to be effective, achieving 96% arsenic removal without significant Au and Cu losses, increasing the commercial value per tonne of concentrate.The mineralogic and petrographic characteristics of the epithermal gold mineralisations in the Serrenti-Furtei mining district in southern Sardinia vary considerably with depth ( The process was designed using ethylxanthate as collector and lime as pyrite depressant. Commercial application to the ores in question proved to be fairly efficient, achieving high Cu and Au recoveries in the bulk concentrate ( Unfortunately, the prevalence of enargite among the copper-bearing minerals and as a result the relatively high As content in the concentrates severely reduces their economic value, owing to the hazardous emissions generated from pyrometallurgical processing. Thus, in unfavourable metal market conditions, direct roasting may well prove to be an uneconomical option. In an attempt to solve this problem, we explored the possibility of dissolving the arsenic from the concentrates prior to pyrometallurgical processing. Two techniques for arsenic removal from enargite are proposed in the literature, namely: alkaline leaching of enargite concentrates using sodium sulphide solutions after mechanical activation via fine grinding ( leaching of natural enargite crystals with sodium hypochlorite under alkaline oxidizing conditions whereby the enargite is converted into crystalline CuO and the arsenic solubilises forming The second method was judged to be especially attractive in terms of its potential application at the commercial scale. Thus we decided to focus our attention on this particular leaching technique. The investigation described here aimed at exploring the possibility of applying this method to the marketable Au–Cu concentrates obtained by flotation of the sulphide ores from the Serrenti-Furtei deposit described above. We experimentally determined the influence of the most important process variables, such as grain size of the solid material, solids concentration in the solution, temperature, pH and hypochlorite concentration in the leachant as well as contact time. The bulk Au–Cu concentrate used in the experiments was obtained in a laboratory flotation cell from drill cores made in the deep zones of the deposit during prospecting. The as received material was first dry crushed to 100% passing 2 The ground product was subjected to flotation with ethylxanthate after pyrite depression with lime. The cleaned concentrate obtained, assaying 90.25 Diffractometric analysis (XRD) ( This concentrate −0.150 Leach tests were conducted in a 1-litre thermostated Pyrex glass reactor containing NaClO solutions mechanically stirred at 500 As mentioned in the introduction, the effect of the main influencing parameters, namely solids concentration (0.004, 0.01, 0.04 The influence of the single variables was then determined following the classic procedure of varying the value of one variable while keeping the other variables constant. Leach results were evaluated through As, Cu and Au determinations on the leachate and solid residue obtained after filtration. Sodium hypochlorite consumption was determined using the iodide titration method ( For a certain number of tests we also analysed the leach residues using diffractometric (XRD) and, for mineral-petrographic observations, scanning electron microscope (SEM) techniques to determine the chemical-mineralogical changes undergone during hypochlorite leaching. The results of some of the XRD analyses are shown, by way of example, for the two different grain sizes −0.150 and −0.050 The concentrations of elements such as S, As, Sb, Cu and Fe were determined in different points of specially prepared polished sections by means of electronic microprobe analysis. Mean data were found to agree with reports in the literature (  As can be seen, arsenic leaching efficiency deteriorates rapidly with increasing solids concentration but improves for the smaller grain size, because of the higher specific surface area available. The gradual diminishing of the differences in arsenic removal efficiencies between the two size classes examined can be clearly attributed to the insufficient availability of the leachant vis-à-vis the amount of arsenic to be removed, as confirmed by the results subsequently obtained for the influence of molar concentration of the leaching agent. The above findings suggest that, for suitable solids concentration, the efficiency of arsenic removal can be enhanced by finer grinding and point to the importance of grain size in process optimization, also in economic terms as well. The influence of these two parameters, as well as of temperature and hypochlorite concentration discussed below, was assessed for solids concentrations of 0.004 optimum pH of the leachant solution was found to be around 12.5, as at higher values the hypochlorite was observed to rapidly decompose, in agreement with arsenic removal efficiency increases with contact time. In this regard, the removal rate was found to be relatively rapid in the first 20–30 The influence of leachant temperature, is shown in the diagram of Generally speaking, leaching efficiency was found to increase with temperature up to a certain point, beyond which the trend is reversed. This “inversion temperature”, observed at between 40° and 45 This behaviour may be explained by the fact that at temperatures higher than the inversion temperature some copper passes into the solution causing a shift in pH to values of below 12.5 due to precipitation of hydroxides, thereby reducing arsenic removal efficiency. This is confirmed by the bluish colour of the leachates observed in these conditions and the difficulty in maintaining pH at close to 12.5. The higher copper solubilisation rate observed for longer leachant/mineral contact times is likely the cause of the decrease in inversion temperature. The diagrams of Over the concentration range tested (0.05–0.28 The results of this series of tests showed that the arsenic can be practically completely removed (As up to 0.71%) by suitably adjusting the molar concentration of the leachant solution. From an applicative standpoint, the findings suggest keeping hypochlorite concentration constant by topping up the solution, also to enhance arsenic dissolution rate. Additional experiments performed to corrobate this finding confirmed expectations. By maintaining constant NaClO concentrations at 0.20 Hydrometallurgical processing using sodium hypochlorite solutions has proven to be an effective technique for removing the arsenic contained in the enargite-rich gold concentrates obtained by flotation of the ores hosted in the deeper sulphide portions of the Italian Serrenti-Furtei mine. The presence of arsenic in these concentrates, which are further beneficiated by pyrometallurgical processing, severely reduces their market value. The leaching process does not produce any adverse effects on the gold which concentrates in the leach residue. Only at temperatures higher than 40 Thus the environmental impact of pyrometallurgical processing is substantially mitigated, increasing the value of the copper–gold concentrates. Process efficiency depends to a large extent on optimum adjustment of a number of variables. The experimental results show in fact that temperature and pH of the leachant should be maintained at around 30 In practice, however, the optimum adjustment of these last three variables is dictated essentially by considerations of an economic nature. For example, finer grinding may well yield the same arsenic removal efficiency at higher solid/liquid ratios or using lower concentrations of hypochlorite in the leachant solution. Research funded by MIUR (Italian Ministry for Education, Universities and Research) and CNR (Italian National Research Council). The authors would like to thank Prof. C. Garbarino for his assistance in performing the mineralogic and petrographic analyses.