The influence of several grinding parameters such as charged material volume, ball filling ratio, and mill rotation speed on energy efficiency of fine grinding of hydrated lime and the product fineness of hydrated lime was studied experimentally using a laboratory scale ball mill. The product size and surface area of the ground samples were determined with respect to the above variables, and changes in energy input during the grinding were described in detailed. Finally, the optimum conditions for the grinding of the hydrated lime with the ball mill were obtained. The results from this study showed that the ball mill load and mill speed are the most important parameters rather than ball mill charged material volume for the fine grinding of the hydrated lime using the ball mill in terms of energy efficiency associated with external surfaces.Mechanical treatment of raw, consumable or prefabricated materials is always a major issue in many industrial productions. Therefore, numerous steps of a wide variety of production methods are necessary to obtain for desired finished material. Recently, in various industrial processes the need for fine particles, especially submicron-sized particles, has significantly increased in field of preparing raw powders. For this reason, many researchers have focused on fine grinding, especially for ultra-fine grinding. In fact, it is an energy intensive stage in the overall process to provide materials in proper fine size range for required properties of final product. Limestone or calcium carbonate (CaCO In this matter, the objective of this paper is to investigate the effect of the various grinding parameters such as ball charge filling ratio, material charged ratio, and mill speed on the properties of hydrated lime and fineness of the product using a ball mill. The hydrated lime powder (< The particle size distribution of the sample was determined using Mastersizer 2000 by Malvern. The SEM pictures of original and ground hydrated lime were obtained using a Zeiss Evo LS 10 microscope. The density of hydrated lime was measured by Ultrapycnometer Quantachrome 1000. The bulk density and activation coefficient were determined according to TS EN 459-2 A laboratory scale batch mill made of stainless steel with an inside diameter of 200 The energy consumed by the mill in dry grinding experiments of the hydrated lime was measured by a MPR-53S-DIN digital multimeter, (ENTES Co., Turkey). In this study, only the active power (kW) was recorded and used by considering the power factor. The active power of the mill is sensitive to the current change at all levels up to the rated power of the motor. An active power reading was recorded for each minute during each grinding pass, and about 10 readings were done for each pass. The mean active power of each pass was regarded as its real one. The mean active power, Energy efficiency or energy utilization, The grindability of the hydrated lime for each milling parameter was calculated from the following equation   When the The grinding behavior of minerals is often explained in terms of the specific surface area of powders and the energy consumed during grinding. Specific surface area is one of the basic properties of a powder, and generally represented by the total surface area of the particles contained in a unit mass of powder. Rittinger suggested that the energy consumed in reduction of the size of a solid was proportional to the new surface produced. In the present experiment, we established the following: Magnification of the surface area of hydrated lime is not proportional depending on the energy input by the various operational parameters of the grinding process mentioned above. This situation indicates that the real surface area enhancement does not occur on external surfaces, but in the inner surfaces due to lime hydration process conditions where CaO hydrated. Limestone (calcium carbonate), which is used to produce quicklime (calcium oxide), has a rhombohedral crystal structure. The conversion of calcium carbonate to calcium oxide (quicklime) results in a cubic crystal structure (Carbon dioxide is driven out of the carbonate portion of the crystal structure by intense heat energy, and a Ca–O bond remains), which is smaller than the carbonate one, hence the new three-dimensional, very porous structure is formed. When quicklime reacts with water, the resultant hydrated lime (calcium hydroxide) has a hexagonal crystal structure which occupies about 25% more volume than the original cubic structure of quicklime. As the quicklime-water reaction takes place, it can be seen that the quicklime pebbles swell and occupy more volume (if the ratio of water to quicklime is low). The resultant measured porosity reaches the value of 55% It is necessary to emphasize that the conclusion of the nil efficiency of the grinding process is deduced by adjudicating the process with the assistance of the conventional theoretical access ( In terms of the energy associated with internal surfaces produced as a result of breaking bonds, the ball mill has lower efficiency. However, for dry fine grinding of the hydrated lime in the ball mill, the milling ball load and milling speed are the most important parameters than mill material charged volume in terms of energy efficiency associated with external surfaces ( As a result, when the ball mill is operated at optimum conditions the hydrated lime with particle size of 853 In this paper, a series of dry grinding experiments with a hydrated lime powder using a ball mill were carried out to investigate the effect of various grinding parameters such as material charged volume, ball filling ratio and mill rotation speed on fine grinding energy efficiency. The results obtained from this study are summarized as follows: It is possible to grind the already-produced hydrated lime in the ball mill; but this can only be done within narrow limits. Therefore, based on the experimental results, the changes on operational grinding parameters have marginal effect on the fineness of the particle, increasing of the external surface area, and also fine grinding energy efficiency. It is found that when hydrated lime was ground in a ball mill, the real surface area enhancement did not occur on external surfaces, but in the inner surfaces due to lime hydration process conditions where CaO hydrated. The ground material produced at the optimum grinding conditions have the physical and physicochemical characteristics of particle size, pore diameter, specific surface area, bulk density whiteness and activation values, those are adequate specifications for most pollution control applications. In the case of fine grinding of the hydrated lime in the ball mill, the milling ball load and milling speed are the most important parameters rather than material charged volume in terms of energy efficiency associated with external surfaces. As a remarkable conclusion from the grinding experiments for the hydrated lime in the ball mill, the undersize percentages of 297, 53 and 10