In this paper, the fluid dynamics induced by a rigid lamina undergoing harmonic oscillations in a non-Newtonian calm fluid is investigated. The fluid is modelled through the lattice Boltzmann method and the flow is assumed to be nearly incompressible. An iterative viscosity-correction based procedure is proposed to properly account for the non-Newtonian fluid feature and its accuracy is evaluated. In order to handle the mutual interaction between the lamina and the encompassing fluid, the Immersed Boundary method is adopted. A numerical campaign is performed. In particular, the effect of the non-Newtonian feature is highlighted by investigating the fluid forces acting on a harmonically oscillating lamina for different values of the Reynolds number. The findings prove that the non-Newtonian feature can drastically influence the behaviour of the fluid and, as a consequence, the forces acting upon the lamina. Several considerations are carried out on the time history of the drag coefficient and the results are used to compute the added mass through the hydrodynamic function. Moreover, the computational cost involved in the numerical simulations is discussed. Finally, two applications concerning water resources are investigated: the flow through an obstructed channel and the particle sedimentation. Present findings highlight a strong coupling between the body shape, the Reynolds number, and the flow behaviour index.An accurate prediction of the flow physics induced by the motion of solid bodies which are immersed in a viscous fluid represents an attractive and interesting challenge for scientists involved in the study of computational fluid dynamics (CFD). Moreover, a huge attention is devoted to CFD by the industrial context, since a lot of practical applications can be covered. For example, in the design of offshore platforms, the oil pipes can undergo large oscillations due to the underwater streams or an approaching storm. In aeronautics, the motion of a flapping wing can be significantly modified by a stream flow. In naval engineering, the impact between the sea waves and the ship hulls may generally generate impulsive forces, thus inducing considerable vibrations and local structural damages on the ship due to stress concentrations and fatigue phenomena. Another interesting aspect is related to the non-Newtonian fluids, whose properties are very popular especially in geophysics and hydrology As well known, the CFD numerical simulations can be performed by solving the macroscopic-based Navier–Stokes equations. Although well consolidated, such approach is affected by several drawbacks. For example, moving meshes are required if a fluid–structure interaction (FSI) problem is simulated, thus involving a huge computational effort. In opposition to this methodology, in the last decades the lattice Boltzmann (LB) method arose as a powerful tool showing that it recovers the solution of the Navier–Stokes equations with a second-order accuracy In this paper, the LB method is adopted to predict the fluid dynamics induced by the harmonic motion of a rigid lamina which is immersed in a non-Newtonian fluid. An implicit strategy is developed to properly compute the shear rate-dependent viscosity and its accuracy and convergence properties are evaluated. In order to account for the presence of a solid body in the fluid lattice background, the Immersed Boundary (IB) method The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section The problem is governed by the Navier–Stokes equations for an incompressible flow and viscous fluid. Specifically, such equations read as follows: Concerning the definition of the problem, the fluid is initially at rest and the no-slip boundary condition is enforced at the fluid–solid interface. The LB and the IB methods are adopted to predict the fluid dynamics and to account for the presence of an immersed solid body, respectively. In the following, these methods are briefly recalled. The lattice Boltzmann method is adopted to predict the fluid dynamics. The two-dimensional lattice Bhatnagar–Gross–Krook equation In order to account for the non-Newtonian behaviour of the fluid, the viscosity (i.e. assign an initial value to the relaxation parameter, i.e. compute the shear rate at the iteration compute the modified viscosity compute the current relaxation parameter, i.e. if the convergence criterion The Immersed Boundary method In this section, firstly the methodology to account for the non-Newtonian feature is validated. Then, the results concerning the harmonic motion of a lamina are discussed. Finally, two applications involving water resources are investigated. In the former, a non-Newtonian fluid is injected in a channel characterized by the presence of a sequence of sharp-edged slats, thus idealizing the flow in a fractured tortuous medium. In the latter, the phenomenon of the sedimentation of a cylindrical particle is dissected. Notice that all the following computations are carried out by initializing the fluid domain at rest, i.e. The proposed strategy to account for the shear rate dependent viscosity is validated against the following test Making reference to In In The dependence of the forces on the tip-induced vortexes is confirmed by a test involving a cylinder. Specifically, a cylinder harmonically oscillates in a fluid at rest. The simulation parameters have been above defined and the Reynolds number is set to In order to verify the effectiveness of the proposed methodology, the scenario characterized by The above discussed findings are used to extract the hydrodynamic function In the present numerical simulations, the computational effort related to the implicit viscosity correction-based strategy proposed to compute the strain rate tensor is investigated by evaluating the average number of iterations Making reference to In For comparison, in As sketched in In In this paper, the LB and IB methods have been combined in order to investigate the flow physics induced by the harmonic motion of a rigid lamina immersed in a non-Newtonian fluid initially at rest. It has been proved that for low values of the Reynolds number, a rise of the flow behaviour index increases the forces acting upon the lamina. On the other hand, as The author would like to thank Prof. Vittorio Di Federico, Prof. Francesco Ubertini and Prof. Stefano Ubertini for the motivating discussions. The author is grateful to the editor and the reviewers for their comments, which improved the quality of the manuscript.