Crude nickel sulphate solutions are produced during the first stage leach of Platinum Group Metal (PGM) containing converter matte in a Sherrit® atmospheric matte leach process. Iron and cobalt sulphates contaminate the nickel sulphate stream due to dissolution during the matte leach process. While iron is an unwanted contaminant, cobalt sulphate production presents a potentially valuable by-product, as long as removal of these metal ions does not introduce other forms of contamination into the solution.
                  Experimental work was performed to evaluate the removal of 1g/l cobalt and 3g/l iron from a sulphuric acid leach solution containing 80g/l nickel using solvent extraction with Ni-Cyanex 272. The effects of various process parameters on preloading, extraction, and stripping were investigated. Based on full factorial experimental designs, the parameters with the largest effects on the process performance were determined to be pH and organic/aqueous (O/A) ratio for preloading, nickel loading and O/A ratio for extraction, and H2SO4 concentration and O/A ratio for stripping. These variables were evaluated in further batch experiments to determine conditions that would allow the production of a high purity nickel sulphate solution and selective stripping of cobalt and iron from the organic phase, and the batch tests results were validated by performing continuous tests on a laboratory scale mixer-settler setup. A flow sheet that allows the production of refined nickel sulphate and cobalt sulphate solutions by extraction with nickel preloaded Cyanex 272 and selective stripping has been proposed. Regeneration of the organic phase is achieved by stripping with 1M sulphuric acid, which yields an iron containing aqueous stream as effluent.The traditional processing of Ni–Cu sulphide flotation concentrates or Platinum Group Metal (PGM) metal concentrates is via smelting to produce furnace matte, converting of the matte to a low-iron (<7%) converter matte and subsequent leaching of the converter matte using spent electrowinning electrolyte, sometimes in conjunction with additional sulphuric acid. In the PGM industry such as at Western Platinum Limited, Northam Platinum, Zimplats and at Impala Platinum Limited, a modified Sherrit® process is used in a Base Metals Refinery (BMR) to produce a crude NiSO The separation of cobalt and nickel had traditionally presented problems due to their similar chemical and physical properties. Effective separation of these species only became feasible after the development of a range of phosphorous-based reagents specifically designed for solvent extraction. Of the extractants that have been used for cobalt and nickel separation, phosphoric acids (DEPHA) are the least effective, followed by phosphonic acids (e.g. PC-88A) and phosphinic acids (Cyanex 272) ( For this particular application, the introduction of sodium to the nickel sulphate solution would negatively affect the quality of the final nickel product. A further potential problem that may arise from the usage of sodium hydroxide involves the formation of sodium-jarosite (according to reaction An alternative approach to achieve Ni and Co separation, as proposed by Nickel, cobalt and iron are typically extracted from sulphate solutions in the pH ranges 7–8, 5–6 and 2–3, respectively, with Cyanex 272 ( Since reaction Since cobalt and iron are extracted at different pH values, it was believed that separation of these two species by selective stripping would be possible. A weaker acid would be used in the first stripping stage to remove cobalt from the organic phase, followed by a second stripping stage utilising a stronger acid to strip iron. A potential process flow sheet based on the discussion above is shown in CoSO The experimental work was performed using synthetic aqueous solutions, made up by dissolving the abovementioned salts in distilled water. The concentration of Cyanex 272 required in the organic phase was dependent on the concentration of the metal species to be extracted. The same basic experimental procedure was followed for the preloading, extraction, and stripping tests. During preloading, Cyanex 272 was brought in contact with a pure nickel sulphate solution; for extraction, the Ni-Cyanex 272 was used for extraction of cobalt and iron from the synthetic process solution, and stripping of the loaded organic phase containing cobalt and iron was achieved by contacting it with sulphuric acid. The aqueous and organic solutions were firstly preheated to the desired operating temperature by using a water heating bath before transferring the appropriate amounts of the respective phases to glass beakers which served as mixing reactors. Magnetic stirrer hotplates were used for mixing of the phases and to control the temperature during agitation. A sodium hydroxide solution was added to adjust the pH of the solution during agitation, as required for the nickel preloading step. After agitation, the pH of the aqueous-organic dispersion was measured before transferring it to 500 The first set of experiments was performed to determine the minimum agitation time required for phase equilibrium to be achieved in the preloading and extraction stage, respectively. All these experiments were performed using a 20 Once the minimum agitation time required for phase equilibrium had been determined, experiments were performed according to a 2 Based on the results obtained with the batch tests described above, optimisation tests for the extraction stage were performed using a 20 For the stripping tests, the first set of experiments was also performed to determine the minimum agitation time required to achieve phase equilibrium. All these experiments were performed using an organic phase containing 4.5 Next, experiments were performed according to a 2 In addition to the factorial design batch tests, optimisation tests were performed to evaluate the possibility to separate cobalt and iron by means of selective stripping, and to determine the conditions at which the regeneration of the organic phase would be sufficient for it to be recycled to the preloading stage. These tests were performed at a temperature of 50 During preloading, the nickel that reports to the organic phase at equilibrium conditions is extracted almost instantaneously, with less than 20 Concerning the kinetics of the extraction stage, it can be seen from A significance level of 0.05 was selected for interpretation of the For the extraction tests, all the variables except the extractant concentration were found to have a statistically significant effect on both the cobalt extraction and iron extraction, as shown in Considering the discussion in Section  When an organic phase with a higher nickel loading is used, the O/A ratio required for cobalt and iron extraction decreases (see The factors identified as having statistically significant effects on the Ni loading, namely the O/A ratio and pH, were varied in the preloading optimisation tests. If a portion of the purified nickel sulphate stream containing 80 From The stripping rates are slower than the preloading and extraction kinetics, with approximately 410 The Based on the results obtained with the factorial experimental design, the effects of the A/O ratio and H A laboratory scale four-stage mixer-settler setup was used to perform continuous tests in order to validate the operating conditions proposed based on the batch tests. Two tests were performed to evaluate the performance of the preloading and extraction stages, followed by two more tests to evaluate the performance of the stripping stage. A four stage mixer-settler plant manufactured by SX Kinetics and consisting of borosilicate glass mixers and settlers with capacities of 320 The circuit configuration and operating conditions utilised for the preloading and extraction tests are shown in The circuit configuration and operating conditions utilised for the stripping tests are shown in The parameters indicating the preloading and extraction performance for the two configurations shown in For the results presented in For the second preloading and extraction test, steady state was reached after approximately 55 The percentage nickel, cobalt and iron stripped in both stages for the two configurations shown in The results for the test performed with the lower metal loading on the organic phase (0.94 The results for the test performed with the higher metal loading on the organic phase (3.07 The O/A ratio and NaOH addition were found to be the two process parameters with the most significant effect on the nickel preloading, while the O/A ratio and nickel loading have the largest effect on cobalt and iron extraction. Virtually all the iron and 95–96% cobalt could be extracted from the nickel sulphate leach solution in a single batch test, while nickel extraction was insignificant. The sodium addition to the nickel sulphate product solution increased as the O/A ratio and nickel loading increased. This is due to the fact that higher nickel loadings require higher sodium additions in the preloading stage, which increases the probability of sodium uptake by the organic phase and consequently ends up in the purified nickel stream. The operating conditions proposed based on the batch test results achieved sufficient removal of iron and cobalt in continuous tests, and the performance proved to be insensitive to a 20% increase in the iron content of the feed solution. The A/O ratio and acid concentration were found to be the two process parameters that have a significant effect on the stripping of Ni, Co, and Fe. Increasing the metal loading of the organic phase will require a higher A/O ratio and/or higher stripping agent concentration to be used. Selective stripping of nickel and cobalt are limited by phase separation problems and is therefore not practical. Based on the batch test results, separation of nickel and cobalt from iron using selective stripping is possible. These results could not be reproduced in continuous tests, but this is believed to be primarily as a result of an insufficiently short agitation time achieved with the mixer-settler setup. Based on these results, it can be concluded that a process flow sheet utilising the Cyanex 272 preloading configuration can be used for the treatment of the crude nickel sulphate leach solution produced in the first leach stage of the modified Sherrit® process to remove dissolved cobalt and iron prior to NiSO The authors thankfully acknowledge the financial support provided by Western Platinum Limited (a subsidiary company of Lonmin Plc).