The microstructure and mechanical properties of Zn–27Al based composites reinforced with rice husk ash (RHA), silicon carbide (SiC), and graphite (Cg) particles have been investigated. The Zn–27Al composites consisting of varied weight ratios of the reinforcing materials were produced using the stir casting process. Hardness test, tensile properties evaluation, fracture toughness determination, and microstructural examination, were used to characterize the composites produced. Results show that the microstructures of the composites are similar, consisting of the dendritic structure of the Zn–27Al alloy matrix with fine dispersion of the reinforcing particles. The hardness of the composites decreased with increase in the weight percent of RHA (and corresponding decrease in SiC weight percent) in the reinforcement. The tensile strength and yield strength decreased slightly with increase in the weight ratio of RHA in the composites with a maximum of 8.5% and 9.6% reductions respectively observed for as much as 40% RHA (corresponding to 40% reduction in SiC) in the hybrid reinforcement. Although some of the composite compositions containing RHA had slightly higher % elongation values compared with those without RHA, it was generally observed that the % elongation was invariant to the composite RHA content. The fracture toughness of the composites increases with increase in the weight percent of RHA with as much as a 20% increase obtained for as much as 40% RHA (corresponding to 40% reduction in SiC) in the hybrid reinforcement.Zn–Al based composites have continued to find relevance in several technological applications ( Commercial pure zinc (Zn-99.96, Fe-0.02, Si-0.006, Pb-0.004, others-0.01, in wt%) and aluminum (Al-99.92, Fe-0.003, Si-0.033, Mn-0.021, others-0.023, in wt%) were procured for the production of the Zn–27Al alloy selected as matrix for the composite to be produced. Rice husk ash of average particle size of 50 The production of the composites was performed using a double stir casting process performed in accordance with The hardness, tensile properties and fracture toughness ( A universal tensile testing machine operated at a strain rate of 10 The fracture toughness of the composites was determined using a circumferential notch tensile (CNT) testing approach ( Microstructural examination of the composites produced was performed using a Zeiss Metallurgical Microscope with accessories for image analysis. The samples for the examination were metallographically polished and etched using dilute aqua regal solution before the microstructural investigation was carried out.  The results of the mechanical properties evaluated for the composites are presented in For the tensile strength and yield strength results ( The percent elongation ( For the fracture toughness results ( The microstructure and mechanical properties of Zn–27Al hybrid composites containing 7 The microstructures of the composites are similar, consisting of the dendritic structure of the Zn–27Al alloy matrix with fine dispersion of the reinforcing particles. The hardness of the composites for both the 7 and 10 The tensile strength and yield strength for both the 7 and 10 The percent elongation was not markedly sensitive to the variation in the RHA content of the reinforcing phase of the composites, although some of the composite compositions containing RHA had slightly higher % elongation values compared with the composite grade without RHA. The fracture toughness of the composites increases with increase in the weight percent of RHA (and corresponding decrease in SiC weight percent) in both the 7 and 10