Physicochemical properties of cationic polyelectrolytes: poly(allylamine hydrochloride) (PAH), poly(ethylene imine) (PEI), and poly(dimethyldiallylammonium chloride) (PDDA), having molar mass of 70,000, 75,000, and 120,000, respectively, were examined and compared. The bulk characteristics comprised the diffusion coefficient and electrophoretic mobility determined as a function of pH (3.5–9) and ionic strengths (10−4
                     M to 0.15M NaCl). These measurements allowed one to determine theamount of electrokinetic charge of the polyelectrolyte molecules and their isoelectric points. On the other hand, formation of polyelectrolyte monolayers on mica and their properties were investigated using the in situ streaming potential method. Additionally, using this method, the stability of monolayers, evaluated via desorption kinetic measurements, was determined. The investigations showed that PAH molecules form the most stable monolayers, which can be used as supporting layers for particle deposition and multilayer formation.Polyelectrolytes (PEs) are charged molecules consisting of ionizable groups, which release counterions when desolating in polar solvents such as water. In the recent years, polyelectrolytes have been extensively studied due to a number of potential applications in many industrial processes, such as filtration, water treatment, papermaking, food manufacturing, and mineral extraction. Due to the growing applications of polyelectrolytes, especially in medicine, many techniques have been exploited to manufacture the monolayer and multilayer films of desired coverage and structure. Thin polyelectrolyte films have been fabricated using various techniques such as Langmuir–Blodgett or self-assembly. One of the most promising techniques of surface modification using polyelectrolytes was the layer-by-layer (LBL) assembly technique, developed by Decher and co-workers in the early 1990s. This technique has become a powerful tool for fabricating thin materials (nano- and microcapsules) with precise control of film composition and structure Thin organic films such as monolayer and multilayer polyelectrolyte films are widely used for the development of immunosensing  In our experimental studies, the following polyelectrolytes were used: (1) poly(allylamine hydrochloride) hereafter referred to as PAH, the cationic polyelectrolyte having a molar mass of 70 As a solid substrate for polyelectrolyte adsorption, the natural ruby mica sheets obtained from Continental Trade were used. The solid pieces of mica were freshly cleaved into thin fragments of desired area and used in each experiment without any pretreatment. Ultrapure water, used throughout the investigation, was obtained using the Milli-Q Elix & Simplicity 185 purification system from Millipore SA Molsheim, France. The diffusion coefficients and the electrophoretic mobility of PE molecules were measured by dynamic light scattering (DLS) and microelectrophoresis, respectively, using the Zetasizer Nano ZS Malvern instrument. Zeta potential of bare and PE-covered mica was determined via streaming potential measurements using a homemade cell described in detail in our previous works The size of polyelectrolyte molecules(hydrodynamic diameter) was obtained via diffusion coefficient measurements by dynamic light scattering (DLS) technique, using the Zetasizer Nano ZS Malvern instrument. The Nano ZS instrument incorporates noninvasive backscatter (NIBS) optics and this technique is based on measurements of the time dependent fluctuations in the intensity of scattered light (measurement range of 0.6 Eq. The number of uncompensated (electrokinetic) charges for each polyelectrolyte and ionic strength ranging from 10 As can be seen, the mobility of all three polyelectrolytes is highly positive for the low pH range, attaining the value of 4.04 The results seen in Knowing the electrophoretic mobility, the number of uncompensated (electrokinetic) charges For example, substituting our experimental data for As mentioned, electrokinetic characteristics of bare and polyelectrolyte-covered mica were determined via streaming potential measurements, carried out in the parallel-plate cell. Polyelectrolyte monolayers were formed in the cell under diffusion-controlled conditions from polyelectrolyte suspensions of appropriate concentrations (typically 1–5 In order to verify this hypothesis, additional measurements of monolayer stability were carried out according to the above described procedure. The desorption of polyelectrolytes from dense monolayers was studied under convection (the flow rate in the channel was 0.03 In the first series of experiments, the validity of various methods of preparing PAH monolayers was compared. In the first method, the adsorption of the PAH molecules was carried out In the case of the convection-controlled transport (third method of preparing PAH monolayers on mica), the surface concentration of the molecules is given by the formula: The results showing the dependence of the mica zeta potential on Results of such measurements obtained for various ionic strengths are shown in Using the coverage, one can calculate the theoretical zeta potential of PAH covered mica from the analytical expression derived in Refs. From Eqs. On the other hand, the zeta potential of PAH in the bulk was calculated using the previously measured electrophoretic mobility from the Henry’s expression: For thin double layers ( As can be seen in Analogous results illustrating the role of pH varied between 5.5 and 9.0 at fixed ionic strength of 10 The PAH monolayer characteristics were done in a more efficient way using slightly modified procedure compared to above described. In the first stage, a dense monolayer of PAH was obtained (pH In Additionally, the experimental results shown in The results shown in Additionally, the streaming potential measurements can be effectively used for determining, under wet PAH desorption runs obtained in this way for For the barrier-less adsorption regime, the adsorption and constants are given by: The averaged mass transfer rate constant for the channel flow is given by the expression Since all parameters in Eqs. As shown in Eq. It is interesting to compare these values with predictions stemming from the mean-field, linear superposition approximation (LSA) double-layer model Using the data given in The results shown in The Thorough studies of this polyelectrolyte for a broad range of ionic strengths By using this approach, one can quantitatively study, via the streaming potential measurements, desorption kinetics of polyelectrolytes under Our investigations showed that the streaming potential method is a useful tool for determining physicochemical characteristics of polyelectrolyte monolayers on solid surfaces, for example, the coverage, isoelectric points, and stability. Such monolayers may find practical application as supporting layers for nanoparticle and protein immobilization in immunosensing and layer-by-layer processes of microcapsule formation. This work was supported by the POIG 01.01.02-028/09-04 grant FUNANO.