The extraction of Zn(II) from aqueous chloride sphalerite leached liquor using bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid or Cyanex®272 in kerosene has been studied. The results of fundamental studies on solvent extraction of synthetic solutions of Zn(II) showed that extraction of metal ions increased with increasing pH, extractant concentration and temperature. The stoichiometry of the extracted metal species by Cyanex®272 with Zn(II) was 1:1. The apparent standard molar enthalpy (∆H°), molar entropy(∆S°) and Gibb's free energy(∆G°) of 26.81±0.11kJ/mol, 107.63±0.05 J mol–1
                     K–1
                     mol–1 and −5.48±0.13kJ/mol were calculated for the process respectively. These values showed that Zn(II) extraction by Cyanex®272 is thermodynamically favourable. The number of the theoretical stages for this process evaluated by the McCabe-Thiele diagram was six. An extraction efficiency of 95% Zn(II) was obtained with 0.047mol/L Cyanex®272 in kerosene from an initial sphalerite leach liquor containing mainly 603.4mg/L Zn, 121.4mg/L Fe and 16.3mg/L Pb. The Pb(II), Ag(I), Cu, Sn, and Al (less than 5mg/L) were firstly separated by cementation with Zn granules and this was followed by Iron removal by precipitating with 4mol/L ammoniacal solution to a pH of 3.5 at 25°C±2°C. A 0.1mol/L HCl was found to be adequate for the stripping of about 95% of Zn from the organic phase. The stripped Zn(II) solution was recovered as zinc oxide (ZnO) via precipitation with sodium hydroxide followed by calcination at 600°C during 120min. A practicable hydrometallurgical scheme summarising the operational procedures used for the extraction of Zn(II) and Pb(II) from the sphalerite ore was presented.Zinc is mostly extracted from sphalerite (ZnS) ore. Deposits of zinc and lead ores including sphalerite which are usually found as mixture have long been known in Nigeria, but they have only been mined in the past on a very small scale. An estimated 10 Zinc is primarily produced from sulphidic ores including sphalerite, ZnS. Other sources of zinc include oxide-carbonate ores and different secondary sources such as zinc ash, zinc dross, flue dusts of electric arc furnace, leach residues, etc. Pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical routes or combination of the two can be employed for treating secondary materials ( In recent years, the recovery of metals from aqueous chloride solutions has attracted much attention. This is due to the high efficiency of the chloride leaching processes, which are now recognised as a logical choice for treating complex sulphide ore concentrates which cannot be easily or economically treated by other means. Another important aspect of such leaching process is that sulphur is liberated in the elemental form rather than as sulphur dioxide ( In hydrometallurgical processes, valuable metals are generally recovered by a combination of two or more of leaching, precipitation, solvent extraction and electrowinning techniques. During leaching, dissolution of metals with a suitable acid or mixture of acids is possible. The processing of leach liquor solutions containing different concentrations of acid/acids is very complex and separation of the metal ions using various techniques such as precipitation, adsorption, solvent extraction, ion-exchange, etc. can be cumbersome ( In this regard, the use of organophosphorus extractants in solvent extraction of metals has been steadily increasing because of their excellent selective nature in forming complexes under specific conditions. In particular, the introduction of diakyl phosphoric and phosphoric acids including Cyanex 272 has brought about a vast change in the separation technology ( In the particular case of chloride-based zinc hydrometallurgy, a number of investigations using different extractants have been reported ( As evident from The first part of the studies on the beneficiation of the sphalerite mineral had earlier been published ( The experimental approach adopted for this study comprises a preliminary work aimed at establishing conditions for the optimal extraction of Zn from synthetic Zn(II) solutions by Cyanex 272 with subsequent application to the recovery of zinc from sphalerite leachate. The leachate obtained from the leaching of 10 The aqueous solutions of Zn(II) with metal concentration of 1 Batch experiments were carried out at ambient temperature (25 The distribution ratio, D, was calculated as the ratio of the concentration of Zn(II) in the organic phase to that in the aqueous phase according to the relation: The leachate from In the extraction experiments, the ratio of Zn(II) in the extract to its concentration in the aqueous, otherwise known as distribution ratio, Dc is given by: Solutions containing different concentrations of Zn(II) within the range of 0–300 It is clear from The influence of pH on the extraction of Zn(II) from an initial 100 It is observed that Zn extraction increases with pH and this behaviour is characteristics of most cationic acidic extractants. The slope in In a related study, a slope of 1.92 has previously been reported ( The results of the effect of Cyanex 272 concentration on the extraction of 100 From In order to establish the number of moles of Cyanex 272 participating in the extraction system, a plot of log D Zn as a function of log [Cyanex 272] was made ( The study of multiple extraction of Zn(II) with 0.047 From The stripping investigations were carried out in order to determine the appropriate concentration of HCl required for stripping Zn(II) from Cyanex 272 in the organic phase. A range of 0–0.35  In order to determine the number of cycles for the re-use of Cyanex 272, the recovered Cyanex 272 from the stripping process was re-contacted with fresh aqueous zinc solution containing 100 From The results of the effect of temperature on the extraction efficiency of Zn(II) are shown in The graph in The slope ∆log D/∆(1/T) gave –1400, and substitution of this value into equation (7) yielded 26.81 Hence, ∆G and ∆S for this system at 25 The values of ∆H and ∆S showed that Zn(II) extraction with Cyanex 272 is entropy controlled. However, the negative value of ∆G indicates that the reaction is thermodynamically favourable. Hence, positive ∆S is an indication of the randomness of the system. These observations are in agreement with the results of Consequently, all the aforementioned optimal conditions for the Zn(II) extraction from the synthetic solutions were applied in the systematic study of the Zn(II) and Pb(II) extraction from the leach liquor of natural sphalerite ore. Zinc metal has a relatively high reducing potential which makes it suitable for cementation ( The results of cementation process of the product from The result of There are many industrial situations where iron as impurities must be removed from solutions. This is usually induced by the precipitation of iron oxide/oxyhydroxides and often involves the co-removal of inorganic and organic impurities because of the strong adsorptive capacity of iron oxyhydroxides ( To eliminate iron, the cemented solution obtained previously ( The results from The clear filtrate solution of Zn(II) from The result from The optimization of stripping (aqueous phase) solution is important for economic considerations ( From the results of A hydrometallurgical flow diagram summarising all analytical procedures for the recovery of zinc(II) and production of pure zinc oxide from Nigerian Sphalerite origin by Cyanex 272 is presented in The results on fundamental studies on solvent extraction of synthetic solutions of Zn(II) showed that extraction of metal ions increased with increasing pH, extractant concentration, and temperature. The stoichiometry of the extracted metal species by Cyanex 272 with Zn(II) was found to be ZnA The separation of Zn(II) from lead, iron and other impurities was carried out from a sphalerite leach liquor containing 603.45 About 92.28% efficiency was recorded as Pb(II) and other trace metals in the leachate have been cemented. Iron was precipitated from the leachate by 4 The authors wish to thank Dr. Oliver Rouher and Mrs Christine Salomon of Cytec Industries, Rungis Cedex, France, for their benevolence by supplying Cyanex 272. A. A. Baba also thanks the University of Ilorin, Ilorin-Nigeria, for the 2005/2006 Staff Development Award for Ph.D research in Chemistry; and the Academy of Sciences for the Developing World (TWAS), Trieste, Italy for the 2010 CSIR-TWAS Fellowship for Postdoctoral Research at Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar-751013, India.