Determination of mine gas explosibility is definitely a significant work for mine safety especially when any mine rescue strategies are under planning or implementing. In detail, its importance can be well understood by the following two aspects: First, if a coal mine's production is under the normal conditions, the underground mine atmosphere must be monitored as a timely matter and its explosibility should also be determined shortly due to the continuous emission of methane or other combustible gases. Thus, the critical time which means a time period that combustible gases could build up to reach the lower flammable limit and then pass the upper flammable limit can be effectively watched and controlled. Second, when facing a mine rescue work or mitigating a hazard of mine accidents (gas explosion, coal fire, etc.), the explosibility determination is also very critical for miners' lives. In this paper, a widely used mine gas explosibility determination method, the Coward diagram, is going to be modified to improve its accuracy. The improvements made in this research effort include: (1) expanding the original Coward diagram; (2) correcting flammable limits; (3) redefining the nose limit for each combustible gas; (4) developing an equation to predict the excess amount of inert gas for individual combustible gas. Finally, the flowchart of the modified Coward explosibility diagram method is listed. By a cross-verification study, it shows that the modified Coward method has better accuracy and reliability and could be applied in practices.Mine gas explosions present a serious safety threat in the worldwide mining industry. Since the beginning of mining, many coal miners have been killed due to the explosions. In 2009, a total of 157 gas explosions were responsible for 755 fatalities in Chinese coal mines. This number represented 28.7% of all Chinese coal mine fatalities ( For many years, mining engineers and researchers have developed a number of methods for assessing the explosibility of the air–gas mixture. Tertiary diagram is initially introduced to determine the explosibility of the fuel–air–inert mixtures. However, it can only deal with tri-mixed gas ( The Coward explosibility diagram method is considered as a fast and easy way to determine the explosibility of the mixture of the air and combustible gases (     Determine the oxygen percentage at the nose limit ( Using the data obtained from these equations, the explosibility triangle for the air–gas mixture can be constructed, and the state point (i.e., concentrations of oxygen and total combustible gases) can be plotted on the same diagram. The relative position between the explosibility triangle and the state point shows the explosive status of the air–gas mixture at the current state and its potential movement when the condition changes. In a sealed mine volume, the following categories of gases make up the sealed mine atmosphere. They are: (1) atmospheric gases; (2) products of chemical reactions in underground mines including the low-temperature coal oxidation, combustion or gas explosions; (3) gases emitted from the virgin coal seams, such as CH Atmospheric gases refer to the gases can be found in an ambient gas sample. Almost 99% consists of nitrogen (N The second category of gases is the product of chemical reactions happening in underground mines. Typically, the chemical reactions include two different forms, one is the coal oxidation or coal combustions, and the other is the mine gas explosion. Coal oxidation is an irreversible exothermic reaction and its reaction rate increases with temperature. When the heat produced by the coal oxidation is not adequately dissipated by conduction or convection, the temperature in the coal mass increases. This increase in temperature leads to an increase in the coal oxidation rate. If not averted with appropriate action, this process results in thermal runaway and a fire ensues ( Spontaneous heating is a low-temperature coal oxidation reaction which takes place when coal is exposed to air. Once it is intensified, coal mine fires will result. When talking about the products produced by a mine fire, it is important to understand the whole process of coal burning. Generally, the following processes are believed to occur in sequence ( Distillation of gases from the coal The gaseous products of low-temperature oxidation at the very early stage are carbon monoxide (CO), carbon dioxide (CO Oxidation of the coal on its surface with the emission of heat Gaseous products during this stage include the alkane (C Flaming combustion When the flaming combustion occurs, the combustible gases will burn to a certain degree which is generally governed by a quantity of oxygen from the air. The final mixture leaving the fire zone is a result of the gases of distillation and the extent to which the fire has become fuel-rich. The above processes can be summarized as the following general chemical equation: In the equation,  In addition, mine gas explosions can also generate hydrocarbon gases. The related chemical equations about the methane explosion can be listed as: In summary, in coal mine fires or explosions, acetylene (C Flammable limits give the proportion of combustible gases in a mixture. They are consisted of two individual limits; one is the lower flammable limit (LFL). Below this flammable limit, the mixture is too lean to burn; therefore, LFL describes the leanest mixture that still can sustain a flame. The other is the upper flammable limit (UFL). Above the upper flammable limit, the mixture is too rich to burn. Thus, it gives the richest flammable mixture. Hence, the quantitative difference between the two flammability limits is called the explosive range. Once an ignition source is introduced, a flammable mixture will burn or explode if its concentration is within the explosive range. Knowing the flammable limits is very important for designing any safety strategies ( Due to the inert effects by the inert gas, once the inert gas is mixed with the combustible gas mixture, it can greatly change the flammable limits. In general, when an inert gas is added into a hydrocarbon gas/air mixture, the result is an increase in the lower flammable limit concentration and a decrease in the upper flammable limit concentration. Generally, two important inert gases are contained in an underground mine atmosphere. There are nitrogen (N  For the inert effects due to the nitrogen, the following extension Le Chatelier's equations can be used to determine the new flammability limits ( For the lower flammable limits (LFLs): For the upper flammable limits (UFLs):       For the inert effects due to the carbon dioxide, the following revised Le Chatelier's equations can be used to determine the new flammability limits ( For the lower flammable limits (LFLs): For the upper flammable limits (UFLs):       To propagate a flame, the layer of unburned gas next to the burning layer must be brought to such a temperature that it will “burst into flame” rapidly. If the unburned gas is already at a temperature above that of the laboratory, less heat is needed to supply from the burning layer; therefore, the lower flammable limit should decrease by increasing the initial temperature and the higher flammable limit should increase. Therefore, a mixture, which is not flammable at one temperature, can become flammable if the environmental temperature increases ( For the lower flammable limit, LFL     When the LFL is known at a given temperature, Eq. Increasing the temperature induces the larger flammable range for fuel gases. For the upper flammable limit, one correlation equation for the temperature dependence of the upper flammable limit (UFL) can be written as (   The normal variations of atmospheric pressure do not appreciably affect the limits of flammability (   It should be noted that the upper flammable limit should be firstly calibrated by the temperature to obtain the temperature-based upper flammable limit (UFL( Generally, nose limits are obtained from the experimental results. Without such fundamental data, it is impossible to construct the Coward explosive triangle. However, the original Coward method only provides the nose limits for three common combustible gases which are CH Like shown in Eq. Consider the situation for the gas CO in   The Coward method is a fast and easy way to determine the mine gas explosibility. However, in order to effectively use this method, the fundamental parameters used must be made sure accurately. Comparing with the original model, the modified Coward explosibility diagram method corrects some fundamental parameters and revises the calculation procedures and improves the accuracy of the method. The major works made for such improvements are: (1) Expand the combustible gas species in the original model. Hence, it becomes much better for dealing with the explosibility of mine gas, especially when facing a mine fire or other chemical related mine accidents; (2) Introduce a procedure to correct the lower flammable limit (LFL) and the upper flammable limit (UFL) in accordance with the environmental temperature, pressure or the effects caused by the inert gases; (3) Redefine the nose limit for each combustible gas. The traditional method to obtain these values only relies on the experimental approach. However, the proposed new calculation method can derive them based on the UFL and LFL by a series of regression equations. The efficiency is enhanced due to avoiding experimental works; and (4) Develop an equation to calculate the excess amount of inert gas for each combustible gas by a mathematical transformation. The procedure of the modified Coward explosibility triangle diagram method can be briefly described as shown in In order to examine the reliability of the judgments made by using the modified Coward explosibility diagram method, the USBM explosibility diagram is served as a supplemental method to double check the results in this section. An example is described as follows: A group of monitored atmospheric gas composition data is collected. Both the normal underground coal mine atmospheric data and ones obtained from various spontaneous combustion/fire/explosion events are included and are going to be investigated by the two methods. In addition, the original Coward diagram is also used to determine the gas-mixture explosibility.  It can be seen that all three methods can get the same determinations of the mine gas explosibility for case 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 and 25. All are considered as explosive gas mixtures. However, it also should be noted that conflicting scenarios happened when determining the explosibility for case 10, 16, 27, 32, 46, 47 and 48. Some of them are considered as non-explosive by the USBM method or the original Coward method. However, they are all considered as explosive by the modified Coward method. One reason is that more combustible gases are considered in the modified method and the explosive zone becomes larger. In addition, it is also should be noted that positions of such conflicting state points in the diagram are very close to the boundary of the explosive triangle. Accordingly, they are easily to be determined as non-explosive by the USBM method or the original Coward method but explosive by the modified Coward method due to research improvement efforts. Hence, the modified method has better accuracy and safety than the other two methods. Results from modified Coward explosibility diagram Results from USBM explosibility diagram Results from original Coward explosibility diagram Due to the importance of the safety issue, determination of the mine gas explosibility must be very carefully calculated. Only based on the calculation results and other considerations, any other management can be performed. Therefore, it is highly recommended that two or more methods be used when analyzing the mine gas explosibility in order to avoid any potential problems from relying only one method. A comprehensive study should be done prior to any operations, particularly for planning and implementing a mine rescue strategy when facing any chemical reactions related to mine accident events (mine fire, gas explosion, dust explosion, etc.). Determination of the mine gas explosibility is very critical for mine rescues and controlling the severity of mine accidents, especially for a mine gas explosion. In this paper, a modified Coward explosibility diagram method is proposed. The improvements made include: (1) The original Coward explosibility diagram is expanded. A total of six hydrocarbon gases are now included; (2) With considering the effects of inert gas, environmental temperature and pressure on the flammable limits (general LFL and UFL), a method to correct the flammable limits for combustible gases is introduced; (3) A series of equation is used to redefine the nose limit for combustible gas. It can provide accurate values of such parameters without an experimental approach; (4) Based on characteristics of the Coward triangle, an equation to calculate the excess amount of inert gas is developed. Though the cross-verification study, not only agrees the testing results from the modified Coward method with these from the USBM method, but also the modified method can provide more careful judgments for some critical scenarios. The partial financial supports by the