This work presents studies of ions uptake from aqueous solutions by natural zeolites showing and validating techniques using pre-treated, modified, saturated zeolites and in the form of floc, with polymeric flocculants. Powdered zeolites (from Chile) were pre-treated with Na+ ions (NaCl) following modification (adsorption by ionic exchange) with Ba2+ ions. Batch adsorption studies of sulphate ions were performed with this treated material in the flocculated and powdered forms. Zeolites samples (approximately 48% clinoptilolite and 30% mordenite) were prepared and characterized by their particle size distribution (d
                     p: 25.4μm), moisture (2.5%), porosity (0.89), specific surface area (80m2
                     g−1), specific mass (2.2gcm−3), zeta potential (pie=pH about 1.8), cation-exchange capacity (1.08meq 
                        
                           
                              
                                 NH
                              
                              
                                 4
                              
                              
                                 +
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     g−1), microstructure and mineralogical composition. Adsorption studies showed that this natural zeolite does not adsorb sulphate ions, but after the treatment (with Ba2+ ions) the zeolite (now Ba–Z) was able to uptake the sulphate significantly. The adsorption capacity was not influenced by the medium pH showing that the mechanism involved appear to be proceeding as a chemisorption reaction. Hence, sulphate ions adsorption showed high process kinetic (0.24min−1) followed by a first-order reaction kinetic model and the data fitted a Langmuir isotherm model; q
                     
                        m
                      and K parameters of 1.3meqg−1 and 0.1Lmeq−1, respectively. An interesting feature was the reuse of the saturated adsorbent materials as new adsorbents. Thus, the BaSO4–Z (Ba–Z, loaded with sulphate ions) uptakes Ba2+ ions again and this Ba2+ bearing zeolite (BaSO4–Ba–Z) showed, again, a high capacity of sulphate ions adsorption (q
                     
                        m
                     : 1.1meqg−1). Moreover flocs of Ba–Z formed with a conventional flocculant (ionic polyacrylamide) showed high sulphate adsorption capacity (q
                     
                        m
                     : 1.1meqg−1) and the results were not affected by the flocculant. Again, the saturated flocs were reused as adsorbents for Ba2+ ions and subsequently for sulphate ions (last stage studied) showing a high adsorption capacity (q
                     
                        m
                     : 1.2meq SO4
                     g−1). It is believed that this new adsorption basis and reuse as pre-treated and modified zeolites, as powder or flocs form, broaden the applications in the area of adsorption of pollutants on natural zeolitic adsorbents.Natural water usually present sulphate and barium ions concentrations due to dissolution of rocks formations and soils containing sulphide and semi-soluble minerals. Another source of sulphate ions (main target in this paper) comes from the oxidation of metal sulphides and of pyrite associate with coal that generates the so-called acid mines drainage (AMD) and from industrial waste ( Natural zeolites are potential adsorbents of ions because of the high capacity and low cost. Structurally, zeolites consist of a framework of aluminosilicates which is based on an infinite three-dimensional structure of SiO Many authors studied the use of zeolites as such (natural) in environmental applications mainly to remove ions from wastewater by adsorption ionic exchange processes (  Modified zeolites have also been utilized for the adsorption of different ions but only a few have been reported for the removal of sulphate ions, all showing low adsorption capacity. The aim of this work was to study the removal of barium and sulphate ions from aqueous solutions by adsorption (uptake) onto pre-treated and modified natural zeolites, in the flocculated and powdered forms evaluating also the reuse of the loaded zeolites as adsorbents. In this work, pre-treatment of zeolites is used to define the activation stage with NaCl and modification for the functionalisation of the zeolites with barium ions (to uptake the sulphate ions). A natural zeolites sample (48% clinoptilolite and 30% mordenite, approximately), from an important and abundant mine in Chile, was provided by Minera Formas Flocculants: Nalco 8589 (cationic polyacrylamide), Mafloc 2880 (anionic polyacrylamide), Flonex 9045 (cationic polyacrylamide), Mafloc 460 (cationic polyacrylamide) and Quemifloc 1020 (non-ionic polyacrylamide). All solutions were prepared with deionised water. Chemical analysis. Sulphate ions concentration was measured using a turbidity method described in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater (APHA, 1995) and based on the formation of an insoluble precipitate of barium sulphate (BaSO Pre-treatment of the zeolites was performed contacting the powdered material with an aqueous solution of sodium chloride. A known quantity of the adsorbent (5 The modification of the pre-treated (activated) adsorbents was carried out contacting the activated zeolite sample with an aqueous solution of barium chloride. Thus, 5 Elution studies of barium ions were conducted with 1 Flocculation studies of the modified zeolite sample were performed using the commercial synthetic flocculants. Jar tests were carried out with 1 The supernatant turbidity was measured and the settling rate determined using a test tube (0.5 The effect of pH on the adsorption of sulphate ions was evaluated by contacting 1 Batch adsorption experiments were carried out, at pH 6.0, in 0.1 The kinetic of sulphate ions adsorption was determined following the same experimental procedure described above and varying the contact time. The sulphate ions uptake ( Langmuir and Freundlich models were employed to fit the equilibrium data (isotherm) obtained. The Langmuir model assumes that the adsorption occurs in surface sites where the energy is equal in each site. Langmuir equation is given by Eq. Reuse studies of saturated zeolite with Ba In the case of reuse of saturated flocculated materials, there was a previous stage of flocculation and the adsorption employed the wetted flocs resulting from the washing processes with deionised water. The barium ions elution of the surface modified natural zeolite was negligible, the filtered aqueous solutions in all cases and at different pH values showed very low concentration of barium ions (0.04 Results showed that Nalco 8589 (cationic) was the best polymer flocculant and data of investigations for the optimal dosage are shown in  The effect of pH on the sulphate ions adsorption by powdered modified zeolites is shown in The results obtained showed that the pH does not significantly influence adsorption, which means that the uptake of sulphate ions proceeds through chemisorption between the sulphate and barium ions. Thus, chemical surface reaction appears to predominate over an ion exchange process between barium and hydrogen ions which, otherwise, could have led to lowering the medium pH. This fact is very important because it allows the removal of sulphate ions at neutral pH (pH 6.0), decreasing costs with chemical reagents, usually required for water neutrality to discharge effluents.   The adsorption isotherm for sulphate ions obtained for the modified zeolite in the form of flocs is shown in  The reuse of saturated modified zeolites as adsorbents was discovered and constitutes a new form of materials recycling. Thus the BaSO Another important fact was that the solutions resulting from the adsorption processes, onto the reused zeolites, did not have significant residual concentration of barium ions (0.9 Similarly, the reuse of the flocculated saturated (exhausted) zeolites, as new adsorbent, was also exemplified by the high uptake capacity for the sulphate ions. Both Langmuir and Freundlich isotherm models yielded high correlation coefficients (0.98 and 0.95, respectively). The Langmuir model fits better the experimental data resulting in Pre-treated and modified zeolites, powders or as flocs form, were found to be excellent non-conventional adsorbents for sulphate and barium ions from aqueous solutions. The powdered zeolites were pre-treated with Na The authors thank all colleagues for the friendly atmosphere at the LTM-Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, and to all Institutions supporting research in Brazil (FAPERGS, CAPES, CNPq and UFRGS). Yet the authors thank the undergraduate student J. Scheffler for his assistance in the experimental work and Minera Formas