Purpose
                  To discuss surgical technique, operative efficacy and clinical outcome of intramedullary fixation in the treatment of subtrochanteric femur fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  From February 2011 to February 2013, 76 cases of subtrochanteric femur fractures were treated by intramedullary fixation in our hospital, including 53 males and 23 females, with the age range of 37–72 years (mean 53.5 years). According to Seinsheimer classification, there were 2 cases of type I, 7 type II, 15 type III, 23 type IV and 29 type V. Firstly, all patients underwent closed reduction with the guidance of C-arm fluoroscopy in a traction table. Two cases of type I and 3 cases of type III fractures had ideal closed reduction followed by internal fixation. The others needed additional limited open reduction. Radiographic examination was used to evaluate callus formation and fracture healing in postoperative 1, 3, 6 and 12 months follow-up. Functional recovery was evaluated by Harris Hip Scoring (HHS) system.
               
                  Results
                  Patients were followed up for 6–12 months. All fractures were healed except one patient with delayed union. The average bone union time was 4.5 months. According to HHS system, 65 cases were considered as excellent in functional recovery, 8 good, 2 fair and 1 poor. The proportion of the patients with excellent and good recovery was 96.05%.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Intramedullary fixation is feasible for the treatment of subtrochanteric femur fracture. The accuracy of intraoperative reduction and surgical skill are important for the clinical outcome and the patients' prognosis.Subtrochanteric femur fracture is defined as a clinically rare fracture with the primary fracture line within 5 cm below the lesser trochanter. In 1949, Boyd and Griffin From February 2011 to February 2013, totally 76 cases of subtrochanteric femur fracture were treated with intramedullary fixation system in our hospital, achieving closed reduction. Two cases of type I and 3 of type III fractures had satisfactory closed reduction and treated with internal fixation, the other 72 cases underwent additional limited open reduction. Inclusion criteria were: (1) the fracture line was located within 5 cm below the lesser trochanter and the patient was treated with intramedullary fixation; (2) interval from injury to operation <3 weeks; and (3) normal anatomic structure of proximal femur before fracture with no history of hip diseases. The patients with old subtrochanteric femur fracture, history of hip diseases or pathologic fracture were excluded. All enrolled patients had complete follow-up data. There were 53 males and 23 females, with the age range of 37–72 years (mean 53.5 years). According to Seinsheimer classification, there were 2 cases of type I, 7 type II, 15 type III, 23 type IV and 29 type V. All the patients were examined by C-arm fluoroscopy in the traction bed. In a supine position, patients underwent closed reduction in the fracture table. C-arm fluoroscopy was used to evaluate the accuracy of reduction. For the patients with unsatisfactory closed reduction, limited open reduction was performed. Taking the fracture end as the center, a 5–8 cm incision along skin soft tissue was made to separate and expose the fracture ends. The hematoma around the fracture segments was evacuated. For a simple fracture, a pointed clamp was used for provisional fixation to maintain the reduction. For complex or comminuted fractures, limited open reduction assisted by auxiliary devices (such as bone-holding forceps, reduction clamps) was adopted. All operative steps were accomplished under C-arm fluoroscopy until accurate reduction was achieved. In small incisions of the fracture ends, 1 to 2 cerclages were given to stabilize the fractured bone blocks. After reduction, according to the intramedullary nail placement procedure, intramedullary fixation was performed. With femoral greater trochanter as the center, a 3–5 cm skin incision was made to separate soft tissue until the greater trochanter. The entry point of intramedullary nails was located in the vertex or medial side of greater trochanter, and lateral projection was in the front 1/3 of greater trochanter. Make an incision at the entry point and insert the needle. C-arm fluoroscopy in anterioposterior and lateral planes was used to ensure or adjust the position and angle of the needle. Then slightly ream until intramedullary nail can be properly inserted, using soft tissue protective sleeve to ensure the needle position and avoid lateral derivation. Afterwards, the antegrade intramedullary nailing of the right width and length was given, meanwhile the force line of the limbs and fracture position were properly maintained. Insert the nail until the right depth, install the guide, insert the proximal and distal locking screws and confirm the fracture position under C-arm fluoroscopy. Then install the tail cap, repeatedly rinse the wound, tighten the screws, place the drainage tube and close the wound. All patients were given prophylactic anti-infective treatment for postoperative 3 days, subcutaneous injection of low molecular heparin to prevent deep vein thrombosis during the hospital stay, and oral administration of clotting factor Xa inhibitors after discharge. The exercise of muscle strength of lower limbs and functional exercises of hip joint were initiated immediately after operation, and weight-bearing was prohibited for postoperative 8–12 weeks. The physicians evaluated the postoperative radiographic results and decided the timing of weight-bearing exercises. The conventional X-ray examination of the injured hip in pelvic anterior-posterior and lateral planes was conducted at postoperative 3, 6, 12 months to assess the fracture healing, the morphology of hip joint and the implant status. After fracture healing, the Harris hip scoring system was used to evaluate the hip joint function. All data were expressed as mean ± SD, and the maximum and minimum values were also listed. The statistical analysis was performed using the SPSS 20.0 software. All 76 cases of femoral subtrochanteric fracture were followed up for 6–24 months. One patient had delayed healing, and the others healed uneventfully. The fracture healing time was 4.5 months on average. According to Harris hip score, 65 cases were considered as excellent in functional recovery, 8 good, 2 fair and 1 poor. The proportion of the patients with excellent and good recovery was 96.05%. In this study, 2 cases of type I and 3 cases of type III were treated with closed reduction and internal fixation. The remaining 71 patients received limited open reduction because of the unfavorable outcome of closed reduction under C-arm fluoroscopy. Among them, 66 patients underwent pointed clamp-assisted reduction followed by intramedullary fixation; since it was hard to fix the fractured bones using clamps in another 5 patients, the cerclage was given in the small incision of the fracture ends to stabilize the bone blocks, followed by intramedullary fixation. The treatment for typical cases is demonstrated in Due to the anatomical features of subtrochanteric femur fractures, conservative treatment is not preferred. For elderly patients, long-term in-bed traction can lead to the complications including pressure ulcers, hypostatic pneumonia and deep vein thrombosis. Generally speaking, surgery is the optimal scheme for the patients with no absolute contraindications. Due to the low proportion of patients receiving conservative treatment, there were few literature about the efficacy of conservative treatment and the comparison between conservative treatment and internal fixation. In 1978, Vlasco et al With the development of internal fixation techniques, surgery is the mainstream of subtrochanteric fracture treatment. But the choice on fixation method has always been a controversial issue. From the perspective of biomechanics, intramedullary fixation has its unique advantage— short force arm, which can better distribute the stress, while extramedullary fixation can load the stress. Although intramedullary fixation has the advantages of biomechanical stability and less soft tissue damage, most studies have not confirmed the clinical superiority of intramedullary fixation over extramedullary fixation using steel plate and DHS. Cook et al Everyone agrees that intramedullary fixation has biomechanical advantages, but why it does not show any clinical superiority? There are many influencing factors in clinical follow-up, including patient's age, fracture pattern, implants, reduction method, reduction outcome and postoperative function exercise, etc. Anatomical reduction was emphasized in early treatment of subtrochanteric femur fractures, and angular steel plate and DCS were once used for internal fixation. In this approach, the surgeon needs to dissect a lot of soft tissues in order to achieve satisfactory reduction under the direct visualization, but the non-union rate was as high as 20%. To solve this problem, some scholars suggested that limited open reduction can decrease the interference on fracture ends, meanwhile maintain the stabilization and precision of reduction. In our study, subtrochanteric femur fracture was treated by intramedullary fixation. For most of the cases, we tried to preserve blood supply of fracture ends in limited open operation, and obtained the satisfactory reduction. The follow-up showed that all 76 cases healed well, with the hip joint function recovered. The limitation of this study lied in two aspects: the retrospective study and no corresponding cases of extramedullary fixation as control. Based on the basic principle of fracture healing, the excellent reduction and blood supply preservation are two important factors for fracture healing and functional recovery of the limbs. For subtrochanteric fractures, it is not easy to achieve the two during operation at the same time, so the physicians should weigh the pros and cons and choose the optimal scheme, which may be the key to avoid the malunion of fracture. Our study showed that intramedullary fixation combined with limited open reduction is feasible and effective for the treatment of subtrochanteric femur fractures, however, long-term follow-up and further observation are still expected.