The aim of the present investigation was to study the biooxidation of a refractory gold-bearing pyrrhotite, in order to increase the gold recovery during the subsequent conventional cyanidation.
                  Bacterial cultures utilised in the biological test consisted predominantly of Thiobacillus genus. Tests were conducted at laboratory scale. The gold content of the ore sample, coming from Bolivia, was of 10 g t−1 Au.
                  After 24 h leaching time by direct cyanidation, low gold recovery was obtained (<20% Au), with a high reagent consumption. On the other hand, a high gold recovery was achieved for the biooxidated samples: after 24 h cyanidation gold dissolution reached about 91% Au.
                  Experimental results have shown the technical feasibility of the biooxidative pretreatment prior to conventional leaching and a complete circuit of treatment, on laboratory scale, has been developed considering also the subsequent gold recovery by carbon adsorption/desorption and electrowinning.
                  A gold extraction yield of about 86% was determined in the whole process for gold extraction from pyrrhotite (biooxidation, solid–liquid separation, cyanidation, adsorption, desorption, electrowinning).Cyanidation is a relatively simple and cheap technology for treating a wide range of gold-containing ores The choice of process for refractory ores or concentrate treatment is based on many technical, economic, and environmental factors. There are several ways for effective oxidative destruction of the sulphide matrix: oxidation roasting, aqueous pressure oxidation, bacterial oxidation and chemical oxidation Traditional methods of pretreating refractory ores, such as roasting, are no longer satisfactory. This can be due to economic or environmental considerations, or both. With the advent of stricter environmental regulations designed to restrict the quantities and control the quality of wastes from mining, milling, and smelting operations, some established techniques no longer have a technical and/or economic advantage Relatively new technologies for refractory ore pretreatment are being developed to overcome these shortcomings, notably including biological oxidation systems. The biological pretreatment of refractory ores containing precious metals has the obvious advantage of not requiring high-temperature or high-pressure equipment and showing the lowest capital requirement Biological leaching, which for many years has been applied for the recovery of copper and uranium, has only been recently (in the last 10 years) considered for the treatment of refractory ores and concentrates containing precious metals, such as gold For new technologies such as this, novelty is an additional factor which, even if technical and economic parity or superiority with other technologies can be demonstrated, can weigh against its selection as the process of choice Microbial metal leaching or bioleaching is based on the ability of a special group of acidophilic bacteria to oxidise sulphuric minerals. They convert these extremely insoluble compounds into water-soluble products. Their activity results in metal mobilisation and sulphuric acid production In the subsequent stage, bacteria oxidise pyrrhotite according to the following reactions: Sulphur is also produced by H A chemical reaction between pyrrhotite and ferric iron takes place Bacteria oxidise sulphur: The main objective of this experimental work was to test this biotechnology in order to obtain high gold extraction from pyrrhotite ores by cyanidation in a laboratory scale Few data are reported in the literature for pyrrhotite bioleaching. Consequently, the efforts to develop new treatment technologies are justified since important deposits of gold associated to sulphide minerals occur in the world The pyrrhotite ore sample comes from Atoroma mine in Bolivia. Representative samples were prepared and ground to −74 μm for characterization. By optical microscopy examination of the polished sections and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis, it has been demonstrated that gold is mainly locked in submicron inclusions within the lattice of the pyrrhotite A mixed culture of microbial strains of The selection was evaluated by monitoring Fe Bioleaching experiments were planned on the basis of the main factors that influence the biooxidative process Samples were taken periodically to monitor iron, sulphate, cell concentration in solution and pH during the bioleaching process.  Homogeneous biotreated samples were collected, with the aim to achieve representative samples for gold recovery on laboratory scale Leaching tests were conducted in hemispherical glass reactor (500 ml volume), at atmospheric pressure. Experimental conditions of the cyanidation tests are reported in Samples of cyanide leached solution were taken periodically for gold and cyanide determination. At the end of each cyanidation test, the pulp was filtered. The solid was exposed to gold analysis, while the solution was stored for the subsequent adsorption stage. pH was continuously monitored and adjusted by Ca(OH) The leached gold was concentrated and purified by adsorption onto activated carbon and subsequent desorption, on laboratory scale. The gold concentration of the solution before adsorption was of 10 mg l The adsorption process was carried out in stirred reactors (500 ml volume) During the tests, solution samples were withdrawn for gold determination. After adsorption, the loaded carbon was separated from the solution by filtration. Preliminary test of carbon-in-pulp (CIP) has been carried out The adsorbed gold was stripped from carbon by a fixed bed glass column The auriferous solution was electrowon in a laboratory-scale electrolytic glass cell of 300 ml of capacity, equipped with a thermostatic water jacket. An AMEL mod. 555 B potentiostat–galvanostat apparatus, equipped with an instrument system to automatically control process parameters, was used for the electrowinning tests. Metallic gold was recovered onto a steel cathode, while platinum wire was used as the anode. The reference electrode was a saturated calomel electrode with standard constant potential at constant temperature. The cathodic useful surface was 60 cm The electrolysis tests were carried out treating 200 ml of gold cyanide solution (60 mg l The experimental conditions of the electrowinning tests are reported in Ferrous and ferric iron were evaluated colorimetrically, after reaction with KSCN, and sulphate ions turbidimetrically, after reaction with BaCl Solutions were analysed for gold determination by atomic absorption spectrophotometer (Perkin-Elmer mod. 460). This investigation was realised on the basis of the previous data obtained by factorial experiments In the present study, biological tests have been carried out extending the time of treatment to 30 days, checking the microbial growth. The aim was to verify the behaviour of biotreatment during a longer period and its effect on gold extraction yields by cyanidation. The cell concentration in solution, pH evolution, total iron, ferric iron and sulphate were monitored vs. time  Cyanidation tests have been performed both on non-treated pyrrhotite ( The bioleaching residues were then collected, obtaining homogeneous samples as concerns the gold content (about 10 g t Lime consumption was 10.1 kg t Cyanide consumption increases from 16 kg t In this section, the results obtained in the unit operations aimed at the recovery of pure gold after cyanidation are presented. As for the purification cycle (adsorption/desorption), 98.1% Au was adsorbed onto activated carbon, obtaining 0.2 g kg Moreover, by preliminary test of CIP about 95% Au was adsorbed onto activated carbon; the activated carbon showed a good attrition resistance: the loss of carbon was of 0.2 g kg As for the precipitation step, 97.8% Au was recovered by electrowinning the concentrated and purified solution. The final concentration of gold in the barren solutions (1 mg l The implementation of the electrowinning in industrial scale, together with the application of cathode with a high surface, could improve the efficiency and the economy of the process.  In this work, an integrated process for gold recovery from the auriferous pyrrhotite coming from Atoroma mine (Bolivia) has been investigated at a laboratory scale. The biological pretreatment prior to the conventional leaching has been demonstrated to lead to high gold recovery. In fact, only 19.7% Au recovery was obtained, by direct cyanidation of Atoroma ore, with high reagent concentration. On the other hand, bench scale bacterial oxidation experiments permitted achievement of higher gold recovery: about 84% Au was obtained from samples bioleached 7 days, while 91% Au was achieved from samples bioleached 30 days, in batch conditions. The gold recovery of the whole process (bioleaching, solid–liquid separation, cyanidation, purification and precipitation) was about 86% Au. Moreover, the recovered gold was demonstrated to have good characteristics. Further work is in progress, aimed at the process scaling up. In particular, a technical and economical comparison of two gold extraction processes, cyanidation with and without biotreatment, will be carried out, considering that there are many possibilities for technology transfer in the East-Europe, that could benefit from this biotechnology. The authors are grateful to Dr. A. Nardini, Mr. M. Centofanti, Mr. P. Fornari, Mr. R. Massidda and Ms. Emanuela Tempesta for their helpful collaboration in the experimental work; moreover, the authors thank Mr. Giampaolo Marruzzo for the X-ray analysis.