Acorga CLX50, a product of Imperial Chemical Industries, is an extractant for cupric chloride. It also extracts a minor amount of antimony as an impurity during extraction of copper from chloride solutions. Behaviors of antimony extraction by CLX50 are investigated in this study. Stability of various antimony species is examined through establishment of Eh–pH and Eh–log[Cl−] diagrams. Slope analysis reveals that two moles of CLX50 react with one mole of antimony species. Acidity affects the antimony extraction differently at different acidity ranges, due to different reactions involved in the extraction. Effect of chloride ion on extraction of antimony and the linear relationship between copper extraction and antimony extraction are explained quantitatively.A copper extractant, Acorga CLX50, has been developed by Imperial Chemical Industries as an effective extractant for divalent copper from chloride solution Although CLX50 is a selective extractant for cupric chloride, it also extracts minor amounts of impurities during copper extraction from chloride leachates. Since antimony frequently associates with copper ores, it enters pregnant solutions of chloride leaching. When copper electrolyte is contaminated with antimony in copper electrowinning, cathodic copper product deteriorates with antimony contamination The Eh–pH diagram of the Sb–H  The organic phase used in this study was composed of CLX50 and Escaid 110, which served as a diluent. The tests were conducted in 250-ml flasks. Mechanical mixing was provided through a paddle agitator with a rotating speed of 400 rpm and a paddle tip speed of 1.2 m/s. A/O ratio was 1:1 in the tests unless otherwise noted. Mixing time was set at 15 min, which was predetermined to be sufficient to reach equilibrium between the organic and the aqueous phases. Temperature was maintained at 25 °C. After separation of the two phases, copper content in both phases was analyzed using an atomic absorption method and antimony in both phases was analyzed by a DCP emission spectrometry method. The total ionic strength in each group of tests was kept constant by addition of sodium perchlorate, so that the activity coefficient of the active constituents did not vary significantly. Concentration, instead of activity, is used in the slope analysis of this study. The organic feed used in the tests of antimony extraction isotherm contained 0.10 M CLX50 in Escaid 110. The aqueous feed contained 0.02 M Sb, 0.10 M HCl and 2.75 M CaCl In the tests, CLX50 concentration was kept to levels as low as possible to avoid the uncertainty of the activity coefficient while the extraction of antimony was high enough for analytical purposes. The concentration of CLX50 in the organic feed ranged from 0.075 to 0.50 M, while the aqueous feed contained 10 A plot of log The equilibrium constant, Under a series of tests in which [Cl The stoichiometric factor, The Eh–log[Cl Antimony with a valence of 3 can react with chloride ions to form a series of chloro-complexes Chloride salts usually have an activity coefficient less than unity in the concentration range of 0.1 to 2.0 M The equilibrium constants, Because SbOCl Under conditions in which [H Since the initial concentration of antimony in the aqueous feed is much smaller than that of CLX50 and H The chloride coordination number of the predominant antimony species could be four in the chloride ion concentration of 2.0 to 2.8 M, i.e., antimony mainly exists as SbOCl  Substitution of Under conditions of constant [H Again, [H Antimony extraction is more effective in chloride concentration range of 1.2 to 2.5 M. To reduce the antimony extraction, the chloride concentration in the aqueous solution should be adjusted to below 1.2 M or higher than 2.5 M. Tests were conducted to evaluate the effect of acidity on antimony extraction. The organic feed contained 0.10 M CLX50 in Escaid 110 and the aqueous feed contained 3.0 M chloride and 0.002 M antimony. HCl was used to adjust the solution acidity to the range of 0.1 to 2.0 M. The effect of acidity on antimony extraction is given in At an acidity below 0.5 M, Under a series of tests, in which [Cl A linear relationship in a plot of log At higher acidities, Sb A similar slope analysis will show that To minimize the antimony extraction, the acidity of the aqueous solution should be kept as low as possible. Cupric species compete with antimony in extraction by CLX50 when they coexist in the aqueous solution. In these tests, an aqueous feed containing 3.0 M Cl The extraction reactions of copper and antimony by CLX50 are given in By rearranging Under the test conditions, both [Cl When the copper concentration in the aqueous feed increases from 0.01 to 0.30 M, A minor amount of antimony is extracted by CLX50 and a stoichiometric factor of 2 is indicated in the slope analysis of the extraction. The reaction order of antimony extraction with respect to chloride ion concentration is 1 in the chloride ion concentration range of 1.0 to 1.4 M and −1 in the range of 2.0 to 2.8 M. The reaction mechanism is explained with the fact that various antimony species predominate in the solution at various chloride ion concentrations. At acidities below 0.5 M, antimony extraction coefficient is a second order function of the acidity, while at acidities above 0.5 M, antimony extraction coefficient is independent of the acidity. Cupric species compete with antimony in the extraction with CLX50. A linear relationship between antimony and copper extraction coefficients is observed and explained based on a proposed exchange reaction between copper and antimony species during the extraction. Antimony extraction is more effective in chloride concentration range of 1.2 to 2.5 M. To reduce this extraction, the chloride concentration in the aqueous solution should be adjusted to below 1.2 M or higher than 2.5 M. To minimize the antimony extraction, the acidity of the aqueous solution should be kept as low as possible. The author wishes to express his appreciation to Mr. X. Wu, Dr. P.D. Rao and Professor D. E. Walsh for their assistance in this study and in preparation of the paper.