Smart manufacturing (SM) is a new paradigm that allows manufacturing to enter its fourth revolution by exploiting state-of-the art sensing, communication and computation as the Industrial Internet of Things (IioT). Through the use of high-performance computing and advanced modeling, SM aims to improve the flexibility and adaptability of manufacturing. This paper addresses this trend by reviewing the combined use of data-driven and knowledge-enabled hybrid models (HM), and discusses how such techniques seamlessly fit in the SM platform. Furthermore, a discussion of the new paradigms of HM enabled by the SM platform is given, highlighting their importance in future large-scale applications of the SM platform.While working as a process engineer in the refining industry in 1982, I decided it was time to go to graduate school, focusing on process control. It did not take me long to realize that my optimal solution was to attend UT-Austin and work with Tom Edgar on multivariable control problems (even though I had not encountered any 6-stage linear, absorption columns while in industry; and we would not have considered applying bang-bang control on them ( Tom, while providing broad objectives and desired outcome metrics, gave me a lot of freedom in my research. When it came writing papers, however, tighter feedback and multiple iterations were implemented. Back then we actually wrote full-length papers for American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE) Meeting presentations, so the week before the paper was due (AIChE would put them on microfishe) would involve multiple iterations with shorter and shorter time scales before Tom would agree that the paper was finished (I suspect that he did not need to iterate as much with Juergen Hahn). It was always clear to us that Tom considered his family life to be very important, and his amazing efficiency enabled him to leave campus at a reasonable time. Being slightly older than some of the other students, and thus having a hint of responsibility, I was asked by Tom and Donna to house-sit their Rhodesian Ridgebacks while they were out of town for several days (apparently their young children could take care of themselves). It was a good gig, given the swimming pool, the semi-automated lawn sprinkling system, and a prime location in the foothills of Austin. While Vice President of the American Automatic Control Council (AACC) in 1989, Tom suggested to Tim Johnson (with GE in Schenectady), Chair of the 1991 American Control Conference (ACC), that he may want to consider me for the position of Finance Chair, since RPI was relatively close to GE and to the conference venue in Boston. My position as finance chair led to a number of ACC positions, and to roles as President and Secretary of the AACC. Another hallmark of Tom is his keen sense of humor (although he occasionally suffers from “Dad joke syndrome”). He and Dale Seborg began a tradition of conference “awards” that were presented at the end of each Conference on Chemical Process Control (CPC), a major conference held every five years. During much of each conference he and Dale would sit on the back row, passing notes back and forth about “contributions” from various speakers. They would also encourage other attendees to provide them with ideas, culminating in a 15–20 min presentation on the awards during the conference dinner towards the end of the week. It has been a pleasure to work with Tom as an advisee and colleague for the past 38 years and I wish him the best of luck as he attempts to retire (I suspect that a number of us will keep him in the loop for quite a while). This paper is contributed in recognition of his tremendous impact on the systems and control field in general, and on my life in particular. The current paradigm of advanced manufacturing is known as Industry 4.0 in Germany and has spread globally in the form of Smart Manufacturing (SM) in the United States of America, Made in China and Make in India. Smart Manufacturing is aimed at the seamless integration and networked operation of data collection, data processing, model and data-driven process simulation, safety and health protection, regulatory control, real-time optimization, planning and scheduling. As a result, a key part of the entire SM ideology is the synchronized predictive capability by using state-of-art sensors, data-networking and sharing platforms, flexible and agile multiscale models (or apps in the CESMII framework ( Integration of intelligence and knowledge of customer, partner and public (knowledge encoding). Higher level Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) serve as references to test different models). Adaptability of the organization to respond to dynamic supply and demand needs. Linking with state of the art Information Technology (IT) infrastructure. Lowered cost of data analytics, modeling, and simulation by using hybrid models. Models are designed to be at the heart of a networked data collection and processing SM platform. A discussion of HM under the SM umbrella requires some background on the general role of models in SM. Models are crucial to every level of SM and this paper focuses on the nature of such models and highlight their characteristics, importance and the ways to integrate them in the SM framework. The concept of a Digital Twin (DT) is a key component of SM which then leads to the nature of models required for SM and how HM fits in the framework. A DT is a high-fidelity digital representation of the plant allowing the integration of the entire production and product life-cycle in a synchronized manner, which can be simulated and tested ( The successful operation of the SM platform requires the use of data-driven, knowledge enabled and model rich applications to use high-fidelity data and computation systems ( Hybrid models often consist of a combination of FPMs and DDMs to perform a task that neither model can individually produce with the required level of performance. A good example which highlights the ease of implementation of FPM over DDM in a HM is discussed in While FPMs are robust and usually generalize well in practice, developing FPMs that are detailed enough for application can be challenging. In complex processes, knowledge of physical, chemical and biological mechanisms may be unavailable, or the model solution may be computationally infeasible. With abundant availability of data, the most uncertain mechanisms in HMs are commonly modeled by DDMs ( FPMs and DDMs are usually developed based on different types of knowledge into different structures and formulations. Therefore, an efficient structure for DDM and FPM integration is crucial for hybrid model development ( In this architecture of hybrid modeling, the FPMs and the DDMs are arranged in parallel as shown in The output of FPMs and DDMs can be combined in different manners. Two general ways of combination are superposition and multiplication ( Another way of combining FPMs and DDMs is to use all the sub-models to predict the same quantity and integrate them by an ensemble approach. Weighting different sub-models is one way to combine the sub-models ( In this architecture the FPMs and DDMs are arranged in series as shown in The performance of hybrid model is determined by the property of sub-models and the way sub-models are combined. DDMs can only be as good as the data available to train them. Therefore, DDMs suffer from poor extrapolation ability and poor generalization due to the lack of underlying knowledge of the process. The quality of FPMs is determined by the availability of knowledge and computational feasibility. FPMs with excess unmodelled effects under unreasonable assumptions could lead to significant prediction errors. HM performance is influenced by the arrangement of the sub-models. The performance of parallel HMs is dependent on the quality of the DDMs ( HMs have been used extensively in various aspects of process engineering, including modeling, control, and optimization. This section reviews the applications of hybrid models by discussing the key factors – application, type of data-driven approach, complexity of the problem and the outcome. Three notable examples of hybrid models used for process modeling are summarized below. An extensive list of hybrid model applications for various processes is outlined in  A three-phase industrial batch reactor is modeled using a hybrid first principle neural network model by  A detailed discussion is provided for three notable examples of hybrid models used for process control and the remaining are summarized in A nonlinear Internal Model Control (IMC) approach based on neural networks was used by   Optimization is performed through iterative evaluations of process models given different values of decision variables to improve design or operation. Numerous iterations need to be performed before optimization criteria can be met. Therefore, to ensure computational feasibility, computationally inexpensive models should be adopted for process optimization. As a result, applications of DDMs in process optimization is growing ( Serial HMs are most commonly used in optimization. Serial HMs arranged similar to The limited use of traditional parallel HMs for optimization is due to their limited ability for extrapolation, which is critical for HMs in optimization applications and is regarded as one of the key advantages over purely empirical process models ( As discussed in the previous section, the structure and performance of HMs are determined by the FPMs and DDMs. By modeling the conservation laws such as mass, momentum and energy balances, robust HMs can be built which generalize and extrapolate well. Additionally, when HMs are used for prediction, structural information encoded by FPMs are crucial to develop confidence in the resulting HM ( Another challenge in developing HMs is the potential of limited data for the development of DDMs. The CPS component of an SM framework can allow access to process data that can be used to increase the robustness of HMs and may even allow such models to adapt to different process conditions over time. In many of the HM approaches described above, DDMs are trained on datasets that are rather limited for various reasons. The resulting model can be deployed online in the process, but the process may not have the sensor infrastructure to ensure model validity over time, or to adapt the model to new process conditions. CPS systems can provide the hardware and fidelity necessary to procure high-quality data for the HM to be run offline or online in an adaptive fashion ( A good example of the SM-HM integrated approach can be found in In conclusion, the need for including HMs in the Smart Manufacturing platform as an approach to realize Industry 4.0 concepts is presented. Considering the role played by the different kinds of models in the SM platform, HMs are introduced by discussing traditional HM structures and their applications in process modeling, control and optimization. A discussion is then presented on how the SM platform can enable a new, innovative paradigm for the use of traditional HMs through SM integration. The true success of Smart Manufacturing lies in the coordinated and synergistic use of expertise and technology from various disciplines in academia and manufacturing. Along with a multidisciplinary approach, current concepts like Human in The Loop ( Next generation computational techniques will be implemented in the SM platform which will further ensure complicated HM architectures running at different time-scales across and along the process hierarchy in a multi-scale approach. Further research on the HM architecture will ensure how different kinds of models can be integrated for such complicated applications. Future improvements of SM must include aspects about self-aware systems in estimation, control and monitoring ( We have no conflict of interest to declare for this paper entitled “Hybrid Modeling in the Era of Smart Manufacturing,” submitted to the special issue honoring Thomas F. Edgar. Financial support has been provided by Isermann Fellowships from the Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, and by the US Department of Energy through the Clean Energy Smart Manufacturing Innovation Institute (CESMII), Award DE-EE0007613.