Percussive blast hole drills were observed in eight rock types at an open pit mine and three motorway sites. The net penetration rates of the drills were calculated from the performance measurements. Rock samples were collected from the drilling locations and the physical and mechanical properties of the rocks were determined both in the field and in the laboratory. The penetration rates were correlated with the rock properties. The uniaxial compressive strength, the Brazilian tensile strength, the point load strength and the Schmidt hammer value exhibit strong correlations with the penetration rate. Impact strength shows a fairly good correlation with penetration rate. Weak correlations between penetration rate and both elastic modulus and natural density were found. Any significant correlation between penetration rate and P-wave velocity was not found.
                  It was concluded that, among the rock properties adopted in this study, the uniaxial compressive strength, the Brazilian tensile strength, the point load strength and the Schmidt hammer value are the dominant rock properties effecting the penetration rate of percussive drills. Theoretical specific energy as defined by different research workers is proved also to be well correlated with penetration rate of percussive drills which verifies basic theoretical works on the subject. In addition, the point load and the Schmidt hammer test can practically be used in the field as a predictive tool for the estimation of penetration rate.Percussive drills have been extensively used in open pit mines, quarries and construction sites. An accurate estimation of drilling rate helps to make more efficient the planning of the rock excavation projects. The drillability of the rocks mainly depends on operational variables and rock characteristics. Operational variables known as the controllable parameters are rotational speed, thrust, blow frequency and flushing. Rock properties and geological conditions are the uncontrollable parameters. In this study, the penetration rates of the percussive drills were measured in the field and the rocks were tested both in the field and in the laboratory. Then, the penetration rates were correlated with the rock properties for the development of reliable equations in order to allow engineers predict the penetration rate from rock characteristics. Many researchers have investigated theoretically or experimentally the percussive drilling and correlated the penetration rate of percussive drills with various rock properties. Hartman A much better correlation was obtained by using a coefficient of rock strength (CRS). Tandanand and Unger obtained simple relationships between the CRS and compressive strength. Rabia and Brook used the modified test apparatus to determine the rock impact hardness number and developed an empirical equation for predicting drilling rates for both DTH and drifter drills. They also determined the surface area of drill cuttings and found that there was no correlation between the surface area of drill cuttings and the penetration rate of a down-the-hole drill. The early works done on drilling were reviewed in detail by Maurer Hustrulid and Fairhust Dutta Lundberg Howarth et al. Wijk Pandey et al. Kahraman The effect of geological discontinuities on the efficiency of mechanical rock destruction is an important point, which is partly neglected in the research programmes. One of the main conclusion made by Thuro Percussive drilling can be divided by the energy transmission medium used by the location of the drill hammers into hydraulic top hammers, pneumatic top hammers and down the hole drilling methods. Hydraulic used in drilling offers specific advantages in the transmission of the forces and energy and the penetration rates of hydraulic top hammers are generally considered to be 50–300% higher than those of competing drilling methods There are four main components in percussive rock drilling, feed, rotation, percussion and flushing. The feed is used to keep the drill bit in contact with rock. The purpose of the rotation is to rotate the drill bit inserts in order to operate on new surface at the hole bottom at each blow and thus achieving a larger volume of crater per impact blown. Subsequent craters are purposely formed within a critical distance of existing craters, which is called indexing. Operational variables of a top hammer are defined in The pioneering work on theoretical and experimental study of the percussive drilling of rock was done by Hustrulid and Fairhust The above equation shows that the penetration rate is proportional to both blow energy and blow frequency, as well as being inversely proportional to McCarty The concept of specific energy was proposed by Teale The main point of the above argument comes to how to formulate specific energy Hughes Farmer and Garritly There are some models in percussive drilling or rotary cutting assuming that thrust force is a product of rock compressive strength and tool projectile area, given good agreement between predicted and actual advance rate values Sinkala The above consideration showed that automatic control of drilling parameters may be realized as rock condition change. Sinkala concluded that his study enabled the sub-level intervals from LKAB-Kirum mine to be increased from 22 to 27 The drilling performance was measured on hydraulic top hammer drill rigs that drill blastholes on eight rock types in four different worksites including three motorway sites and an open pit ( Uniaxial compression tests were performed on trimmed core samples, which had a diameter of 33 Brazilian tensile strength tests were conducted on core samples having a diameter of 33 Tangent Young's modulus was measured at a stress level equal to 50% of the ultimate uniaxial compressive strength. The diametral point load test was carried out on the cores having a diameter of 33 N-type Schmidt hammer tests were conducted in the field. The Schmidt hammer was held on downward position and 10 impacts were carried out at each point, and the peak rebound value was recorded. The test was repeated at least three times on any rock type and average value was recorded as rebound number. The device designed by Evans and Pomeroy P-wave velocities were measured on the rock blocks having an approximate dimension of 13×20×12 Trimmed core samples were used in the determination of natural density. The specimen volume was calculated from an average of several calliper readings. The weight of the specimen was determined by a balance, capable of weighing to an accuracy of 0.01 of the sample weight. The natural density values were obtained from the ratio of the specimen weight to the specimen volume. The average results of the all tests are listed in The coefficients of variation (CoV) were calculated to evaluate the variability of test results for each test and each rock type ( The UCS values range from 20.1 The Brazilian tensile strength values range from 1.2 The elastic modulus values range from 1566 The point load strength index values range from 1.1 The average Schmidt hammer rebound number ranges from 36 for the Osmaniye/Bahce altered sandstone to 70 for the Osmaniye/Bahce sandstone. The CoV ranges from 0.82% for the Osmaniye/Bahce sandstone to 8.00% for the Yahyali metasandstone with an overall average of 2.66%. The impact strength index range from 70.4 for the Osmaniye/Bahce altered sandstone to 89.5 for the Gaziantep/Erikli diabase. The CoV ranges from 0.14% for the Gaziantep/Erikli limestone to 1.04% for the Gaziantep/Erikli marl with an overall average of 0.60%. The P-wave velocity values range from 2.0 The natural density values range from 2.20 Penetration rates were correlated with the rock properties using the method of least-squares regression. The equation of the best-fit line, the 95% confidence limits, and the correlation coefficient ( Although the drilling mechanics are complex, one should be able to consider from first principles what rock properties govern failure, even in this complex dynamic case, what properties will govern drilling. Theoretical and practical considerations discussed in  Some theoretical models in percussive drilling and rotary cutting assume that thrust force and penetration rate is related to the product of rock compressive strength and tool projectile area. The linear relationship between penetration rates and the UCS values shown in  The plot of penetration rates as a function of the elastic modulus is shown in As shown in The relation between penetration rate and Schmidt hammer value is shown in The plot of penetration rate as a function of the impact strength index is shown in  A linear relation between penetration rate and natural density was found ( The average coefficient of variation values of each test method are summarised in The impact strength test yields most consistent result of the eight methods. The coefficient of variation for both the sound velocity tests and natural density are rather close that of the UCS test. The Brazilian tensile test, elastic modulus and the point load test have relatively high average values of coefficient of variation, but the variability of their results is still within acceptable limits for most engineering purposes. Theoretical considerations given in the paper show that penetration rates of percussive drills are directly proportional to blow energy, blow frequency, energy transfer rate and inversely proportional to hole diameter and specific energy values. However specific energy is not a fundamental intrinsic rock property and operational parameters such as blow energy controls the numerical values of specific energy. It is concluded that for a given power of drill rig specific energy is direct function of rock parameters and may be formulated as given in Among the other rock properties adopted in this study, the Brazilian tensile strength, the point load strength and the Schmidt hammer value exhibit strong correlations with the penetration rate. Impact strength shows a tolerably good correlation with penetration rate. Weak correlation between penetration rate and natural density was found. Any significant correlation between penetration rate and P-wave velocity was not found. The specific energy, the uniaxial compressive strength, the Brazilian tensile strength, the point load strength and the Schmidt hammer value were selected as the most significant rock properties effecting the penetration rate of percussive drills. From the four most significant rock properties, the point load strength and the Schmidt hammer value can easily be obtained according to uniaxial compression and tensile test. The testing equipment of these properties is portable, and so they can be used easily in the field. The derived equations are valid for 76–89 Predicting the penetration rate is very important in rock drilling. The penetration rate is a necessary value for the cost estimation and the planning of the project. One of the important parameters effecting the drillability is the rock properties. The penetration rate of percussive drills was correlated with theoretical specific energy values and eight rock properties. Among the rock properties adopted in this study, the uniaxial compressive strength, the Brazilian tensile strength, the point load strength and the Schmidt hammer value are found as the dominant rock properties effecting the penetration rate of percussive drills. The point load strength and the Schmidt hammer value can easily be measured in the field and used for the rapid estimation of the percussive drill penetration rate. Theoretical considerations given permits to generalize the prediction equations formulated in this paper. Further study is required to check the validity of the derived equation for the other rock types. The authors acknowledge to Dogus Constr. and Trade Co., Tekfen Constr. and Institution Co. and Ozkoyuncu Mining Co. due to providing facilities for site investigations.