Due to the excellent chelating properties of aminopolycarboxylic acid (APCAs), they can be used for the removal of metals from contaminated waters. This paper reviews the research results obtained for both commercial and self-prepared adsorbents functionalized with four most common APCAs: iminodiacetic acid (IDA), nitrilotriacetic acid (NTA), ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), and diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA). The structural characteristics and unique metal binding properties of these chelating adsorbents are presented. The theory of the adsorption phenomena is discussed based on the kinetics of adsorption, equilibrium adsorption isotherm models, and thermodynamic models. The most important applications of APCA-functionalized adsorbents are also described. APCA-functionalized adsorbents are found to be highly promising materials for metal removal from contaminated waters.The discharge of toxic metals into the nature due to anthropogenic and other activities causes severe environmental and health related problems. This is mainly due to their persistency and tendency for bioaccumulation in several of the components of the ecosystem. To prevent heavy metal pollution, it is important to apply robust and effective purification process(es) of wastewaters containing elevated concentrations of toxic metals. Adsorption technology is presented to be one of the most promising methods to this end ( In order to maximize the removal of heavy metals from contaminated waters, it is important that metals strongly bind on the adsorbent's surface. It is well known that chelating agents such as aminopolycarboxylic acids (APCAs) form stable structures with metal ions. APCAs are an important group of chelating agents that contain several carboxylate groups bound to one or more nitrogen atoms and have the ability to sequester metal ions. They are also used to prevent the formation of metal precipitates, to hinder metal ion catalysis of unwanted chemical reactions, to remove metal ions from systems, and to make metal ions more available by keeping them in solution. Therefore, surface functionalization with these high affinity binding groups has received considerable research interest in the recent years. Iminodiacetic acid (IDA), nitrilotriacetic acid (NTA), ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), and diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) are the most frequently used APCAs for the binding of metal ions. This review seeks to provide comprehensive information on properties and applications of the adsorbents functionalized with the four most common APCAs. Both commercial and self-prepared materials are included for the review. Besides the experimental findings, theoretical aspects are also discussed. It should be noted that APCA-functionalized adsorbents can be referred as chelating or ion-exchange resins. In this paper, the term “adsorption” is used to cover all the metal binding phenomena by these materials. The structures and properties of the group of APCAs are extensively reviewed in the literature ( APCAs are water-soluble polycarboxylic acids with zero to five protonation degrees. Their solubility increases in the order of: DTPA < EDTA < NTA < IDA with increasing pH. The most studied properties of different APCAs are their degradability and environmental fate ( APCAs are widely used in many industrial processes or products e.g. (i) to prevent metal precipitation, (ii) to inhibit catalytic activity of metal ions, (iii) to remove metal ions, or on the other hand (iv) to keep metal ions in the solution ( The high stability of metal-APCA chelates can be attributed to the multidentate binding of APCA to the metal center. Both carboxyl and amine groups participate in chelation. For example, NTA with four donor atoms forms octahedral chelates with divalent metal ions. In these structures metal is coordinated via all carboxyl groups, nitrogen, and two water molecules ( The above is related to the metal-APCA chelates found in the solution phase. However, the situation is considerably different when APCAs are bound on solid support. More detailed discussion has been presented in the following sections. Due to the chelate formation properties, APCA-functionalized adsorbents can be referred as ‘chelating resins’. These materials have some special features, which should be highlighted at first onset. These arise from the difference between surface-bound ligands and their dissolved analogies in the liquid phase. Immobilized ligands are insoluble, they have a limited set of conformations, a more irregular distribution, high volume concentration, and are sterically unequivalent. All of these characteristics strongly influence the adsorption performances of the chelating resins ( Iminodiacetic acid is the simplest APCA containing two carboxyl groups. IDA-functionalized adsorbents have been widely studied during the recent decades. Besides the self-synthesized materials, a wide variety of commercial IDA-functionalized chelating resins exist ( Silica gel is an amorphous form of silicon dioxide where silicon atoms are linked together via oxygen atoms with siloxane bonds. Silica gel surface contains hydroxyl groups that can be further functionalized using a familiar silanization procedure ( Chitosan can be prepared from chitin, one of the nature's most abundant biopolymers. Chitosan contains primary amino groups, which can be further functionalized with different organic ligands. A wide variety of polymeric resins containing IDA-groups has been prepared in recent years. High adsorption capacities for metals have been obtained for acrylonitrile-divinylbenzene copolymer (AN-DVB) modified by IDA-functionalities ( Furthermore, IDA-functionality bearing magnetic chelating resins have been prepared by few researchers (  For further comparison, Cu(II) removal by four different IDA-functionalized adsorbents is illustrated in As in the case of IDA, there are some NTA-bearing commercial chelating resins available ( NTA-modified melamine–formaldehyde (NTA-MFA) resin was prepared in the hot slurry of NTA, melamine, acetone, guaiacol, and formaldehyde ( Layered double hydroxides (LDHs) are two-dimensional nanostructured clays, which contain cationic brucite-like sheets and hydrated interlayer with anions susceptible for ion-exchange ( Various materials, from biomass to inorganic oxides, have been functionalized with EDTA. The popularity of EDTA arises from its strong metal chelating ability, stability, local availability, and low price. EDTA can be attached on the silica support by first using the amine group containing silylating agents ((3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane, APTES) and then reacting surface-bound amines with EDTA anhydride ( Rather similar synthetic route as depicted above was used by Silanization procedure was also used for the modification of graphene oxide (GO) ( In the synthesis of EDTA–chitosan, chitosan was reacted with EDTA anhydride in acetic acid/MeOH solution ( EDTA-functionalized chitosan–silica hybrid materials have also been tested for the removal of Co(II), Ni(II), Cd(II), and Pb(II) ( The same authors, who first prepared EDTA-functionalized chitosan ( Silica polyamine (PAA and PEI, see Most of the commercial ion-exchange resins are based on the crosslinked polystyrene (PS). The high loading capacity (0.5–3 mmol/g) and low cost of PS makes it a good support for solid-phase synthesis ( Polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimers are branched, well-defined synthetic nanoscale materials. PAMAM dendrimers with amino terminal groups have previously been used for Cu(II) removal ( Many natural, low-cost materials have also been utilized as supports for EDTA functionalities. These include sawdust (SD) and sugarcane bagasse (SB) ( LDHs intercalated with EDTA (EDTA–MgFe–LDH and EDTA–ZnAl–LDH) have been tested for Cu(II), Pb(II), and Cd(II) adsorption ( As in the case of IDA, a great variation of adsorption performances can be seen between different EDTA-functionalized materials ( DTPA is a more intricate molecule than EDTA. As seen from Recent examples of DTPA-modified adsorbents are melamine–formaldehyde–DTPA (DTPA–MF) ( Finally, as in the case of NTA and EDTA, LDHs have been intercalated with DTPA and then obtained DTPA–ZnAl–LDH and DTPA–MgAl–LDH used for heavy metal adsorption ( Generally, comparison of The sections above give an overview of the adsorption properties of APCA-functionalized materials. Comparison of the results, however, is rather difficult due to the different experimental conditions used. Furthermore, similar materials prepared by different authors may show significantly different adsorption performances for metal ions. For the in-depth evaluation and comparison of the different APCA-functionalized adsorbents, systematic studies in different conditions as well as validation of synthetic routes should be conducted. It is important to consider the binding mechanism of metal ions by the immobilized chelating agents. However, there is a considerable research gap in this area because only few studies have been focused on this aspect. The reasons may arise from the lack of proper instrumentations and required technical knowledge. In some cases, structures are suggested directly based on the solution phase structures ( The metal chelate formed on EDTA–silica gel was assumed to have an ideal octahedral structure ( The structures of metal DTPA chelates are even more complex than those of EDTA. Octahedral chelate formation was suggested for Cu(II) and Co(II) based on the color change of DTPA–MF after adsorption experiments ( Stability constants of the APCA-functionalized adsorbents have been determined by the potentiometric titration and UV–vis spectrophotometry and applying the Bjerrum method ( The practical applications of APCA-functionalized adsorbents require the determination of fundamental equilibrium and kinetic parameters. These parameters are crucial for further modeling the process dynamics in more elaborate systems like fixed-bed columns and for process scale-up and optimization ( In this review, considerable effort has been made to compare theoretical results presented by different authors for different APCA-functionalized adsorbents. Comparative tables and figures can be found in the supplementary data ( Before reaching the equilibrium state, several steps affect the adsorption process ( The pseudo-first-order (PS1) model associated with the kinetics of one-site adsorption governed by the rate of the surface reaction was proposed by A marked variation amongst the rate constants obtained for different adsorbents is observed (  The Elovich equation describes the chemisorption on heterogeneous surfaces. The linearized form of the Elovich model has been tested in the case of APCA-functionalized PVA- and PS-resins ( An adsorption isotherm describes the amount of component adsorbed on the adsorbent surface versus the adsorbate amount in the fluid phase at equilibrium. The most commonly used adsorption isotherms are still the Langmuir and Freundlich models even though they were introduced over 90 years ago ( The Langmuir model is the most commonly used equation to present sorption equilibrium of metals on APCA-functionalized adsorbents ( Another often used isotherm equation is the linear Freundlich model. Usually, this model does not show a good fit to equilibrium experimental data. This can be attributed to the fact that the Freundlich model predicts multilayer adsorption and an exponentially increasing adsorption capacity ( Usually, the models that have features from the both Langmuir and Freundlich models give the best approximations for the equilibrium behavior. The Temkin model explicitly takes into account the interactions between adsorbent and adsorbate ( The Sips model combines the adsorption behavior of the Langmuir and Freundlich models. The Sips model was applied by Only in some cases, multi-component modeling of isotherm equations has been tested. In the case of chelating adsorbents, the adsorption phenomenon equally depends on temperature. The thermodynamic parameters related to the adsorption are usually determined from the adsorption isotherms at different temperatures. The following general equations are used: Negative Δ Regarding the adsorption mechanism, chelation has been suggested to be the governing physicochemical phenomenon occurring when metal ions are captured by surface-bound APCAs ( However, the effect of immobilization and pH dependent speciation of APCAs complicates the prediction of the exact mechanism. The immobilization of APCAs results in decrease of pKa values of carboxyl groups and increases the stability of metal chelates ( Heterogeneous adsorption of metals by APCA-modified chitosan ( Furthermore, other functionalities than APCAs on the surface can compete to interact with metals. On the whole, exact evaluation of the adsorption mechanism requires a complete analysis of the structures of metal chelates bound on the surface, which, as discussed earlier, is seldom conducted in fundamental adsorption studies. Functionalization of adsorbents with different organic groups may change the adsorbent properties into a desirable set of chemical and physical traits. Addition of functional group may increase the adsorption capacity, render the adsorbent more selective, or increase the stability of the adsorbent. In the case of resins functionalized with chelating agents, the main applications are the removal of heavy metals from contaminated waters, separation of metals, or preconcentration of metal ions prior to their analysis. In all of these applications regeneration of the adsorbent is an important step and therefore this aspect is briefly discussed below. Regeneration of the used adsorbent is a crucial step in order to increase its practical applicability. For APCA-functionalized adsorbents regeneration can be usually accomplished using acidic solutions. In these conditions, protons are able to replace chelated metals liberating them back in the solution. For example, EDTA-functionalized SBA-15 was effectively regenerated by 0.1 M HCl ( In principle, most of the synthesized adsorbents are first tested in pure solutions containing only one target metal. Real waters to be treated, however, contain various metals as well as salts, acids, and different organic species. Therefore, the adsorption performance of novel adsorbents should also be tested in different solution matrices. The benefits of APCA-functionalized adsorbents are their selectivity toward heavy metals due to their high affinity surface groups. Therefore, they can show high adsorption efficiencies in the presence of various interfering species. Wood sawdust and sugarcane bagasse modified with EDTA were able to remove 89–92% of Zn(II) from real electroplating wastewater ( One of the most important organic compounds found in water matrices is EDTA. Its presence is undesirable since the metals chelated by it do not effectively adsorb on the adsorption resins. Additionally, EDTA enhances the transportation of metals from disposal sites into soils. Taking into account that some APCA-functionalized adsorbents form more stable chelates with metals than EDTA, APCA-functionalized adsorbents could work as selective adsorbents for metal ions ( The reuse of metals collected from wastewater requires their separation from each other. Conventional separation methods for metals are precipitation and liquid phase extraction. Compared to the latter methods, solid-phase extraction using chelating resins offers several advantages such as higher recovery and enrichment factors, lower consumption of organic solvents, and repeated use ( At low pH, metal ions are better separated by many of the APCA-functionalized adsorbents ( APCA-functionalized resin packed columns have also been used as analytical columns in ion chromatography, which otherwise is not sensitive enough for analysis of ultra-trace levels of metals ( The determination of trace amounts of metals in environmental samples is highly important due to their toxicity even at very low concentrations. The analytical equipments such as inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS), however, are highly sensitive to matrix effects and high concentrations of salts and these sensitivities considerably decrease their detection limits. Preconcentrating metals by chelating resins is a most promising technique to obtain reliable results in metal analysis. Preconcentration can be conducted by either online ( Prior to ICP-MS analysis, commercial IDA-functionalized Muromac A-1 chelating resin was successfully used to preconcentrate 15 rare earth elements from seawater ( For NTA Superflow resin almost 100% recovery was obtained for Cu(II) and Fe(III) at pH values ranging 2–6 from 100 μM metal solutions. For Co(II), Ni(II), Zn(II), and Cd(II), however, a pH above 5 was required for their total recovery ( APCA-functionalized chelating adsorbents are very promising materials for heavy metal removal from wastewaters. A wide range of both commercial and self-prepared materials exists. Adsorption efficiencies of APCA-functionalized materials are dependent on the type of metal, APCA, and matrix used. Metal binding can occur through chelation by one or two surface-bound APCA-groups. However, other surface functionalities may compete and determine the mechanism and kinetics of adsorption. Stability constants of surface metal–APCA chelates may also differ from those of their free analogies. Common kinetic and equilibrium adsorption isotherm models are widely used to describe the adsorption phenomena. However, general inferences may not be made from the results of the kinetic and equilibrium modeling. This discrepancy and lack of unanimity for a common adsorption behavior have been attributed to the inherent complexity and variety of physical and chemical properties of the systems. Furthermore, structures of the surface-bound metal-APCA chelates should be carefully defined in order to define exact adsorption mechanisms. The most important applications of APCA-functionalized adsorbents are selective removal, separation and preconcentration of metals. These applications are possible because of the different interactions among different metal species and APCAs as well as the high stabilities of the formed metal–APCA chelates. Despite a relatively large number of published studies, research still seems deficient in giving a practical application of new APCA-functionalized adsorbents on an industrial scale. Even though APCA-functionalized adsorbents have advantages such as selectivity and regenerability, their price remains rather high and preparation methods complicated. In order to make a modest and novel contribution in a large scale application of these adsorbents, additional synthetic procedures capable of meeting the growing commercial demands are required. These synthetic methods should be simple, green, and low cost when APCA-functionalized adsorbents could compete seriously with existing adsorption materials such as activated carbon and natural minerals. Furthermore, a critical cost evaluation from a reasonably comprehensive lifecycle analysis perspective is required prior to larger scale applications. Another reason for poor applicability of APCA-functionalized adsorbents at industrial scale is their unsuitability for column-based systems in some of the cases. Especially, swelling of organic polymers structured materials decreases their performance at dynamic conditions. By ricochet, further statistically designed column experiments at laboratory and then pilot scales need to be thoroughly conducted to elucidate the adsorption behavior of APCA-functionalized adsorbents for heavy metals. The results would then have to be used for actual design purposes for columns to be used at industrial scale. This review focused only on four different chelating agents although the most common ones. However, there are a lot of other chelating agents available such as organophosphonates with higher stability constants and succinic acid derivatives with increased biodegradability, which could be utilized in similar way as APCAs. Investing on the material science developing chelating adsorbents with improved properties through simple synthetic routes could create a better chance of a breakthrough of this novel technology.  For meeting a variety of industrial needs, these adsorbents should not only have adsorption characteristics as effective adsorbents but also have capable of matching a wide variety of forms. Regeneration studies need to be performed in detail with the metals-laden adsorbents to recover the metals as well as adsorbents. It will enhance the economic feasibility of the process. The potential of APCA-functionalized adsorbents under multi-pollutants needs to be assessed. This would make a significant impact on the potential commercial application of APCA-functionalized adsorbents to industrial systems. It is further suggested that the research should not be limited to only lab-scale batch studies, but column, pilot-plant and full-scale studies should also be conducted with APCA-functionalized adsorbents to check their potential on commercial scale. The development in the field of adsorption process using APCA-functionalized adsorbents essentially requires further investigation of testing these materials with real industrial effluents. There is also continuing need for more information on the effect of natural organic ligands on metal speciation using APCA-functionalized adsorbents. The stability of APCAs on functionalized adsorbents should be continuously monitored during the metals removal process to make sure that there is no leaching of APCAs is being occurred in treated water, otherwise it would give rise several problems due to acute and chronic toxicity of APCAs. The authors are grateful to the  Amino methyl polystyrene Acrylonitrile-divinylbenzene Aminopolycarboxylic acid (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane Diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid Electron paramagnetic resonance Electron spin resonance Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy Glycidyl methacrylate Graphene oxide Reduced graphene oxide Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry Iminodiacetic acid Layered double hydroxides Sugarcane bagasse Mercerized cellulose Melamine–formaldehyde Double mercerized cellulose Melaminepolyvinylidene fluoride Nitrilotriacetic acid Polyallylamine Polyamidoamine Polybenzylamine Polyethyleneimine Polystyrene Pseudo-first-order Pseudo-second-order Polyvinyl alcohol Polyvinylidene fluoride Sugarcane bagasse Sawdust Thermogravimetric analysis Wide-angle X-ray diffraction X-ray diffraction X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy  Supplementary data related to this article can be found at