The two-parameter Weibull distribution has been widely used for modelling the lifetime of products and components. In this paper we study the effect of the shape parameter on the failure rate and three variables of importance in the context of maintenance and reliability improvement. These variables are (i) time to failure, (ii) age at replacement based on risk and (iii) residual life. We propose a classification scheme for the distribution based on the shape parameter and discuss the application of the results.The lifetime of an item (product or component), If the item is operated till failure then Usually, Another variable of interest is the residual life of an item of age All of these three variables as well as the failure rate are important in the context of use and maintenance of the item. In this paper we focus our attention on the effect of the shape parameter on these variables and the failure rate. We suggest a scheme for classifying the Weibull distribution based on the shape parameter and discuss the application of the results of the study in the context of maintenance and design of systems, which use components with the Weibull distribution. There is a vast literature that deals with the Weibull distribution and several authors look at the Weibull shape parameter. Refs. The paper is organised as follows. The mean time to failure is given by From   These two observations suggest that a product with a large Often, one uses the coefficient of variation (    Small To illustrate, we look at an example by considering expected number of claims of a product with the Weibull distribution in a given warranty period Note that The mean value of Using partial integration with the transformation Let It is a function of For a given For a given These imply that larger the value of Similar to the derivation of From   For a given  There are two concepts that are related to Design often requires a component to have a life limit When an item survives till The mean Eq. In the case of a repairable item, another interpretation of the mean residual life (MRL) function The coefficient of variation,  For a given  Residual life is relevant in the context of reuse or remanufactured product (e.g., see We discuss several different notions of failure rate. The instantaneous failure rate given by  Negative aging if Non-aging if Positive aging if Most manufactured products have The rate of change in the failure rate function A small [large] value of The average interval failure rate over (0, Jiang et al. We look at the effect of  Using   The variable of interest is the interval average failure rate over [0, For fixed Many authors (e.g., see  The average failure rate in the interval ( We look at the case where For a fixed From When We confine our attention to small medium large The values of The upper limit of If there is considerable variation of usage over time, the life distribution can have large variation resulting in a small In the modelling of material strength, the usual range of Cluster analysis is used to group objects according to similarity and the most popular method is the For our problem, The first step is to find As a result, The second step is to find  For a range of values of An approximation (with relative errors less than 1%) is given by the following expressions: We now discuss the reasonableness of the values of We now look at the values of Most products are complex systems consisting of several components and the product reliability depends on the component reliabilities. If the reliability performance (predicted reliability if it is still at the design stage, inherent reliability—the reliability of manufactured products, or field reliability if the product is put in operation) is not satisfactory then there are two options for improving the reliability as indicated below. Use of effective maintenance strategy. Replacing one or more of the existing components with new ones with better reliability. Option 2 is possible only when there is choice of different suppliers providing the same component (as far as functionality is concerned) but differ in their reliability. If the component failure times can be adequately modelled by Weibull distributions, then the results of The product consists of 10 components ( Effective maintenance strategy needs to take into account two factors or criteria: dispersion of component lifetime, which we denote by consequence of component failure which we denote by For the first factor, the 4th column of Safety or environmental related (the most serious and, denoted by Operational related (denoted by Non-operational related (the least serious and denoted by The 5th column of The different maintenance actions are as follows: ABR: age based replacement. RTF: run-to-failure (or replace only on failure). IMP: either replace with a more reliable component (from the same or different supplier) or carry out reliability improvement of existing component by eliminating some failure modes through design changes to the component. CBM: conditioned based maintenance. The maintenance strategies depend on both The effect of the shape parameter can be summarised as follows: if if if the failure category is 3, the run-to-failure policy is the effective strategy.  Often the same component (from a functional perspective) is manufactured by several manufacturers and they can have different life characteristics. The life is often measured using MTTF or Component 3 is manufactured by three different manufacturers (which we denote as A, B and C), and the parameters of the failure distribution for these components are shown in Based on MTTF manufacturer A is the one that should be selected. Since component 3 has If the design requires Evaluation of component manufacturers and the selection of the manufacturer is a multi-criteria decision problem involving many attributes. For a more detailed discussion, see Preventive replacement policy is widely used in the maintenance of complex systems (e.g., see For the components using the age replacement policy, the designer needs to specify the replacement age Step 1: Find the initial replacement age Step 2: Develop a grouped block replacement policy (e.g., see  In this paper, we have examined the effect of the Weibull shape parameter on three different lifetimes and the failure rates that are relevant in the context of failure replacement, age replacement and minimal repair policies, respectively. The Weibull shape parameter can be used to characterize product quality, and we have classified the shape parameter into three categories—small, medium and large. The partition points depend on the upper limit of the Weibull shape parameter, and are obtained through cluster analysis. An approximate expression has been fitted to adapt different values of the upper limit. The magnitude of the shape parameter and the category of failure consequences are the two main criteria for specifying reliability improvement or maintenance strategy for each component in a system. We have proposed A similar study can be carried out for other well-known distributions, e.g., the lognormal distribution would be a good starting point for future research. We are grateful to the reviewers for their helpful comments. The research of the first author was supported by the