The mineral industry has been using cyanidation of aerated slurries to recover gold from ores for more than a century. However, the leaching plant is usually designed as a series of agitated tanks of the same size, without any attempt to find an optimal plant design for improving the circuit efficiency, either by decreasing the cyanide consumption, or increasing the gold recovery, or decreasing the total plant volume. The objective of the study is to test, by simulation, if it would be profitable to use plant designs differing from the usual ones. The focus is put on the selection of the volumes of the tanks in the cascade of leaching reactors. The methodology involves the use of gold dissolution and cyanide consumption kinetic models incorporated into a simulator, and the definition of a performance criterion for the plant optimization. The performance is characterized by a cost function containing a term representing the value of the unleached gold and a term accounting for the cyanide consumption costs. It is shown that, for the same total volume, using a sequence of increasing size reactors improves the performance of the plant. The results are produced for different size of the ore particles and different numbers of tanks in the leaching circuit.cyanide concentration in the liquid (mg/kg) gold concentration in the liquid (mg/kg) oxygen concentration in the liquid (mg/kg) gold concentration in the ore (mg/kg) solid concentration in the pulp (g/g) residual gold concentration in the ore (mg/kg) average size of the ore particles (μm) cost function ($/h) liquid hold up (kg) ore hold up (kg) number of reactors in the cascade price of cyanide ($/kg) price of gold ($/g) cyanide flow rate added (kg/h) liquid flow rate (kg/h) ore flow rate (kg/h) dissolution rate of gold (mg/kg rate of cyanide consumption (mg/kg rate of oxygen consumption (mg/kg rate of oxygen feed (mg/kg net volume of the total net volume of the reactor cascade (m ore density (g/cm liquid density (g/cm average residence time (h) first reactor of the cascade  last reactor of the cascade Leaching of ores by cyanide in aerated alkaline slurries has been the dominant process for gold extraction for more than one century. In order to accelerate the gold recovery, in most of the high-grade ore plants, the cyanidation process occurs continuously in a cascade of large agitated tanks. The reactor volume optimization is a relevant problem that has been studied for many chemical systems; however, hydrometallurgical reactors have received much less attention. This is particularly true for the leaching tanks that are of interest in this paper. It is widely accepted that pure gold cyanidation is an electrochemical process, where gold is oxidized and then complexed to the stable ion [Au(CN) In a conventional cyanidation process, high cyanide concentrations in large tanks are used to improve gold leaching rate and gold recovery, but at the same time this practice is responsible for high cyanide consumption and investment ( The determination of the minimum volume configuration of a cascade of continuous stirred tank reactors (CSTRs) is a particular problem, in the field reactor optimization, which was first pointed out by Three systematic optimal design studies of the volumes in a cascade of leaching reactors are available. The first one ( Despite the economic importance of gold ore cyanidation, systematic studies of the optimal size design of the cascade of reactors are not available, especially due to the lack of reliable kinetic data for ore cyanidation. For a long time, the effort has been focused on the comprehension and quantification of pure gold cyanidation. However, gold ore cyanidation behaves very differently, because the gold grains are not completely liberated from the gangue, the galvanic interactions between the minerals, the effects of the foreigner ions in the solution, and the gold frequently occur in compounds or alloys. Recent studies by The objective of this paper is to present an analysis of the volume design of cascade of reactors for gold ore cyanidation. For that purpose, a rate equation for gold leaching and another for cyanide consumption are used to model the steady state gold cyanidation, in conjunction to a cost function based on a metallurgical performance criterion. Initially the effect of the ore size fraction and the number of reactors in the cascade are studied, then the most appropriate reactor volume distribution is analyzed for this system. The primary leaching section of Doyon Mine (Cambior Inc., Canada) is used as a case study to illustrate the optimal design method (see This paper is organized as follows. Section Gold cyanidation takes place in agitated tanks where the slurry flow behavior exhibits some non-idealities ( Assuming that the segregation in the reactor is negligible, the solid particles, the liquid and the pulp have the same average residence time ( The non-linear system of equations given by Eqs. An objective function (see When the amount of cyanide added to the circuit increases, the plant operating cost increases, but the gold recovery increases. On the other hand, if the amount of cyanide added to the circuit is insufficient, the gold loss rises but the cost of processing diminishes. There is, consequently, an equilibrium operating regime, well expressed in the criterion, which is a function of the design of the cascade of reactors, i.e., their number and sizes. The effect of increasing the number of reactors in the cascade of cyanidation tanks on the cost function is first discussed in this section. Then the optimum volume ratios, as functions of the ore particle size, are presented for a three-tank cascade. Finally, the effect of increasing the number of reactors on the optimal volume distribution and the cost savings is discussed. The objective of the first simulation test is to characterize the variation of the gold loss and cyanide consumption as a function of the number of equally sized tanks in a cascade of constant total volume. The total volume of the cascade ( The next simulation test aims at characterizing the optimal size distribution of the tanks in a constant total volume cascade of reactors. The same simulation tests for determining the optimal size distribution of the tanks at constant overall volume are performed for a varying number of reactors in the cascade plant (from 1 to 10).  The objective of the paper was to determine whether the usual practice of using equal size reactors in series for gold ore cyanidation is efficient or could be improved. A steady-state simulator of a leaching plant composed of a cascade of tanks was used to calculate an economic loss function. Simulated results, for various particle sizes and numbers of reactors, show that there is an optimal reactor volume distribution for the gold leaching cyanidation circuit, which makes a trade off between the gold recovery and the reagent cost. The main conclusion is that for most of the cases the series of cyanidation tanks must be of increasing volumes from the first one to the last one. This research was supported by the