Ballistic penetration experiments have been performed on ceramic tiles laminated with thin layers of polymer in between. The experiment involves shooting a cylindrical rod made of a tungsten heavy alloy (WHA) against an unconfined ceramic/polymer laminated structure that is backed by a 6061-T6 aluminum alloy cylindrical-block, at a velocity ranging between 1000 to 1200m/s. The residual depth of penetration in the aluminum block is used as a measure of the resistance offered by the laminated ceramic/polymer structure to ballistic penetration. Penetration resistance of the laminated ceramic/polymer structures is compared to that of monolithic ceramic structures of the same total thickness. Experimental results demonstrate that penetration resistance of an unconfined ceramic structure can be improved significantly by laminating ceramic tiles with thin polymer layers in between. This enhanced performance of the laminated structure is attributed to a reduced wave propagation (and damage) velocity in the laminated ceramic/polymer structure and also to the crack arresting feature of the polymer layer.Due to their low density but high compressive strength and hardness, ceramic materials have been considered for lightweight armor applications for the past three decades or so. In fact, the first major reported use of ceramic for armor applications dates back to the early 1960s when it was used for helicopter armor and personnel armor. The developed armor consisted of a composite system of boron carbide (B The advances in the processing techniques over the past few decades have further lead to the availability of lower cost ceramic materials. This has lead to a wide utilization of ceramic composite armors in both military and non-military applications. Numerous advances have been made in reducing the areal density of the ceramic composite armor systems. The majority of these efforts have been directed in two distinct directions: (a) synthesizing new ceramic materials with improved mechanical properties, and (b) synthesizing stiffer backing materials to better support the ceramic. However, an alternative approach of reducing the areal density of a ceramic composite armor system is to use a laminated ceramic/polymer structure where the ceramic tiles are laminated with very thin layers (<1 This paper presents the results of penetration experiments performed on unconfined ceramic structures laminated with very thin (0.254 This section presents a synopsis of the relevant literature on mechanical behavior of monolithic and laminated ceramic structures. Several studies have been performed to understand the influence of material properties and test conditions on the penetration resistance of monolithic ceramic materials and are discussed in Several studies have been performed to determine the material parameters that influence the penetration resistance of monolithic ceramic targets. For example, Rosenberg and Yeshurun Sternberg It should be noted that when a ceramic target is impacted by a long-rod penetrator, a divergent spherical wave propagates within the ceramic which is followed by the slower mechanical penetration of the penetrator. It has been observed (e.g. For brittle materials, the target resistance ( The transmission of mechanical waves through a laminated structure has been studied quite extensively during the last 40 years (e.g., A one-dimensional and a two-dimensional axisymmetric analysis of propagation of transient linear elastic waves in a periodic structure has been performed by El-Raheb Cook and Gordon Flocker and Dharni This section presents a brief discussion of the experimental methodology adopted in this study along with a description of the penetrator and target materials and the target design.  The experiments were performed using a cylindrical WHA penetrator with a flat nose, a length to diameter ( The experiments were performed on 101.6 The tungsten alloy penetrator was launched down a 3-m long smooth bore barrel (of inside diameter 35 The monolithic or the laminated ceramic structure (101.6 We first present the results of DOP experiments performed on the 6061-T6 aluminum alloy backup block, followed by the shots performed on the monolithic and the laminated ceramic/polymer structures. Experimental results indicate that the penetration resistance of ceramics could be increased significantly by lamination, and possible mechanics-based explanations for this phenomenon are presented. Finally, the effect of the ceramic tile thickness and polymer bond properties on depth of penetration is discussed. In order to obtain a quantitative measure of performance of the monolithic and laminated ceramic structures, some baseline shots were performed to measure the depth of penetration of tungsten alloy penetrators into 6061-T6 aluminum backup blocks, at different impact velocities.  The experimental results from One of the main reasons for the enhanced penetration resistance of the laminated ceramic/polymer structure is the reduced wave propagation speed within the laminated ceramic structure when compared to an equivalent monolithic ceramic. Due to their low density and high stiffness, the speed of longitudinal sound waves in ceramics is generally of the order of 10 El-Raheb One of the other mechanisms that can possibly lead to the enhanced penetration resistance of a laminated ceramic/polymer structure is the crack arresting feature of the polymer layers in the laminated structure. As discussed in Note that the ballistic penetration experiments performed in this study are not suitable to identify the most dominant mechanism responsible for the enhanced penetration resistance of the laminated ceramic/polymer structure. It is possible that all of the mechanisms mentioned earlier, viz. (a) attenuation of the stress waves due to the periodicity of the laminated structure, (b) reduced damage velocity in the laminated structure, and (c) the crack arresting feature of the polymer layer, are important factors that lead to the enhanced penetration resistance of the laminated ceramic/polymer structure. Further, well-designed experiments—which at this point have not been conceptualized, except that they cannot be the traditional ballistic experiments—are necessary to identify relative contribution of each of these mechanisms to ballistic performance of the laminated ceramic/polymer structures. We now present a brief description of wave propagation and failure mechanisms in a laminated structure to increase our understanding of the influence of various material and geometrical parameters on the ballistic performance of laminated ceramic/polymer structures. This would also help us in understanding the reasons for the reduced penetration resistance of the laminated ceramic/polymer structures comprised of six 6.35 When a stress pulse is applied on top of a periodic stack, a compressive normal wave is generated under the footprint which disperses as it propagates across the thickness of the first ceramic tile. The difference in normal stress, Ballistic penetration experiments have been performed on aluminum nitride (AlN) ceramic. Depth of penetration (DOP) experiments were conducted on monolithic and laminated ceramic/polymer structures of a constant total thickness of 38.1 This research was supported by the Dow Chemical Company which is gratefully acknowledged. The authors would like to express their sincere gratitude to Mr. S. Hanchak, Dr. M.J. Forrestal and Mr. E. Repacki for their assistance provided while setting up the experimental impact facility at Caltech.