This chapter outlines the historic legal interpretations and tries to make the explanation in the context within which general principles may affect geologic sequestration (GS) of CO2 projects. The preponderance of case law presented here suggests that surface and mineral owners will have a legitimate claim on subsurface strata used for GS projects. Many actors will have real interests in GS projects, including the injector, owner of injected material, surface property owner, mineral owner, mineral lessee, neighboring surface and mineral owners, and neighboring mineral lessees. Because of the large size of many proposed GS projects, care needs to be taken to ensure that adjacent mineral rights owner's holdings are not compromised. Because mineral rights have been found to trump both storage uses and surface holdings, any GS project needs to carefully examine mineral, water, and surface uses of the land that will be influenced by an injection project. Mineral extraction in adjacent strata could compromise the formation's storage integrity. Likewise, pressure increases in the substrata could affect lateral movement of waters in the subsurface and affect groundwater quality.Geologic sequestration of CO The clarification of property rights as they relate to GS is important from both regulatory and liability perspectives, because both can have a significant impact on the future cost, acceptability, and feasibility of GS projects. Sequestration of CO In this chapter, I briefly outline the historical context within which subsurface property rights have evolved and examine the gradual decomposition of property rights. Next, I outline relevant case law that has shaped subsurface property rights in the oil and gas industry and injecting industries (hazardous waste and natural gas storage case law). Finally, I explore the implications of case law for GS and future research concerns and directions. The property rights system in the United States (US) is based on English common law, which in turn is based upon more ancient property rights regimes. The historic principle of land ownership, The Fifth Amendment to the US Constitution guarantees the right to keep private property (“. . . nor shall private property be taken for public use without just compensation” The rules governing property rights are largely set by the states and affect property access, management, and exclusion, with property rights being divided spatially, temporally, and according to use. Property and mineral rights are framed in various ways. Under the English common-law system in the US, land can be divided into surface and mineral estates. Mineral estates can be conveyed separately from the surface estate, and in the majority of states, such conveyance will include oil, gas and other petroleum products. As technology evolves, so does the law, and case law surrounding secondary recovery operations has served to further refine property rights and liabilities of oil and gas holdings. Secondary recovery operations have revitalized oil production in the US By injecting fluid into the producing reservoir, secondary recovery operations repressurize the reservoir and increase oil and gas recovery. These operations have raised questions surrounding the operator's liability vis-à-vis reducing the amount of recoverable oil and gas from an adjacent mineral rights holder. One of the first cases to deal with the implications of secondary recovery operations was Most secondary recovery activities will only take place in a field that has been unitized. With “field unitization” (or the combination of oil or gas field leases for resource development, creating a field-wide operation In a recent Alabama case, While clear on the importance of secondary recovery for field maintenance and the right of state oil and gas boards to approve it, the courts have not been consistent in the resulting liability rulings. Liability for resulting mineral damage has been found in many cases, and fields that are not fully unitized could be especially vulnerable. If CO While the experience with secondary oil recovery provides a rich body of case law, the goals of secondary recovery are inherently different from those of GS. While many early GS projects will probably be linked to CO There are approximately 120 hazardous waste wells operating in 19 states, most injecting at depths of ~1400 In their class action lawsuit against BP Chemical, plaintiffs-appellants charged that injectate from BP's injection well had laterally migrated below the plaintiff's property, violating their rights as property owners. At trial, the court also excluded plaintiffs’ evidence involving other problems at other deep-well injection sites, Ohio's property disclosure law, and information on the Lima, Ohio, housing market, among other things. The Court of Appeals affirmed for BP Chemical. While the court found that even though BP Chemical “operates the wells pursuant to the permits, that fact in and of itself does not insulate [BP Chemical] from liability,” The Court in In The appeal for this case consisted only of the unconstitutional takings, a charge that was not valid under the Louisiana Constitution. Because the plaintiffs never specified that their case also included a federal claim in addition to the stated Louisiana claim, the federal claim was not included. Under Louisiana law, only private agents authorized by the government can be held liable for an unconstitutional taking from the expropriation of property. Since Monsanto had received no such delegation of authority, they could not be implicated in an unconstitutional taking. Whereas the Louisiana Commissioner of the Office of Conservation has the power to delegate permits for injection and issue unitization orders affecting property rights, there was no evidence in this case that the rights of the property owners could be “redefined or limited.” In all cases, holding a valid permit to inject did not exempt the operator from liability; however, the burden of proving damages is on the plaintiff. In The implications for GS are significant, as surface property owners have not been found to have a legally defensible interest in the subsurface in one case, and have not been found to have one that resulted in damage awards in the other, when hazardous waste was injected and had possibly migrated below the surface of their property. These cases highlight the difficulty in proving trespass (especially when no monitoring wells are required) by the plaintiff and subsequently underline the lack of material interest that surface property holders have been determined to have in the subsurface. However, unlike hazardous waste injection, the quantities that will be injected for GS projects are large, and subsurface trespass could be more easily proven. The cases were fought out, in large part, by experts with dueling hydrogeologic models. Much of the testimony focused on the validity of the specific model parameters and underlying assumptions. Uncertainties in the subsurface geology and the ability of the specific various models to capture these were the focus of much of the argument. Because of the large quantities and large area influenced by GS injection, modeling the heterogeneous subsurface features over such a large area would be a challenge. Natural gas storage provides another relevant analog for understanding the evolution of subsurface property rights. Natural gas is stored underground in depleted oil and gas reservoirs, salt caverns, or suitable natural aquifers to provide for the increased market demand during the winter months. US natural gas storage capacity is approximately 230 billion m A large number of cases have upheld that after the removal of underground minerals, oil, or gas, the While surface owners retain the right to the storage space, mineral rights holders have also been found to have a continued property, interest, and right “after the underground storage facility … has been created,” in an “ownership in place” state like Texas. McKinnon highlights the case law interpretation of differences between storage rights and mineral rights. One of the first cases decided in 1934 was The Natural Gas Act of 1938 granted the power of eminent domain to private companies for the construction of interstate natural gas transportation. The act was later clarified to include the construction of underground storage facilities. When a property owner overlying a natural gas storage project does not voluntarily enter into a contract with the storage company, these remaining properties are termed “windows” in the storage field. Formulas for granting compensation for storage of natural gas under land were explored in Comparable sales of easements for natural gas in the particular formation. Present value calculation (if sufficient natural gas exists for commercial recovery) of the “foreseeable net income flow from the property for its foreseeable life.” Capitalization of rental income for the right to store gas, calculated by multiplying the area to be rented with the value of comparable storage rights. Calculation of the depreciation of the entire tract from taking of the easement used for storage, calculating the difference of the market value of the property before and after the taking. Mineral lease value. Viewpoint of value: The value calculated from the point of the view of the landowner, “The yardstick is what the landowner has lost, not what Columbia has gained.” Whereas Ohio law is now clear at both state and federal levels, the same cannot be said for other jurisdictions. The federal law in the Sixth Circuit is clear, but state law in Michigan, Kentucky, and Tennessee is not as explicit, and in other jurisdictions outside of the Sixth Circuit, the issue is largely undecided. Unlike Recent case law varies but has largely confirmed that ownership of injected natural gas rests with the storage operator. If the same principle applies for GS, injected CO Natural gas storage rights were also found to be secondary to those of mineral production. Possible mineral extraction below GS storage strata however, could conceivably lead to compromising the integrity of the storage reservoir. Additionally, as many of the cases found extensive lateral movement of stored natural gas, ensuring that GS projects characterize the reservoirs as thoroughly as possible and contact property interests will be a key requirement of any GS project. This will be especially challenging given the long time frames for GS projects and thus the greater importance of future interest holders. Finally, with ownership of the injectate comes liability. Trespass is tolerated for natural gas storage projects because the gas is a valuable commodity and the activity is considered necessary for the common good. Because no power of eminent domain exists for potential GS projects, it will be interesting to see how “window properties” overlying the storage reservoir are handled. Because GS is to be stored underground for long time periods, the implications of different types of compensation methods outlined in Case law builds upon itself; principles cited in cases are used as building blocks for other situations and arguments. The goal of this chapter is to highlight the historic legal interpretations and begin to understand the context within which general principles may affect GS projects. The preponderance of case law presented here suggests that surface and mineral owners will have a legitimate claim on subsurface strata used for GS projects. Many actors will have real interests in GS projects, including the injector, owner of injected material, surface property owner, mineral owner, mineral lessee, neighboring surface and mineral owners, and neighboring mineral lessees. Since property rights are governed by state laws and interpreted by state courts, any legal opinion on GS projects will be influenced by jurisdictional differences. Several issues that could directly affect GS projects are outlined here: subsurface property ownership, potential liability, ownership of injected CO In most of the case law explored here, the ownership of the subsurface pore space seems to rest with the owner of the surface estate. This is different from English and most Canadian law, where the pore space ownership remains with the mineral estate owner. Though it has been theoretically explored in several texts, Much as is done with natural gas storage, explicit “storage rights” could be granted for GS projects. Both surface and mineral estates will need to be involved in this process. Additionally, compensation for subsurface use and royalties for mineral rights owners has regularly been paid for natural gas storage projects. Further study on the impacts of compensation schemes on GS costs should be undertaken. GS project time frame is an important consideration for leasing versus purchasing subsurface interests. Theoretically, competing GS projects could create a market for storage strata. The title of injected natural gas largely remains with the storage operator, and this has been affirmed in subsequent cases. This is true even if the gas migrates out of the defined boundaries of the storage area. However, natural gas is a valuable commodity that will be recovered and sold. For other fluids, this is not as certain, and no case law deals directly with injected CO Because of the large size of many proposed GS projects, care needs to be taken to ensure that adjacent mineral rights owner's holdings are not compromised. Because mineral rights have been found to trump both storage uses and surface holdings, any GS project needs to carefully examine mineral, water, and surface uses of the land that will be influenced by an injection project. Mineral extraction in adjacent strata could compromise the formation's storage integrity. Likewise, pressure increases in the substrata could affect lateral movement of waters in the subsurface and affect groundwater quality. The advantages of some type of unitization framework for GS should be further explored. Such a framework could combine mineral interests and coordinate storage activities to ensure efficient and safe GS projects. Each of these issues should be examined in more detail to fully understand their ramifications on GS. Litigation is costly and time consuming, and substantial efforts should be made to understand the legal framework and implications of legal precedents on GS projects to avoid costly future litigation. The legal framework is likely to vary significantly between states and among specific project sites, as will the science. Note that several dimensions of import to GS have not been explored in this paper: scale related issues; the impact of injecting large quantities of CO A special thanks to Maria Savasta-Kennedy from the University of North Carolina Law School and Tony Beyer of the US EPA for their legal editing, and to Tim Johnson and David Keith for their careful eyes and insightful comments. I also thank Malcolm Wilson, Wolfgang Heidug, and Stefan Bachu, who planted the seed and helped bring this work to fruition. A very special thanks also goes to Owen Anderson from the University of Oklahoma Law School for his insight into oil and gas law and to Myron Sereda for an understanding of differences between US and Canadian systems.