An Mg-0.41Dy (wt%) alloy was successfully processed by high-pressure tension (HPT) through 5 turns at room temperature. The evolution of the recrystallization microstructure and the texture and mechanical properties of the deformed alloy were investigated after annealing at 200 and 400 °C for 1 h using Electron Backscatter Diffraction (EBSD) and Vickers measurements. The recrystallization temperature and activation energy were evaluated using Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC). Processing by HPT led to significant grain refinement with an average grain size of ~0.5 ± 0.1 μm which increased to ~1.2 ± 0.8 μm after annealing at 400 °C. This slow increase in grain size at a high temperature demonstrates a good thermal stability of the microstructure. The alloy exhibited two main fiber textures after HPT processing: firstly a typical basal fiber (φ1 = 0–360°, Φ = 0° and φ2 = 0–60°) and secondly a fiber localized at φ1 = 180°, Φ = 60° and φ2 = 0–90°. These textures were retained after annealing at 400 °C. There was no change in the microhardness value after annealing at 200 °C (41 ± 1 Hv) and only a minor decrease after annealing at 400 °C (38.4 ± 0.5 Hv). The DSC results showed that the temperature associated with the recrystallization process increased with increasing heating rate and the activation energy for recrystallization was measured as ~25 kJ mol−1.Severe plastic deformation (SPD) techniques such as equal-channel angular pressing (ECAP) and especially high-pressure torsion (HPT) have proven effective in producing ultrafine-grained (UFG) microstructure down to the sub-micrometer level in several Mg-based alloys [ One major advantage of HPT processing is that the grain refinement of Mg-based alloys may be achieved at room temperature without sample cracking and/or segmentation due to the high imposed hydrostatic pressure which effectively prevents propagation of fracture during torsional straining [ Significant improvements in the mechanical properties were reported in various Mg-based alloy caused by the grain refinement, the very high dislocation densities and the point defects that are introduced through the application of intense deformation [ It is well established that HPT processing may produce excellent superplastic flow in numerous Mg-based alloys [ Accordingly, the ability of Mg-based alloys to maintain grain refinement during recrystallization annealing is an important requirement for achieving superplastic properties and thereby extending the use of these alloys to industrial superplastic forming applications. Improving the thermal stability of UFG materials may be achieved by reducing the grain boundary mobility and the driving force for grain growth, and this may be realized through the addition of different alloying elements or by the precipitation of second phase particles [ The as-cast Mg-0.41Dy (wt%) alloy was provided by the Institute für Metallkunde und Metallphysik, Aachen, Germany. The alloy was produced by induction melting and casting under a protective gas atmosphere of Ar/CO Discs with diameters of 10 mm and thicknesses of ~0.9 mm were processed by HPT at room temperature through 5 turns. More details on the sample preparations and the processing history were given earlier [ Electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) measurements were performed in the rotation direction-shear direction (RD-SD) plane of the recrystallized samples using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) with a field emission gun JEOL JSM-7001F working at a voltage of 20 kV. The EBSD step size was 50 nm and the acquired raw EBSD data and orientation distribution functions (ODFs) were analysed and calculated using MTEX software [ The surface morphology and chemical compositions were characterized in the RD-SD plane of the samples using an SEM coupled with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The surface preparation consisted of grinding with progressively finer SiC paper followed by mechanical polishing using a diamond solution with particle sizes ranging between 3 and 1 μm. The grain structure was revealed by subsequent etching at room temperature in an acetic-nital solution (5% HNO The Vickers microhardness was measured using a SHIMADZU type HMV-2 tester. At least five indentations were made to give an average hardness value (Hv) using a load of 100 g and a dwell time of 10 s. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) analyses were performed with a 2920 MDSC calorimeter under constant heating rates of 10, 20, 30 and 40 °C/min in a nitrogen atmosphere under a pressure of 1 bar. Samples of 12–19 mg were cut and placed in an aluminum holder and a separate empty aluminum holder was used as a reference.    The annealed sample at 400 °C for 1 h contains different types of particles as shown in The distributions of the grain boundary misorientation angles are shown in As shown in The variations of the microhardness of the processed Mg-0.41Dy alloy are presented in   It is apparent from  In practice, the recrystallization temperatures of cold-deformed Mg-based alloys depend strongly on the deformation strain and it was reported that at low strains (ε <0.1) the recrystallization of the cold-deformed AZ31 alloy occurs only above ~200 °C whereas by increasing the strain (ε >0.3) the recrystallization temperature decreases to ~150 °C [ Following the Boswell-Kissinger method, the activation energy for recrystallization may be obtained from the slope derived by plotting the following equation [ Using eq. It is shown in this investigation that HPT processing may produce a decomposition of second particles by decreasing Dy in the Mg Although dissolution is reported only in metastable particles, stable particles have a tendency to grow under SPD processing [ The generation of dislocations during HPT processing leads to excellent grain refinement as shown in The activation energy of recrystallization in the present study was found to be ~25 kJ mol The low activation energy found in the present study could be attributed to the ability of SPD processing to introduce high deformation leading to more nucleation sites including HAGBs, a high concentrations of vacancies and/or vacancy agglomerates [ Unfortunately, there are few results available in the literature dealing with the activation energy of recrystallization in severely-deformed Mg-based alloys and therefore there is no complete understanding of the recrystallization mechanisms. The good thermal stability in this alloy is attributed to the presence of particles, most probably to those containing 15.36% of Dy, since they are stable, very small and well-dispersed in the microstructures of the deformed and annealed samples ( Nevertheless, both OIM maps show color gradients within some relatively large grains, as denoted by the arrows in Another microstructural feature for the sample annealed at 200 °C is that grains with different orientations are aligned in bands. The nucleation and growth of these randomly oriented grains is indicative of shear banding and recrystallization at shear band is known as a mechanism responsible for random texture in Mg-Rare Elements (RE) alloys [ The evolution of the deformation texture in the present work is different from earlier reports for pure Mg [ It has been shown that the development of a basal texture during the early stages of HPT processing is due to the activation of extension twinning {10 In practice, the origin of the strong texture during dynamic recrystallization is not well understood. For many years the strong basal texture observed in Mg-based alloys upon dynamic recrystallization was attributed to the activation of basal slip and dynamic recovery mechanisms [ It is well known that the final recrystallization texture depends either on the oriented nucleation of new grains or the subsequent favorable growth of grains with specific orientations or on both of these effects [ The present work demonstrates that the grains sizes of the Mg-0.41Dy alloy are reasonably stable and the microstructures have HAGBs which suggest this alloy is a good candidate material for exhibiting high ductilities and possibly even superplastic behavior. The relative activation of each deformation mode in Mg-based alloys is fundamental for predicting the deformation behavior. The Schmid factor (SF) is frequently applied to analyze the possibility of the activation of deformation modes with different values of the critical resolved shear stress (CRSS) with respect to the loading direction [ The evolution of SF values shown in  Experiments were conducted on an Mg-0.41Dy (wt%) alloy to evaluate the thermal stability after processing by HPT through 5 turns at room temperature. Following HPT processing, samples were annealed for 1 h at temperatures of 200 and 400 °C. Processing by HPT produces a significant refinement in grain size from an initial value larger than ~2 mm to a value of ~0.5 ± 0.1 μm. Following annealing, the grain sizes increased slightly to ~0.9 ± 0.2 and ~1.2 ± 0.8 μm at annealing temperatures of 200 and 400 °C, respectively. These results demonstrate a good thermal stability. After HPT processing, there was a typical basal fiber (φ The microhardness values were stable after annealing at 200 °C but there was a slight decrease in hardness after annealing at 400 °C. The recrystallization temperature was measured in the range of ~120 HPT processing and an annealing treatment leads to significant decomposition of second particles by the decreasing Dy element in the different types of particles that are present in this alloy. The good stability of the Mg-0.41Dy alloy after annealing up to 400 °C is attributed to the occurrence of dynamic recrystallization during HPT processing, the presence of particles and the effect of the Dy elements on grain boundary mobility. HA gratefully acknowledges the help of Dr. Talal Al-Samman, Institute für Metallkunde und Metallphysik (IMM-RWTH), Aachen, Germany, in supplying the Mg-RE alloys. AH wishes to heartily thank the staff of the Biomaterials Research Group in Polytecnia ETSEIB, Universidad Politécnica de Cataluña (UPC), for their support in the DSC analysis. Two of the authors (YH and TGL) were supported by the