Coffee is one of the most widely consumed beverages worldwide, thus being a rather relevant food commodity from an economic standpoint. In the coffee processing chain, from plant to cup, a series of by-products are generated in significant amounts with the major ones being husks, parchment husks, chaff (silverskin), and spent coffee ground (SCGs). Currently, these by-products are being underutilized in low-cost applications, e.g., ingredients for animal feed, substrate for composting and vermicomposting, and feedstock for in-farm or coffee industry combustion systems. The knowledge of the physical state and the chemical composition of each specific by-product is essential to define a path for its adequate exploitation. Coffee production and processing by-products present distinct physical and chemical characteristics, however, with a common distribution of classes of compounds among them, with carbohydrates comprising the major fraction, followed by proteins, lipids, ashes, polyphenols and caffeine. Thus, all the by-products are suitable for further profitable exploitation with current proposals for such valorization encompassing recovery of potential food ingredients, recovery and production of pharmaceutical and cosmetic products, production of composite materials and films, production of adsorbents and catalysts, and production of biofuels. Thus, a critical overview of the current proposals is herein presented and future directions are suggested.      Food Products Pharmaceutical Polymers and Materials Adsorbents Catalysts Energy and Biofuels Recovery and Production of Value-Added Compounds    Coffee is one of the most widely consumed pharmacologically active beverages worldwide and a rather relevant food commodity from an economic standpoint. The beverage is prepared by brewing the roasted and ground beans, with the methods of brewing being quite diverse. The end product of coffee processing, i.e., the roasted and ground beans, is a result of the roasting of crude beans (also termed ‘green beans’). Green beans are thus the commodity that is largely produced and commercialized worldwide, with the most valuable commercial species being Coffee is produced solely within the commonly termed ‘Coffee Belt,’ the regions of the world delimited by the Tropic of Cancer (23.43695°N) and the Tropic of Capricorn (23.43695°S) ( Botanically, coffee belongs to the genus Coffee is a perennial evergreen dicotyledon plant, cultivated exclusively in tropical regions where the climate is warm (average temperatures of 18–24°C) and rainfall is abundant (ideally, 1500–2500 The coffee tree has a prominent vertical trunk with primary, secondary, and tertiary lateral branches, which are termed “suckers” and “stems” at the developmental and final stages, respectively. The leaves are of a shiny dark green color with conspicuous veins and each leaf pair decussating to the pair immediately above it. The roots of the coffee plant are shallow, with its system being comprised of a main taproot with lateral and small feeder roots. The feeder roots of the Arabica species penetrate deeper into the soil than those of the Robustas, which concentrate close to the soil surface. Inflorescence takes place at the leaves axil on lateral branches, in conditions of 8–11 The coffee fruit, also referred to as cherry, has a green exocarp (called skin or peel) when immature, and either a red or a yellow exocarp when ripe, depending on the variety. The exocarp is comprised of a monolayer of parenchymatous compact, polygonal cells covered with a waxy substance, with the function to protect the inner content of the fruit. From the exocarp inward, the content of the cherry is comprised of an approximately 2-mm-thick gelatinous-pectic pulp (mesocarp), enclosing a pectinaceous layer of mucilage firmly adhered to a parchment, which, in turn, loosely encapsulates the beans or seeds (usually two per fruit, comprised of endosperm and embryo), the latter being covered by a thin closely-fitting sclerotic layer called silverskin ( The main product of commercial interest constitutes the coffee beans, representing 50%–55% of the dry matter of the fruit and varying in size, shape, and density according to the genotype (species) and the agricultural practices. Arabica beans are shaped like a half triaxial ellipsoid with a sigmoidal longitudinal slit on its flat side, whereas Robusta beans are rounder with a slightly straight central slit ( Coffee fruits of a single plant usually do not mature at the same time and, even on a single branch, it is possible to find fruits at distinct stages of maturity. Because of this heterogeneity in maturity stages, harvesting is usually carried out when the majority of fruits are ripe ( Manual selective picking is the harvesting process in which only the mature and overripe coffee fruits are handpicked and the immature ones are left on the tree for future harvesting. In this type of harvesting, the laborers pick the fruits and place them into baskets and the full baskets are emptied in larger bags. At the end of the harvesting day, the daily harvest is spread out and the occasional debris are removed from the lot and the overripe fruits are separated. Subsequently, the graded fruits are weighed and payments to the pickers are apportioned by the total weight of harvested fruits. Manual stripping is the harvesting process in which the pickers place a canvas on the ground below the coffee tree to ensure the fruit does not come into contact with the ground, grab a branch laden with coffee cherries at its base, close to the trunk, and pull outward until all the fruits, irrespective of their maturity stage, are stripped from the branch and collected onto the canvas. When all the branches are completely stripped, the canvas is emptied into bags, which are taken to be weighed when full so that the pickers are paid accordingly. The mechanical stripping method is similar to the manual stripping, except that the pickers use mechanical strippers comprised of a type of grass trimmer in which the working end is a vibrating scissors-like assembly ( In the mechanical harvesting technique, coffee cherries are stripped from the trees by a portico-shaped combine operating on top of the coffee plants row. As the machine moves along the coffee plant row, the trees are drawn into the small gap between parallel rotating vertical shafts with slightly horizontally inclined rods attached to it. In this gap, the branches are beaten and horizontally shaken with enough force to knock the fruits out of them and down into a collector, the latter comprised of retractile blades that close the space under the trees. The machine operator is positioned at a high point in the picking unit for optimal visibility and control of the harvesting process. In this technique, all the fruits are harvested from the tree, regardless of their maturity stage. Although the technique of selective picking is the one that assures high-quality coffees and associated high revenues for the producers, for it results in lower percentages of immature fruits being harvested, it requires a large rural labor force with consequent high labor costs, potentially increasing farming costs by 40% when compared to mechanical harvesting. In countries where labor costs are high, e.g., Brazil, it is more cost-effective to harvest all the coffee in one single sweep of the plantation. In that regard, strip-picking and mechanical harvesting are the preferred techniques, regardless of the disadvantage of producing lots with fruits in various stages of maturation, consequently leading to nonuniform lower quality products and forcing coffee producers to rely on postharvest technologies to achieve higher quality products. Manual stripping can be carried out in any type of topography whereas mechanical harvesting is not suitable for terrains with reasonably steep slopes. Subsequently to the harvesting, the coffee fruit undergoes what is termed ‘primary processing,’ which is basically the separation of the coffee beans from the rest of the fruit. The general steps involved in the primary processing of coffee are displayed in In semi-wet processing, the exocarp and mesocarp are mechanically removed from the freshly harvested fruit (dehulling), with the parchment still remaining loosely attached to the bean. Before dehulling is performed, the inferior quality fruits are separated by flotation, a process in which the superior quality fruits sink and the inferior ones float in flowing water in a washing tank. Following flotation, the graded fruits are dehulled in a mechanical pulping machine (the pulper), in which the fruits are squeezed between a screw conveyor and a perforated stationary casing. The clearance between the conveyor and the casing is finely adjusted to allow only the mature fruits to burst into separated parchment beans and pulp that exit the system through the perforations in the casing, while the intact immature ones are pushed forward. Thus, this dehulling process also promotes the separation of immature fruits from the mature ones. The immature cherries are taken to the patios for sun-drying as whole fruits and the parchment beans and pulp are moved to a rotating sieve where they are further separated from each other. The parchment beans are then spread out in the patios for sun-drying in a period of 8–12 The processing operations carried out subsequently to drying, dehulling, and storage are denominated curing ( Following commercialization, coffee beans undergo a series of operations to generate the final products of consumption, which are the roasted and ground coffee and the soluble and instant coffees. These processing operations are usually termed ‘secondary processing’ ( After roasting and grinding, coffee can be commercialized as such for domestic or commercial brewing or be further processed to produce soluble or instant coffee. In the production of both soluble and instant coffee, there is a common operation that is the extraction of solubles from the roasted and ground coffee, ideally with a concentration of soluble solids of 15%–25% ( Following concentration, the coffee solubles extract is submitted to drying, either by freeze drying or by spray drying, leading to the products conventionally termed instant and soluble coffee, respectively. In the freeze drying method, the concentrated extract is initially frozen, the formed frozen slabs are milled into granules, and the frozen water in the granules is subsequently removed by sublimation under high vacuum, leading to the desired final product, the instant coffee. For the production of soluble coffee, concentrated coffee extract is atomized in a spray dryer, in which the water is removed by contacting the sprayed extract with air at temperatures of the order of 200–300°C, generating a rather fine powder. Upon exiting the spray dryer, the fine powder is usually further processed in a vibrating fluidized bed to promote subsequent agglomeration of the powder, thus improving the product wettability and, consequently, its dissolution in hot water during preparation of the beverage. In the coffee processing chain, including both primary and secondary processing, a series of by-products or wastes are generated with the major ones being husks, parchment husks, chaff, and spent coffee grounds (SCGs). Defective coffee beans, which impart negative qualities to the beverage and are sorted out at the last step in processing the crude beans, are dumped in internal markets in producing countries but could be considered a by-product if a proper processing operation were to be implemented for its exploitation and further valorization as precursor material for value-added products ( The knowledge of the physical state and the chemical composition of each specific by-product is essential to define a processing path for its adequate exploitation. To compile and present the available data for the proximate or a more detailed chemical composition of each and every by-product in the coffee production and processing chain, is a rather difficult task, because the ranges of determined values are rather wide due to significant differences in the way the by-products were produced, in the extraction of their respective analytes and in the analytical methods employed thereof. However, a common distribution of classes of compounds is found among the different types of by-products, with carbohydrates comprising the major fraction, followed by proteins, lipids, ashes, polyphenols, and caffeine. For specific compositional values of each class of compounds or of individual ones, the reader is referred to the compilations by Coffee is one of the most widely consumed pharmacologically active beverages, and thus coffee consumption has been frequently associated to health studies. It is still a controversial subject, although more than 8000 studies were developed on this subject over the past 40 Coffee husks, CH (dry processing residue) and pulp, CP (wet processing residue), contain the hull and part of the pulp of the coffee fruits, and thus present high amounts of carbohydrates (58%–85% in CH, 45%–89% in CP) ( SCGs are the residues resulting from water extraction of roasted and ground coffee in the preparation of coffee beverage or industrial soluble and instant coffees, thus SCG is actually roasted and ground coffee depleted of the majority of its water-soluble compounds. These by-products have been evaluated as potential sources of dietary fiber (DF), mostly insoluble ( Another by-product that has been recently evaluated as a potential food ingredient is coffee silverskin (CS), the solid residue that is collected by cyclone separation from the exhaust gas of coffee beans roasting. CS presents high contents of DF (50%–60%), mostly insoluble (85%) ( Although most studies focus on coffee by-products as possible food ingredients, recent studies evaluated the pharmacological and cosmetic potentials of SCGs and CS ( Fiber reinforced polymers composites present a wide variety of applications (e.g., automotive, construction, and others), but the majority of the commercially available materials are based on petroleum-based polymers reinforced with synthetic fibers ( SCGs consist mainly of fibers (hemicellulose, cellulose, and lignin associated compounds), and therefore recent studies have investigated the possibility of incorporating SCG particles into polymers such as polyurethane, PP, polyethylene, polyester, polyvinyl alcohol, polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA), poly(butylene adipate-co-terephthalate) (PBAT), and maleic anhydride-grafted polylactide ( In order to produce a truly renewable composite, not only the fiber but also the polymer matrix should be bio-based, and all the previously discussed studies employed petroleum-based polymers. The only study in which both the polymer and reinforcement are renewable was recently developed by Results on the addition of SCG to a polyurethane film showed that SCG provided increases in the ultraviolet protection factor and thermal comfort parameters, indicating possible applications for summer clothes and sunscreen products ( Aside from using coffee wastes as ingredients or fillers for altering the properties of materials, using them as source of raw materials for the production of polymeric materials has also been recently tackled. Polymeric films were developed with the polysaccharide fraction extracted from delignified SCGs by Many studies employing CH and SCGs have focused on construction materials. Recent applications include addition of CH ashes to increase clay strength ( Agricultural residues in general contain high levels of cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin, and proteins and as such have been intensely investigated in the production of adsorbents ( Recent applications of coffee by-products in the production of AC aiming at wastewater treatment include: development of a polyester matrix loaded with SCG to be used as adsorbents in oil spill cleanup processes ( A heterogeneous catalyst was prepared by sulphonation of incompletely carbonized SCG with H Coffee wastes and by-products can be either used directly as energy sources or as precursor materials for biofuels production. As energy sources, the wastes can be torrefied, pyrolyzed, or gasified to produce solid, liquid, and gaseous biofuels. Combustion mechanisms of two types of coffee husks were studied by The performance of an improved gasifier stove that uses coffee husks as source of energy for household cooking purpose in Tanzania was evaluated by The energetic characteristics and combustion behavior of pellets produced from pure SCGs or blends of it with pine sawdust were investigated by Coffee wastes have been extensively used as precursor material for the production of a diversity of gaseous and liquid biofuels, employing a variety of processes. The literature on the production of biogas by fermentative processes of coffee wastes is aplenty, with successful reports on biogas production from coffee processing wastewater published in the early 1980s ( The liquid biofuels produced from coffee wastes are primarily ethanol, biodiesel, and pyrolitic bio-oil. Studies on the production of ethanol from coffee wastes are based on the fact that coffee husks, mucilage, and SCGs are rich in fermentable sugars, either readily available or as constituents of the polysaccharides fraction. For the commonly employed yeasts (e.g., Biodiesel is commonly produced by transesterification reactions of oils with short-chain alcohols and oils from coffee by-products have been considered a suitable precursor material for such. Biodiesel was produced from defective coffee beans oil ( A bio-hydrotreated fuel was produced from spent coffee oil by The recovery of valuable compounds from coffee wastes have been extensively studied with the bioactive ones, such as caffeine and chlorogenic acids, as the main compounds of being targeted ( Coffee wastes or by-products are generated in expressive large amounts throughout the entire coffee production and processing chain. These by-products differ among themselves in terms of physical characteristics and chemical compositions, having in common the fact that polysaccharides are the dominant class of compounds in all of them. Regardless, all by-products are rich in a diversity of chemical components and thus are suitable for a plethora of exploitation pathways. Currently, the majority of them are being used in a low-value applications such as compost and vermicompost, ingredients for animal feed or fodder for in-farm or coffee-industry-in-house combustion systems. Proposals for value-adding of these by-products have gained momentum since the beginning of the 21st century, due to worldwide spread people's awareness of environmental problems caused by these by-products which, in some places, affect how consumers select and purchase their coffee products. Furthermore, environmental laws are becoming stricter and being rigidly enforced, preventing the inadequate disposal of these by-products in water streams and landfills, as it was done since large plantations and associated processing operations were established in the beginning of the 20th century. The applications being currently proposed for profitable exploitation (valorization) of these by-products are quite diverse, including production and use of adsorbents, production of liquid and gaseous biofuels, recovery of valuable biologically active compounds, and production of composite materials and polymeric films, among others. There are no currently implanted processes for profitable exploitation of coffee by-products, neither in farms nor in industry. Due to the fact that coffee by-products are in their majority of low density, high volume, and high moisture contents, it is not economically viable to transport them for long distances to processing facilities, thus, whatever the processing to be carried out for their proper valorization, it should be done on location or as close to the sources as possible. Also, generation of further wastes and by-products from these processing operations should be eliminated or minimized, hence, the concept of biorefinery should be considered and, if determined to be economically feasible, be implemented. To implement such a concept it is essential to have a systemic view of the entire process, starting from collection, followed by storage and transportation (for short distances to assure viability), recovery of valuable components by optimized routes (preferably employing the concept of green chemistry), removal of undesirable components (for which, when possible, a valorization pathway should be proposed), and finally the recovery of the least valuable materials, resulting in a minimum amount of residues that can be further used for low-value applications such as composting, animal feed ingredients, or feedstock for combustion systems ( A biorefinery concept for the valorization of SCGs was developed by