A systematic investigation on the extraction of boron from salt lake brine using 2-ethylhexanol as the extractant is reported with an emphasis on the extraction thermodynamics and extraction process design in order to obtain high purity boron product. The extraction parameters were optimized with respect to the time of extraction, volume percentage of extractant, phase ratio, and the concentration of magnesium. Logarithm linear regression revealed an average association constant of 0.7 for 2-ethylhexanol and boric acid. Thermodynamic modeling results indicate that the association is an exothermic, enthalpy driven process. A three-stage countercurrent extraction and stripping was designed in order to assess the process feasibility. Results showed an overall boron extraction efficiency of 99.5% with a purity of 95.5%. In addition, attempts were also made on improving the product purity with a two-stage washing step. These results indicate the application potential of present extraction process.Boron (B) is an essential micronutrient for animals and plants. In addition, its many special properties, such as flame retardance, heat and wear resistance, high rigidity, and high strength ( In aqueous solutions, boron may exist as boric acid [B(OH) In this paper, a low cost extractant 2-ethylhexanol was adopted to extract boron from brine sources taken from East Taijinaier salt lake. The extraction thermodynamics is systematically investigated, and the extraction reaction mechanism proposed. The process parameters for liquid–liquid extraction are investigated for an optimal extraction effect. Stripping of boron from the organic phase using various stripping solution is carried out in order to assess the feasibility of solvent extraction of boron. Results of this research may pave a solid theoretical and technical basis for next step piloting work. 2-Ethylhexanol (C All liquid–liquid extraction experiments were conducted using separation funnels (150-mL). Both single-stage extraction and multi-stage extraction were investigated as detailed below. The feed brine (Aqueous, abbreviated as Multi-stage extraction was designed to simulate a counter-current extraction process with separation funnels as shown in  The concentration of the cations in the aqueous samples was analyzed using an Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectrometry (ICPE-9000, Shimadzu, Japan). The boron in the organic phase was analyzed after being stripped completely into an aqueous phase. A mass balance of boron in the aqueous and organic phase confirmed the analysis was accurate (deviation < The percentage of extraction (% E) was calculated as the ratio of the boron extracted to the organic extractant phase to the total boron as in the original feed, Eq. The main element concentration in the East Taijinaier salt lake brine is listed in Boric acid is a weak acid, and it will hydrolyze in water: ( Therefore, at pH well below 9.23, boric acid is the main form. Consequently, boric acid is dominant in the brine because the pH of salt lake brine is 2.38. Boric acid can react with hydroxyl compounds via esterification as shown in The association reaction is as follows: The association constant, By reformulating Eqs. By taking logarithm of Eq. By varying the O/A from 0.5 to 1.5, as shown in At equilibrium, the change of Gibbs energy of the extraction reaction is related to the temperature and the equilibrium constant K as below. ( The relationship between the K and temperature could be reformulated as shown in Eq. Combining Eqs. Entropy change can be obtained by as follows: A linear relationship between lgD vs 1/T is shown in The effect of 2-ethylhexanol volume percentage was investigated in terms of solution viscosity and interfacial tension. The viscosity of organic phase increases with the volume percentage of 2-ethylhexanol, as shown in The interfacial tension of the extractant also varies with the volume percentage of 2-ethylhexanol. As shown in From a thermodynamic point, the relationship between the loading capacity and the viscosity and interfacial tension would have limited influence on the extraction. From a kinetic point, these two values are very important in controlling the mass transfer rate, designing of the suitable equipment for achieving quick extraction and high extraction rate. The interfacial tension parameters provided an important basis for selecting extraction equipment, lower interfacial tension will help to reduce the mass transfer unit height. The boron extraction efficiency was studied against the volume percentage of 2-ethylhexanol in the organic phase. As shown in The volume ratio between the organic and the aqueous phase, R (O/A), is another important factor that influences the extraction equilibrium of boron. As shown in The effect of magnesium concentration on the distribution ratio of boron extraction and extraction efficiency is shown in The positive effect of Mg concentration on the boron extraction is understood as follows. Magnesium ions are highly charged, which have a strong binding affinity to water molecules in the solution. This binding leads to the formation of the hydration layer, where the water molecules lose their translation freedom. With the increase of Mg concentration in the brine, and more and more water molecules were bound. Therefore the content of free water molecules in the brine became reduced, which is typical of the salting-out effect. According to Eq. Based on the real salt lake brine, a three-stage continuous counter-current extraction experiment at a phase ratio O/A Since the extraction reaction is an association reaction, the stripping reaction is a dissociation reaction. The stripping efficiency (S %) was calculated in a similar way as the extraction efficiency,by dividing the initial amount of boron in the organic phase with the amount of boron in the stripped aqueous phase. Alkali, acid and water are potential candidates as the stripping agents. NaOH solution (0.1 This experimental process was basically the same as shown in In this session, we intend to introduce a process design for extraction of boron from salt lake brine based on above results. The main parts of the process are extraction and stripping. In order to improve the boron purity, a washing step was introduced as shown in A proof of concept experiment was then carried out by two stage continuous countercurrent washing experiment. In the two-stage washing step, the feedback volume ratio was 40%, and the results are listed in As shown in The solubility of the extractant is of serious concerns. The solubility of 2-ethylhexanol in water is about 1 Systematic investigation on the extraction of boron from the salt lake brine using an alcohol extractant 2-ethylhexanol was reported. The extraction thermodynamics was studied. An association constant of 2-ethylhexanol in the chemical extraction was found to be 0.7 in average. Logarithm linear regression of the extraction data revealed that the extraction is an enthalpy-driven, exothermic process. Optimal process parameters were obtained by varying the volume percentage of 2-ethylhexanol in kerosene and the organic/aqueous phase ratio. In addition, the presence of magnesium in brine appeared to be beneficial to the extraction of boron due to the “salting-out” effect. Using water as the stripping agent, a three-stage countercurrent extraction and stripping process resulted in an overall extraction efficiency of 99.5% and stripping efficiency of 97.8%. This high overall extraction efficiency is significant and it gives a high purity product of 95.5%. In addition, product purity was improved to 99.5% by employing a two-stage washing step indicating the application potential of present process. This result is promising for the large-scale application of boron extraction from salt lake brine. Nevertheless, further investigations are still needed for this extraction process to become feasible, such as the co-extraction of other elements, the recovery of 2-ehylhexanol and cost efficiency. The authors would like to thank the partial financial support from