The simultaneous extraction and separation of Co(II) and Mg(II) from nickel sulphate solutions was carried out using the phosphinic extractant Cyanex 272. Nickel, which remained in the aqueous phase, was concentrated by Cyanex 272 and then stripped by synthetic nickel spent electrolyte in order to produce a solution suitable for nickel electrowinning. Subsequently, cobalt and magnesium separation was achieved by the thiophosphinic acid Cyanex 302. Statistical design and analysis of experiments were used, in all cases, in order to determine the main effects and interactions of the solvent extraction factors, which were the extraction pH at equilibrium, the temperature, the extractant concentration and the organic to aqueous phase ratio. A statistically designed experiment was, also, carried out in order to study stripping of the loaded, with cobalt and magnesium, Cyanex 272 organic phase by diluted sulphuric acid. Cobalt was recovered from the loaded Cyanex 302 by a synthetic cobalt spent electrolyte, in order to produce a solution suitable for cobalt electrowinning. The slope analysis method was used to determine the nature of the cobalt and nickel complexes extracted by both extractants. The number of stages required for the extraction and stripping processes was also evaluated. Finally, the results of the continuous, counter-current, mini-plant tests clearly demonstrated the feasibility of the simultaneous recovery of cobalt and magnesium from nickel sulphate solutions by Cyanex 272, as well as their separation by Cyanex 302.A novel integrated hydrometallurgical method, suitable to treat low-grade nickel oxide ores efficiently and economically, has been developed and patented after many years of laborious work at the Laboratory of Metallurgy of the National Technical University of Athens. It involves heap leaching of the ore by dilute sulphuric acid at ambient temperature, purification of the leach liquors and recovery of nickel and cobalt ( The present paper gives the results of a research study involving the separation of cobalt and nickel, in the presence of magnesium, by solvent extraction from a synthetic sulphate solution, with concentrations similar to those of a real leach liquor. The study was conducted in the framework of the Research Project BRE2-CT94-1020, entitled “a new approach to the metallurgical treatment of nickeliferrous laterites”, funded by the European Union. The extraction and separation of cobalt and nickel from sulphate, chloride and ammoniacal solutions have been of interest to hydrometallurgists for a long time. The separation of both metals has been achieved in materials such as copper converter slag, chromite overburden, nickel laterite, manganese sea nodules, etc. although the separation of these two metals is particularly difficult from weak sulphate solutions. This is due to the very similar chemical behaviour, exhibited by these metals, in aqueous solutions. The solvent extraction technique is one of the most versatile methods used for the removal, separation and concentration of metallic species from aqueous media and has been widely used in the extraction of cobalt, in the presence of nickel, from sulphate solutions ( A lot of work has been performed in the field of solvent extraction to develop extractants selective for either of these two metals. Although some of these reagents have been developed for the selective extraction of nickel (II) over cobalt (II), the more usual route has been to extract cobalt (II) leaving nickel (II) in the aqueous phase. It is the latter route that has found application in nickel refineries of INCO, Outokumpu and Matthey Rustenburg. The present research work proposes a new route for the separation of nickel and cobalt by solvent extraction, in the presence of magnesium. More specifically, cobalt and magnesium were simultaneously extracted by Cyanex 272, leaving nickel in solution. The loaded organic phase was then stripped by diluted sulphuric acid. Subsequently, cobalt was separated from magnesium by Cyanex 302. The loaded with cobalt organic phase was stripped by a synthetic cobalt spent electrolyte. Nickel was concentrated by solvent extraction using Cyanex 272. Nickel from the loaded organic phase was finally stripped by synthetic nickel spent electrolyte in order to produce a solution suitable for nickel electrowinning. Factorial design of experiments and statistical analysis of the data were used to determine the main effects and interactions of the chosen factors and select the optimum conditions ( The extractant Cyanex 272, registered by Cyanamid Canada, was kindly supplied by the Holland branch of the company, Cytec Holland. The reactive component C The extractant Cyanex 302 was also supplied by the Cytec Holland. The reactive component is C The initial aqueous phase was a synthetic solution with 0.63 g/l of Co All batch experiments were conducted in a 500-ml five-necked, round bottomed split reactor, which was fitted with a glass stirrer, a vapor condenser, a thermometer and a pH electrode. The two phases were contacted by rapid stirring and the pH was controlled by small additions of 5 N NaOH, using an automatic titration device (Metrohm-Dosimat/Impulsomat). Heating was provided by an electrical mantle and the temperature of the liquid was controlled by a Fisons Scientific Apparatus monitor. Stripping of the loaded Cyanex 272 organic phase was carried out by diluted sulphuric acid (4 M), whereas cobalt from the loaded Cyanex 302 was recovered by synthetic cobalt spent electrolyte (30.8 g/l Co Continuous tests were carried out in a laboratory solvent extraction unit (Bell Engineering Model 282). Nickel, cobalt and magnesium in the aqueous phases (aqueous feed and extraction raffinate) were analyzed by atomic absorption spectrophotometry. In order to determine the ability of Cyanex 272 to selectively extract cobalt and magnesium from nickel sulphate solution, extraction tests were carried out at various equilibrium pH values, at certain conditions. The effect of pH on the extraction of cobalt and magnesium by Cyanex 302 from sulphate solutions was also investigated. The results, presented in Factorial design and analysis of experiments were used in order to determine the main effects and interactions of the solvent extraction factors. The factors studied and their levels for cobalt and magnesium extraction over nickel and for nickel concentration by Cyanex 272, as well as for cobalt extraction over magnesium by Cyanex 302, are shown in Parameters, which were kept constant during experimentation, were stirring speed=1200 rpm, initial cobalt concentration=0.63 g/l, initial nickel concentration=3.8 g/l, initial magnesium concentration=5.75 g/l. The concentration values of cobalt and magnesium before and after solvent extraction experiments, in the presence of nickel, by Cyanex 272 are given in As can be seen in The data presented in Finally, according to the results of To study the main effects and interactions of the factors on the solvent extraction processes, Yates' analysis and an analysis of variance were carried out on the percentages of Co pH=6.0, pH=7.5, pH=5.0, The loaded with cobalt and magnesium Cyanex 272, resulting from the extraction tests, was subjected to scrubbing with water at pH=5.5, O/A=4/1, Cobalt and magnesium were stripped from the loaded Cyanex 272 organic phase by diluted sulphuric acid. Nickel stripping from the loaded Cyanex 272 organic phase was effected by nickel spent electrolyte in order to produce solutions suitable for nickel electrowinning. Cobalt spent electrolyte was also used for the recovery of cobalt from the loaded Cyanex 302 organic phase. The industrial conditions of nickel electrowinning, in diaphragm cells type, require 55–65 g/l of Ni spent electrolyte with 25–30 g/l of Ni drop, in 6–10 days cathodes cycle. On the other hand, cobalt electrowinning, in non diaphragm cells type, require 30–45 g/l of Co spent electrolyte with 4–6 g/l of Co drop, in 6–7 days cathodes cycle ( On the basis of conclusions drawn from preliminary experiments, the variables and levels chosen to study the stripping of cobalt and magnesium from the loaded Cyanex 272 organic phase, the stripping of nickel from the loaded Cyanex 272 by nickel spent electrolyte, as well as the stripping of cobalt from the loaded Cyanex 302 by cobalt spent electrolyte, are given in Parameters with constant values throughout the design were organic/aqueous (O/A): 1/1, stirring speed: 1200 rpm, Cyanex 272 organic phase: [Co Cyanex 272 after Ni concentration: [Ni synthetic nickel spent electrolyte: 55.45 g/l Ni, Cyanex 302 organic phase: [Co synthetic cobalt spent electrolyte: 30.8 g/l Co. The concentrations of cobalt and magnesium in the loaded Cyanex 272 before and after stripping, as well as the corresponding values for nickel stripping from the loaded Cyanex 272 are given in As the tables show, high percentages of Co Based on the statistical analysis of the results, the optimum conditions are H H H If extraction were to occur by a simple cation exchange, the extraction reaction for a divalent cation, such as Co In the case of Cyanex 272, both plots for cobalt and nickel were straight lines over the extractant concentration range 0.16–0.66 M. The initial cobalt concentration was 0.63 g/l and that of nickel 3.8 g/l. Based on the experimental data obtained at equilibrium pH (pH=6.0 for cobalt, pH=7.5 for nickel) and Regarding extraction by Cyanex 302, the plot for cobalt was a straight line over the extractant concentration range 0.15–0.62 M. The initial cobalt concentration was 0.63 g/l and, at equilibrium pH=5.0 and As Cyanex 272 proved to be an efficient extractant for the simultaneous extraction of cobalt and magnesium in the presence of nickel from sulphate solutions, a Mc-Cabe Thiele diagram was constructed for Co After cobalt and magnesium extraction by Cyanex 272 and their stripping by diluted sulphuric acid, the aqueous solution contained 1.57 g/l cobalt and 14.3 g/l magnesium. Cobalt extraction, by Cyanex 302, isotherm was determined at the following conditions, which had been found to be optimum by the statistical analysis preceded: Cyanex 302 concentration=20% (v/v), diluent=Exxsol D-80, extraction pH=5.0 and Nickel remained in the aqueous phase, after extracting cobalt and magnesium by Cyanex 272, was concentrated by solvent extraction using also the reagent Cyanex 272. Nickel extraction isotherm was determined at the following conditions, which had been found to be optimum by the statistical analysis preceded: Cyanex 272 concentration=10% (v/v), diluent=Exxsol D-80, extraction pH=7.5 and Continuous tests were carried out in a laboratory solvent extraction unit (Bell Engineering Model 282). The effective volume was 185 ml for each mixer and 364 ml for the settler. The operating conditions for the simultaneous extraction of cobalt and magnesium, from nickel sulphate solution, by Cyanex 272, as well as their stripping by diluted sulphuric acid were solvent=20% (v/v) Cyanex 272 in Exxsol D-80 with 5% TBP, liquor=0.63 g/l Co, 3.8 g/l Ni and 5.75 g/l Mg, pH=6.0, extraction stages=3, stripping stages=3, temperature=40 °C, strip feed=diluted sulphuric acid––H flow rate (ml/min)=aqueous feed: 20.57; solvent feed: 8.23; strip feed: 4.12. At those conditions, cobalt and magnesium extraction by Cyanex 272, in the presence of Ni The corresponding operating conditions for the extraction of cobalt, from magnesium sulphate solution, by Cyanex 302, as well as cobalt stripping by cobalt spent electrolyte were solvent=20% (v/v) Cyanex 302 in Exxsol D-80 with 5% TBP, liquor=1.57 g/l Co, 14.3 g/l Mg, pH=5.0, extraction stages=2, stripping stages=2, temperature=40 °C, strip feed=Co flow rate (ml/min)=aqueous feed: 20.57; solvent feed: 10.29; strip feed: 5.72. At those conditions, cobalt extraction by Cyanex 302, in the presence of Mg The operating conditions for the extraction–concentration of nickel from sulphate solution by Cyanex 272, as well as nickel stripping by nickel spent electrolyte acid, were solvent=10% (v/v) Cyanex 272 in Exxsol D-80 with 5% TBP, liquor=3.8 g/l Ni, pH=7.5, extraction stages=2, stripping stages=3, temperature=40 °C, strip feed=Ni flow rate (ml/min)=aqueous feed: 20.57; solvent feed: 8.57; strip feed: 3.57. At those conditions, nickel extraction by Cyanex 272 reached 99.5%. Nickel stripping by nickel spent electrolyte reached 99.4% (77.25 g/l nickel––Ni spent electrolyte: 55.45 g/l and Ni for electrowinning: 21.8 g/l). Based on the data presented in this paper, there is suggested a complete solvent extraction process for nickel and cobalt separation from magnesium sulphate solutions. The process comprises the following steps: Contacting the initial sulphate liquor with the phosphinic Cyanex 272 in a cobalt and magnesium extraction circuit to produce a first raffinate, rich in nickel, and a first solvent, rich in cobalt and magnesium. Cyanex 272, diluted in Exxsol D-80 with 5% TBP, could extract cobalt and magnesium, in the presence of nickel, in two stages, at pH=6.0, Contacting the loaded with cobalt and magnesium Cyanex 272 with diluted sulphuric acid. A H Separating cobalt and magnesium by solvent extraction, using the thiophosphinic extractant Cyanex 302 to produce a third raffinate, rich in magnesium, and a second solvent rich in cobalt. Cyanex 302, diluted in Exxsol D-80 with 5% TBP, could extract cobalt, in the presence of magnesium, in two stages, at pH=5.0, Contacting the loaded with cobalt Cyanex 302 with cobalt spent electrolyte in order to produce a solution suitable for cobalt electrowinning. Cobalt spent electrolyte solution (0.5 M H Concentrating nickel from sulphate solution by solvent extraction using, Cyanex 272. Cyanex 272, diluted in Exxsol D-80 with 5% TBP, could extract nickel, in two stages, at pH=7.5, Contacting the loaded with nickel Cyanex 272 with nickel spent electrolyte in order to produce a solution suitable for nickel electrowinning. Nickel spent electrolyte solution (2.0 M H The authors express their warmest thanks to the European Commission, Directorate General XII, for the financial support of the present work, which was carried out as a part of the research project BRE2-CT94-1020.