Due to its high gas–solids heat transfer efficiency, a vibrated fluidised bed is suggested to be suitable in cryogenic comminution system as a pre-cooler. It is of great significance to use high efficient facility to minimise the effect of low thermal conductivity of rubber on the heat transfer between gas and rubber particles. The purpose of this paper is to establish a mathematical model to describe the characteristics of heat transfer between gas and solid in vibrated fluidised bed with the aid of computer simulations. In order to simplify the modelling, this paper presents the hypothetic particle motion style and gas velocity distribution. After the control equations have been presented, discretised and solved, the temperature profile in rubber particle was obtained according to certain boundary and initial conditions. Computational results were verified by means of comparing with experimental data. There was a good consistency between them.half amplitude of vibration, mm vibration frequency accelerator due to gravity, m/s convective heat transfer coefficient, W/m radius of spherical particle, m radius of orifice on perforated distribution plate, m absolute temperature, K temperature of wall, K temperature of gas, K time interval for particle deviating from distribution plate, s velocity of gas based on coordinate gas velocity at outlet, m/s mean velocity of gas, m/s velocity of gas based on coordinate coordinate parallel to the gas flow direction, m coordinate perpendicular to the gas flow direction, m vibration angle thermal conductivity of rubber particle, W/m time, s angular speed Fluidised beds have been widely used in chemical, energy engineering, dehumidified and pharmaceutic industries. A vibrated fluidised bed is one type of gas–solids or liquid–solids contacting equipment by the aid of auxiliary stimulation (obviously, vibration is the stimulating force for the vibrated fluidised bed) to common fluidised beds. It is well known that vibrated fluidised beds have been utilised in special conditions of bad fluidisation performance or of difficulties for the particles to be fluidised due to very large or tiny diameters of particles, wet particles or very thin bed layer thickness. In the field of cryogenic comminution dealing with industrial waste such as discarded tyres Heat transfer in vibrated fluidised beds This paper establishes a mathematical modelling to investigate the thermal and heat transfer behaviour between rubber particles and cold air within the vibrated fluidised bed. The structure of a cryogenic vibrated fluidised bed is illustrated in Vibration gives rise to the fluidisation of rubber particles, as well as presents the stimulating force to make particles move along the distribution plate. Apart from the ease to reach good fluidisation condition, comparing to the general fluidised bed, vibrated fluidised bed can save energy substantially The complexity of the mechanisms contributing to the gas flow deters from finding any general model for the heat transfer in such beds. It is necessary to develop a series of simplified models with acceptable accuracy. Considering the complexity of flow inside the vibrated fluidised bed, to understand particle motion and gas distribution flow is the starting and important step to the further investigation on the gas–solids heat transfer. In this model, it is assumed that spherical particles are well distributed on the plate. Mutual impact of particles and the effect of gas flow on particles are ignored. When a particle moves in a vibrated fluidised bed, it follows the principle of projectile motion by the motivation of distribution plate. The distribution plate motion versus time could be expressed as Many parallel jets are formed when gas puffs through the distribution plate. This type of flow causes high thermal conductivity near the axis of jets. A simplified velocity distribution in the jet is formulated as As The thermal conductivity and specific heat of rubber are obviously influenced by the variation of temperature and, moreover, the convective heat transfer coefficient varying with velocity difference of particles. Therefore, the heat transfer between solid particles and gas is an unsteady-state problem which can be solved by using finite difference method. For the reasons of equations to be solved, the model can be simplified by following assumptions: (1) pressure drop of gas through bed layer is ignored, (2) gas pass through particles uniformly, (3) particles are spherical, (4) irrespective of effect of particles on gas flow and (5) heat conductivity among particles, as well as between particles and the bed plate, is ignored. Consider a solid spherical particle of radius The convective heat transfer coefficient  The problem of heat transfer in a vibrated fluidised bed on cryogenics condition has been numerically analysed. With the simplified physical models of particles motion and the gas flow, finite difference method is successfully adopted to predict the cooling process and outlet temperature of rubber particles in a vibrated fluidised bed. The modelling will be modified by reducing the assumptions to close to the real working conditions of the vibrated fluidised bed. The detailed work and results will be available in the oncoming publications.