An atomic force microscope (AFM) was used to measure the surface forces in thin liquid films (TLFs) confined between gold surfaces hydrophobized by chemisorption of alkylthiols. The measurements were conducted in different H-bonding liquids and in water–ethanol solutions. Attractive forces stronger and longer-ranged than the van der Waals force were observed in water, ethanol, and 1-butanol in a descending order. The attractive force measured in methanol was much weaker.
                  The surface forces measured in ethanol solutions varied with concentration. Initially, the attractive forces decreased rapidly upon ethanol addition, passed through a broad minimum centered around mole fractions in the range of 0.15–0.20, and then increased as the ethanol mole fraction was further increased above ∼0.5. Thermodynamic analysis of the data suggests that clusters of water and ethanol may form in TLFs. Thus, the attractive forces may arise from changes in liquid structure. It appears that structuring is a consequence of H-bonding liquid to minimize its free energy in the vicinity of hydrophobic surfaces and in the presence of foreign species in solution.Thin liquid films (TLFs) of water or an aqueous solution confined between two surfaces control the stability of colloids, foams, wetting films, adhesive joints, The wetting films formed on It has been shown that the water adlayers formed on hydrophilic mica surfaces grow epitaxially We recently measured the surface forces in TLFs of water confined between hydrophobic surfaces at several different temperatures to derive more complete thermodynamic information than was previously available The H-bonded clusters we refer to here may be related to the low-density liquid (LDL) species that are known to be present in bulk water even at ambient conditions In the present work, we further explored the notion that hydrophobic force may be of structural origin. To this end, AFM force measurements were conducted using gold surfaces hydrophobized with It has been well documented that the structure of ethanol–water mixtures is a complex function of concentration. In principle, mixing of two liquids should entail an increase in entropy. When ethanol is admixed into water, however, the entropy increase is far less than anticipated As the surface tension of ethanol is 22.22 In the present work, the surface force data obtained in ethanol solutions were analyzed using the Derjaguin approximation A Nanopure III (Barnstead) water purification system was used to obtain double-distilled, deionized water with a resistivity of 18.2 Gold-coated glass slides were obtained by depositing pure gold onto glass using a vacuum evaporator. A 50 To obtain high-quality self-assembled monolayers of thiols, it is necessary to clean gold substrates thoroughly The gold surface cleaned in the manner described above exhibited zero water contact angle ( The gold spheres, on the other hand, could not be cleaned using the piranha solution, as they were glued onto AFM cantilevers. The sphere-cantilever assembly was washed first with pure ethanol, irradiated by UV light (254 For each force measurement, a pair of gold plate and sphere was immersed in a thiol solution for a period of time, so that both have the same hydrophobicity. The hydrophobicity was controlled by varying the immersion time in a thiol (C Surface force measurements were conducted at room temperature (22   A similar set of measurements were conducted using gold substrates hydrophobized by self-assembly of C  The results presented above are different from those reported by Ederth More recently, two of us followed the same procedure as Ederth and observed significant steps in the force curves for pure water It has been shown previously that long-range attractions measured between two hydrophobic surfaces immersed in water increase with increasing water contact angle To show the changes in the attractive non-DLVO (hydrophobic) surface force in a quantitative manner, we fitted the surface force data presented in From the surface force data obtained in the present work, one can determined the film tension using the Derjaguin approximation From the counterpart of the Gibbs surface tension equation that holds for TLFs of composed of water–ethanol mixtures, one finds the following relation, The results obtained with the C Liquid water is characterized by an extensive network of H Many SFVS studies showed that the water next to hydrophobic surfaces (and air bubbles) exhibit the characteristic peaks at ∼3700 We have seen in Inert gases (e.g., O As ethanol concentration is increased further, the correlation between ethanol molecules is enhanced As shown in Although methanol is less likely to form clusters than ethanol for the reasons discussed in the foregoing paragraph, the cluster formation may be enhanced if the surface hydrophobicity is increased. To explore this possibility, additional force measurements have been conducted by using hydrophobic surfaces of varying contact angles, with the results presented in Finally, we may ask ourselves whether it is appropriate to call the attractive forces measured in We have conducted AFM surface force measurements using hydrophobic gold surfaces in various H-bonding liquids. The results showed the presence of long-range attractive forces in the thin liquid films (TLFs) confined between hydrophobic surfaces. The forces were most attractive in water, followed by ethanol and 1-butanol. The forces measured in methanol were the weakest but still stronger than the van der Waals force. The surface forces measured in water–ethanol mixtures varied strongly with composition, reaching broad minima centered around mole fractions in the range of 0.15–0.2. A thermodynamic analysis of the surface force data showed that clusters of primarily water are formed in the TFLs at concentrations below this range, while clusters of primarily ethanol are formed at higher concentrations. These findings indicate that the long-range attractions are presumably related to structural changes in the liquid cores of TLFs. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from the