Drop weight testers have been widely and successfully used to characterize ore breakage parameters for simulation of crushers and mills. In some cases, limitations of time, sample availability, and even cost, can prevent the conduction of these tests when preparing samples for chemical analysis and/or grindability and flotation/concentration testing. The present work demonstrates how a laboratory cone crusher equipped with a power meter, in conjunction with Whiten–Awachie crusher model, has been used to quickly estimate the A
                     *
                     b breakage parameters. With an average absolute error of 36% when applied to a variety of materials, it is demonstrated that the method is not a priori restricted to the particular crusher used, neither to the crushing conditions employed. It is discussed that the method, when part of a variability study, can be used as a convenient tool for geometallurgical mapping of ore deposits regarding ore breakage response.A number of questions should be answered when selecting the appropriate crusher to an application, which include crusher capacity, power consumption, product size distribution and wear rate of liners, amongst others ( Throughout the life of a mine, crushers may be fed with ores with highly variable crushing responses, so that characterizing the amenability of ores contained in different parts of a deposit to crushing is worthwhile. This requires, however, proper crushability tests as well as mathematical expressions that can use characterization data to predict equipment performance. Briefly, two main indices have been used to access the response of ores to crushing ( The Evidently, a number of measures of breakage response of ores have some degree of correlation with the The present paper demonstrates that the laboratory crushing operation that is used to prepare drill core samples for grindability or concentration tests, or even assaying, can be, after proper calibration, used to estimate the breakage indices Comminution in compression crushers can be described by the well-known model from W. Whiten ( The breakage function in density form The power model relates the actual power drawn by the crusher to the power required by the laboratory drop weight tester to achieve the same size reduction ( The drop weight equivalent power Values of Samples of over 25 materials have been collected for testing, which include several samples of bauxites, copper ores, limestones, acid rocks, coals and an iron ore. They have been prepared for testing by sieving in the appropriate size fractions. Samples were dried to moisture contents below 0.1% prior to all tests. More details on the sample characteristics can be found elsewhere ( In the impact load cell ( Parameter Crushing experiments were conducted in a laboratory-scale shorthead cone crusher (Denver No. 12) equipped with a power meter ( Crushing experiments consisted of continuous feeding samples containing from 7 to 15  Data from three laboratory crushing tests were, initially, used to fit a consistent set of parameters of the classification function (Eq.    The following step consisted of fitting a unique value of the parameter From the fitted parameters and the results from the tests it was then possible to estimate the breakage parameter A comparison of the breakage parameter values calculated on the basis of data from the crushing tests (Eq. Evidently, this relationship is not universal, varying typically with ore type ( In summary, the application of the method proposed in the present work to estimate the ore-dependant parameter Although in the present work the feed size distribution was maintained constant for the different materials, the method allows, in principle, varying the size distribution of the feed, since it explicitly accounts for it in Eqs. The deviations found between the rapid method proposed in the present work and the standard method of calculating the Perhaps the greatest applicability of the method would be as part of variability studies when a large number of drill cores are generated, but are not often available for breakage characterization. In those cases, it is the authors' experience that the ratio between the maximum and the minimum values of A rapid and convenient method has been proposed to estimate the The method has been able to predict the Although not meant to replace the standard drop weight or the rapid breakage tests used to calculate the The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from the