In this research, LC resonator was designed and tested for biomolecule detection. As the first step, 15nH spiral inductor at 2GHz and 15pF inter-digital capacitor at 2GHz were designed. And the measured each inductance and capacitance were 15.3nH and 0.41pF at 2GHz. From both the data, LC resonator was designed by the combination of inductor and capacitor. The difference of return loss between bare device after fabrication and biotin binding was 1.87dB, and biotin–avidin binding was 0.53dB at 2.2GHz, respectively. The impedances for bare device, biotin and avidin steps were Zo*(0.718-j0.002), Zo*(0.761-j0.003) and Zo*(0.803-j0.002) in the Smith chart, respectively. From the mentioned data, we can conclude that the return loss variation at resonance point is large distinctly. From the smith chart analysis, we can confirm that the biomolecule acts as a resistance and the increased resistance of the resonator leads to the impedance matching change.Recently, biomolecule detection has gained significant attention for lab-on-a-chip (LOC) because this field has a low theoretical approach and development has been from a scientific perspective. Even though it has a problem in development for LOC detection, LOC system for handheld disease detection is considered to be an important area in biomedical or biological micro-electro-mechanical-systems (BioMEMS) technologies. For the last decade, BioMEMS and associated devices have been used as biosensors and the resulting biochips allow sensitive, rapid, and real-time measurement Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) as a new detection method is recently encouraged by several researchers In this paper, we present a new and simple label-free biomolecule detection method for LOC in RF domain. In coplanar waveguide (CPW) types, we found the possibility as the biosensors in structure and design In a LOC system, the typical size of a biomolecule is several nanometer, and the volume ranges from micro- to nano-liter. Thus the detection signal, signal to noise ratio and reliability have always been very low. In detection area, finding a good method for molecule detection has become a hot issue. Detection using RF method is one of the prospective candidates out of the several schemes for biomolecule detection. The advantages of RF technology are that several RF characteristics can be measured by either a direct or combination method. The principle relies on detecting the change in RF signal caused by the resistance, permeability and permittivity of a biomolecule on the RF device surface. The binding of biomolecule is almost restricted to surface chemistry phenomenon. In this research, we tried to measure the impedance change by the absorption of biomolecule with RF resonator as biosensor. Recently, the biosensor researches are represented by the two items. One is research of surface acoustic wave (SAW) If biotin is immobilized on the surface of the RF device in the second step, it will make some RF signal loss by biotin charges and the dielectric constant changes ( To fabricate the LC resonator, spiral inductor and inter-digital capacitor were simulated and fabricated each other. Also, the both inductor and capacitor were modeled to apply for LC resonator. The parameters for each design are shown in The BCB is a useful material as it is easy to process and has a good performance as a low dielectric constant material. But it has a hydrophobic surface which causes low immobilization rate and is not suitable for amine coating. Therefore, surface treatment was performed to change the surface from being hydrophobic to hydrophilic, in order to increase the immobilization rate. Plasma processing was performed for 90 The substrate with the amine groups was treated for 1 As we mentioned, the spiral inductor and the inter-digital capacitor were fabricated and measured by the network analyzer. The RF devices are measured on a Cal-Suss probe station using CPW probes (The Cascade Microtech). An Agilent E8354A network analyzer which can measure up to 50 For any type of passive device represented by admittance, the capacitance can be defined as followed Over a wide frequency band, the inter-digital capacitor can be viewed as capacitor with parasitic inductance which causes the self-resonance. As shown clearly in As shown in In this research, we presented a promising biomolecule detection method using a proposed RF device which provided straightforward fabrication and excellent performance. The surface chemistry of the BCB and Cu layers was defined by the silane and the thiol treatment. The biotin–avidin on the Cu was confirmed by FT-IR. LC resonator was fabricated with the combination of the inductor and capacitor designs. From the mentioned data, we can confirm that the return loss at resonance point showed large variation. It means that the biomolecule acts as a resistance, and the increased resistance of the resonator leads to the impedance matching change. SAIT (Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology) is multi-program laboratory and center operated by Samsung Corporation, with the NFTC (NanoFabrication Technology Center) being one of the several centers in SAIT. This work is carried out as an internal SAIT project. Authors thank K.H. Lee for proof-reading the text.