Electrically polarized bulk sintered hydroxyapatite (HAp) compacts have been shown to accelerate mineralization and bone tissue ingrowth in vivo. In this work, a comprehensive study has been carried out to investigate the influence of surface charge and polarity on in vitro bone cell adhesion, proliferation and differentiation on electrically polarized HAp-coated Ti. Uniform and crack free sol–gel derived HAp coatings of 20±1.38μm thickness were polarized by application of an external d.c. field of 2.0kVcm−1 at 400°C for 1h. In vitro bioactivity of polarized HAp coatings was evaluated by soaking in simulated body fluid, and bone cell–material interactions were studied by culturing with human fetal osteoblast cells (hFOB) for a maximum period of 11days. Scanning electron microscopic observation showed that accelerated mineralization on negatively charged surfaces favored rapid cell attachment and faster tissue ingrowth over non-polarized HAp coating surfaces, while positive charge on HAp coating surfaces restricted apatite nucleation with limited cellular response. Immunochemistry and confocal microscopy confirmed that the cell adhesion and early stage differentiation were more pronounced on negatively charged coating surfaces as hFOB cells expressed higher vinculin and alkaline phosphatase proteins on negatively charged surface compared to cells grown on all other surfaces. Our results in this study are process independent and potentially applicable to any other commercially available coating techniques.Today, the occurrence of musculoskeletal disorders, such as osteoporosis and osteoarthritis, have been recognized as among the most common human health problems, and afflicting more than 33% of US adults. In parallel, a range of musculoskeletal metallic implants are also available in the market to treat or even prevent these diseases, which cost society an estimated $20 billion in the US alone in 2008, an expenditure that is projected to grow by 11.8% by 2012 In recent years, the electrostatic charge storage capacity of polarized sintered HAp has attracted the attention of many biologists and materials scientists Here, we report on a comprehensive study of polarized HAp-coated Ti, in an attempt to understand the efficacy of polarization treatments on HAp powder was prepared in-house by the sol–gel route, using calcium nitrate tetrahydrate (Ca(NO Polarization was carried out on sintered HAp-coated samples in air, using platinum electrodes, with a Keithley 6487 picoammeter (Keithley Instruments, OH, USA) and a ceramic strip heater (OMEGA, CT, USA). During polarization, the samples were heated from room temperature to polarization temperature (  The combined influence of the stored surface charge and the charge polarity on  Cell morphology was assessed after 5 and 11 The proliferation of viable hFOB cells attached on the sample surfaces was assessed by the MTT assay (Sigma, MO, USA) after 3, 5 and 11 Vinculin and ALP, the specific protein expressions relevant to focal adhesion formation and osteoblast cell differentiation, respectively, were assayed for test samples by fluorescent staining and confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) observation. Briefly, different test samples were cultured for 3 and 5 The MTT assay results are presented as mean   The mineralization behavior of each sample after 5 Quantitative measurement of the mineralization process is presented in In FESEM images of samples cultured for 11 hFOB cell proliferation on both poled and unpoled samples was studied using the MTT assay. Vinculin, a protein expressed by osteoblast cells, is involved in the formation of focal adhesion sites. Osteoblast adhesion and response to material surfaces after 5 ALP is a protein expressed by differentiated osteoblasts during the bone remodeling process. For this reason, ALP protein expression was assessed as a differentiation marker for hFOB cells and observed under a confocal microscope. At day 5, a moderate green fluorescence expression for ALP on the “N” poled surface indicates that cells reached confluence and started to differentiate, as shown in The polarization mechanism of HAp coatings can be discussed in light of the results reported in the literature. In general, polarization of HAp has been attributed to an ionic conduction mechanism, where protons (H To better understand the influence of surface charge and charge polarity on biomineralization and osseointegration, we have investigated SBF immersion and bone cell (hFOB) interactions on various samples with different surface properties. We have already demonstrated that surface charge, surface energy and wettability of sintered HAp compacts influence mineralization and bone cell–material interactions From However, on the “P” poled surface, after 5 These conclusions are supported by the MTT assay results ( The present study critically investigated the possible effect of surface charge and charge polarity on the The authors thank Dr. Christine Davitt and Dr. Valerie Lynch-Holm, of Franceschi Microscopy and Imaging Center, Washington State University, for their helpful assistance in the confocal microscopy and FESEM analyses. The authors also acknowledge financial support from Certain figures in this article, particularly Figures 9–11, are difficult to interpret in black and white. The full colour images can be found in the on-line version, at