Commercial level operation of uranium leaching from the ores is carried out as a continuous process because of techno-economical benefits. Batch kinetic data of uranium leaching from a lean ore, is scaled to multiple continuous stirred tank reactors using the Residence Time Distribution (RTD) model. A graphical approach reported earlier was improved for better predictions of the observed experimental results. Batch data was obtained from a laboratory scale reactor. The scaling is used to predict the temperature rise in a continuous reactor, which happens mostly due to conversion of pyrites present in the ore. The scaling obtained with the modified model is compared with measurements of uranium conversions and reactor temperatures in a pilot scale continuous reactor having three stirred tanks in series. A good comparison is obtained for several different operating conditions of the pilot and commercial scale reactors. Hence, RTD is a good tool for scale-up and design of commercial scale leaching of uranium from lean ores.Reactor discharge at time Time, h Number of tanks in series in continuous reactor Average retention time per tank, h Percent conversion of pitchblende in batch leaching Percent conversion of pitchblende in continuous leaching Percent conversion of UO Percent conversion of pyrite in continuous leaching Percent decomposition of NaHCO Mass flow rate of solids into/out of the continuous leach reactor (kg/h) Mass flow rate of liquid into/out of the continuous leach reactor (kg/h) Mass flow rate of UO Mass flow rate of UO Mass flow rate of FeS Mass flow rate of NaHCO Heat capacity of solids in continuous reactor (kJ/kg-°C) Heat capacity of liquid in continuous reactor (kJ/kg-°C) Temperature of inlet slurry to the continuous reactor (°C) Temperature of outlet slurry from the continuous reactor (°C) Rise in temperature of slurry in the continuous reactor (°C) Heat of reaction of oxidation of pitchblende/kg of pitchblende (kJ/kg) Heat of reaction of dissolution of UO Heat of reaction of oxidation of pyrite/kg of pyrite (kJ/kg) Heat of reaction of decomposition of NaHCO Pyrite content of feed solids to the continuous reactor (%) Commercial exploitation of a uranium resource is assessed on the basis of maximum extractable uranium from it by leaching. Extraction of uranium is first carried out on a laboratory scale. After identifying the optimum leaching parameters at this scale, they are scaled up to a pilot level and then to a commercial level. One of the important steps in designing the commercial scale leaching process is finding relation between operating conditions of laboratory batch process and continuous process; the latter offers superior operational convenience and savings on account of no shutdown time for loading and unloading of materials ( Residence time in a batch leach reactor is same for all the particles participating in chemical reactions. However, this time is distributed in a continuous reactor due to non-ideal flow patterns that include short circuits and dead zones ( There are several theoretical scale up methods for designing continuous leaching process from laboratory batch kinetic tests. Heat effects play a vital role in the operation of a commercial scale continuous leach reactor. The temperature of all the exiting streams from the reactor is influenced by inlet temperature of entering streams and the heats of reactions ( The heat effects are not crucial if the ores contain small quantities of pyrites. For ores having large amounts of pyrites, they are separated out before the uranium is extracted and hence the heat effects due to pyrites are negligible. However, for ores containing intermediate quantities of pyrites, as in this paper, the effects cannot be ignored. The results of the present study serve as a reference for predicting the leaching efficiency as a function of time, inlet stream temperature and pyrite content of the ore. The simulation of residence time and heat absorption/evolution for continuous leaching from the laboratory data is useful in operation of the recently commissioned alkaline leaching plant at Tummalapalle in India. The Tummalapalle uranium ore was crushed using a jaw crusher followed by a roll crusher. The crushed product was ground in a laboratory ball mill to a fine powder and sieved. Each sieve fraction was separated according to specific gravity as bromoform lights, methylene iodide lights and methylene iodide heavies. Minerals in each fraction were estimated under transmitted and reflected light by microscopic grain mounting. Cellulose nitrate film auto-radiography was carried out on all fractions to estimate the distribution of radioactive phases. The complete mineralogical composition of feed ore sample is given in During alkaline leaching of uranium ores, the uranium is oxidized from the + The optimum leaching parameters (particle size, leachant concentrations, temperature, pressure and residence time) used in the present study were taken from The height and diameter of the autoclave are 0.32 Continuous mode pressure leaching tests were carried out on pilot scale in an 850 Slurry was fed in the first compartment; the reactor contents overflow over the weir plates, from this compartment to the next; from the second compartment the contents overflow to the third. The slurry discharge from the third compartment is through a dip tube. Samples are withdrawn through a side discharge after reducing the pressure in two stages and cooling. The feed and discharge of the slurry from the CLR were controlled by two separate interlocks. The solenoid valve in the feed-line opens only if the pressure of input slurry exceeds the reactor pressure. The slurry is discharged through a dip tube in line with a pneumatically operated control valve. The opening of the control valve is interlocked with the level in the third compartment. The level in the third compartment is monitored with a differential pressure transmitter (DP), which sends signals to the control valve. The CLR was fed continuously with feed slurry of 50% solids ( The uranium leached and the pyrite reacted at different cumulative reaction times were computed from the concentrations of U Results of the tests conducted at different flow-rates and inlet temperatures of feed pulp, under fixed operating conditions, mentioned in Different fractions of the feed pulp (solids The values of  The conversion of pyrite,  Energy balance on the reactor shows that enthalpy of stream leaving the reactor equals sum of enthalpy of the entering feed and the heat generated/absorbed due to chemical reactions, assuming that the reactor is well insulated and kinetic and potential changes are negligible.  The feed pulp density of the continuous system mentioned in The total heat generated by reactions (1) to (4) is given by,  In Eq. The heat capacities of solid and liquid streams are assumed to be constant in the range of operating temperature and equal to 0.5 Low pyrite in uranium ores is beneficial in alkaline leaching, as described in The ore in the present study, however, contains pyrite in the intermediate range, −  If the reactor temperature surges above the optimum value, 125 The slurry temperature, at different residence times, can be calculated from Eq. Using For scaling alkaline-leaching of uranium from lean ores, residence time distribution has been used to relate conversions of pitchblende and pyrite in laboratory scale batch reactor (5 The recovery of uranium in laboratory batch leaching with Na The authors are grateful to their colleagues in petrological and chemical laboratory of Mineral Processing Division for timely analyses of samples. They are thankful to all their colleagues in Mineral processing Division of BARC for their co-operation during the investigations. They also acknowledge the suggestions of two anonymous reviewers.