Management of posterior tibial plateau fractures has gained much interest over the past few years. Fracture morphology, trauma mechanism, and soft-tissue injury have been identified as the key factors determining the treatment strategy and outcome. We provide a rationale for the operative management of posterior tibial plateau fractures by discussing the interplay between fracture morphology, trauma mechanism, and soft-tissue injury. The trauma mechanism has proven to be an important tool, not only to understand fracture morphology, but also to assess concomitant soft-tissue (i.e. ligamentous) injury. Subsequently, soft-tissue injury might play a role in future classification and diagnostic work-up of tibial plateau fractures, particularly in fractures with posterior involvement. Plate osteosynthesis using a posterior approach is safe and should be considered routinely in coronal fractures of the posterior tibial plateau, as illustrated.Tibial plateau fractures have significant impact on knee function The goal of this narrative review was to evaluate the current evidence regarding the surgical management of PTPF. Fracture morphology, trauma mechanism and soft-tissue injury have been identified as the key factors determining the treatment strategy and outcome Detailed understanding of fracture morphology is essential in order to optimize preoperative planning and surgical treatment. In 2016, Millar et al. reviewed all thirty-eight available classification methods for tibial plateau fractures 3D classification systems such as the three column, four column or ten segments classification highlight the posterior aspect of tibial plateau and provide 3D understanding tibial plateau fractures. 3D classification approaches offer a more intuitive way to understand fracture morphology compared to 2D systems. Therefore, the widely used Schatzker classification was recently revisited 3D, dividing the tibia plateau into 4 quadrants in the axial plane, wherein the main fracture plane for each quadrant is identified. Subsequently, the main fracture plane is denoted by the two points of intersection at the tibia plateau rim, and by the exit point at the metaphyseal area The increased awareness of PTPF and importance to address these fractures, along with the improved imaging modalities such 3D CT-imaging, have boosted the search for more extensive classification methods. The CT-based three-column concept has gained much interest since the introduction by Luo et al. in 2010, and has proven beneficial in depicting PTPF New insights into fracture morphology significantly contribute to a better understanding of PTPF, which is crucial in defining treatment strategies. Molenaars et al. have shown that as much as 85% of all tibial plateau fractures with a posteromedial fragment, would possibly benefit from a non-standard customized lateral plating or additional medial or posterior plating Based on the three-column classification, Wang et al. introduced the updated three-column concept, which incorporates trauma mechanism (flexion/extension and varus/valgus), in order to guide surgical decision making Merging fracture-mapping with fracture-mechanism classification, Xie et al. aimed to combine the best of both concepts These trauma mechanism-based studies focus primarily on flexion/extension/hyperextension and valgus/varus forces. It should be noted that force vectors other than in the axial plane, like rotation, translation, and forces anterior onto the tibia plateau are not considered to date. However, based on the recent studies, the simplification of force vectors into sagittal and coronal plane is assumed to account for the majority of tibial plateau fractures Limited reports on the updated three-column concept demonstrate good radiographic and functional outcomes The mechanism-based interpretation provides a dynamic perspective to understand fracture morphology and concomitant soft-tissue injuries. PTPF are considered as the result of either a flexion or extension compression force vector in the sagittal plane, or a hyperextension force acting as a tension arc at the posterior cortex. As a consequence of the latter, a posterolateral ligamentous injury is likely and the fixation strategy is different. Concomitant injuries to the collateral ligaments, cruciate ligaments and menisci are common with tibial plateau fractures. Incidences of soft-tissue injuries range from 52% up to 73%, with medial collateral ligament, posterolateral corner and lateral meniscus injury being most frequent, followed by ACL injury Lateral tibia plateau depression and widening are regarded as important predictors of lateral meniscal tears. Although the thresholds for articular depression and fracture gap vary across literature, ranging from 6 to 14 mm and 5–10 mm respectively, most studies seem to agree that large displacements warrant high suspicion for a meniscal tears The value of the Schatzker classification in predicting soft-tissue injuries is debatable. Most authors suggest that it is not suitable to estimate the probability of soft-tissue injuries in acute tibial plateau fractures, since they were unable to establish a significant association with meniscal or ligamentous injuries Diagonal lesions are commonplace in knee sports medicine, however the recurrent patterns of a tibial plateau fractures and concomitant soft-tissue injury, are not concluded in the literature yet. The injury force mechanism theory is based on the understanding of 3D fracture morphology, which allows us to predict soft-tissue injuries. It gives us a more thorough understanding of PTPF due to forces on the posterior tibia plateau. PTPF are frequently associated with ACL avulsions due to flexion- varus forces and are accompanied by posterolateral ligamentous injury as a consequence of hyperextensions forces acting as a tension arc at the posterior cortex The question remains whether early detection of these soft-tissue injuries will alter the treatment strategy, since the effect of these injuries on the outcome remains controversial Surgical planning should include a strategy for all affected columns and concomitant soft-tissue injury in a step-by-step manner. Regarding PTPF, there are multiple posterior approaches described in the literature (  Cadaveric studies have clearly indicated the unstable nature of posteromedial fractures during motion of the knee, with and without weight-bearing Multiple outcome studies have indicated the important prognostic impact of sagittal malalignment; given the risk of secondary displacement, stabilization and restoration of sagittal alignment is very important in PTPF According to Wang et al., posterior fixation is based on trauma mechanism and column classification and the main principle being the need for buttress plating on the compression side of the fracture pattern Recently implicated ‘main fracture planes’ imply that the direction of the fracture should guide plate osteosynthesis. Fracture mapping clearly shows the high frequency of coronal fractures ranging up to 85% in Schatzker types IV-VI, with possible benefit of additional posteromedial or posterior fixation PTPF are associated with high energy trauma and specific soft-tissue injuries depending on the diagonal injury pattern Posterior approaches have clearly shown to be safe and feasible in order to address and fixate PTPF with good clinical results In tibial plateau fractures, research has evolved over the previous year's towards a more trauma mechanism-based view. In ankle fractures, the trauma mechanism based Lauge-Hansen classification has been used for many years in guiding treatment and predicting instability. This system is built on a comprehensive understanding of trauma mechanism and interplay between fracture morphology and ligamentous injury. One of the key aspects in such a concept is the in-depth appreciation and diagnosis of soft-tissue injury. Xie et al. introduced the diagonal injury pattern, integrating the trauma mechanism based three-column classification and associated ligamentous injuries Further research should focus on diagnosis and classification of concomitant soft tissue (i.e. ligamentous) injury in order to guide future treatment protocols and positively affect functional outcome. Ultimately, the goal should be a comprehensive treatment concept which incorporates fracture morphology, trauma mechanism and soft-tissue injury. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. There is no funding source.