A combined system of flow injection on-line dialysis sample pretreatment and high performance liquid chromatographic separation/detection (FID–HPLC) was developed for simultaneous determination of six organic acids (tartaric, malic, lactic, acetic, citric and succinic acids). A sample or mixed standard solution (400μL) was injected into a donor stream (water) of FID system and was pushed further through a dialysis cell, while an acceptor solution (water) was held in the opposite side of the dialysis membrane. The dialysate containing organic acids in the acceptor solution was then flowed to an injection loop of the HPLC valve, where it was further injected into the HPLC system and analysed under normal HPLC conditions, using a reversed-phase (C18) analytical column and UV detection (210nm). The order of elution was tartaric, malic, lactic, acetic, citric and succinic acids with the analysis time of 8min. The FID system could be operated in parallel with HPLC separation, providing sample throughput of 7.5h−1. Dialysis efficiencies of six organic acids were in range of 4.6–9.5%. Calibration graphs for all the mentioned organic acids were linear over the range of 250–7500mgL−1. Precisions for all the organic acids were within 5.4%. The proposed system was successfully applied for analysis of some Thai wines. By spiking wine samples with mixed acid standard solutions, the percentage recoveries in range of 84–104 were found. This system has advantages of fast and high degrees of automation for dialysis sample pretreatment, on-line sample separation and dilution, good clean-up for prolongation of life-time of the HPLC column and low consumption of chemicals and materials.Low molecular weight organic acid compounds are the important ingredients in wine Several analytical techniques have been used for identifying and quantifying organic acids in wine samples of various fruit materials and matrices in order to control the evolution of acidity, stability or illness of wine, during the different steps of the winemaking process until bottling step. These techniques include titrimetric Dialysis Flow based techniques such as flow injection (FI) and sequential injection (SI) offer high degrees of automation of dialysis sample pretreatment for various detection systems. Flow injection dialysis (FID), in which only a specified volume of sample is injected into the donor stream provides fast analysis or high sample throughput, and better precision and accuracy of the analytical results. This strategy allows small volumes of sample to be in contact with dialysis membrane and the membrane is continuously washed by the donor solution, thus less possibility of deterioration of the membrane (e.g., clogging or changing of property of the membrane) would result. FID with ion chromatography has been exploited for the determination of some common anions in wastewater samples In this work, we developed the FID–HPLC system for the determination of some organic acids in wine. The proposed system offered a simple, fast, convenient and low consumption sample pretreatment system and gave better precision and accuracy of the analytical results. Moreover, the dialysis pretreatment should prolong life-time of the expensive HPLC columns by preventing the particulate and some large molecules to enter the column. Ultrapure water (18.2 Stock standard solutions of six organic acids (50,000 The HPLC mobile phase was a mixture (1:99, v/v) of acetonitrile (99.8%, BDH) and 0.05 The manifold of the FID–HPLC system is shown in A home-made dialysis cell ( The HPLC system ( Recommended conditions from the Aquasil C The combined system of FI on-line dialysis (FID) and HPLC as shown in HPLC is suitable for simultaneous determination of multi-analytes, e.g., several organic acids in wine. However, sample clean-up/pretreatment is needed for the application to most of the real samples. In this work, the FID–HPLC system was designed and optimized for efficient operation and for obtaining good analytical results. Factors which may affect the HPLC separation, on-line dialysis efficiency and selectivity, and percentage recovery were studied as following. The HPLC system was optimized for good separation (high peak resolution), short analysis time and high sensitivity. A suitable detection wavelength for the high sensitivity in determination of six organic acids (tartaric, malic, lactic, acetic, citric and succinic acids) was investigated by using batch spectrophotometric system. The standard solution of each acid was prepared in the mobile phase of pH 2.8 (as recommended by the column producer to be used as a mobile phase for separation of organic acids on Aquasil C Effect of pH of the mobile phase on the separation of organic acids was investigated. According to the fact that the pK Under the conditions used as described above and as in Section An off-line dialysis sample pretreatment using a dialysis bag was investigated for the analysis of wine sample. The standard/sample was placed in the dialysis bag and dialysed into water until reaching equilibrium and the dialysate was then analysed by HPLC under the selected conditions. It was found that the dialysis time to attain the equilibrium was 4.3 The FID system as shown in The main parameters, flow rate and standard/sample volume, which affected the timing of an operation cycle were firstly studied. The flow rates of donor and acceptor streams were varied in the range of 0.2–1.5 Selectivity in dialysis depends on pore size of the membrane used. Commercially available dialysis membranes of 2 ranges of pore size or MWCO values (6000–8000 and 12,000–14,000 Da) were tried. Percentage recoveries on spiking of standard organic acids into wine sample were considered. As could be seen from Effect of pH of standard sample solution was studied in range of 2.0–7.0, by adjusting pH with 1.0 Ionic strength of sample may affect the dialysis efficiency. This could be encountered in the on-line dialysis system by using the donor and acceptor solutions of high ionic strength to control/adjust ionic strength of the sample Some species commonly found in wine, which could possibly be the interferences or might damage the HPLC column were tested. The proposed FID system was operated under the selected conditions as described above. The solutions of 5 Chromatogram of six organic acids obtained from FID–HPLC system is depicted in The proposed method was applied to determine the six organic acids in seventeen commercial Thai wine samples of different brands, prices and fruit materials. The mixed standard of all the studied organic acids was spiked into all samples at two different concentration levels (750 and 2500 A flow injection on-line dialysis sample pretreatment coupled to HPLC system was developed for the determination of tartaric, malic, lactic, acetic, citric and succinic acids in wine samples. This system has advantages of fast and higher degrees of automation in sample pretreatment, on-line sample separation and dilution, good sample clean-up for prolongation the life-time of the expensive HPLC column and low consumption of chemicals and materials. The system should be conveniently employed for quality control of wine. The Thailand Research Fund (TRF) and the Commission on Higher Education (CHE) of Thailand are acknowledged for financial support. We thank Faculty of Science, Naresuan University for partial support, and the staff of Chemistry Department, Naresuan University for their assistance.