Commercially pure copper sample was subjected to severe plastic deformation (SPD) processing via applying twist extrusion (TE) and equal channel angular pressing (ECAP) at room temperature. It was found that in the same accumulated strain 
                        (
                        ~
                        
                        2.4
                        )
                     , TE decreased the mean grain size more than ECAP did. Moreover, the microstructure produced by TE was more homogeneous than that obtained by ECAP. The results of the tensile test showed that the strength properties of the TEed sample were higher than those of the ECAPed one. However, in the same strain value the ductility of the ECAPed specimen was higher than that of the TEed sample.SPD techniques have attracted much attention in the past two decades The material used in this study was commercially pure copper (99.96%). The large billets with the dimensions of 18×32×70   In contrast, the value of the dislocation density resulted from the third pass of ECAP is lower than that obtained by the third pass of TE. Hence, the fraction of the HAGBs of the ECAPed sample is lower than the TEed one. Comparision of  By employing the first pass of ECAP the texture is dominated by the orientations belonging to the According to the Performing four passes of ECAP decreases the ductility of the material. As the amount of imposed strain increases, the dislocation density enhances. In case of pure copper, the SFE is almost low, thus the dislocations are widely dissociated and therefore cross-slip is difficult. Hence, the ductility of the ECAPed specimen decreases. The variations of the ductility properties of the TEed sample differ from those of the ECAPed one. According to the  In the same accumulated strain of about 2.4, TE decreased the grain size more than ECAP did. The reason was attributed to the existence of two shear planes in TE processing and also the sequential folds and stretches created by TE. The strength improvement obtained by TE was more than that achieved by ECAP. Finer grains of TEed microstructure and also more internal stresses contributed in higher strength of TEed specimen. However, in the same imposed stain