Surface treatment techniques were deployed to alter the surface of indium tin oxide (ITO) samples to attain a favorable interface between printed nano-inks and ITO surface. Surface free energy components of treated ITO substrates were calculated for each treatment using the van Oss–Chaudhury–Good method. The surface treatments of ITO changed the Lifshitz–van der Waals and Lewis acid–base components, and contact angle hysteresis significantly. Among all the surface treatments, air plasma treated samples showed high polar in nature, whereas dodecyltrichlorosilane self-assembled monolayer treated sample showed the lowest. In addition to the polarity and homogeneity, the surface roughness of the ITO was studied with respect to the surface treatment. Silver nanoparticulate ink was printed on treated ITO surfaces using aerosol jet printing system. Printed silver nano-ink line width and morphology strongly depended on the surface treatment of the ITO, ink properties and printing parameters.Direct write technologies using nano-inks, have attracted significant interest as a pathway to low-cost, large-area and flexible electronics Because of its low electrical resistivity and optical transparency, indium tin oxide (ITO) is widely used as a transparent conductive oxide material for many electronic and optoelectronic devices such as light emitting diodes, liquid crystal displays, and solar cells In this work, surface free energy components of surface treated ITO samples are calculated using van Oss–Chaudhury–Good theory in terms of acid–base components. The surface morphology and roughness of the treated ITO are investigated with respect to the surface treatment. In addition to ITO surface characterization, we report the impact of the ITO treatments and printing parameters on line width of the aerosol jet printed silver nano-ink. For aerosol jet printing, the three dimensionless parameters (Reynolds, Weber and Ohnesorge numbers) that control the forces of spreading phenomenon are calculated and compared with ink jet printing. This study is directed toward determining the surface free energy components of the ITO to help in deciding which surface treatments are suitable for printing a particular ink to obtain a desired line width. ITO-coated glass slides with sheet resistances of 8 to 12 Contact angle measurements were carried using the sessile drop method with a Ramé-Hart Model 500 advanced contact angle goniometer/tensiometer. Advancing (θ Solid surface free energy components were calculated using the van Oss–Chaudhury–Good method from contact angle data of liquid triad consisting of two polar and one apolar liquid According to van Oss–Chaudhury–Good method, total surface free energy ( From this theory, interfacial energy of a solid in contact with liquid can be written as Combining the above equation with Young's equation gives the following expression: Surface morphologies of treated ITO samples were investigated using Zeiss Supra 40VP field-emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM) at 1 Two different nano-inks of mixed ligand (decanoic acid and hexanoic acid 1:1) capped silver nanoparticles were used for printing on glass and treated ITO surfaces using an aerosol jet printer purchased from Optomec® Inc., USA  The advancing contact angles of water on as received and AP 30 The effect of the AP treatment time was studied by varying the AP treatment time from 2 to 30 AP treatments increased the base component of surface free energy on both higher and lower energy regions of the ITO surface, which ultimately induced the highest polar component and the highest total surface free energy among all the surface treatments, as shown in  In general, surface roughness acts as an energy barrier as liquid spreads on the surface, and is partly responsible for the contact angle hysteresis The modification phenomena of surface free energy components can be used in printing applications. In order to verify that changes in the printed line width were the result of variation of the ITO surface free energy, lines of silver ink 1 were printed over the course of an hour. This data also allowed the stability of printing to be examined. Average line width of around 60 printed lines on glass was 104.4 From Eq. Eqs. As the surface free energy of treated ITO sample increases, contact angle decreases which ultimately enhances the ink wettability. When In addition to the substrate surface free energy and ink properties, printing parameters also influence the spreading of the printed ink. Aerosol jet printing is similar to ink jet printing, but not the same. In aerosol jet printing, atomization of the ink creates aerosol with 1 to 5 According to Schiaffino and Sonin Line widths of ink 1 at 75 The effect of surface treatments on solid surface free energy components and morphology of ITO samples was investigated. The morphology of printed patterns was studied with respect to the surface treatment. AP treated samples have the highest surface free energy, whereas DDTS SAM treated sample showed the lowest surface free energy. The change in the total surface free energy was originated from both the Lifshitz–van der Waals and Lewis acid–base components. After AP treatment, the ITO surface became more homogeneous and displayed increased surface free energy and decreased contact angle hysteresis. Surface roughness also decreased from 2.4 to 1.6 We would like to thank E. F. Duke for his help in doing SEM. We would like to thank K. W. Whites and A. Amert for their valuable suggestions in printing. This material is based upon work supported by the