The main goal of mastication is to prepare a food bolus suitable for deglutition. The bolus preparation consists in food breakdown and processing during which oral sensations are generated. This study was performed to examine the particle size distribution in the bolus formed by chewing 10 natural foods. Ten young subjects with normal dentition were asked to chew the food and to expectorate the bolus just before swallowing, while masticatory parameters were recorded. The particle size distribution of each bolus was evaluated by wet sieving. The number of cycles, sequence duration and masticatory frequency varied among subjects and foods. The particle size distributions differed among foods but were similar among subjects. The median particle size d
                     50 gave a range from 0.82 to 3.04mm allowing a food classification based on the state of the bolus. The d
                     50 value reflected the fracturability and may be useful to describe food behaviour in the mouth during bolus preparation.Food perception is classically defined in relation to the sensations experienced by the consumer whilst the food is being transformed in the oral cavity. The effects of mastication and salivation markedly change the texture of a food from the moment it is introduced in the oral cavity until it is swallowed. Throughout the formation of the food bolus, texture changes are permanently sensed by the mouth sensory system. During the masticatory act, sensations are generated in the mouth, a complete sensory organ, by the successive events involved in food transformation ( In the mouth, the perception of the characteristics of the food bolus has two main meanings: (i) theses characteristics generate gustatory and textural perceptions, helping to construct an overall appraisal, and Masticatory function is usually evaluated through granulometric bolus composition with a limited number of test foods. Peanuts, carrots, coffee beans, bread, almonds, and cheese are among the most common test foods chosen. These foods are, however, generally used alone and the granulometric features of their corresponding boluses cannot be compared due to methodological differences in the studies. In a recent study where six foods classified into two types, nuts and raw vegetables, were tested, the measurement of particle size indicated large differences in distributions between food types, while the same particle size characteristics were observed for foods of the same type ( Ten Caucasian subjects (6 female, 4 male), selected on the basis of strict dental criteria ( Ten foods of different texture, water or lipids content (peanuts, carrots, gherkins, stoned green olives, mushrooms, egg white, ham, chicken breast, emmental cheese and coconut) were studied ( Each subject attended five masticatory sessions spaced one week apart. Two foods were tested during each session. The order of presentation of five pairs of foods was the same for all the subjects but in each pair presented during the same session a random order was applied for each subject. Eight samples were prepared for each food. To begin a trial, a food sample was placed in the mouth by the subject who was instructed to close his or her mouth before starting to chew. Then, on a signal from the experimenter, the subject inserted the food between his or her teeth and began to chew. The first two samples were chewed and swallowed. The next two samples were chewed and expectorated after complete mastication just before the subject felt the need to swallow. These samples were used to train the subject to the “chew and spit” procedure (to identify swallowing threshold and to expectorate easily). In the same manner, the next four samples were chewed and expectorated, just before swallowing. These four samples were studied for both mastication variables and food bolus granulometry. They were treated as replicates. During these last four masticatory sequences, physiological variables of the masticatory act were collected by the experimenter, who timed the sequences (duration of the sequence The 400 boluses were collected (10 subjects During the experiments, the subjects were asked to chew in a usual manner. They had been instructed to eat a meal between one and two hours before the experiment to reduce variations in the desire to swallow. Informed consent was obtained from all the subjects after they had been given a full explanation of the goals and schedule of the study. This protocol was accepted by the local Ethics Committee. Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS The replicate effect could be neglected for further analyses since a one-way ANOVA, made for each of the three physiological variables measured for each food, indicated no difference between repetitions in all cases ( Comparison between foods for these physiological variables were presented in The total masses of the expectorated boluses produced by each of the four repetitions of chewing were not significantly different whatever the food ( The particle size distribution was significantly different between subjects ( The results can be expressed as the cumulative percentage of the bolus mass recovered in each sieve ( Correlation tests performed between the masticatory parameters (number of cycles, duration of mastication, masticatory frequency) and the particulate mass recovered on each sieve for each food showed that the number of cycles and the duration of the sequence were proportional to the mass recovered for sieve apertures smaller than 1.4 The masses of all the foods collected after mastication accounted for only a fraction of the initial mouthful, 40–70% of the initial mass of the food samples being lost, irrespective of food and subject. Intermediate swallowing probably accounted for this marked loss of particles. The mass loss may result from the transport of bolus fractions, and also from the liquid and juice released from the food and loaded with soluble components. According to several authors, intermediate swallowings, which occur in nearly 80% of masticatory sequences, are characterized by several displacements of food fractions to the oropharynx caused by tongue-palate contact during protraction of the tongue and hyoid ( A way to help overcome this difficulty is to use artificial foods. In numerous studies, a variety of both natural and artificial test foods has been used to determine masticatory performance ( It is well known that different bolus sizes could generate different oral-motor patterns during food reduction. For example, the number of chews needed increased with the mouthful or with the bolus weight ( Results show that different foods may require different chewing strategies, as the number of cycles and the sequence duration for food breakdown varied. The nature of the food and particularly the rheological properties influenced the masticatory process and the comminution mode. Previous results had shown that the particle size distribution varied with food type ( An increase in the number of masticatory cycles observed with an increase in food hardness has been extensively described. It seemed more appropriate and certainly more accurate to link the length of the masticatory sequence to the ease with which the food was processed and swallowed, since the overall sensed food behaviour in the mouth could serve as peripheral information to adjust the masticatory process. The values of the physiological parameters of mastication reflect a process of adaptation to the rheological properties of the food ( To link masticatory strategies to the physical state of the food bolus, the need arose to describe the food breakdown in the mouth. Extraction of a It appears from this study that the calculation of This study improves our understanding of the granulometric characteristics of food boluses obtained after mastication just before swallowing with different types of foods. The 10 foods studied gave boluses of widely ranging particle size distributions. Some foods were degraded into a majority of small particles (<2 We are indebted to Jean-François Martin (INRA), to Prof. Aublet-Cuvelier Bruno and to Dr. Ughetto Sylvie (University of Auvergne) for statistical analyses.