Anatase TiO2 powders have been subjected to mechanical treatment for selected time intervals. The mechanical processing induced a gradual microstructural refinement, accompanied by a two-stage phase transformation into TiO2 II phase and then rutile. Thin film electrodes were then prepared by depositing the processed powders on Ti supports from an organic suspension. The electrodes were successively exposed to irradiation with Hg lamps and the photoelectrochemical response of the powders evaluated in terms of efficiency of photocurrent generation. The experimental findings clearly show that the efficiency of the photoelectrochemical response drops as the duration of mechanical treatment increases. A suitably developed model indicates that the observed efficiency decrease is mostly due to the formation of nanostructured phases consequent to the mechanical deformation at impacts.Mechanical processing is well known to promote physical and/or chemical transformations in powders The accumulation of defects is favoured by the relatively low temperatures at which the mechanical treatment is carried out However, large contents of lattice defects can also be detrimental to the desired performance of a given material in a given process. An evident example is represented by the capability of semiconductors of generating photocurrent Elucidating the role of lattice defects in the performance of semiconductors is therefore a relevant objective for fundamental research in the field of photovoltaics and photocatalysis. Not only this could contribute to improve the basic knowledge in fields of such importance for the energetic future of mankind The present work represents a first attempt to correlate the content of lattice defects with the photoelectrochemical properties in semiconductors. The experimental activity focused on the behaviour and properties of TiO The details of experimental procedures as well as obtained results are described in the following. TiO Experiments employed high purity anatase powders. Handling procedures were performed inside a glove-box under inert Ar atmosphere with moisture and oxygen contents below 2 Mechanical treatment was carried out by operating the mill for selected time intervals at the end of which the vial was emptied and refilled with a new 8 The TiO The TiO The performances of electrodes prepared starting by powders mechanically treated for different times were compared by measuring the so-called incident photocurrent efficiency ( Analyses based on the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy were also carried out to gain information on the stability of the TiO The mechanical processing of the pure anatase powders results in a fast decrease of the average crystallite size Simultaneously to the microstructural refinement, though on longer time scales, the anatase undergoes the well-known two-stage phase transformation to rutile. The mass fractions The photoelectrochemical properties of TiO The experimental A reasonable connection between microstructural parameters, phase evolution and photoelectrochemical properties can be however found by suitably linking the different aspects in a single conceptual framework. This can be done by recalling first a few fundamental results from previous work regarding the evolution of microstructure and phases under mechanical processing conditions Consider a certain amount of powders trapped at collision. In general terms, a fraction of such powder will experience the critical loading conditions (CLCs) necessary to locally obtain a decrease of the crystallite size Based on analogous statistical considerations Under such conditions, the anatase phase can be regarded as consisting of two distinct mass fractions, namely the one with initial microstructure and the one with nanostructured features. Being Based on the considerations above, it is now reasonable to suppose that the electrochemical properties of each phase depend on its microstructure. Anatase, TiO The starting point for such model is that the efficiency of the overall photoelectrochemical response of TiO Electrochemical impedance analyses suggest that the The results of the best-fitting indicate that a rough model such as the one worked out in the present work is able to catch the fundamental features controlling the photoelectrochemical behaviour of powders subjected to mechanical treatment. At least as a first approximation, the efficiency of the photoelectrochemical response measured in terms of It is here worth noting that the lengths of the time periods of mechanical activation is intrinsically related to the processing conditions under which experiments are carried out. As extensively discussed in previous work The capability of Eq. The mechanical processing of TiO Financial support has been provided by the University of Cagliari, the University of Sassari and Sardegna Ricerche.