This research work demonstrates the use of fractional factorial experimental design technique for the novel synthesis of ordered mesoporous silica SBA-15 from the tailings slurry of a gold mine treatment plant. A two-level factorial design was employed to investigate the influence of five factors (weight ratio of NaOH/slurry, leaching time, stirring time, synthesis temperature, and synthesis time) on specific surface area (S
                     BET). The experimental design results show that only the weight ratio of NaOH/slurry influenced S
                     BET significantly and the obtained model predicts the S
                     BET as a function of the weight ratio of NaOH/slurry. The experimental values were in reasonable agreement with the predicted values. It was revealed that fractional factorial design is a suitable tool for investigating the effects of large number factors simultaneously, thus reducing the number of experiments required.In 1998, a turning point in the production of mesoporous materials was reached with the production of a variety of ordered mesoporous structures denoted as SBA by Zhao et al. Ordered mesoporous silica SBA-15 is synthesized by self-assembly of triblock copolymer template to form micelles and condensation of silica precursor onto these micelles under acidic mediums. An expensive silica sources such as tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS), fumed silica, silicon tetraethoxide, Some authors have recently investigated the conversion of coal fly ash into SBA-15 mesoporous silica Tailings slurry is the waste from gold mines which is used an alternative silica source in the synthesis of mesoporous materials due to having high content of SiO To the best of the authors’ knowledge, optimization of synthesis of SBA-15 from gold mine treatment tailings slurry has not previously been reported. In this study, we synthesized and characterized of ordered mesoporous silica SBA-15 using unpurified tailings slurry as a silica source. In addition, we applied two-level fractional factorial design with five variables that were considered to play a crucial role in the synthesis of SBA-15 in order to obtain ideal synthesis conditions. Gold mine tailings slurry was obtained from Bergama Ovacık Gold Mine Treatment Plant, Turkey. The slurry sample was dried at 105 The small-angle X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the samples were recorded on a Philips Panalytical X’Pert-Pro X-ray diffractometer, using Cu The preparation of the silica source from unpurified gold mine treatment plant tailings slurry by alkali fusion method has been reported previously. Different NaOH SBA-15 was synthesized using Pluronic 123 (P123) triblock copolymer as the structure-directing template and tailings slurry as the silica source. The given amount of P123 triblock copolymer was dissolved in 2 In order to determine the most suitable conditions for ordered SBA-15 mesoporous silica synthesis from tailings slurry, fractional factorial experimental design was applied to evaluate the preliminary significance of the factors, as well as the interactions between them. Fractional factorial design is used to decrease the number of experiments to a reasonable amount by eliminating the insignificant factors. Five factors, weight ratio of NaOH/slurry, leaching time, stirring time, synthesis time, and synthesis temperature were chosen as the control variables, with the response variables being the specific surface area ( All factors were evaluated at two levels, low and high. In addition, a triple replicate at the center point was included in the design. The reason of selection of The regression model for fractional factorial design relating the variables to the responses is given by the equation:  FTIR spectra of samples prepared under different experimental runs are shown in The SEM images of samples obtained following syntheses under different operating conditions are shown in According to these results, it was seen that the ordered SBA-15 mesoporous structure was only obtained from sample prepared at weight ratio of NaOH/slurry 1. The highest Si content was found in the extracted solution from NaOH/slurry ratio of 1 mentioned above. This Si content was sufficient for the cooperative self-assembly of silica precursor and triblock copolymer template to the ordered SBA-15 silica formation. Chandrasekar et al. The design matrix of coded values of the factors and the values of the responses for all experimental runs including replicates, are given in As can be seen in The relationship between response as The linear and interaction effects of the parameters can be approximated to a linear regression model using the normal least square technique Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to test how the experimental factors affect  A Pareto plot that visually displays the absolute values of the effects of the individual factors and interaction factors is illustrated in The main effect plots were generated to visualize the effect of each variable on the response ( The experimental model for response In order to confirm the experimental model, two different design matrices were built. Design analysis matrix and comparison of experimental and calculated response values are listed in When the results of the experimental design analysis were inspected, it was determined that the only effective parameter on the synthesis of SBA-15 from slurry is the weight ratio of NaOH/slurry. In the experimental design study, its levels were chosen according to the weight ratio of NaOH/bentonite in the synthesis of mesoporous Al-MCM-41 from bentonite The amounts of Si, Al, and Na in the extracted solution of prepared mixture at weight ratio of NaOH/slurry:0.8 were 24,080, 896, and 68,741 XRD results for the samples prepared at weight ratio of NaOH/slurry 0.8 are given in The only effective parameter was weight ratio of NaOH/slurry on the synthesis of SBA-15 from tailings slurry according to results of experimental design. Ordered mesoporous SBA-15 was observed at weight ratio of NaOH/slurry 1. To reduce cost of synthesis of SBA-15, most suitable synthesis conditions were selected as follows: weight ratio of NaOH/slurry 1, leaching time of 16 In this study, we report a novel synthesis of SBA-15 using gold mine tailings slurry as a cheap and environmentally friendly silica source. In order to evaluate the influence of variables on the synthesis of SBA-15 from tailings slurry, fractional factorial design was applied. The response (