SPH method was employed in this study to develop machining models to study the thermally assisted machining of Ti6Al4V process. Both 2D and 3D models were developed for investigations of chip formation and cutting force, respectively. Two sets of machining parameters under four different target initial workpiece temperatures were simulated. Corresponding thermally assisted machining experiments were conducted for the validation of the models. The influence of the initial workpiece temperature on the chip formation and cutting force was studied. The chip formation mechanism and its relationship with the cyclic cutting force were also discussed.Titanium alloys are widely used in many established and emerging industries owing to their superior properties such as high strength-to-weight ratio, the ability to retain that strength at high temperatures, and high corrosion resistance compared with other alloys. However, the machining cost of titanium alloys is very high and a lot of efforts have been made by researchers to improve the machinability of titanium alloys in an attempt to lower manufacturing costs to meet the increasing demand of titanium alloys. Some new machining technologies such as thermally assisted machining (TAM) have been developed to improve the machinability of titanium alloys Machining is a process with complex thermo-mechanical and highly dynamic features. Experimental studies alone have some difficulties in revealing the mechanisms behind removing the chip, especially in terms of the chip segmentation and cyclic cutting force phenomena during the machining process of difficult to machine materials. Thus, it is essential to develop a reliable numerical model in order to understand and optimize the machining process. Although there has been quite a bit of interest in applying TAM practice to machine titanium alloys in recent times, only little literature available that addresses the simulation of thermally assisted machining, most of which are about laser assisted machining. Germain The chip formation process is a large deformation process with complex physical and chemical features. The traditional finite element method has some difficulties in simulating the chip formation process such as mesh tangling and distortion. In recent years, some researchers have reported a form of machining model which adopted the smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH) Lagrangian method to simulate the metal cutting process. Applying SPH method to machining models involves several advantages compared to the traditional finite element method. First, the mesh-free SPH method does not have the mesh tangling and distortion problems which usually happen in traditional finite element analyses involving large deformation. Another advantage of SPH method is that it does not need to use chip separation criterion or predefine the cutting path to allow the chip separate from the workpiece, in SPH machining models, the chip will naturally separate from the workpiece, and the creation of the new free faces is directly managed by the SPH method. Limido et al. SPH method is a mesh-free Lagrangian numerical method originally developed in 1977 for astrophysics applications, and has since been applied in mechanics problems during the past three decades. SPH uses a set of particles to represent a continuum, material properties and state variables are approximated at these finite particles, which move with material deformation. Each particle interacts with all other particles that are within a given distance from it, the distance is usually assumed to be 2 Then, the smoothing function Normalization condition:  Delta function property:  Compact support condition: After several steps of derivation and by converting the continuous volume integrals to sums over discrete interpolation points, the equations can be expressed as follows: The SPH method is available in LS-DYNA and was used in this work to study thermally assisted machining of Ti6Al4V. However, in order to reduce the model size and shorten the computational time, the presenting models used SPH particles and traditional finite element simultaneously to model the workpiece. The SPH method in the frame of the LS-DYNA was applied to simulate the large deformation areas of the workpiece, the remaining low deformation areas of the workpiece and the cutting tool were modeled by the traditional finite element method. Both 2D and 3D coupled SPH-FE models were developed in order to study chip formation and cutting forces, respectively. Two sets of machining parameters over four different initial workpiece temperatures were simulated. Experimental results were used to validate the SPH models. The influence of the initial workpiece temperatures on the chip formation and the cutting forces were investigated. The chip formation mechanism and its relationship with the cyclic cutting forces were also discussed in this study. Both 2D and 3D thermally assisted machining of Ti6Al4V alloy models were developed in the general purpose finite element software package LS-DYNA. The 2D model was used to investigate the chip formation process while 3D model was used to study the cutting force. For each cutting trial, the machining parameters in both 2D and 3D models were the same. Details of the machining parameters and the cutting tools are given in The 2D thermally assisted machining model was developed first. The turning process was simplified into orthogonal cutting. The workpiece in the simulation was divided into two parts. The upper part (chip part) where the chip would be generated and large deformation would occur was modeled by SPH particles while the bottom part was modeled by traditional finite elements. The inter-particular distance between the SPH particles was fixed at a very small value (about 10 This simulation setup offers the capability to solve large deformation problems without having an extremely large computational time which is always an issue for SPH metal cutting models A node to solid contact algorithm was adopted in this model, which is a contact type used particularly for SPH particles with solid elements using the plane stress, plane strain or axisymmetric formulation. The 2D node to solid contact was used for the cutting tool contacting the SPH particles while the 2D node to solid tied contact was selected for the contact interface between the SPH part and the bottom part of the workpiece to eliminate the gap between these two parts. The nodes on the bottom surface of the workpiece were fixed in all directions so that the entire workpiece would not move during the machining process. A prescribed motion was given to the cutting tool to simulate the movement of the cutting tool. Workpiece material in the simulation was Ti6Al4V alloy, its material properties were allocated to the SPH part and the bottom workpiece part, details are listed in In machining models, accurate and reliable flow stress models are considered as highly necessary to represent workpiece materials’ constitutive behaviour, the constitutive material model reported by Johnson and Cook In the 2D machining model, the chip part was modeled by one layer of SPH particles, and the “thickness” of this layer cannot be defined by an arbitrary value. Therefore, the volume of the material removed by the cutting tool during the machining process cannot be accurately presented in a 2D machining model. Consequently, 2D SPH/FE machining models are unable to predict the cutting forces correctly, thus 3D coupled SPH-FE machining models were developed in this study to investigate the cutting forces. The basic setup of the 3D machining models was the same as 2D models. The workpiece in the 3D models was divided into two parts as well. The chip part where chip would be generated and large deformation would occur was modeled by SPH particles while the bottom part was modeled by traditional finite elements. However, in order to reduce the model size to acquire an acceptable computational time, the inter-particular distance between the SPH particles in 3D models is much longer than that in 2D models. Detailed cutting tool and workpiece geometries are shown in Thermally assisted machining experiments were conducted to validate the simulation Two turning experiments with different cutting parameters were tested as per A 3-component force dynamometer (Kistler 9257A) was used to measure the cutting forces during these experiments. As shown in The chip formation result predicted by the 2D simulation of cutting trial 2 giving 20 Similar chip formation results can be found in simulations of cutting trial 1, and changing of the initial workpiece temperature does not affect this result in both cutting trials either. The reason for the constant chip formation predictions when changing the machining conditions might be a result from the same tool geometry and the relatively close cutting speed of each simulation, which are suggested by many researchers to be the major factors of chip morphology Cutting forces predicted by the 3D coupled SPH-FE models shown in As can be seen in In order to study the relationship between the chip segmentation and the cyclic cutting force, the time interval of the simulation needs to be relatively small to produce useful data for analyzing. 3D models always have a larger model size than 2D models and subsequently require a much longer computational time. Therefore, 2D coupled SPH-FE model with a 0.01 Part of the detailed cyclic cutting force predicted by the 2D machining model is shown in These time points include 0.34 The cutting forces are higher at 0.34 By looking at In this study, SPH method was employed to develop coupled SPH-FE models to study the thermally assisted machining of Ti6Al4V process. Both 2D and 3D models were developed for investigations of chip formation and cutting force, respectively. Two sets of machining parameters under four different target initial workpiece temperatures were simulated. Experimental results were used to validate the SPH models. The influence of the initial workpiece temperature on the chip formation and cutting force was studied. The chip formation mechanism and its relationship with the cyclic cutting force were also discussed. The main findings of this work are: Simulation chip formation results are in very good agreement with the experimental results. However, either the simulation results or the experimental results indicated any regular pattern between the chip formation and the initial workpiece temperature. The chip formation process predicted by the simulation showed there were crack initiation and propagation happened inside the primary deformation zone on the chip, which could be the main cause of chip segmentation during machining of titanium alloys. Cutting forces predicted by machining models showed excellent correlation with the experimental data, and both simulation results and the experimental results indicated that increase the initial workpiece temperature will significantly reduce the cutting forces. Study of the relationship between the chip segmentation and the cyclic cutting force indicated that the chip segmentation is the main cause of the cyclic cutting force. Higher cutting force occurs when a saw-tooth is fully generated and the shear stress is localized at the tool rake face side in the primary deformation zone, and the cutting force will start to drop when the crack propagation and chip shearing start. The authors acknowledge the support of the Queensland Centre for Advanced Material Processing and Manufacturing. The authors would also like to acknowledge the support of the Defence Material Technology Centre.