In this work we use fractal statistics in order to decipher the mechanisms acting during explosive volcanic eruptions by studying the grain size distribution (GSD) of natural pyroclastic-fall deposits. The method was applied to lithic-rich proximal deposits from a stratigraphic section of the Cretaio Tephra eruption (Ischia Island, Italy). Analyses were performed separately on bulk material, juvenile, and lithic fraction from each pyroclastic layer. Results highlight that the bulk material is characterized by a single scaling regime whereas two scaling regimes, with contrasting power-law exponents, are observed for the juvenile and the lithic fractions. On the basis of these results, we infer that the bulk material cannot be considered as a good proxy for deducing eruption dynamics because it is the result of mixing of fragments belonging to the lithic and juvenile fraction, both of which underwent different events of fragmentation governed by different mechanisms. In addition, results from fractal analyses of the lithic fraction suggest that it likely experienced a fragmentation event in which the efficiency of fragmentation was larger for the coarser fragments relative to the finer ones. On the contrary, we interpret the different scaling regimes observed for the juvenile fraction to be due to sequential events of fragmentation in the conduit, possibly enhanced by the presence of lithic fragments in the eruptive mixture. In particular, collisional events generated increasing amounts of finer particles modifying the original juvenile GSDs and determining the development of two scaling regimes in which the finer fragments record a higher efficiency of fragmentation relative to the coarser ones. We further suggest that in lithic-rich proximal fall deposits possible indications about the original GSDs of the juvenile fraction might still reside in the coarser particles fraction.The grain size distribution (GSD) generated by volcanic explosions is related to the efficiency of the magma fragmentation (e.g. Different types of statistical distributions have been used to characterize the GSD of volcanic deposits: Several studies on fragmentation have shown that rock fragment size distributions can be approximated by a power-law distribution ( In this work, we use fractal statistics to investigate the fundamental mechanisms acting during magma fragmentation in the course of explosive volcanic eruptions by studying GSDs of natural pyroclastic-fall deposits. The method is applied to study lithic-rich proximal deposits from a representative stratigraphic section of the Cretaio Tephra eruption (Ischia Island, Italy). We collect GSDs for the bulk material (BM), juvenile (JV), and lithic (LC) fraction from each tephra layer and apply fractal fragmentation theory. Different scaling behaviors, characterized by different values of fractal dimension of fragmentation ( The Cretaio Tephra (1860 EUA corresponds to the basal bed, identified as an ash-surge deposit ( In this work we focus on EUC and EUD, which correspond to the magmatic phase of the eruption. We do not consider EUF, as it is topped by a soil and therefore erosion processes and bioturbation might have perturbed the original grain size distribution. Five samples were collected from the EUC and three from the EUD, and analyzed as reported below. Samples were placed in an oven at 60 For each layer, a mass of ca. 250 From the image of each particle, the software measured its length and width. Then, assuming the geometric shape of an elongated rotational ellipsoid, it calculated the volume of each particle. Results were delivered as volume percentage (vol%) on a discrete range of particle sizes with bins of approximately 0.2 Ф. We merged several consecutives fractions to obtain a consistent 0.5 Ф scale from − Results from DIA were converted to wt%-based GSDs ( Fractal analysis has been applied to describe a wide variety of natural fragmented materials (  The volume of a particle of size Substitution of Eqs. Therefore, The analyses explained above were performed on a data set of 8 samples, including BM, JV and LC fractions. The Approximate GSDs descriptions of the pyroclastic samples have been obtained using the parameters defined by Values of σ Md Moving to the top of EUC, GSDs exhibit a progressive change from relatively good to moderately sorted ( Md The sorting of GSDs for LC samples, in general, does not correlate with stratigraphic height for EUC and EUD and values of σ The GSDs of the samples from the fall deposits were evaluated for their fractal character ( The plots presented in The plots of Power-law fitting of BM datasets provides values of Two scaling regimes characterize the grain size distribution for all the JV samples, with the kink in the range 1.0–2.83 Results from the fitting indicate that the slope ( All the members show a very similar behavior in their fractal character, with one scaling regime extending from the finest sizes to 4.0 Results from the linear fitting procedure indicate that, contrary to the JV fraction, value of the slope ( Visual inspection of the graphs in  As for the BM, the fact that grain size distributions can be quantified using a single power-law argues in favor of the hypothesis that a single fragmentation mechanism might explain the observed GSDs. The variation of Contrary to BM, lithic and juvenile fractions show two scaling regimes, thus reflecting the possible action of different fragmentation mechanisms/events that acted to generate the observed GSDs. In particular, the finer and coarser particle size ranges for LC and JV (LC According to the above discussion, it is clear therefore that, depending on the type of fraction that is analyzed (BM, JV or LC), different and controversial information can be derived from the GSDs. In the following discussion we attempt to link the observed complexity of grain size distributions to the possible processes that, during eruptive activity, might have operated to generate the different scaling regimes. In order to do this, the basic mechanisms developing fractal size distributions need to be taken into account. The conceptual model used to derive Eqs. The fractal analysis performed on the lithic fraction shows that the probability of fragmentation ( Considering the above results and discussion, the question arises as to which processes may have been responsible for this variability of As for the variation of fractal dimension of fragmentation of JV and LC, they could potentially carry different information about the fragmentation processes that generated them. In fact, the JV populations arise from fragmentation of the magma, due to a decompression event, and their sizes and shapes should always be sensitive indicators of eruptive processes ( In the following we attempt to explain the different populations and scaling regimes observed for JV and LC fractions according to two different fragmentation mechanisms. The results for the lithic fraction display a probability of fragmentation ( As discussed above, the probability of fragmentation ( From the above discussion it is clear that different events of fragmentation, characterized by different efficiency, are needed to explain the scaling behavior of the JV; these events must have taken place syn-eruptively, prior to juvenile deposition. Results from The kink in the juvenile fractal distributions at 2 In this work we used fractal statistics of GSDs of natural pyroclast deposits to decipher the mechanisms acting during explosive volcanic eruptions. The method was applied to lithic-rich proximal deposits from a representative stratigraphic section of the Cretaio Tephra eruption (Ischia Island, Italy). The GSDs for the bulk material, juvenile, and lithic fraction from each pyroclastic layer yield different scaling behaviors, having different fractal dimensions ( According to our interpretation, the following conclusions can be drawn: in lithic-rich pyroclastic deposits the bulk material extracted from pyroclastic deposits cannot be considered as a proxy to infer the mechanisms acting during the development of an eruption and, therefore, it is not representative of eruption dynamics. In fact, the bulk material is a mixture of fragments belonging to the lithic and the juvenile fraction, both of which underwent different events of fragmentation, governed by different mechanisms; the lithic fraction likely experienced a solid state fragmentation event, in which the coarser and finer fractions were subjected to different mechanisms that generated different particle size distributions at different length scales. This remained fossilized in the lithic GSDs as two different scaling regimes in which the efficiency of fragmentation was larger for the coarser fraction relative to the finer one; the juvenile GSDs, after the initial explosion of the magma at the fragmentation level, underwent sequential events of fragmentation in the conduit, a process possibly enhanced by the presence of lithic fragments constituting the eruption mixture. Collisional events generated increasing amount of finer particles, modifying the original GSDs. The result, as observed in the studied outcrop, is the development of two scaling regimes in which the finer fraction was characterized by a higher efficiency of fragmentation relative to the coarser one; possible indications about the original GSDs of the juvenile fraction might still reside in their coarser fractions. As such, this fraction might be used to reconstruct eruption dynamics and its time development during the course of the eruption. The results and conclusions arising from this work need to be thoroughly tested through the study of additional natural pyroclastic deposits to check for the presence of different scaling regimes in the different components (lithics and juveniles) that might indicate the occurrence of the fragmentation events and dynamics suggested above. Along with the study of natural outcrops, new experiments need to be designed (for example using the fragmentation bomb; e.g. Avoiding doing so, the use of natural pyroclastic deposits to infer eruption mechanisms and dynamics, especially in the proximal facies where the amount of the lithic fraction tends to be abundant, remains elusive. This research was funded by the  Supplementary data to this article have been provided. This material is intended to show the influence of largest- and smallest-scale data points in the estimation of