Ethnopharmacological relevance
                  Osteoporosis is a chronic epidemic which can leads to enhanced bone fragility and consequent an increase in fracture risk. Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) formulas have a long history of use in the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis. Antiosteoporotic TCM formulas have conspicuous advantage over single drugs. Systematic data mining of the existing antiosteoporotic TCM formulas database can certainly help the drug discovery processes and help the identification of safe candidates with synergistic formulations. In this review, the authors summarize the clinical use and animal experiments of TCM formulas and their mechanism of action, and discuss the potential antiosteoporotic activity and the active constituents of commonly used herbs in TCM formulas for the therapy of osteoporosis.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  The literature was searched from Medline, Pubmed, ScienceDirect, Spring Link, Web of Science, CNKI and VIP database from 1989 to 2015, and also collected from Chinese traditional books and Chinese Pharmacopoeia with key words such as osteoporosis, osteoblast, osteoclast, traditional Chinese medicine formulas to identify studies on the antiosteoporotic effects of TCM formulas, herbs and chemical constituents, and also their possible mechanisms.
               
                  Results
                  Thirty-three TCM formulas were commonly used to treat osteoporosis, and showed significant antiosteoporotic effects in human and animal. The herb medicines and their chemical constituents in TCM formulas were summarized, the pharmacological effects and chemical constituents of commonly used herbs in TCM formulas were described in detail. The action mechanisms of TCM formulas and their chemical constituents were described. Finally, the implication for the discovery of antiosteoporotic leads and combinatory ingredients from TCM formulas were prospectively discussed.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Clinical practice and animal experiments indicate that TCM formulas provide a definite therapeutic effect on osteoporosis. The active constituents in TCM formulas are diverse in chemical structure, and include flavonoids, lignans, saponins and iridoid glycosides. Antiosteoporotic mechanism of TCM formulas and herbs involves multi regulatory pathways, such as Wnt/β-catenin, BMP/Smad, MAPK pathway and RANKL/OPG system. Phytochemicals from TCM formulas and their compositional herb medicines offer great potential for the development of novel antiosteoporotic drugs. The active ingredients in TCM formulas can be developed in combination as potent drugs, which may exhibit better antiosteoporotic effects compared to the individual compound.Osteoporosis, a chronic epidemic, is characterized by low bone mass and microarchitectural deterioration of bone tissues, leading to enhanced bone fragility and consequent increase in fracture risk ( Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) has been used in China and other Asian countries for thousands of years ( The literatures were searched from Medline, Pubmed, ScienceDirect, Spring Link, Web of Science, CNKI and VIP database from 1989 to 2015, and also collected from Chinese traditional books and Chinese Pharmacopoeia to identify studies on the antiosteoporotic effects of TCM formulas, herbs and chemical constituents, and also their possible mechanisms. The following keywords were used for the search: osteoporosis, osteoblast, osteoclast, and traditional Chinese medicine formulas. All of these keywords were searched for each plant and its constituents. All published studies in English or Chinese language were included in the review. The literature search was conducted by both authors independently, with no inconsistencies between the two authors. The review included the following steps: (1) the TCM formulas for the treatment of osteoporosis in human and animal were reviewed using the available literature. (2) The herb medicine and their chemical constituents in TCM formulas were summarized. (3) The possible mechanism of action of TCM formulas and their chemical constituents were reviewed. Osteoporosis are caused by multiple factors, such as estrogen deficiency, aging, chemical agents and decreased mechanical loading, and afflicted patients should be treated with different TCM formulas according to different syndromes. Thirty-three TCM formulas have been reported in ethnopharmacological studies for their potential benefits in osteoporosis treatment including 5 classic formulas, 23 empirical formulas, and 5 Chinese patent medicines. Multiple references were consulted for detailed information on research status of major TCM formulas which are discussed below. The classic formulas which have been recorded in ancient medicine books have definitive efficacy, and often are standardized in preparation using traditional technique according to traditional Chinese medicine theory, and also commercially available. The formulas, such as Qing E Wan, Er Zhi Wan (EZW), Zuo Gui Wan (ZGW), You Gui Wan (YGW) and Liu Wei Di Huang Wan (LW) are used to treat osteoporosis through reinforcing the kidney, and clinicians can usually remove or add one or more herbs, and adjust their dosage in the prescription according to differentiation of the patient’s physical condition. The ingredients, recorded literature, efficacy and indication, usage and dosage of classic formulas for the treatment of osteoporosis are shown in Empirical formulas, which are derived from a summary of clinician's experience in long-term medical practice, has definite efficacy leading to a standard formula composition. These formulas are also standardized in preparation by investigator, but are not permitted to sell in market, and only used for treatment disease in the institute of investigator. The commonly used empirical formulas for the treatment of osteoporosis include Gu Song Kang, Er Xian Decoction (EXD), Fu Fang Lu Rong Jian Gu Jiao Nang (LRJG) etc. The empirical formulas for the treatment of osteoporosis are shown in Chinese patent medicines, which are approved by the State Food and Drug Administration of China, are standardized in preparation by pharmaceutical company, and are commercially available in market. They are often used alone or in combination with chemical drugs to treat various diseases. Chinese patent medicines for the treatment of osteoporosis include Xian Ling Gu Bao Jiao Nang (XLGB), Gu Shu Kang Jiao Nang (GSK), Gu Song Bao Jiao Nang, Hu Gu Jiao Nang and Jin Tian Ge Jiao Nang (JTG). These TCM formulas have the characteristic of fixed composition and dosage and no herbs can be either added or removed from the formulas. The Chinese patent medicines for the treatment of osteoporosis are shown in According to the guidelines for clinical evaluation of agents used in the prevention and treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis approved by the Food and Drug Administration, the clinical observation for anti-osteoporotic drugs should determine BMD and the serum biochemical parameters, such as vitamin D, urine hydroxyproline, Ca etc, and in double-blind, placebo-controlled trail for 12 months in phase Ⅱ clinical study. Based on the characteristics of TCM formulas, Food and Drug Administration of China suggested that clinical observation of TCM drugs for reducing fracture incidence should last more than for 3 years, and that for relieving or alleviating the clinical symptoms should last for 6 months, while the indexes of effectiveness included bone mineral density and bone turnover markers. The clinical investigations showed that TCM formulas are effectiveness in preventing and treating osteoporosis, especially in alleviation of the pain symptoms. However, there are still many problems in clinical trials. For example, the most of reported clinical investigations are general clinical observations instead of application of RCT designed clinical studies. The method of randomization was often inappropriately described; the sample sizes are 50–100 patients, and are less than 200 in most of studies. Over half did not report and analysis side effects. The duration of clinical trials often last 3–6 months, did not reach to the requirements of 6 months or 3 years. Most of these trials combined with other interventions, such as calcitonin, calcium preparation; the efficacy of TCM formulas on osteoporosis is not confirmed. Some clinical studies about primarily osteoporosis did not distinguish and assess the effects on postmenopausal and senile osteoporosis, respectively. The indexes of effectiveness focused on bone mineral density, and lack of biochemical parameters in serum and urine. Therefore, in clinical study researchers should adhere to the guidelines of FDA and SFDA of China to design experimental therapeutic efficacy parameters, observational period, sample size, and also including random and double-blinded control to improve and standardize clinical trials of TCM formulas for the treatment of osteoporosis. The animal models that have been established and used to understand the pathogenesis of osteoporosis and for the preclinical evaluation of drugs include castrated osteoporotic models, osteoporotic models caused by chemical drugs and disuse osteoporotic models. The antiosteoporotic effects of TCM formulas in animal experiments were summarized in The ovariectomized rat is the most common used animal model in the study of anti-osteoporotic medications. Ovariectomy (OVX) leads to a rapid bone loss up to 100 days. The mechanism of bone loss currently accepted for the estrogen-deficient rat is an imbalance in bone turnover, i. e., bone resorption exceeds bone formation. This model mimics postmenopausal cancellous bone loss when examined over relatively short periods of time ( Glucocoroticoids reduce bone density by diminishing intestinal calcium absorption, increasing renal clearance of calcium, and sex steroid deficiency. Furthermore, previous studies showed that glucocoroticoids exert pro-survival effect on osteoclasts, inbihit recruitment and activity of osteoblasts, and induce apoptosis of osteoblasts and osteocytes, leading to reduction in bone formation and increased bone resorption ( Retinoic acids (RA), major oxidative metabolites of vitamin A, play a regulatory role in many key processes, such as inhibition of cell proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, shaping of the embryo, and organogenesis. With regard to osteoblastic cells, RA induces differentiation in primary cultures of both mouse and human osteoblasts, while increase the activity of osteoclasts ( The disuse osteoporosis refers to bone mass decrements under conditions of decreased mechanical loading, including decreased ground force reaction, muscular contraction, and microgravity-related bone loss in astronauts after space flights. The aetiology, pathophysiology, and resultant pathology of disuse osteoporosis differ from those of primary osteoporosis. The resulting bone loss from diminished weight bearing has been generated in animal models by nerve sectioning, tenotomy, casting of limbs, leg bandaging, internal joint fixation, external joint fixation, chair immobilization and spaceflight. Most studies reported a significant reduction of mineralization and histomorphometric parameters towards osteoporosis. The bone loss due to immobilization is apparent locally but not systemically, and therefore, is not appropriate to simulate human osteoporosis ( In summary, the investigations of TCM formulas on osteoporotic model animals are mainly the search for new drugs or further proving the efficacy. However, these animal models are not totally consistent with human osteoporosis, and still need improvement. On the one hand, traditional Chinese medicine thinks that kidney governs bone, and primary osteoporosis is caused by deficiency of kidney and function disturbance of hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. However, osteoporotic animal models commonly used in the research of TCM formulas does not associate with kidney deficiency, and the pharmacological parameters also does not reflect the alteration in function of hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. On the other hand, the kidney deficiency in TCM includes two aspects of yin and yang, but there is no corresponding animal model to reflect the characteristic of kidney yin or yang deficiency. There is no discrimination between the reinforcing kidney yin and yang formulas in the treatment of osteoporosis. Therefore, osteoporotic animal model reflecting TCM yin and yang deficiency syndrome should be established, and used to investigate the antiosteoporotic effects of TCM formulas. A wealth of information indicates that TCM formulas for the therapy of osteoporosis contains a variety of herbal medicine, which can be divided into 3 categories based on their action in the formula: (1) replenishing kidney herb medicine, which commonly produces the marked effect; (2) strengthening spleen herb medicine; (3) activating blood circulation and dissipating blood stasis. There are more than 20 commonly used herbal medicines occurring in the antiosteoporotic formula. Their chemical constituents and pharmacological activities are summarized in Some important antiosteoporotic traditional Chinese medicine, including The bark of The total lignans extracted from The root of The root of The root of The fruit of The dried root of  The dried root of   The dry seed of The fruit of The research conducted over the years implies that the cause of osteoporosis is predominantly driven by the disorders of bone metabolism, of which the imbalance between bone formation and bone resorption play a major role. Bone formation, primarily mediated by osteoblasts, and resorption which is predominantly depended on the function of osteoclasts, is a balanced and continuous process. The activation of bone cells in bone remodeling process is regulated by multiple pathways that are fundamental in the development of therapy for osteoporosis, including the Wnt/β-catenin pathway, the PTH pathway, the BMP signaling pathway, the RANK/RANKL/OPG system and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. The Wnt/β-catenin pathway is known to be an important modulator of osteoblast function and bone formation. Wnt is the member of highly conserved secreted glycoprotein family, rich in cystein residue and is divided into two classes: canonical Wnts (wnt1, wnt3a) and non-canonical Wnts (wnt5a). This pathway is triggered by binding of canonical with frizzled (FZD) and LDL receptor related proteins (LRPs) which promote the phosphorylation and inactivation of glycogensynthase kinase 3 β (GSK3β) and prevents the degradation of β-catenin as well as subsequent translocation into the nucleus where it forms a complex with a T-cell factor to induce the transcription of osteoblastic genes ( The MARK includes the extracellular signal-related kinases (ERKs), p38 and c-Jun N-terminal kinases, and contributes to cell morphogenesis, kinesis, apoptosis, proliferation, differentiation, growth and other physiological process ( BMP, which is pleiotropic cytokines belonging to the TGF-β superfamily, display osteogenic properties. Runx2, as a transcription factor required for osteoblastogenesis. BMP binds heterodimeric receptors to activate Smad proteins, which transactivate osteoblastogenic genes either directly or via Runx2 ( One of the most critical pathways in the osteoblast-osteoclast interaction scheme is the RANKL-OPG relationship. Receptor activator of NF-B (nuclear factor-κB) ligand is a key factor stimulating the differentiation and activation of osteoclasts, and therefore, is essential for bone remodeling ( The mitogen-activated protein kinases, the family of secondary messengers that convey signals from the cell surface to the nucleus (  EXD is composed of six herbal medicines, with TCM formulas not only reduce bone loss by decreasing bone resorption and increasing bone formation through multi-component and multi-targets, but also regulate the body's function in overall and relieve the pain in back and lumbago. The herbal medicine that possess activity of replenishing kidney are often shown to have estrogen-like, antioxidant activity or regulating the function of hypothalamus-pituitary axis to enhance the estrogen level in serum, and the herbal medicine that reinforce spleen can intensify the effects of tonifying kidney, and herbal medicine activating blood can help active chemical constituents to arrive at the skeleton site and regulate bone metabolism. Furthermore, TCM formulas modulate bone metabolism networks modestly and then alleviate symptom of osteoporosis at low concentration through exerting synergistic effects of multiple component. Therefore, rationally designed TCM formula also can be considered as an option for multitarget therapeutic and prophylactic applications. Development of standardized, synergistic, safe and effective TCM formula with robust scientific evidence can offer faster and more economical alternatives. Aging, estrogen deficiency, chemical drugs, and decreased mechanical loading may cause bone loss leading to osteoporosis. The corresponding animal models are respectively castrated osteoporotic models, osteoporotic models caused by drugs and disused osteoporotic models. The investigations of TCM formulas on osteoporotic animals focus on osteoporotic rats induced by ovariectomy, glucocoroticoids and retinoic acid, and lack other osteoporotic animal, such as disuse model. The determined parameters in animal experiments did not reflect the action characteristic of TCM formulas. Therefore, some novel TCM formulas should be developed and studied in animal models, such as disuse osteoporotic rats, some specific parameters that are associated with animal model should be analyzed to highlight the antiosteoporotic characteristic of TCM formulas. Antiosteoporotic effects of TCM formulas are attributed to active chemical constituents of their herbs. These active constituents are diverse in chemical structure, including flavonoids, saponin, lignans and coumarins, and have the potential to be developed as antiosteoporotic leads. Hence, phytochemicals from TCM formulas and the composition of their herbs is of great potentials for the development of novel antiosteoporotic drugs. There is some accumulated evidence of the value of TCM in the treatment of osteoporosis. EXD, a TCM formula is composed of Compared with chemical drugs, TCM formulas have the advantage of fewer side effects, are relatively cheap, and suitable for long-term use. A mass of clinical practice and animal experiment shows that TCM formulas can not only repair bone microarchitecture, increase bone mass, improve bone biomechanical properties, but also can reduce or eliminate the lumbar debility, back pain and other symptoms ( None of the authors has any conflicts of interest to declare. This study was supported by the