Conventional cation exchange resin catalysts, used in the phenyl xylyl ethane (PXE) synthesis was found to deactivate after a few cycles. In the present study efforts were made to determine the concentration of residual double bonds of styrene-divinylbenzene based ion exchange resin catalyst. Bromine value of 6–7 was obtained for Indion-130 and Amberlyst-15. An alternate catalyst based on styrenated phenol and formaldehyde which does not use conventional vinylic chemistry for polymer formation was developed. PXE synthesis was explored using these new catalysts. An improvement in the catalyst performance in PXE synthesis was observed, compared to conventional catalysts. Reusability and temperature stability of the new catalysts have been verified by carrying out esterification of phthalic anhydride with 2-ethyl hexanol.The alkylation of Yadav and Dixit have reported that Amberlyst-15 used in the PXE synthesis deactivated after four cycles and was not reusable The presence of residual double bonds arising from the difference in reactivity of the two double bonds of divinyl benzene (DVB) has been reported by Guyot In the present study efforts were made to determine the concentration of residual double bonds of conventional catalysts. An attempt has been made to develop an alternate catalyst based on a system which does not use conventional vinylic chemistry for polymer formation. Matrices other than styrene-DVB were considered to avoid grafting of the styrene to the catalyst surface. The selected polymer was based on phenol and formaldehyde. But the sulfonated phenol-based catalysts suffer from the draw backs such as low hydrolytic stability and low acidity. In the present study an alternate catalyst was developed with silica support and styrene substituted phenol formaldehyde based polymeric matrix. Using these new catalysts PXE synthesis was explored and the results compared with that using conventional acid catalysts. Commercial phenol was obtained from s.d. Fine Chemicals. Formaldehyde, methanol, styrene, hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide and oxalic acid were obtained from Loba chemie. The extent of unsaturation of conventional catalysts Amberlyst-15, Indion-130 was determined by bromination methods using bromine in suitable solvent. The sample along with the brominating reagent was kept overnight in a stoppered Erlenmeyer flask. To the mixture 10% potassium iodide solution was added and titrated with 0.1 N sodium thiosulfate solution to the starch end-point. A blank run was also carried out and bromine value was calculated as grams of bromine consumed per 100 grams of sample. The quantity of brominating reagent and bromination time was optimized. Dehydrobromination method was developed for finding the correction for substitution reaction. Substitution to the aromatic ring along with addition to the unsaturation is a major possibility with chemical bromination method which may lead to higher values The preparation of the silica support has been described in the previous work The reactions involved in the catalyst preparation are substituted phenol synthesis and condensation polymerisation with formaldehyde. The first step of the reaction, The second step of catalyst preparation was synthesis of trimethylol phenol from phenol and formaldehyde as shown in The third stage in the synthesis is as shown in    Required quantity of The conversion of styrene to PXE was found out by gas chromatography (Model: MAK-Analytica 911) using flame ionisation detector. For analysis, a S.S column (4 m×2 mm) packed with 10% SE-30 on chromosorb W was used. Synthetic mixtures were used for calibration. The catalytic activity of the sample was investigated using simple system of esterification. The esterification of phthalic anhydride with 2-ethyl hexanol (2-EHA), in presence of xylene which aids in the removal of water formed in the reaction, was used as a model reaction to study high temperature stability of the catalyst. The experiments were carried out in a round bottom flask of capacity 250 ml. The flask was equipped with a stuffing box and a condenser through which cooling water was circulated. The xylene and water being distilled out were condensed and collected in a Dean and Stark apparatus. The glass reactor was kept in constant temperature bath maintained at the desired temperature. In the glass reactor phthalic anhydride and 2-ethyl hexanol were first heated to 433 K and then the catalyst was added. The reaction was carried out for 4 h. At the end of the reaction the remaining xylene was distilled out. All the reactions were carried out at 10% (w/w) loading of catalyst. The mole ratio of phthalic anhydride to 2-ethyl hexanol used was 1:2. The percentage conversion was determined by determining the acid value of the dioctyl phthalate. The unsaturation determination studies of standard catalysts, Amberlyst-15 and Indion-130 have been carried out by chemical bromination methods. It gave quantitative idea of the double bond present in the final catalyst. The different parameters such as type and quantity of brominating reagent as well as bromination time were optimized. The two different brominating reagents used, were bromine in carbon tetrachloride and in acetic acid. The effect of brominating reagent on the bromine value are shown in The reaction time was also varied from 1 to 20 h. As shown in One simple way to distinguish the addition and substitution bromination is detection of by-product HBr. In these experiments, determination of liberated HBr led to inconclusive results. Alternate approach of dehydrobromination, applicable to only aliphatic part was, therefore, adopted. To distinguish the substitution and addition, the brominated resins were subjected to alkaline dehydrobromination, by refluxing with 10% sodium hydroxide (NaOH) solution and the bromine content of the samples before and after the treatment was determined by elemental analysis. On treatment with alkali under the reaction conditions, the possible reactions are dehydrobromination of the brominated product along with the formation of the acetylenic bond as proposed in Phenol and formaldehyde based ion exchange catalysts are primitive among condensation type. Amphoteric ion exchangers are prepared by polycondensation of phenolic compounds with formaldehyde. Kaczvinsky et al. developed porous ion exchange polymers by introducing template during condensation polymerisation In acidic pH, styrene substitutes with phenol as shown in The condensation reaction with formaldehyde proceeds similar to the mechanism of conventional phenol-formaldehyde resin formation and it is shown in The polymerisation step is followed by sulfonation with chlorosulfonic acid in ethylene dichloride solvent. The sulfonic acid groups can be substituted only to the available para position of the styrenated phenol as shown in The new catalyst has the advantage of good thermal stability, as proved by the esterification reaction of phthalic anhydride with 2-ethyl hexanol. The poor mechanical strength of the silica gel support precludes its use in stirred reactor as it would lead to excessive comminution of the catalyst particles. Reactors with external recycle of the reacting medium may be required to operate the catalyst in the fixed bed mode to reduce mechanical damage. Disposal of the catalyst after exhaustion does not create any problem as by contacting the used catalyst with a strong alkali, silica dissolves leaving behind only the organic mass which needs to be disposed off by suitable means. The alkylation of ortho xylene with styrene is shown in Yadav and Dixit Conventional catalysts such as Amberlyts-15 are based on styrene-DVB backbone. The chemistry of copolymerisation of styrene and DVB is a complex process and has been studied in detail by many authors. Guyot has explained the effect of overall conversion of styrene monomer on percentage consumption of residual double bonds during the polymerisation of styrene and DVB It is our contention that some portion of this residual double bonds may be embedded inside the core, but the remaining portion must project from the surface. The extent of residual double bonds available was calculated by chemical methods was about 6–7% as shown in The chances of reactions of these residual double bonds with each other are ruled out due to physical distance. Homogeneously distributed accessible acid groups surrounding the pendent unsaturation as shown in The results of PXE synthesis using the newly developed phenol based catalyst are shown in An improvement in the catalyst performance in PXE synthesis compared to conventional catalysts was observed. Fouling of the catalyst is avoided by the absence of residual double bonds. Phenols are inhibitors for vinylic polymerisation and therefore no polymerisation of monomers is seen on the pores of catalyst or in the reaction mixture. Even though, in the case of phenol based catalyst there was a reduction in the exchange capacity with repeated use, there is an improvement in the catalyst performance compared to the conventional catalyst. The drop in conversion with repeated use can be attributed to the neutralization of acid sites by impurities from the raw materials. This problem may be overcome by treating the raw materials with cation exchange resins prior to use. Further studies are needed to improve the catalyst performance. The results of the performance of the catalyst in the esterification of phthalic anhydride with 2-ethyl hexanol (2-EHA) giving dioctyl phthalate (DOP) are as shown in The residual double bonds present on the conventional ion exchange resin catalysts from the unreacted divinyl benzene have been determined by bromination methods. Residual DVB content of 6 % and 4 % of what was used, was found for Indion-130 and Amberlyst-15 respectively. New catalysts based on styrene substituted phenol and formaldehyde have been developed. These catalysts are found to have exchange capacity of 0.2 meq/g. PXE synthesis was explored using these new catalysts. An improvement in the catalyst performance in PXE synthesis compared to conventional catalysts was observed. The drop in conversion to PXE, is avoided by the absence of residual double bonds on the catalyst surface. Phenolic resins are inhibitors for vinylic polymerisation and therefore no polymerisation of monomers is seen on the pores of catalyst. We expect similar advantage in the synthesis of MTBE where polyisobutylene oligomers deactivate the catalyst affecting conversion and life of the catalyst. Temperature stability and reusability of the new catalyst have been verified by carrying out esterification of phthalic anhydride with 2-ethyl hexanol. The new phenol based catalysts are also cheap compared to styrene-DVB based product since the cost of chemicals is considerably lower. E.S.S. is grateful to the University Grant Commission (UGC), New Delhi for the award of Senior Research Fellowship. The authors also wish to express their gratitude to Herdillia Chemicals for supplying the o-xylene sample, Ion Exchange (India) Ltd, and Smart Instruments Co. Ltd. for allowing the facility for some of the analysis.