Conventional drum pelletization circuits exhibit undesirable surging behavior that is known to result from uncontrolled occurrence of the mechanisms of nucleation, coalescence and layering. This study was undertaken to investigate the mechanism of pellet growth by layering. Several laboratory experiments were carried out to delineate the effect of feed moisture content and feed quantity. This paper presents an analysis of the experimental results and a simple model to describe the layering process.Pelletization is the unit operation of agglomerating moist particulate materials by tumbling in horizontal rotating drums or inclined discs. Pelletization has extended the life of the iron ore industry by enabling the treatment of low-grade iron ores, which are available in large reserves throughout the world. Iron ore pelletization is a two-step process consisting of pellet production in balling circuits and pellet induration in straight-grate or grate-kiln systems. Extensive applied research and plant-scale testing are directed to understanding and improving the induration process and pellet quality. While the induration process can be optimized to a definite extent, the balling circuits are found to present problems that are yet to be addressed. More specifically, the balling circuits tend to be inherently unstable and at times result in the generation of poor green pellets and consequently inferior-quality fired pellets. It is commonly accepted that a good-quality green pellet is a prerequisite for a good fired pellet. Past research on the fundamentals of green pelletization provided a basic understanding of the kinetics of pellet growth in batch systems A drum pelletization process is described by considering the agglomerate charge to be composed of (i) moist feed or free fines and (ii) well-formed species or pellets Nucleation refers to the initial formation of well-formed species due to capillary interaction between a collection of individual moist particles. It gives rise to an increase in the number and mass of well-formed species. Coalescence is a mechanism of growth resulting from clumping of two or more colliding well-formed agglomerates. For the sake of mathematical simplicity, binary coalescence is considered to be the elementary event. Coalescence results in the decrease of the number of well-formed species but does not change in their mass. Layering is another growth mechanism referring to the continuous growth of well-formed species by the consumption of moist fines. As such it does not change the number of pellets but does account for increase in their mass. Clearly, layering occurs only when a supply of moist fines exists in the system along with a collection of well-formed species, commonly known as seed pellets in the context of layering. When moist feed is added to seed pellets, three conditions may arise Studies of the layering mechanism have revealed that the rate of layering is proportional to the exposed surface area of the seeds Experimental investigations were performed in a 23-cm-diameter by 15-mm-length balling drum fitted with three lifter bars and a scraper. The details of the drum, lifter bar and scraper construction have been presented elsewhere The iron ore concentrate used in the experimental program was produced by magnetic separation at the Malmberget pellet plant of LKAB, Sweden. The concentrate has a density of 5.14 g/ml, a Blaine specific surface area of 1550 cm Moist feed for the experiments was prepared by mixing desired quantities of water and binder (0.5% by weight of Wyoming bentonite) with the dry concentrate and then rubbing the moist mix through a 6-mesh screen. This feed was stored in sealed plastic containers for further use. Seed pellets were produced by pelletizing a 350-g batch of moist feed for 200 rev and sieving the agglomerated product in the size range of 4.75 to 9.50 mm. During this test program, we have not changed any of the properties of the seed pellets. The layering experiments consisted of adding a predetermined quantity of moist feed at time zero to 200 g of seed pellets that were kept in motion in the drum. During the first set of experiments, the drum contents were tumbled for a period of 120 rev while stopping the drum at predetermined intervals of time so as to determine the change in the size distribution of the agglomerating charge as a function of time. The second set of experiments involved tumbling the charge nonstop for 40 rev to study the effect of moisture content and the quantity of feed on the mass of feed layered. The size distribution of the product pellets was determined by sieving them into a number of sieve size fractions ranging from 4.0 to 12.5 mm. Subsequently, the number and mass of agglomerates in each size fraction was determined. Using the size distribution of the seed and product pellets, size distribution of layered pellets and new seeds was calculated and finally the mass of material layered during a given cycle was estimated. Results from the first set of three experiments are presented in  The dependence of the mass of feed layered, The shape of the curves obtained in The variation of A detailed analysis of the dependence of In this paper, we have presented results from an experimental investigation of the layering mechanism during the pelletization of iron ore concentrates. Two important variables included the quantity and moisture content of the feed to the system. Following are several observations that were made from the present study. Layering and new seed generation occur together under almost all conditions, except for the cases of low feed addition and low feed moisture. The partition of added feed between layering and new seed generation can be predicted by a relatively simple relationship. High feed moisture conditions favor high generation of new seeds. For a given feed and seed condition, there exists a maximum amount of feed that may be consumed by layering, This is the first time in the literature that the joint occurrence of new seed generation and layering has been addressed. Results from this study are extremely useful in developing a basis for developing strategies for stable operation of balling circuits. Arbitrary constants in Mass of feed added Arbitrary constants in Mass of feed layered onto the seed pellets Maximum mass of feed that can be layered onto the seed pellets Feed moisture content Minimum feed moisture content below which layering does not take place This research was made possible through a grant from LKAB, Sweden.