Apatite is one of the important host minerals of the rare earth elements (REEs). Separation of REEs from apatite has not been studied extensively compared with other main minerals such as monazite, bastnasite and xenotime. Therefore, it is essential to develop an effective method for recovery of REEs from apatite-based ores.
                  This paper presents the results of laboratory studies for the recovery of rare earth elements from an apatite ore sample by using sulphuric acid leaching, solvent extraction, and precipitation processes. Results showed that the most effective dissolutions of light REEs (>85%) and heavy REEs (>89%) from the apatite ore sample were achieved with a dilute sulphuric acid solution (1 M H2SO4) at a temperature of 20 °C in an hour. The heavy REEs present in the pregnant leach solution were almost entirely extracted using 1.2 M di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) as a cation exchanger, while the most light REEs remained in the raffinate. The heavy REEs loaded into the organic phase were stripped completely by 3 M H2SO4 solution. REEs remained in raffinate and stripped into the aqueous solution were precipitated as RE oxalates by the addition of 0.08 M oxalic acid.The rare earth elements (REEs) have very similar chemical properties. They have generally categorized into two groups based on their double-salt solubility: light rare earth elements (LREEs) are called the cerium sub-group elements (lanthanum to europium) and heavy rare earth elements (HREEs) are known as yttrium sub-group elements (gadolinium to lutetium & yttrium) ( Since 1990, China has been providing about 90% of REEs worldwide. The different metallurgical, chemical, catalytic, electrical, magnetic and optical properties of the REEs have led to an ever increasing variety of applications. For example, yttrium is used in laser crystals, catalysts, computer monitors, lenses, super conductors and microwave filters ( The REEs are relatively abundant in the earth's crust and typically dispersed, but they rarely occur in concentrated forms making them economically challenging to obtain. In rock-forming minerals, REEs occur in compounds as trivalent cations in carbonates, oxides, phosphates, and silicates. Nearly 200 minerals containing >0.01% REEs are presently known. However, only a few minerals are economically viable for mining, which are bastnasite ((Ce,La)(CO One of the REE bearing apatite ore deposit in southern Mongolia composes of sheet-like magnetite-apatite ore bodies which consist mainly of apatite (Ca Rare earth minerals are usually concentrated using flotation, magnetic or gravity separation methods and the concentrates produced are subsequently leached in hydrochloric acid (HCl), sulphuric acid (H Different separation techniques such as solvent extraction, ion exchange, and precipitation are often used for recovery of REEs from pregnant leach solutions obtained from the acid leaching. Ion exchange technology was the only practical way to separate the rare earth elements in large quantities in the 1960s ( In the mineral processing field, separation techniques for the recovery of rare earth elements have not been studied sufficiently compared to other metals. Therefore, it is essential to develop an effective method for recovery of REEs from rare earth resources and concentrates. To address this challenge, we have suggested a viable method for recovery of REEs from apatite ore using a dilute sulphuric acid solution and solvent extraction followed by precipitation technique. Apatite ore samples obtained from Mushgia Khudag, Mongolia were used in this study. Reagent grade sulphuric, nitric and hydrochloric acids were used to dissolve REEs from the apatite ore sample. Organic extractants such as di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA), tributyl phosphate (TBP), tributylphosphine (TBPP), trioctylamine (TOA) and trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO), supplied by Tokyo Chemical Industry Co., Ltd., were used to extract REEs from the pregnant leach solution. The dilute inorganic acid solutions used in this study were prepared by addition of concentrated acids such as H The pulverized apatite ore sample was prepared by crushing (jaw crusher, P-1, Fritsch Japan Co., Ltd), milling (disc mill, P-13, Fritsch Japan Co., Ltd) and sieving (AS200 digit shaker, Retsch Co., Ltd). The apatite ore sample and solid samples from leaching, precipitation and roasting were characterized by X-Ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku RINT – 2200 V), X-Ray fluorescence (XRF), and scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive X-Ray spectroscopy (SEM/EDS, JEOL/ JSM-7800F) analysis. Concentration of elements in aqueous phases from acid leaching, extraction, stripping, and precipitation was analyzed by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES, SPS-5500, Seiko Instruments Inc). Temperature and agitation speed were controlled by an automatic multi-position magnetic stirring hot plate, (HSH-6D, AS ONE CORP). The pH value of each solution was measured by pH meter (LAQUA, Horiba Scientific). A mechanical shaker [Almighty shaker AW-2, AS ONE] and glass separating funnels were used for extraction and stripping experiments. In order to obtain rare earth oxides (REO), rare earth oxalate precipitates were roasted in a muffle furnace (FP 410). All experiments and instrumenta analysis were performed in a Mineral Processing and Recycling Laboratory of Akita University, Akita, Japan. In this study, the pulverized apatite ore sample with particle size fraction under 150 μm (D The process parameters including the extractants property and concentration of D2EHPA were investigated. A diluted organic extractant and a leach solution were mixed at the volume ratio of O: A = 1: 2 and shaken on a mechanical shaker at the ambient temperature for 20 min after which the two phases were separated by using a separating funnel. The concentrations of REEs loaded into the organic phase were calculated by a mass balance using the results of ICP-OES analysis to estimate the extraction efficiencies of REEs in the organic phase. The REEs loaded into the organic phase were stripped back into an aqueous phase with different H The REEs remained in raffinate after extraction with 1.2 M D2EHPA in kerosene and stripped aqueous solution were precipitated by the addition of (0.04 to 0.8 M) oxalic acid as a precipitating agent. The precipitates including light and heavy rare earth oxalates were dried at 70 °C for 24 h. Then, RE oxalates were cooled down and placed in an oven at a temperature of 105 °C for 2 h. In order to produce rare earth oxides, the prepared RE oxalate precipitates were roasted in a furnace at a temperature of 900 °C for 1 h. All experimental conditions for leaching, solvent extraction, stripping and precipitation are summarized in The chemical composition of the apatite ore sample characterized by X-ray fluorescence spectrometry and inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry are shown in  The reaction between the REEs–fluorapatite and sulphuric acid is represented by Eq. In this study, the equilibrium constant, K, for the formation of rare earth sulphate complex ion, Log K {RESO The equilibrium constant for the formation of RE sulphate complex ion, Log K, can be calculated using Eq. The XRD patterns of an initial apatite ore sample and solid residues from sulphuric acid leaching confirmed that the apatite structure did not completely break during leaching in 0.1 M H The chemical compositions of total rare earth oxides (TREO), calcium oxide (CaO) and phosphorus pentoxide (P   The leaching studies were pursued at different temperatures and the results are shown in The effect of leaching time is plotted in A comparison of the results shows almost similar trends for REEs leaching in the three different acids, but the leaching behavior of calcium in HCl and HNO The efficiencies of REEs dissolution might be related to the liberation of REEs from the apatite mineral matrix in acidic solutions. A large amount of calcium sulphate as gypsum (CaSO Solid residues produced from nitric and hydrochloric acid leaching were characterized by XRD. The sharp peaks in XRD analysis correspond to phlogopite whereas minor peaks are typically attributed to apatite and quartz (not shown in Figures). Incomplete extraction of REEs from apatite by acid leaching is probably due to occlusion of unreacted mineral phases in phlogopite and apatite. As a result, it was found that the copious amounts of REEs in an apatite ore sample were dissolved in a diluted H The results in The extraction efficiency of HREEs increased from 10% to nearly 93% with an increase of the concentration of D2EHPA from 0.3 to 1.8 M, whereas the extraction efficiency of LREEs was increased only from 1% to 17% at same conditions. However, further studies were carried out with 1.2 M D2EHPA to prevent loss of LREEs into the organic phase as the amount of LREEs in the PLS was much higher than HREEs. The extraction efficiencies of REEs loaded into the organic phase are listed in The molar ratio of an extractant to total REEs is shown in The extraction of REEs with cation exchangers is promoted by increasing the pH of the aqueous phase, while the stripping (reverse extraction) is promoted by increasing the acidity of aqueous strip solution (decreasing the pH) (  Thermal decomposition of light and heavy RE oxalates to their oxides by calcination can be demonstrated as (Eq. The RE oxides obtained after calcination were characterized by XRD and the diffraction patterns of oxides are displayed in A flowsheet for the recovery of rare earth elements from apatite ores is proposed in In this study, the influences of processing parameters on the recovery of REEs from Mongolian apatite ore sample by leaching, solvent extraction, stripping, precipitation and calcination were investigated. The results obtained are summarized as below: The LREEs (>85%) and HREEs (89%) were dissolved from the apatite in a dilute H The result showed that total recovery of light and heavy REEs were 76% and 77% from the apatite ore sample, respectively. About 77.4 wt% of light REO as Ce The authors would like to thank to the Leading Graduate Program of Akita University “New Frontier Leaders for Rare Metals and Resources” from