Aspen wood (Populus tremula) was pretreated with ionic liquid 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium acetate ([EMIM]OAc) and dilute sulfuric acid for improvement of ethanol production. The ionic liquid pretreatment included wood dissolution at 120°C and 5% solid loading for 1, 3, and 5h followed by regeneration using water as an anti-solvent. More than 95% enzymatic digestibility was achieved for the ionic liquid treated wood, while the yield from the untreated wood was only 5.3%. Furthermore, over 81% of the maximum theoretical ethanol yield was attained after 24h fermentation of the ionic liquid treated wood, whereas the yields were only 5.3% and 42.1% for the untreated and dilute acid treated materials, respectively. A side-by-side comparative analysis of the pretreated materials using semi-quantitative techniques (e.g., Simons’ staining and enzyme adsorption) revealed that the ionic liquid treatment was much more successful in increasing the cellulose accessibility to cellulases and decreasing the lignin content.Lignocellulose is the primary component in plant cell walls and is the most abundant sources of biomass in the world. It has a high potential to provide an inexpensive and renewable feedstock for the future production of bioethanol ( The major obstacle of hydrolysis of lignocellulose is not only due to the protective nature of lignin and hemicelluloses, but also the intrinsic physical and morphological characteristics of the heterogeneous biomass such as cellulose fibers crystallinity and surface area, which govern the hydrolysis efficacy. The cellulose crystallinity is defined as the ratio of the crystalline to the amorphous portions that influences the rate of hydrolysis, given that the loosely organized amorphous cellulose is more amiable to enzymatic (cellulase) conversion than the closely packed crystalline cellulose. The available surface area (exterior and interior), porosity, and range of pore sizes play significant roles in the rate and extent of enzymatic hydrolysis, by providing active sites for cellulase adsorption and facilitating enzyme diffusion into the pores ( Pretreatment is a key step to overcome the lignocelluloses recalcitrance and make them more susceptible for hydrolysis by cellulases. Several methods have been discussed in the literatures including physical (e.g., mechanical comminution and pyrolysis), chemical (e.g., acid hydrolysis and organosolv process), physicochemical (e.g., steam explosion and AFEX), and biological pretreatments (e.g., fungi and actinomycetes). One of the primary challenges is the development of a cost-effective pretreatment technology, while remaining environmental and energy efficient. Some pretreatment techniques such as acid hydrolysis are hazardous, corrosive, and need neutralization due to the formation of inhibitory compounds, whereas others like steam explosion and AFEX are capital intensive ( Certain ionic liquids have demonstrated a promising ability for efficient dissolution of biomass and its cellulose regeneration upon dilution with an anti-solvent ( In order to track the changes in lignocellulose properties due to the pretreatment, several quantitative methods such as nitrogen adsorption and solute exclusion have been used to measure the substrate surface area and accessibility to cellulases ( This research evaluated the effectiveness of ionic liquid [EMIM]OAc pretreatment of aspen wood compared to dilute sulfuric acid by assessing the changes in physiochemical and structural properties of lignocellulosic substrate. The research focused on the use of rapid semi-quantitative methods to gain a better understanding of the key factors affecting enzymatic digestibility and subsequent bioconversion to ethanol. An aspen wood ( Ionic liquid, 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium acetate ([EMIM]OAc), produced commercially by BASF (Ludwigshafen, Germany), was purchased from Sigma–Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). An amount of 1 The aspen wood was presoaked in dilute sulfuric acid solution (1.2%, w/w) at a solid loading of 5% (w/w) and room temperature for 4 Polymeric carbohydrates, acid soluble lignin, and acid insoluble lignin contents of the untreated and pretreated wood were determined by the method presented by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory ( Accessibility of the woody materials to the cellulases was assessed by evaluating the pore size distribution of the samples using Simons’ stain method. This method is based on the competitive adsorption of two dyes, Direct Blue 1 (DB) and Direct Orange 15 (DO), in an aqueous medium, and in this study, a modified version of Simons’ stain technique was used ( Water retention value (WRV) is the ability of a substrate to keep water molecules in the cell wall pores and is used to represent the total volume of the pores. The WRV measurement is based on subjecting a water-saturated sample to a centrifugal force, and the WRV is defined as the amount of retained water per unit weight of dry material. Approximately 1 The maximum extent of enzyme adsorption, an indication of the available surface area for cellulase binding, was measured according to the method presented by Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy technique was applied to examine changes in structure of the woody materials caused by the pretreatments. The FTIR system (Tensor 27 FT-IR Spectrometer, Bruker, Germany) was equipped with a universal attenuated total reflection sampling accessory, and deuterated triglycine sulfate detector. The spectra were acquired at 4 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis was performed to obtain detailed microscopic view of morphologic changes occurred by the pretreatments. Prior to the study, the untreated and pretreated samples were coated with gold (BAL-TEC SCD 005), and then images were recorded with an acceleration voltage of 15 Two commercial enzymes, cellulase from A flocculating strain of The biomass for fermentation was prepared in 250 The sugar solutions following 30 The factor 0.51 was applied to consider the theoretical conversion of glucose to ethanol. The liquid samples from fermentation were analyzed using an HPLC system equipped with UV-Vis and refractive index detectors (Jasco International Co., Tokyo, Japan). The ethanol concentration was determined after separation on an Aminex HPX-87H ion-exchange column (Bio-Rad, Richmond, CA, USA) at 60 All the analyses and experiments were performed in duplicate, and the reported data are average values of the two replications. The main chemical composition of control (untreated), dilute sulfuric acid, and ionic liquid pretreated aspen woods were analyzed, and the results are presented in The two-color Simons’ stain experiments were carried out on the untreated and pretreated woody materials to quantify changes in the biomass porosity and pores sizes as a result of the pretreatments. The results ( The swelling ability of the biomass before and after pretreatments was characterized by the water retention value as it mainly reflects the pores volume of a substrate. For determination of WRV values, the substrate was soaked in deionized water, subjected to centrifugal force, oven-dried, and then the ratio of absorbed water to dry fibers was calculated. As shown in Langmuir adsorption isotherm was applied to describe cellulase binding to the untreated and pretreated substrates, and the maximum extent of adsorbed protein was considered proportional to the surface area available for the cellulase enzyme. Adsorption capacity ( The bands for untreated and representative treated materials were observed over the range of 600–4000 Scanning electron microscopy analysis was conducted to qualitatively assess the surface morphology of the untreated and pretreated materials. As shown in The untreated and different pretreated substrates along with pure cellulose (Avicel PH-101) as a reference were subjected to enzymatic hydrolysis, and a summary of the results are presented in Fermentability of the hydrolysates was evaluated using A summary of the overall mass balance for the different pretreatment, enzymatic hydrolysis, and fermentation stages are presented in Growing studies have focused on pretreatment of lignocelluloses such as wheat straw, switchgrass, corn stover, and spruce using different ionic liquids ( Major improvement in enzymatic digestibility (∼18-fold) of aspen wood was observed via the ionic liquid pretreatment and more than 95% of the glucose theoretical yield was achieved. Consequently, the pretreatment with [EMIM]OAc succeeded in improving the fermentability of aspen wood up to about 82% of ethanol theoretical yield after 24 The regenerated materials had higher level of glucan and lower levels of residual lignin compared to the untreated and dilute acid treated solids. It is acknowledged that the lignin associated with microfibrils occupy the internal space of lignocellulose and restrict the accessibility to hydrolytic enzymes. The delignification effect of ionic liquids has also been investigated for various materials such as spruce and maple woods. For example, more than 32% and 19% lignin removal from maple wood has been observed after acetate containing ionic liquid and [BMIM][MeSO4] pretreatments, respectively ( Analysis of the substrate by Simons’ stain and WRV methods showed significant increase in dye adsorption capacity, adsorption ratio, and swelling ability of the ionic liquid treated materials. Direct dyes (e.g. Simons’ stain dyes) have high affinities for cellulose hydroxyl groups and can be considered as molecular sensors for cellulose-containing materials. They can be assumed to dock onto the cellulose surface with their long axis parallel to and aligned with the polymer chains ( Substrate accessibility to cellulases plays an important role in enzymatic hydrolysis. Higher surface area and enlarged pores are effective parameters when they can enhance the fiber accessibility to the hydrolytic enzymes. The ionic liquid was capable of great increase in the substrate accessibility to cellulase, whereas the regenerated biomass exhibited higher binding capacity and affinity for cellulase compared to the untreated and acid treated materials. A possible explanation is dissolution of restricted cellulose within the biomass matrix and precipitation of the regenerated form on the biomass surface that provides more accessibility to the cellulose ( Recently, impact of ionic liquid pretreatment conditions on cellulose crystalline structure has been investigated for different feedstocks, including microcrystalline cellulose (Avicel) and lignocelluloses ( In accordance with the results of compositional analysis, the delignification effect of the ionic liquid treatment was well detected from the spectrum. Furthermore, SEM images confirmed that significant morphological modification occurred after the ionic liquid pretreatment compared to the dilute acid treatment. It is expected that the amorphous, porous, and fragmental regenerated cellulose could provide more accessible surfaces area and consequently be more amiable to the enzymatic attack. The agreement between the digestibility and semi-quantitative analysis results implied that the applied techniques are strong indicators of the changes in substrate and enzyme–substrate factors caused by the ionic liquid and dilute acid pretreatments. Assessment of the ionic liquid and dilute sulfuric acid pretreated aspen wood by rapid semi-quantitative methods showed that the treatment with [EMIM]OAc, even for a short time, resulted in significantly higher accessibility and affinity to cellulase enzyme, lower cellulose crystallinity, and improved morphological features. The aforementioned modifications caused by the ionic liquid pretreatment led to efficient digestibility of aspen wood, whereas the dilute acid was more suitable for xylan removal. This work was financially supported by