Objective
                  The aim of this study was to retrospectively compare a series of patients surgically treated with ORIF or early resection arthroplasty due to isolated comminuted radial head fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Between the years 2009 and 2013, 34 patients with isolated comminuted fractures of the radial head (Mason Type 3) had been operated (ORIF in 19 patients, resection arthroplasty in 15 patients). The mean age of the patients in the ORIF group was 38.5 years and 54 years in the resection group. The carrying angle (CA) and ulnar variance were measured bilaterally, and radiographs were reviewed for degenerative elbow arthritis. The Mayo elbow performance score, Turkish version of the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand questionnaire (DASH-T) and visual analog scale (VAS) were used to evaluate the clinical results.
               
                  Results
                  The mean follow-up period in the ORIF group was 40.2 months and 44.4 months in the resection group. In the ORIF group, 11 patients were clinically rated excellent, six good, and two fair. In the resection group, seven patients had excellent, five had good, and two had fair scores. We did not find a statistically significant difference between the ORIF and resection groups regarding the clinical and radiological outcomes.
               
                  Conclusion
                  With these short-term results, resection arthroplasty may be considered an effective method in the treatment of isolated comminuted radial head fractures, as it is less technically demanding and it also allows for early postoperative motion. However, the patients should be evaluated in detail, regarding ligamentous injuries prior to resection arthroplasty.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level III, Therapeutic study.Ground level fall on the outstretched arm in 15 (79%) Sports injury in 3 (16%) Motor vehicle accident in 1 (5%) Ground level fall on the outstretched arm in 13 (86%) Motor vehicle accident in 1 (7%) Work accident in 1 (7%) Ground level fall on the outstretched arm in 28 (82%) Sports injury in 3 (9%) Motor vehicle accident in 2 (6%) Work accident in 1 (3%) The surgical treatment of comminuted radial head fractures is challenging and controversial. Surgical treatment options include open reduction-internal fixation (ORIF), resection arthroplasty and radial head arthroplasty, with no clear advantage of one over the other. Recent studies have addressed the proper restoration of the radial head fractures in maintaining the stability of the elbow and the forearm The aim of this study was to retrospectively compare a series of patients surgically treated with ORIF or resection arthroplasty due to isolated comminuted radial head fractures, and to report the clinical and radiological outcomes. Between 2009 and 2013, 55 patients with radial head fractures were surgically treated. After reviewing their medical records, 19 patients, in whom radial head fracture was accompanied by a complex elbow fracture–dislocation, who had undergone ORIF due to a Mason Type 2 radial head fracture, in whom radial head arthroplasty, delayed radial head resection or additional surgical procedures for ligamentous repair were performed and who were reported to have an obvious ligamentous injury detected by valgus/varus stress and/or radius pull tests, The patients were operated by five different surgeons with no definitive surgical protocol, thus, the selection criteria for surgical indications for each case was not clear on the medical records. Patients were divided into two groups. Group 1 consisted of 19 patients (9 males, 10 females; mean age: 38.5 [range: 29–56] years) who underwent ORIF, and Group 2 consisted of 15 patients (7 males, 8 females; mean age: 54 [range: 38–64] years) who underwent resection arthroplasty. Patient demographics are demonstrated in In Group 1, ORIF was performed using the lateral Kocher approach with anatomical titanium interlocking radial head plates and 2.7 mm screws (TST Tıbbi Aletler San., Istanbul, Turkey) on seven patients (37%), and only headless cannulated compression screws (TST Tıbbi Aletler San., Istanbul, Turkey) on the remaining 12 patients (63%). The mean follow-up period in this group was 40.2 (range: 27–58) months. In Group 2, the Kocher approach was used on all patients, and the radial head was resected with a bone saw close to the surgical neck. The intraoperative notes in the medical records of the patients were reviewed, and only the cases in which radius pull test Due to the retrospective design of the study, there was no specific postoperative rehabilitation protocol. Generally, a molded posterior plaster long-arm splint at 90° of flexion was kept for two weeks in both groups. Then, passive and active range of motion (ROM) exercises were begun and gradually commenced. Clinical outcomes were assessed with the Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS) Bilateral anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the elbows, including the forearms and wrists were used for the measurement of the carrying angle (CA), the evaluation of posttraumatic osteoarthritis and the presence of periarticular ossification. The CA was measured from the long axes of the humerus and forearm with the elbow at maximum extension. Degenerative changes were evaluated using the Broberg and Morrey classification. Statistical analyses were performed using the SPSS v.20.0.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) software. The outcomes of the two groups were compared by the independent samples t-test and Pearson correlation test. In Group 1, the mean MEPS, DASH-T and VAS scores were 86.8 (range: 65–100), 3.9 (range: 0–15) and 1.5 (range: 0–6), respectively ( In Group 2, the mean MEPS, DASH-T and VAS scores were 85 (range: 70–100), 3.7 (range: 0–18) and 1.8 (range: 0–6), respectively ( The clinical and radiological parameters and ROM in both groups were compared, and no statistically significant differences were found between Group 1 and Group 2 (p > 0.05) ( The controversy over the treatment techniques in comminuted radial head fractures and the variety of the results are probably related to the fact that most of the studies had not evaluated the radial head fractures by classifying them as ‘isolated’ or ‘with accompanying fractures’ of the elbow. Besides, ligamentous injuries may be present in even seemingly uncomplicated radial head injuries. There are only two studies comparing resection arthroplasty and ORIF techniques in the treatment of isolated comminuted radial head fractures. Open reduction and internal fixation of the repairable comminuted fractures with reconstruction of the native radial head is conclusive. There are several studies reporting outcomes in patients undergoing resection arthroplasty for comminuted radial head fractures. The common characteristic of the patients in our study was the presence of an isolated radial head fracture without ligamentous instability. In both groups, we had functional scores comparable with the data provided in the literature. Stiffness is a common complication following fractures and surgeries of the elbow. Functional ROM may be achieved by allowing early mobilization. After resection arthroplasty, proximal migration of the radius and increase in the CA should be considered. In our study, the limited number of patients, heterogeneity of the groups in terms of age, short follow-up periods, and the retrospective design are the main drawbacks and preclude reaching a more definite judgment. The heterogeneity of the groups in terms of age may have led to misinterpretation of the clinical outcomes as it may have an impact on clinical scores. Some of the complications of resection arthroplasty, such as degenerative changes and proximal radial migration occur in the long-term. Thus, short follow-up periods of the patients in Group 2 may have precluded observing these complications, which may effect on both clinical and radiological outcomes. Retrospective design of the study is a certain objection for the determination of the selection criteria of the patients regarding surgical indications. However, we believe that this is an important study as there is no sufficient data in the literature regarding the comparison of radial head resection and ORIF techniques in the treatment of isolated comminuted radial head fractures. In conclusion, no statistically significant difference was found between the groups in terms of clinical and radiological evaluation parameters and ROM. With these short-term results, resection arthroplasty may be considered a surgical option for isolated comminuted radial head fractures as it is less technically demanding and also allows for early postoperative motion. However, the patients should be carefully evaluated regarding ligamentous injuries such as Essex-Lopresti lesions or collateral ligament ruptures before performing resection arthroplasty. Our results need to be interpreted with caution because of the retrospective nature and other limitations of the study. Long-term, prospective studies with larger patient groups are required for a definite judgment.