The polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastics with calcium carbonate (CaCO3) or di-n-octyl phthalate (DnOP) serving as additive were chosen to investigate the effects of additives on the surface of PVC plastic, and flotation tests were conducted to study the natural flotability of PVC plastics. The surface free energy of the polished and original surface of PVC plastics demonstrates that the crushed or shredded particles in the flotation system present the true surface property of plastics, and the additives show significant impacts on the surface free energy of PVC plastics. The addition of CaCO3 results in an increase of the attraction force between plastic surface and water, and a decrease of the adhesion force between plastic surface and bubble, and thus the flotability is reduced. DnOP decreases the attraction force between plastic and water and increases the adhesion force between plastic and bubble, and thus the hydrophobicity of plastic is enhanced while the flotability rises. Flotation tests of PVC plastics and waste PVC plastics confirmed the above conclusions, and infrared spectra of the two waste plastics verified the influence of the additives. These conclusions provide some insights into flotation technique with respect to plastic separation, especially for the recovery of waste PVC plastics.Plastics have been one of the most widely used materials in our daily life and industrial production Plastics recycling involves primarily four steps, namely collection, separation, reprocessing and marketing Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) is one of the major synthetic resins, and is widely used in the building, packing, and automobile industry. Additives such as calcium carbonate (CaCO PVC plastics ( Distilled water, glycerol, formamide, ethylene glycol and diiodomethane were used as probe liquids to measure the contact angles between the liquids and surface of PVC plastics; glycerol, formamide, ethylene glycol and diiodomethane were chemically pure and used as received. Tap water was used throughout the flotation tests. The flotation tests were conducted for about 6 Before the measurement of contact angle, different kinds of surfaces were prepared to detect the contact angles. Plates of PVC resin and PVC plastics with different content of additives were tailored into 20 A JJC-I contact angle measuring instrument (Changchun Optical Instrument Factory, China) is employed to measure the contact angle of liquid on the solid surface, and the measurement of contact angle is demonstrated in detail in our previous paper The surface free energy of plastics was calculated using the Lifshitz–van der Waals/acid–base approach Based on the determined data of contact angles, surface free energy of various surface were calculated and the results are shown in In the case of DnOP, the difference in surface free energy between both the polished and original surface of PVC-DP Owing to the “surface enrichment” effects, the surface of plastic does not exhibit the true performance of polymer resin and additives. Such additive as CaCO The surface of plastic can be viewed as the mixed surface composed of polymer resin and additive. Supposing that additive are distributed evenly in the plastics and substituting the volume percentage of additive for area percentage, the relationships between surface free energy of the mixed surface and content of additive were obtained, and details on the calculations are presented in supplementary material. The surface free energy of PVC-CaCO As shown in The total interaction energy As demonstrated in Based on the extended DLVO theory As exhibited in The natural flotability of PVC plastics with additives are shown in The natural flotability of waste PVC plastics were further studied, and the result is demonstrated in Comparing the original and polished surface of PVC plastics, it is demonstrated that the shredded plastic particle in flotation system reflects the surface property of plastics and the additives have conspicuous effects on the surface free energy. The addition of CaCO The total surface free energy of PVC-DnOP surface decreases with increasing the amount of DnOP. The total interaction free energy between the mixed surface and water decreases and the interaction free energy between the mixed surface and bubble increase slightly. The attraction force between particle and water is weakened, but the hydrophobic attraction between particle and bubble is enhanced, and thus DnOP improves the flotability of PVC plastic. The flotation tests of PVC plastics confirm the effects of additives on the natural flotability of PVC plastics. Flotation recovery decreases significantly with increasing of the amount of CaCO The authors would like to gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the Project (2010CB630903) supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: