In this study, power ultrasound was used as aiding method for the mineral processing technique, which have recently been developed for the remediation of soil contaminated by heavy metal containing bullets, their broken parts and alteration products. Power ultrasound was used to disperse the soil to remove metals and metal compounds from soil particle surfaces instead of attrition conditioning. The soil diluted with water was treated using 22 kHz ultrasound power of 100 W up to 500 W. The effect of different ultrasonic treatment time and pulsation of ultrasound were studied on the purity of sink and float fractions in heavy medium separation process, screen fractions, and mineral concentrates and tailings from flotation process. Ultrasound enhanced the remediation of soil fractions in all the studied cases. Optimisation of the ultrasonic power will be done in the continuation study.Separation techniques used in mining industry, such as screening, heavy medium separation and flotation, have recently been successfully applied in the remediation of soils contaminated by heavy metal like bullets, their broken parts and alteration products In the technique studied power ultrasound was mainly used to aid removing metals and metal compounds from soil particle surfaces. The aim was to decrease the heavy metal content of remediated soil under limit values for problem waste ( The soil examined was brought from former military shooting range. The coarsest material (+20 mm), which did not contain bullets or their parts, was screened out before ultrasonic treatment experiments. The other screen fractions −20 to +4 mm, −4 to +1 mm, −1 mm and −250 μm (particles smaller than 250 μm) containing heavy metals were treated separately into remediation process using now ultrasound treatment before separations. A round shaped ultrasonic reactor of 10 l was used in each batch experiments. It contained five 22 kHz piezo ceramic transducers on the bottom of the reactor. Ultrasonic frequency and power were adjusted using ENI 1140 LA (S/N 563) power amplifier and Tabor 8552 function generator ( The input power of 100 W up to 500 W was used in the experiments. The effect of different treatment time and pulsation of ultrasound were studied on the remediation of different soil fractions. The soil was diluted with water for the experiments and mixed during ultrasonic treatment using agitator rotations of 150–200 per minute. The treatment conditions are shown in Contaminated soil fractions of −20 to +4 mm and −4 to +1 mm were treated separately using ultrasound before heavy medium separation tests. Reference tests for each test were made using the same procedure without ultrasound. The sink and float fractions from heavy medium separation were analysed using XRF-method. The laboratory scale apparatus used in heavy medium tests, Erickson's cones, is presented in Ultrasonically treated −1 mm fraction was screened into eight smaller fractions and the metal content (lead and copper) in each fraction was analysed using XRF-method. The fraction of −1 mm was at first screened to the fractions of +250 and −250 μm before flotation and US treatment. Flotation experiments were done only for the fraction of −250 μm because the flotation method used could not effectively operate with +250 μm particles. This lack will be avoided in the continuation study by using SIF (flotation in froth) technology, which can operate with −1mm material. Soil fraction of −250 μm was first treated using ultrasound with different combinations of treatment time and pulsation, and then floated. Mineral concentrates and tailings from flotation were filtrated and metal contents (lead and copper) were analysed by XRF-method from the filter cakes. The flotation experiments were carried out using mainly fatty acid type collector (RaRa=turnip fatty acid). Emulgator type KOAL 10 was used to disperse fatty acid collector to water to obtain higher effect in collection of hydrophobic particles. Sulfid collector (KAX=K-amyl xanthate) was used in some experiments alone or together with CuSO In heavy medium separation the ultrasonic pre-treatment experiments (experiments 1–3, The ultrasonic treatment of the fine test material (−1 mm) (experiments 5–6, In the first flotation tests, when fatty acid was used as collector chemical ( Ultrasound improved the remediation results of both products (sink and float products) in heavy medium separation. That was based on the fact that the amount of ultra fine metal fraction was diminished when attrition conditioning was replaced by ultrasound. The remediation process produced float product (cleaned soil) that could be left to their original place. This way the process costs would be lower without transportation of large amounts of soil materials. The next phase is to study in more detail especially ultrasonic cleaning of the finer fraction (−1 mm) combined together with SIF flotation technology (separation in froth). SIF process can handle coarser fraction than conventional flotation technologies, which can handle materials up to the grain size of 250 μm. SIF technique is more economic new flotation method and combining it with ultrasonic treatment could make the total process commercially more interesting. This remediation project was financed by VTT Processes and Jyväskylä Science Park.