Process safety and risk analysis have paramount significance in the modern process industries for preventing fatalities and asset and reputation loss due to an accident. Hence, this has been an active area of research for many decades around the world. In this paper, a bibliometric analysis-based review is presented to investigate the evolution of process safety and risk research. Specifically, the following basic questions are addressed: (i) Which countries are active in the research? (ii) What are the key areas? (iii) Who are the leading contributing authors? (iv) What are the potential sources of the publications? (v) What is the focus of most of the documents? (vi) What are the dominant factors behind the citations? and (vii) What is the contribution of the industries? Additionally, the evolution and popularity of major tools used in this field are also analyzed. It is found that safety and risk analysis is a global topic. China, Malaysia, and Iran are the emerging countries with an impressive percentage increase in research volume in this decade (2009–2018). The USA is the leading contributor, and India is the most cost-effective country. Methodology development-related works cover the vast portion of this field, and journals focusing on these works are highly likely to be cited by peer researchers. Despite a healthy contribution from industry, unfortunately collaborative works between industry and academia are rare. It is also observed that the field of process safety and risk analysis is of great growth potential with an exponential increase in the number of annual publications.Nowadays, the chemical process industries are growing and becoming more complicated to meet human demand due to ever-increasing social and technological developments. Most chemicals are hazardous by nature, and often make processes unsafe and accident-prone. More alarmingly, chemical accidents propagate faster than other types of accidents, which entails the loss of assets and reputation along with human injuries, fatalities, and detrimental environmental impacts. Thus, proper safety analysis is crucial to prevent such unwanted consequences. Process safety includes hazard identification and analysis, risk analysis and mitigation, accident modeling, consequence analysis, and many other areas. Hazard identification is the technique of screening out “what can go wrong in a process”. Risk is an alternative expression of safety. It can be expressed as the product of two questions: “what is the frequency of an accident?” and “how many consequences will the accident exert on the process and ecosystem?” ( Process safety has been a feature of industrial practice from the beginning of industrialization ( Although review articles do not provide new models or methodologies, these contribute significantly by providing a concise up-to-date overview of the development of a field. Many reviews have been conducted by a number of researchers on several aspects of process safety. ( Although the above review papers provide significant information to researchers, no review paper was identified that showed the numerical growth, contribution of involved countries and their effectiveness, emerging countries, major tools and their evolution, prominent authors and their focus on published documents, potential sources of the publications, prevalent factors behind the higher number of citations of a document, and industrial contribution. The current authors believe that an analysis of these important research parameters will be both helpful and interesting to researchers worldwide, especially for early-career researchers in this field to get a head start, as they will get a quick and brief overview of the present status of process safety research as well as its evolution. These are the motivations behind the current review article. A bibliometric analysis can well describe these aforementioned parameters, and, hence, this technique is becoming increasingly popular among researchers ( The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section This bibliometric review methodology is comprised of three main steps, as shown in  AND This search resulted in bibliographic details of 20,500, 25,703, and 18,880 documents from the WS, Scopus, and Compendex databases, respectively. Compared to the other two databases, Scopus includes many conferences. Furthermore, it stores the documents in lesser segments than WS and Compendex. For example, Scopus stores a vast number of documents under the Engineering category, while the other two databases have distinct divisions such as Engineering Chemical, Engineering Civil, Engineering Mechanical, Process Control, and so on for the engineering documents based on the relevance of the field. These are the underlying reasons behind Scopus’ relatively higher number of documents. The search results were further refined based on the relevancy of the fields. Engineering Chemical, Chemistry Multidisciplinary, Engineering Industrial, Operations Research Management Science, Engineering Multidisciplinary, Statistics Probability, Chemistry Applied, Engineering Petroleum, Mining Mineral Processing, Engineering Marine, and Engineering Ocean were selected for WS, which resulted in 6,589 documents. Similarly, 10,800 documents were obtained from the Compendex database for Accidents, Risk Perception, Risk Analysis, Safety Engineering, Failure Analysis, Hazardous Materials, Occupational Risk, Chemical Plant, Chemical Industry, Chemical Hazards, Explosions, Gas Industry, Petroleum Industry, Petroleum Plants, Industrial Plants, Probability, Industrial Management, Process Engineering, and Process Control categories. Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Chemistry, and Multidisciplinary subject areas were selected for the Scopus database, and 12,562 documents were obtained. Unlike Scopus and Compendex, WS gives bibliometric information in a Tab-Delimited formatted file. It is noteworthy to mention that it is possible to download only 500 documents at a time for both WS and Compendex, while this number is 2,000 for Scopus. First, Tab-Delimited files from WS were converted to CSV (Comma-Separated Values) files using MS Excel. Then, all these documents were arranged according to the year of publication for the ease of bibliometric analysis, and all the CSV files were amalgamated into one CSV file. Duplicate documents were removed both automatically (using MS Excel) and manually. Then, irrelevant documents were eliminated manually. All these actions gave 7,164 documents for bibliometric analysis. Finally, the number of citations for all these documents was cross-checked with the Google Scholar database from September 7, 2018 to September 28, 2018; it was found that Google Scholar provided further updated information about the number of citations. MS Excel and VOSviewer ( All documents (7,164) were categorized by document focus and publication type. Based on the focus of the publication, the documents were further categorized into six major divisions: (i) academy related (A), (ii) methodology development (MD), (iii) application of risk/safety-based principles (Ap), (iv) intelligent systems (IS), (v) data sources (DS), and (vi) opinions and discussions (O). These categories have been selected based on the major focus in publication observed while analyzing the documents. Academy related documents mainly focus on teaching process safety, safety curricula, and lab safety techniques in academic institutions ( Category five presents documents that are potential data sources ( From The evolution of process safety can be divided into four major periods based on publication trends, as shown in The span of geographical area is an indication of versatility and popularity of a research field around the world. The more countries engaged in the research field, the more significant the field is. Using VOSviewer, it can be found that 83 countries are involved in advancing the field of safety and risk engineering.   In Equation 1, x = number of publications before 2009 and y = number of publications from 2009 to 2018. Percentage decrease in publication volume for any country in In Equations 2 and 3, u = total number of documents published by a country, v = total population in million, and w = per capita income in thousand USD. Values of v and w were collected from https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.TOTL, https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/ny.gdp.mktp.cd, http://www.worldometers.info/world- population/taiwan-population/, and https://tradingeconomics.com/taiwan/gdp on October 10, 2018. The number of documents per million population indicates what proportion of a country’s population is engaged in research, while the number of documents per capita income (per thousand USD) implies how well the financial resources of a country are utilized to fund research. VOSviewer was utilized to extract the key areas in safety and risk analysis. A total of 10,893 author-indexed keywords were registered, which is an indication of the diverse nature of this field.  Highly frequent: FTA, HAZOP, and Fuzzy theory. Moderately frequent: BN, AHP, and ETA. Less frequent: LOPA, PN, and BT. HAZOP and FTA have the oldest origin and are reasonably popular because of their practical applications. Fuzzy-based documents mostly present hybrid techniques. Although BN is a newer tool, it has drawn researchers’ appeal because of its ease of construction, capability of displaying both horizontal and vertical dependency, practical application, and suitability in capturing both data and knowledge uncertainty ( Although several conferences such as those run by the Society of Petroleum Engineers (SPE) and American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE) are potential sources of publications, we have discussed only journals in this section. Journal of Loss Prevention in the Process Industries (JLPPI), Process Safety Progress (PSP), Journal of Chemical Education (JCE), Safety Science (SS), Process Safety and Environmental Protection (PSEP), Journal of Hazardous Materials (JHM), and Reliability Engineering & System Safety (RESS) are the topmost journals that publish many documents in this field. The total numbers of documents found for these journals are 377, 263, 192, 171, 152, 138, and 104, respectively.  Process safety and risk engineering is a growing field, which has constantly drawn the attention of researchers. A total of 7,164 documents were analyzed; it was found that 11,707 authors have contributed in this field. 322 authors have a minimum of 5 documents, whereas 83 authors are registered with a minimum of 10 documents. Fifteen authors have a minimum of 30 documents. Khan F. has the highest number of documents (290) and citations (9,848), followed by Mannan M.S. (141 documents and 4,963 citations), Cozzani V. (133 documents and 3,494 citations), and Reniers G. (88 documents and 1,161 citations). Baybutt P. and Steere N.V. are the two industrial authors in Furthermore, citation analysis for the top five most cited authors was carried out to understand the prevalent factors for the citations ( Authors’ affiliated institutes were screened out to determine the status of industrial contributions in process safety and risk research. Complete institutional information was found for 6,285 documents. These documents were further manually analyzed for the type of institution (i.e. academy, industry) to which an author belonged. Although the number of industrial authors is significant, authors from academic institutions dominate the research publication in this field ( A total of 3,978 industrial authors have contributed in this research field. Baybutt P., Steere N.V., Ogle R.A., Laskar S., and Moore D.A. are the most prolific industrial authors. Process Safety Progress, Journal of Chemical Education, Journal of Loss Prevention in the Process Industries, Journal of Hazardous Materials, Chemical Engineering Progress, Hydrocarbon Processing, and Reliability Engineering & System Safety are the notable journals for industrial documents. The numbers of industrial documents for these journals were registered as 137, 57, 49, 28, 27, 21, and 19, respectively. Primatech Inc., DuPont Engineering Research and Technology, Dow Chemical Company, Chevron, Shell, BASF, and DNV GL are industrial organizations significantly engaged in process safety and risk research as judged by author affiliations. Although the contributions of joint industry-academia are not frequent, CCPS has published many books on several aspects of process safety with the help of experts from academia and industry. ( In this paper, a bibliometric review of research on chemical process safety and risk engineering is presented utilizing the information available in four major databases: Web of Science Core Collection, Scopus, Compendex, and Google Scholar. Investigation in the key areas, prominent tools, leading contributors, potential sources, industrial contributions, and engaged countries was carried out. Research on process safety was found to be very popular among researchers, with an exponential growth in the number of documents over the last five decades. Even though publications in this field started almost one hundred years ago, documented research activity was found to be regularized only from 1965. Researchers are mostly active in methodology development for safety and risk analysis, hazard identification, accident modelling, and safety management to prevent catastrophic accidents. More specifically, journal articles focusing on model and methodology development are found to be most popular among researchers. The evolution of process safety suggests that these methods have already been used as industrial practice for the last three decades, and they are becoming more and more popular each day. Moreover, it is observed that process safety is a global topic, and both developed and developing countries around the world are active in this research field. Although the USA is found to be the predominant country, tremendous development has been recorded for China, Malaysia, and Iran in the period, 2009–2018. Publication efficiency analysis of the countries from two different perspectives was also conducted: number of documents per million population and number of documents per capita (per thousand USD). Norway has the highest number of documents per million population, while India’s number of documents per capita income (per thousand USD) is the greatest. Abbasi S.A., Amyotte P., Cozzani V., Khan F., Mannan M.S., and Reniers G. are observed to be active authors in this field; all have focused mainly on framework development for process safety analysis. Baybutt P. is the most prolific industrial author. Investigation of key areas and tools suggests that current research is often focused on attempts to devise hybrid dynamic quantitative analysis methodologies with an aim to minimize uncertainty and represent complex interdependencies. In this context, BN and its derivatives have great potential and popularity since they can handle all these features. Journal of Loss Prevention in the Process Industries, Process Safety Progress, Journal of Chemical Education, Safety Science, Process Safety and Environmental Protection, Journal of Hazardous Materials, and Reliability Engineering & System Safety are the most popular journals for publication in this field. Although conferences are the principal source of industrial documents, some journals such as Process Safety Progress, Journal of Chemical Education, Journal of Loss Prevention in the Process Industries, Journal of Hazardous Materials, Chemical Engineering Progress, Hydrocarbon Processing, and Reliability Engineering & System Safety are also found to be potential sources of industrial documents. Investigation on author affiliation suggests that authors based in industry have made significant contributions. Nevertheless, collaborative research between academic and industrial authors is found to be limited. This should be improved to encourage further pragmatic advances in chemical process safety and risk analysis. Although this review has tried to cover all the documents on process safety and risk analysis using several combinations of the most frequently used keywords in this field, many documents can inadvertently be omitted due to the limitation of the automated search technique described in Section The authors thankfully acknowledge the financial support provided by the