Energy of activation (Ea
                     ) and specific heat capacity (Cp
                     ) for mixtures of sulphide minerals that on their own do not self-heat (SH), sphalerite/pyrite, pyrite/galena, chalcopyrite/galena and sphalerite/galena, were determined using a self-heating apparatus at temperatures below 100°C in the presence of moisture. The mixtures all gave Ea
                      ranging from 22.0 to 27.8kJmol−1, similar to the range reported for Ni- and Cu-concentrates. The Ea
                      is close to that for partial oxidation of H2S which adds to the contention that the partial oxidation of H2S contributes to SH of sulphides at low temperature. The Cp
                      values ranged from 0.152 to 1.071JK−1
                     g−1 as temperature rose from 50°C to 80°C, similar to the reported findings on Ni- and Cu-concentrates. The role of galvanic interaction in promoting SH is tested by examining correlations with the rest potential difference of the sulphides in the mixture.The spontaneous or self-heating of sulphide minerals can pose a hazard anywhere along the extraction chain from mining to concentrate transport. There have been a number of studies of the phenomenon over the years ( Galvanic interaction is driven by the rest potential difference between the components and is known to affect the reactivity of sulphides ( To have a role in self-heating the galvanic effect must contribute to one or more of the reactions surmised to be the cause of self-heating. We are engaged in determining physico-chemical properties of sulphide self-heating with at least three aims: to provide parameters to assess risk, to model the phenomenon, and to devise options for mitigation. This work is facilitated by a unique self-heating test apparatus developed by The transient heat model also includes the specific heat capacity ( The purpose of this paper is to determine the self-heating activation energy and specific heat capacity for a range of sulphide mixtures to test correlations against the rest potential difference to assess the contribution of galvanic interaction to self-heating. Application of the transient self-heating model to sulphide self-heating to determine activation energy was introduced in the previous paper ( When chemical reactions are alike or suitable for comparison, a linear relationship between the energy of activation The measurement methodology is described in detail by In the presence of an electrolyte, two or more sulphides with differing rest potential in contact form a galvanic cell. Rest potential values from literature for the sulphides studied here are shown in By convention, the cathode is the sulphide with higher rest potential and the anode the sulphide with lower rest potential ( An alternative cathodic reaction which may be relevant in the context of sulphide self-heating, as noted by giving the overall reaction:  had shown H Noting the almost universal presence of iron ions in sulphide mineral systems, The energy of activation ( To investigate a dependence of self-heating on galvanic effects we examined the relationships between the two physico-chemical parameters and Δ Thus we anticipate that To relate Δ Thus we anticipate that Around 4 The SH apparatus ( The standard test conditions for stage A (i.e., below 100 Number of air injections (cycles): 3. Duration of air injection for every cycle: 15 Time between injections: 5 Temperature: 45–85 Air flow rate: 100 This requires plotting ln(SHR) vs. 1/T, i.e., Eq. (2). At the set temperature, the self-heating rate (SHR) was measured for the 3 air injections (total time 15 Determinations were made at 50, 60, 65, 70 and 80 After cooling for one hour, the temperature was raised to the next setting and the measurements repeated. This was done for each sample. The tests were replicated 3 As the standard reference material for The 95% CI for SHR (K  The least squares best fits were:  The rest potential values are taken from The procedure is illustrated by a specimen calculation for sphalerite/pyrite at 70  A plot of All the mixtures in this work self-heated. The linear relationship for the Arrhenius type plot ln( The The range in The specific heat capacities for the mixtures were also over a similar range and proved comparable with the values for Ni- and Cu-concentrates determined previously ( In testing the role of galvanic interaction literature rest potential values were used to estimate Δ The activation energy The specific heat capacity Relationships were found between rest potential difference Δ