Our study aimed to compare the anatomical result after treatment of intraarticular distal radius fracture with locking volar plates with and without arthroscopy. This was a retrospective, single-center study of intraarticular fractures. A volar locked plate was used for fracture fixation in all patients. Twenty patients were operated on with fluoroscopy only (“plate” group) and 20 operated using arthroscopy assistance (“arthroscopy” group). All patients underwent a CT scan before surgery and at 3 months postoperative. The main outcome measure was the residual intraarticular step-off (measured in millimeters). Other studied outcomes were the residual gap between fragments and extra-articular reduction. The two groups were similar preoperatively in all aspects except the size of the gap between fragments. The residual step-off was significantly less in the arthroscopy group: 1.9mm (Q1 1.7; Q3 2.25) for plate versus 0.8mm (Q1 0.7; Q3 1.5) for arthroscopy (P
                     =0.001). The change from the preoperative to the postoperative measurement was significantly greater in the arthroscopy group: 0.1 mm (Q1 −0.5; Q3 0.8) for plate and −1mm (Q1 −1.9; Q3 −0.6) for arthroscopy (P
                     =0.0002). The residual gap was similar between both groups: 2.4mm (Q1 1.9; Q3 3.5) for plate vs. 2.3mm (Q1 1.1; Q3 2.8) for arthroscopy (P
                     =0.37). The change in gap was not significantly different between the two groups: −0.9mm (Q1 −1.8; Q3 −0.1) for plate vs. −2.9mm (Q1 −4.4; Q3 −1.7) for arthroscopy (P
                     =0.32). There was no difference in the extra-articular reduction. Damage was found to the scapholunate ligament in 30% and the TFCC in 30% of arthroscopy cases. Arthroscopy improves intraarticular reduction without altering extra-articular reduction in patients with intraarticular fractures of the distal radius, and it allows for assessment and treatment of any injuries discovered. We must now follow these patients over the long-term to assess the clinical benefit.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  3.Distal radius fractures make up nearly 18% of all fractures in adults and are the reason for 1.5% of emergency room visits Concurrent ligament damage has been found in 20% to 30% of cases, and can lead to degenerative wrist lesions if not treated adequately Intraarticular fractures of the distal radius are increasingly being treated by open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) using volar locking plates. In comparison to fracture pinning, plate fixation reduces secondary displacement and post-traumatic stiffness by shortening the immobilization period It was shown that fluoroscopy was not sufficient to determine whether the articular surface had been correctly reduced. But until now, no study has used objective CT-based criteria to compare postoperative reduction when arthroscopy is performed in addition to standard ORIF The purpose of our study was to compare the treatment of intraarticular distal radius fracture with locking volar plates with and without arthroscopy. We compared short-term anatomical recovery between the two groups. We hypothesized that the intraarticular reduction was better with arthroscopic assistance than without. This was a retrospective, single-center study with parallel groups. In one group, the fracture was treated with a volar locking plate (plate group) and in the other group, the fracture was treated with the same locking volar plate (Stryker VariAx Distal Radius Locking Plate™) but arthroscopy was also performed (arthroscopy group). The arthroscopy was performed by two surgeons who were experienced in wrist arthroscopy and the ORIF was performed by orthopedic surgeons. Patients were eligible for the study if they were between 18 and 65 years of age and came to the emergency room with an intraarticular fracture of the distal radius. The delay between diagnosis and surgery was always less than 72 Patients were excluded if they had neurological or vascular deficits in their hand, suffered a fracture-dislocation, had previous surgery on the ipsilateral wrist or other fracture of the ipsilateral limb, suffered polytrauma or were pregnant. The two study groups were similar preoperatively ( In nine patients, we performed subchondral pinning in addition to plate fixation because of poor reduction ( All patients were operated under regional anesthesia. The installation was in supine position. An arm tourniquet was inflated to 250 The main endpoint was the residual articular step-off (measured in millimeters) on CT scans done preoperatively and at 3 months postoperative. The largest step-off on frontal and sagittal slices was measured ( Secondary endpoints were the gap between the intraarticular fragments (in millimeters); this was measured the same way as the step-off ( It was noted the intra-carpal lesions visualized during arthroscopy. We used the EWAS classification for the scapholunate and luno-triquetral tears The reduction at the metaphysis and epiphysis of the radius on preoperative and 3-month postoperative A/P and lateral X-rays of the wrist were compared. The ulnar variance (in millimeters) was measured on A/P views, the direction of fracture displacement was determined on the lateral views, the radial slope (in degrees) was measured on A/P and lateral views, and the fracture type was determined based on the AO classification Qualitative parameters are expressed in frequencies and percentage. Quantitative parameters are expressed in terms of mean and standard deviation (SD) or median and interquartile range. Normality of distributions was checked graphically and using the Shapiro-Wilk test. Qualitative parameters were compared between the two groups by Chi Regarding the exploratory nature and small sample size of the present study we did not adjust for multiple comparisons. Statistical testing was done at the two-tailed α level of 0.05 and data were analyzed using the SAS software package, release 9.3 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC). The median height of the step-off preoperatively was similar between the two groups ( The largest fracture line (highest step) was on the lunate facet of the radius in 30 patients and on the scaphoid surface in the other 10 patients. The distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) was also damaged in 30 patients ( The number of fracture fragments found during arthroscopy was the same as that identified on the CT scans. Additional injuries were found in 12 joints: 6 cases of scapholunate ligament damage and 6 of TFCC damage. The procedure time was significantly greater ( The residual step-off height was significantly greater in the plate group and the delta was greater in the arthroscopy group based on CT measurements. The step-off was 1.9 The residual gap was similar between groups ( Two patients in the plate group had screws protruding inside their joints (1 distal radioulnar and 1 radiocarpal). All fractures had healed on X-rays at 3 months, with no extra-articular malunion in either group. The two groups have similar median values for the A/P radial slope ( Fixation of intraarticular fractures of the distal radius requires that the fracture be reduced as anatomically as possible to prevent the development of OA in the long-term Intraoperative radiographic evaluation is insufficient to determine whether an articular step-off has been reduced. Although it remains the exam of first choice, it underestimates the size of the step-off and gap between fragments, both in the radiocarpal joint and the ulnar notch of the radius In our non-randomized study, the only difference found on the preoperative X-rays and CT scans was the gap between fragments, which was larger in the plate with arthroscopy group. Postoperatively, the residual articular step-off was significantly smaller in the arthroscopy group, and the change from preoperative to postoperative was significantly higher in this group ( These findings are consistent with published results. Other studies have described an arthroscopic or radiographic verification of the step-off and gap between fragments after ORIF Yamazaki et al. Several authors favor using arthroscopy intra-operatively when treating distal radius fracture, both to improve intraarticular reduction and to assess the damage to other structures Subchondral bone loss required subchondral pinning with K-wires, which provided enough support to reduce the step-off but did not reduce the gap. It is difficult to reduce the gap using a hook probe when several fragments need to be reduced. Pinning can distract the fragments at any time. In addition, when fragments can move freely inside the joint, small ones are often removed resulting in a cartilage defect ( Associated damage has been documented in other published studies: up to 60% of patients have scapholunate or luno-triquetral injuries or TFCC injuries that can cause distal radioulnar instability. Our results are consistent with this: 30% of patients had SL ligament damage and 30% had TFCC damage ( We chose to perform ORIF with a volar locking plate instead of pinning the fractures with K-wires. Some studies have found that plate fixation provides better radiological, functional and clinical outcomes We found screws that jutted into the joint on the CT scans of two patients in the plate group at 3 months postoperative. There were no other complications. Arthroscopy improves the intraarticular reduction but it makes the surgery longer, although the tourniquet time is always less than 120 Our study suffers some limitations: patients were not randomized and the follow-up is too short to determine the effectiveness of arthroscopy assistance. Surgical treatment of intraarticular fractures of the distal radius in young adults has several goals: restore the anatomy of the distal radius; be stable enough to allow early rehabilitation because of the functional demand of this young population; provide the most anatomical articular reduction possible to prevent the development of radiocarpal and midcarpal OA in the long-term; make it possible to diagnose and treat any associated injuries discovered. ORIF meets the first two criteria, but by itself, it cannot fully restore the joint's anatomy, which is the key driver of the outcomes for these fractures. The addition of intraoperative arthroscopy improves these major criteria, and likely the long-term outcomes of patients and their wrists. With simple fractures (two or three fragments), arthroscopy helps to obtain anatomical reduction. With complex fractures, arthroscopy helps to reduce the occurrence of articular damage. This occurs through the stabilization of fragments with subchondral K-wires and the removal osteochondral fragments that cannot be secured and could become intraarticular loose bodies. It also helps to make sure screws do not protrude inside the joint. We believe that arthroscopy is a useful, if not indispensable tool for treating intraarticular fractures of the distal radius in young patients, improving the overall intraoperative surgical outcome of these fractures. This technique is fairly new and its use has been spreading rapidly. We hope that studies with a longer follow-up will help to demonstrate that arthroscopy helps to protect against non-dissociated carpal instabilities and the development of OA. C. F.: Conferences: invited speaker by Allergan, Baxter, IPSEN, MERZ; no other conflicts of interest. The other authors declare that they have no competing interest. None of the authors received subsidies from Strycker The authors wish to thank Joanne Archambault, PhD, for editorial assistance during the preparation of this manuscript, and Helene Behal (Department of biostatistics, Univ. Lille, CHU Lille, EA 2694 – Santé publique, épidémiologie et qualité des soins, 59000 Lille, France).