The present paper deals with the speciation of selenium in potatoes (enriched or not in selenium). The study was carried out by using differential pulse cathodic stripping voltammetry (DPCSV) for quantifying selenium. Results obtained provide evidence that the selenium content in the protein fraction is rather independent from the selenium added to the plants during their growth. On the contrary, the amount of Se in the non-protein fraction (water and starch) in Se-enriched sample is significantly higher than in non-enriched one, suggesting that it is the main selenium-storing site. In this fraction the Se(VI)/Se(IV) ratio seems independent from selenium application but it may be related to the redox conditions. The accumulation of selenium in the non-protein fraction is tentatively ascribed to the “Se–starch interaction” that should be able to modulate both the Se absorption into proteins and, possibly, its toxic effect for the plant itself.Selenium is a very important essential trace element for mammalians, being essential in a very narrow concentration range; outside this range deficiency or toxicity occurs The daily intake of selenium depends on its concentration level in food and on the amount of food consumed: the recommended intake is 80 μg/day for men and 55 μg/day for women In the previous study we demonstrated how several polysaccharides (starch, cellulose derivatives, amylopectine etc.) can bind Se(IV), forming a true adduct. Adduct formation seems unaffected by the polysaccharides charge; on the contrary, a dependence on the molecular weight seems to exist In the present work we investigate the distribution of selenium in potatoes (normal and selenium-enriched) to clarify the role of starch on selenium speciation in the considered matrix. A primary standard solution of 2 g L 2 g L For the method validation, the following reference standard materials (from the National Institute for Standard Technology (NIST)) were analyzed: Rice Flour (SRM 1568a) and Durum Wheat Flour (RM 8436). When possible Suprapure reagents were used. In particular the following were used: H Amyloglucosidase (12,000 units g Double distilled mercury and ultra pure deionized water ( All measurements were carried out by an Amel model 433A (Amel Instruments, Milan, Italy) computerized polarograph (controlled by dedicated software running on a 486 personal computer). The potential of the working electrode (a hanging mercury drop (HMDE)) was referred to an Ag, AgCl/KCl Samples were homogenized by an Ultra Turax T18 (IKA) homogenizer. A model TGS2 Hewlett-Packard termobalance (10 °C/min) was used for water content determination. Before use, all containers were treated for at least one week, first with 1:4 HNO 1 g of sample cut into small pieces and put in 10 ml of (0.1 mol L Both sample digestion and selective reduction of Se(VI) to Se(IV) were always performed in a microwave oven, by using specific heating programs. For the determination of the total selenium content of the samples, mineralization was carried out on 0.6–0.8 g (100 mg for reference materials) of the rough sample, treated with 10 ml of a 9:1 of concentrated HNO The reduction of Se(VI) to Se(IV) was achieved by heating the samples (made 2 mol L Before recording the voltammogram, the solution was deaerated by ultrapure nitrogen at different times according to the selenium concentration level that had to be detected (at least 15 min) and kept under nitrogen atmosphere during measurements. The selenium concentration was always evaluated by differential pulse cathodic stripping voltammetry (DPCSV) in 0.1 mol L The selenium content was always determined by the multiple standard additions method (generally four additions); each data point used was the average of at least four distinct measurements). All the data reported throughout the paper was always the average of at least three separate analyses. In the present work the analysis of the speciation of selenium in potatoes was evaluated by using DPCSV for determining the selenium. DPCSV determination of selenium was always carried out adding to the sample a constant concentration of Cu Thee following reactions occur in two steps: preconcentration: H Stripping: Cu The cathodic scan produces a peak of − 550 mV whose height is proportional to the selenium concentration. The selenium determination in the presence of copper is more sensitive and less affected by the interference of heavy metals than that carried out without copper In The repeatability and the accuracy of the method were evaluated by ten replicate analyses (by multiple standard addition method) on standard solutions whose concentrations were respectively: 4 ng L The reliability of the results, especially for trace elements determination, generally depends on the kind and complexity of matrices taken into consideration; to this end frequently some treatments (as for instance mineralization processes) of the matrices are needed. Sample digestion is usually obtained by treating the sample (for several times, under heat) with concentrated mineral acids (single or in mixture): HNO The selective reduction of Se(VI) to Se(IV) is usually taken by HCl The analytical method reliability was checked analyzing NIST reference standard materials whose total content in selenium is certified. These standard reference materials were Rice Flour (SRM 1568a) and Durum Wheat Flour (RM 8436). They were analyzed according to the procedure reported in the The analysis of selenium speciation was carried out with the main purpose to verify the role (if any) of starch in affecting the selenium speciation in tubers. The approach is described by the flow diagram reported in Since the amyloglucosidase induces starch breakdown to glucose, the inorganic Se possibly involved in adducts with starch should be rendered free. The digestion step to be performed on the two fractions (solution and residue) has to be necessarily different according to the matrix complexity and for the purpose to be reached: on the solution it should avoid interferences without changes in the selenium oxidation state, on the contrary on residue (where Se is part of the protein structures) a strong action is required to free the selenium; note that a strong treatment favors the highest oxidation state. In the former case (i.e., in solution), a digestion with concentrated HNO The protein content of the samples was determined by Kieldal method and 6.25 was assumed for the conversion of nitrogen in proteins. Water content was determined by thermogravimetry. Besides the contents of water and protein, the total selenium content and its distribution in the considered potato samples are reported in From the table analysis, we reach the following considerations: In the two samples, the protein content is practically the same; The starch content is quite different: assuming that a potato is essentially constituted by protein, water, and starch, we can estimate that in the starch in selenium-enriched sample is ≅ The total selenium content, determined separately, agrees (within the experimental error) with the sum of the different forms from the analysis of speciation. Despite the total Se content higher (≈ The selenium is accumulated in non-protein part of tuber (starch and water). In the non-protein part of both potato samples, Se(VI) is more abundant than Se(IV). The Se(VI)-to-Se(IV) ratio is ≈ The higher starch content of the selenium-enriched sample suggests that the added Se stimulates starch production as previously reported by other authors The different total selenium content in the two samples obviously is the consequence of the different Se concentration (probably added as Se(VI) in view of its higher solubility) experimented during the sample growth. Although it is unknown that both concentration and chemical form as well as the procedure used to get Se-enriched-potatoes, addition seems to influence the selenium distribution in the samples. The similar Se(VI)-to-Se(IV) ratio found in the non-protein fraction of the two samples, suggests that the Se distribution in this fraction is not determined by the Se addition itself, but by the Se addition, by the red-ox conditions during the samples growth. The rather constant Se content in the protein fraction suggests that the two samples contain proteins very similar in structure; in addition, the Se absorption mechanism into the protein structure seems not to be so greatly affected by the total selenium present during plant growth. In truth, the selenium adsorption mechanism changes depending on the kind of plant considered. In selenium-non-enriching plants, enzymes are unable to distinguish between selenium and sulfur; therefore, the adsorbed selenium substitutes the sulfur in some residue present in the protein sequences and, if the selenium content overcomes a critical value it becomes toxic for the plant itself. By contrast, primary selenium-enriching plants can live and grow on soils containing high selenium concentration because, besides the aforementioned mechanism, are also able to convert adsorbed selenium in non-protein aminoacids less toxic for themselves In potatoes, selenium is mainly stored in the non-protein fraction probably as inorganic Se, even if organic forms cannot be excluded. If so, an important role could be played by starch in determining the storage mechanisms. As mentioned above, Se(IV) forms with starch (and more in general with polysaccharides) a true adduct (log The starch should act in a similar way, and the higher selenium content in non-protein fraction for selenium-enriched potato agrees with these findings. But, how may we explain the Se(VI) content highly prevalent over Se(IV)? May it be only due to its higher water solubility or other factors could play an important role? So, it will be of interest to clarify if, like Se(IV), Se(VI) is able to interact with starch. At present any information is available about possibility of Se(VI)–polysaccharides interaction; in any case this interaction, if present, will be rather hard to be evaluate, due to the lack of suitable (specific) techniques sensitive enough for its direct detection in presence also of other selenium forms. To better clarify the whole mechanism involving speciation of selenium in potatoes, very important would be to have available samples grown under rigorously controlled treatment conditions: chemical form, concentration, and way of application of selenium.