A commercially available extractant, LIX®63 was used to investigate the extraction of molybdenum(VI) and vanadium(V) from a synthetic sulphuric acid leach solution of spent hydrodesulphurisation catalysts. The molybdenum(VI) and vanadium(V) were extracted and separated completely from other metals at pH 1.5. The loaded organic solution was easily stripped by NaOH solution with excellent phase separation. After the precipitation of most of the vanadium(V) as ammonium vanadate from the loaded strip liquor, a pure molybdate solution could be obtained by further removing the small amount of vanadium(V) remaining in the filtrate using Aliquat 336 at pH 8.5. Therefore, both pure molybdenum(VI) and vanadium(V) products can be obtained. The separation of nickel(II) and cobalt(II) from iron(III) and aluminium(III) in the raffinate after the recovery of molybdenum(VI) and vanadium(V) could be achieved by ion exchange with Dowex M4195 resin. A process flowsheet has been developed to recover the valuable metals from leach solutions of spent hydrodesulphurisation catalysts.Among secondary resources, spent catalysts are undoubtedly very important because of not only their large amounts and enormous economic values, but also because of the environmental concerns associated with their disposal. Spent hydrodesulphurisation (HDS) catalysts usually consist of molybdenum sulphide mixed with sulphides of vanadium, cobalt and nickel on an alumina carrier. A number of metallurgical processes are reviewed and reported to treat these catalysts ( In recent decades, many researchers have studied and developed solvent extraction processes for the separation and recovery of molybdenum and vanadium from leach solutions (  A commercial hydroxyoxime extractant LIX Firstly, the authors used vanadyl sulphate (VOSO Secondly, the selective stripping or scrubbing of vanadium (IV) from the organic solution to separate it from molybdenum(VI) was not complete, resulting in impure products, especially, molybdenum(VI). It would be better to bulk-strip both metals and recover them as pure products in another solvent extraction circuit. Thirdly, the separation of nickel(II) and cobalt(II) from iron(III) and aluminium(III) in the raffinate using the SSX system consisting of Cyanex To solve these problems, the present study was carried out to investigate the separation and recovery of molybdenum(VI), vanadium(V), nickel(II) and cobalt(II) from leach solutions of spent HDS catalysts. Based on the present study, a process flowsheet has been proposed. Reagent LIX The organic system consisting of LIX To determine the metal extraction distribution isotherms, the organic system containing 0.50 Batch adsorption tests with ion exchange resin were carried out by equilibrating the resin (10 The two phases of the solution mixture samples taken were separated through a Whatman 1PS filter paper. The aqueous phase of each sample was, again, filtered through a 0.45 The feed solution was contacted with 0.5 It is noted that the extraction pH isotherm of vanadium(V) in It is also noted that the extraction of molybdenum(VI) and vanadium(V) was not pH dependent in the pH range tested of 1.0–2.0, indicating the extraction of these two metals by LIX The molybdenum(VI) and vanadium(V) extraction distribution isotherms with the SX system consisting of 0.5 The SX system consisting of 0.5 The stripping distribution isotherms of molybdenum(VI) and vanadium(V) from a loaded LIX In order to obtain products of molybdenum(VI) and vanadium(V), reasonably high concentrations of both metals in the loaded strip liquor are normally required. A test was conducted using 1 With 1 Ammonium salt precipitation is the primary and economic method for the separation of vanadium(V) from molybdenum(VI) in a molybdate solution containing relatively high concentration of vanadium(V) ( As can be seen, the best pH range for the separation of vanadium(V) from molybdenum(VI) was between 8.0 and 8.5. In this pH range, 94–97% V and 3.3–4.6% Mo were extracted after a single contact, indicating that vanadium(V) can be selectively extracted over molybdenum(VI). The extraction of vanadium(V) decreased significantly when the pH was higher than 8.5 or lower than 7.5 while the extraction of molybdenum(VI) increased when pH was lower than 8.0. This is mostly because Aliquat 336 more strongly extracts polynuclear than mononuclear anionic species. Based on the solution chemistry of molybdenum(VI) and vanadium(V) ( The stripping of vanadium(V) from the loaded Aliquat 336 organic solution was complete using a strip solution containing 1 The separation of nickel(II) and cobalt(II) from iron(III) and aluminium(III) in the raffinate after the removal of molybdenum(VI) and vanadium(V) could be achieved by ion exchange with Dowex M4195 resin ( The metal adsorption constants Based on the investigation and discussion above, a process flow sheet to separate and recover metal values such as molybdenum(VI), vanadium(V), nickel(II) and cobalt(II) from the synthetic leach solution of spent HDS catalysts using SX and IX technologies is proposed in The recovery of molybdenum(VI), vanadium(V), nickel(II) and cobalt(II) from synthetic sulphuric acid leach solutions of spent HDS catalysts by solvent extraction and ion exchange was studied. Both molybdenum(VI) and vanadium(V) can be selectively extracted over iron(III), aluminium(III), nickel(II) and cobalt(II) from the synthetic solution using 0.4 After the precipitation of vanadium(V) as ammonium vanadate to separate vanadium(V) from molybdenum(VI), Aliquat 336 was used to further remove a small amount of vanadium(V) remaining in the filtrate. The loaded Aliquat 336 was stripped and regenerated using a strip solution containing 1 The authors would like to thank Dr. Wensheng Zhang, Dr. Zhaowu Zhu, Dr. Weiwei Wang and Mr Yoko Pranolo for assistance in the test work. Dr Matthew Jeffrey is thanked for reviewing this paper and providing valuable comments. Shell Chemicals provided the Shellsol D70 diluents and Cognis Australia the LIX