The understanding of the carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) mineralization is essential to mitigate the climate change and improve the soil quality for agricultural sustainability. An incubation study was carried out to investigate the effects of corncob-derived biochar with and without the corncob residues, as added organic matter (AOM), on C and N mineralization in an organic C deficient alkaline soil. The study used biochar produced from corncobs by pyrolysing the biomass at 400°C and consisted of four treatments: unamended control soil, soil +2% biochar (45tonsha−1), soil +2% corncob residue (45tonsha−1) and soil +1% corncob residue +1% biochar (22.5tonsha−1 each of biochar and residue). Soil C mineralization was quantified by measuring soil respiration periodically throughout the experiment over the 54d incubation period. Soils were analyzed for microbial biomass C (MBC), water extractable organic C (WEOC) and N mineralization. We also calculated microbial metabolic quotient (qCO2), net C mineralization (NCM), net CO2 efflux and priming effect values. The results revealed that only a very little fraction of biochar was respired whereas a high proportion of corncob was decomposed. Biochar addition suppressed decomposition of native and AOM by 16.31% and 30.13% respectively through negative priming effect (−40.01%). Compared to the corncob residue alone, addition of biochar with corncob residue significantly increased MBC but decreased WEOC, qCO2, NCM and net CO2 efflux. Moreover, residue significantly increased the net CO2 efflux, NCM and qCO2 and, at the same time, decreased net N mineralization. Extractable NH4
                     +-N, NO3
                     −-N and mineral-N contents were the highest in the biochar and biochar+residue treatments. In addition, biochar alone and in combination with residue resulted in higher negative net N mineralization/immobilization. Enhanced MBC contents and reduced qCO2 indicated efficient C utilization by microorganisms. The results of this study conclude that biochar could decrease C mineralization but enhanced microbial C use efficiency and, therefore, offer an important management strategy to improve C sequestration in nutrient and organic C deficient alkaline soil. The results also imply that the amendment of corncob residue with biochar had a potential to reduce the rate of the soil N leaching and N2O emission by N immobilization and sorption to biochar.Biochar is a potentially effective soil management strategy to increase the carbon (C) status in the soil-plant systems ( Biochar is a recalcitrant organic material produced from thermal decomposition of biomass in complete absence or partial presence of air through pyrolysis ( Biochar acts as a soil conditioner and increases soil fertility and quality by improving soil physico-chemical and biological properties owing to the large surface area, high porosity and charge density ( Biochar is a rich source of C which is not directly utilized by plants but plays an important role in biogeochemical processes to improve the soil fertility and quality. Changes in soil structure are the results of surface oxidation and a minor utilization of C by microbes as a substrate ( Nitrogen (N) is an essential nutrient for plant growth and plants take up N in the form of NH Application of biochar is emerging as an attractive approach to improve crop production and soil quality, enhance soil C and mitigate the climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions in wide variety of agroecosystems. However, research on these effects of biochar is still young and unavailability of robust data and heterogeneity among the available data, particularly of biochar effects on microbial activity and crop productivity under varying soil types, and environmental or climatic conditions pose major challenge ( assess the effects of corncob-derived biochar on the decomposition of native and corncob residues as AOM through a possible priming effect; investigate changes in microbial activity and C turnover in terms of MBC, WEOC, evaluate the impacts of biochar addition on soil N mineralization, and interaction between C and N pools in less fertile soil. Soil for this study was collected from an agricultural field under historical wheat-rice crop rotation at University of Agriculture Faisalabad Pakistan (31.4329° N, 73.0671° E). The agroecology of the field plot falls in sub-tropical monsoon climate, and the average rainfall at the site is 200 The surface soil samples (0–15 In this study, corncob residues were used as a source of fresh AOM and also as a feedstock for biochar production. Fresh corncobs were collected from an agricultural field after the maize harvest. The corncobs were dried in an oven at 70 The corncob feedstock was pyrolyzed in laboratory setup following method of The laboratory microcosm incubation experiment consisted of four treatments: control (unamended soil); residue (soil biochar (soil biochar The rate of treatments was calculated by assuming soil bulk density of 1.51 Following the modified method of We calculated the interactive priming effect of biochar and corncob residue on C mineralization using method described by Although this method of estimating priming effect is simple and has been used successfully, it has certain disadvantages compared to the isotopic labeling method of calculating priming effect. For example, it doesn't clearly distinguish between CO Based on cumulative CO In this equation: Net CO Net N mineralization for each treatment was quantified by subtracting extractable mineral N contents of the unamended control soil from extractable mineral N contents found in each treatment ( Soil pH and electrical conductivity (EC) were measured in 1:5 soil to water suspension using the standardized pH meter (HANNA Model 210) and EC meter (HANNA Model HI 8733), respectively. pH and EC of feedstock and biochar were also measured using the same protocol but at 1:10 (amendment: water, w/v ratio). Soil organic matter and total organic carbon were measured by dichromate oxidation and subsequent titration with acidified ferrous ammonium sulfate using a modified Walkley and Black method ( After the incubation period, the microcosms were removed from jars, the soil was taken out of the microcosms gently and transferred into clean plastic bags and always kept at 4 Soil moisture contents were determined by the gravimetric method by oven drying the soil at 105 Following the methods of The pool of soil microbial biomass carbon (MBC) was determined by fumigation extraction method ( Soil extractable mineral N contents were measured with the method of The C and N pools were expressed on an oven-dry soil weight basis. Data were tested for normality and homogeneity of variations, and, if required, were log-transformed prior to statistical analysis. We used one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) test to study the treatment effects on soil cumulative respiration, MBC, WEOC, Soil, corncob residue and biochar contained 9.21, 426.9 and 732.7 Treatment effects on changes in soil respiration rate over the 54 Effects of treatments on MBC and WEOC are shown in The treatments also had significant effect on the soil WEOC contents ( Changes in NCM had large and significant difference in response to the addition of residue and biochar alone or in combination ( We found significant treatment effects on soil extractable NH Significant individual and interactive treatments effects were examined on net CO The addition of corncob residue showed the highest rate of soil respiration followed by residue plus biochar treatment, implying that raw corncob residue contained easily biodegradable labile organic C pool which caused an increase in the rate of soil respiration ( It must be noted, however, that calculation of apparent and real priming effect requires the use of differentially labelled native and AOM ( MBC contents were not significantly different between the control and biochar amended soils suggesting the low microbial availability of C derived from biochar due to adsorption of nutrients and microbes on its porous surface, responsible for possible suppressing the microbial metabolism and growth ( Our study showed the highest negative N mineralization/immobilization and/or retention in soil treated with biochar alone or with residue. Extractable mineral N contents were also higher in the biochar and biochar plus residue treatment than the residue alone soil. This decrease in mineral N in the presence of biochar could indicate that organic N from residue decomposition was assimilated into microbial biomass rather than being mineralized ( Interaction between C and N cycling is inevitable. We found negative correlation between net CO Interaction between C and N cycling is inevitable. We found negative correlation between net CO We investigated the effects of corncob-derived biochar on mineralization of native and AOM in low fertility alkaline soil in a laboratory incubation study. A major finding of this short-term study was the reduction in decomposition of native and AOM with biochar by inducing negative priming effect. Very little C from biochar was respired. Lower fractions of mineral N were extracted from biochar amended soil whereas there was reduction in net N mineralization which, simultaneously, suggested N immobilization and/or retention. However, biochar resulted in higher microbial biomass C and lower The following is the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The authors are thankful to