Sintered solid porous pellets of copper sulfide (Cu2S) and Cu2S/FeS were electrolysed at a cell voltage of 2.2–2.8V to elemental Cu, S and Cu, Fe, S, respectively in molten CaCl2–NaCl at 800°C under the protection of argon gas. The process parameters for optimal electrolysis are presented. The electrolysis products are characterized by microscopic techniques and XRD. The product characteristics are linked to the process parameters. The direct electrolysis of the sulfide to copper with the emission of elemental sulphur offers an attractive green process route for the treatment of copper ore.Over 90% of the world's primary copper on the earth's crust is present in the form of sulfide minerals, such as chalcocite (Cu Thus, it is essential to find a method to capture most of the sulphur in a stable form, especially as elemental sulphur. In the past few years, a generic process Even though the electro-reduction principles have been presented in a number of earlier publications During the above process with respect to oxide materials, the use of graphite anodes leads inevitably to the carbon getting oxidized, leading to the emission of CO and CO In this respect, the following reactions are considered: The values of standard Gibbs free energy in this work were all calculated by Factsage Software It can be seen that the formation of CS is not thermodynamically favoured. On the other hand, CS CaCl The crucible was filled with CaCl After the electrolysis, the electrodes were held above the molten salts and cooled to room temperature under argon gas protection. The cathode was washed with distilled water and subjected to an ultrasonic treatment. For Cu  During every experimental run, a yellow powder deposit could always be observed along the tube, gas path and in the condenser without any liquid condensate indicating that the formation of CS For the electrolysis of Cu Thus, when the electrolysis starts, sulphur in Cu This would explain the presence of CaS in the cathode product in the early stages of electrolysis. However, under a relative high voltage of 2.8 Reaction If the CaS formed had a low solubility in the salt melt, it could be present in the form of Ca During the present series of experiments, the graphite anode almost remained intact after every experimental run, confirming the negligible formation of the anodic product, CS EDS analysis of the different locations in a partially reduced pellet as shown in  In the present experiments, no special steps were taken to purify the salt mixtures such as purification by chlorine gas. Further, high purity argon gas was used in the electrolysis experiments as supplied without taking extra precautions for the removal of traces of oxygen, moisture and carbon dioxide. This would mean that the following possible side reactions might occur: Even assuming that the partial pressure of SO Since CaCl The generated HCl can react with Cu CuCl has a low decomposition voltage of In the present work, an attempt was also made to explain the formation of the needle-like structure close to the surface as shown in The current efficiency and energy consumption can be estimated from the current–time plots during electrolysis in combination with corresponding sulphur contents in the electrolysis products by chemical analysis. In the case of pure Cu Attempts were also made in the present investigation to study the electro-reduction of chalcopyrite. But the chalcopyrite pellet started disintegrating during the process, leading inevitably to material loss into the bulk electrolyte. Preliminary experiments with chalcopyrite show that prior heating of CuFeS XRD patterns of the reduced Cu The results obtained so far show a promising green process route for treatment of copper ore by the electro-reduction method. However, further work is needed to be carried out in order to understand the reduction mechanism of pellet, formation of the dendritic- and needle-structure, collection of anode sulphur, optimization of process parameters such as cell voltage, sintering temperature and pellet porosity to improve the current efficiency, etc. In the present work, a potential process for copper extraction from copper ores in molten CaCl The Swedish Foundation for Strategic Environmental Research (Mistra, project No. 88032) and Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 50425415) are acknowledged for the financial support of this work. The first author is grateful to the content of the analysis for anode product from Li et al.