The further development of Fe0-based remediation technology depends on the profound understanding of the mechanisms involved in the process of aqueous contaminant removal. The view that adsorption and co-precipitation are the fundamental contaminant removal mechanisms is currently facing a harsh scepticism. Results from electrochemical cementation are used to bring new insights in the process of contaminant removal in Fe0/H2O systems. The common feature of hydrometallurgical cementation and metal-based remediation is the heterogeneous nature of the processes which inevitably occurs in the presence of a surface scale. The major difference between both processes is that the surface of remediation metals is covered by layers of own oxide(s) while the surface of the reducing metal in covered by porous layers of the cemented metal. The porous cemented metal is necessarily electronic conductive and favours further dissolution of the reducing metal. For the remediation metal, neither a porous layer nor a conductive layer could be warrant. Therefore, the continuation of the remediation process depends on the long-term porosity of oxide scales on the metal surfaces. These considerations rationalized the superiority of Fe0 as remediation agent compared to thermodynamically more favourable Al0 and Zn0. The validity of the adsorption/co-precipitation concept is corroborated.The use of metallic iron (Fe The prevailing concept was introduced in the early phase of investigations regarding the mechanism of aqueous contaminant removal by Fe It is important to notice that the reductive transformation concept has never been univocally accepted An alternative concept regards the oxide scale on Fe The present communication is motivated by recent publications speaking disparagingly about the concept of adsorption/co-precipitation as fundamental mechanisms of aqueous contaminant removal in the presence of Fe Aqueous iron corrosion on which remediation with metallic iron is based is a heterogeneous electrochemical process. A simplistic mechanism for iron oxidative dissolution involves four major steps: (i) diffusion of the oxidizing agent (H The presentation above recalled that iron corrosion at pH In batch experiments or fluidised beds, the rate of contaminant removal by Fe The example of the usefulness of mixing operations in investigating processes involving iron corrosion reveals that care must be taken while using well-documented results from other branches of science in designing experiments and/or interpreting new experimental data. A further example is the way to experimentally evidence a chemically controlled reaction. To demonstrate the occurrence of a chemical reaction in a system, the temperature of the system should be varied. An increased reaction rate with increasing temperature is a strong proof for chemical reaction The present communication aims at presenting some aspects of the electrochemical cementation process as used in the hydrometallurgy and discusses their usefulness for metallic iron as currently used in environmental remediation. Two particular aspects will be discussed in some details: (i) the differential reactivity and the suitability of aluminium, iron and zinc as removing agent, and (ii) the proper consideration of the surface scale on Fe Cementation is an electrochemical process by which a more noble metal ion ( The thermodynamic basis of cementation can be summarized as follows: The standard free energy (Δ Cementation is one of the most effective and economic techniques for removing valuable metals from industrial effluents The control of the pH value is a key task for the cementation process for a variety of reasons including: (i) corrosion damage of reactors, (ii) excess dissolution of the reducing metal (Al, Fe and Zn), and (iii) hydroxide precipitation. Accordingly, the determination of the optimal pH value is an important economical issue for any cementation plant. The impact of pH on the performance of Al, Fe and Zn as reducing metal will be discussed on the basis of the results from Hg   The presentation above clearly shows that cementation is optimally performed under conditions where ions from the reducing metal (here, Al Diffusion is a spontaneous process involving mobility of species due to the existence of a concentration gradient in a system. The extend of diffusion depend on (i) the properties of the diffusing species (including their size) and (ii) the structure of the diffusion layer (connectivity, morphology, porosity, pore site distribution or tortuosity). Here the diffusion layer is a precipitated scale (oxide scale). Oxide layers on remediation metals are formed at pH It is well-documented that upon immersion, the surface of aluminium is rapidly covered by a very thin and adherent layer of oxide (protective layer). Accordingly, despite theoretical thermodynamic suitability, Al is a worse remediation metal than Fe and Zn. As seen above ( The formation of surface scale on immersed elemental metals is a common feature for remediation with metallic elements and electrochemical cementation ( The avoidance of the oxide scale formation on elemental metals under natural conditions is not possible. Therefore, one could only discuss or access their porosity and their electronic conductivity. As a rule an electronic conductive oxide scale cannot be expected under environmental conditions. In fact, regardless from the availability and abundance of molecular oxygen (anoxic or oxic conditions), Fe In conclusion, a careful consideration of the optimal conditions for the hydrometallurgical process of cementation using Al