We introduce a new miniature double direct shear (mini-DDS) apparatus, housed within a standard-triaxial (TEMCO) pressure vessel, capable of concurrently measuring the evolution of frictional strength, stability, healing and along-fault permeability under in situ conditions of stress and temperature. The apparatus accommodates gouge samples (25 mm × 32 mm) and intact rock samples with confining and shear stresses and pore pressures up to ∼26 MPa. Permeability may be measured with applied flow rates ranging from 1.67 × 10−11 to 3.6 × 10−6 m3/s to a flow accuracy of 0.5% representing a lower bound of permeability >2.2 × 10−18 m2. Sliding velocities are in the range 0.1 μm/s to 0.67 cm/s with a frame stiffness of 0.067 kN/μm. We describe protocols and procedures for calibration and experiments and note the potential of the apparatus for both rapid and extended-duration measurements of friction-permeability evolution and healing. The apparatus returns measurements of friction and stability of reference materials of F110 quartz consistent with the literature while additionally allowing the concurrent measurement of permeability. Permeability of F110 quartz evolves in slide-hold-slide (SHS) experiments with increases during holds and decreases during subsequent slides. These observations are consistent with grain crushing and resultant wear products that reduce that permeability by clogging during slides with unclogging of the major fluid channels occurring during shearing.Fault gouge is unconsolidated, granular wear materials that are developed by shearing and grinding through relative movement of slipping wall rocks. Measurement of the frictional (frictional strength, stability, and healing behavior) and hydrologic properties (permeability, pore pressure) provide fundamental characteristics to predict fault zone stability and subsurface fluid migration. Fluid overpressures may lubricate the fault and reduce the effective normal stress that locks the fault, promoting slip. This overpressure may result from thermal pressurization due to shear heating, commonly seen in the natural systems, Many previous studies have focused on characterizing the influence of mineralogical composition of gouge on shear strength, frictional stability and permeability evolution. These properties must be measured simultaneously as permeability is a clear function of shear strain. Much work has shown that clay-rich fault gouges incorporate weak minerals with a coefficient of friction <0.5 that impart a velocity strengthening response during slip. Even small increases in clay concentrations can dramatically reduce the permeability of fault gouge, possibly reaching four orders of magnitude, as clay content increases from 0 to 50% under otherwise identical conditions In order to answer these questions, we first develop a new experimental method that can concurrently measure frictional and hydrological properties of fault gouge. This method is inspired by stiffer and more cumbersome large-scale double direct shear apparatuses, The new miniature double direct shear (mini-DDS) configuration can be run within the TEMCO simple-triaxial core holder by appropriately miniaturizing the core configuration ( We prepare sample layers to a uniform initial thickness using a precision leveling jig, surrounding the perimeter of the side blocks with a flexible adhesive membrane. We then wrap Teflon tape around the U-shaped reaction plinth, preparing the sample and piston together, and attach the twin protection plates. This entire assembly is placed inside a rubber sleeve that is further sealed within a heat-shrink jacket to isolate the sample from the confining fluid. The piston and the connected center (shear) platen can then move inside of the Latex sleeve with all other parts of the core configuration fixed. The shear platen runs into the U-shape platen as the shear displacement is incremented and is guarded within the side protection plates. This entire assembly is then placed inside the TEMCO vessel as shown in To better understand the fidelity and resolution of friction and permeability measurements made with the mini-DDS configuration within the TEMCO vessel, we first calibrate out machine and jacket stiffnesses. We then measure friction, the velocity dependence of friction, then healing properties of reference materials F110 (99% of quartz) to validate the new DDS against standard measurements. Finally, we characterize permeability response concurrently with friction measurements during SHS experiments. Machine stiffness reflects the elastic interaction between specimen and testing machine. To measure the machine stiffness, we place an equal length of rigid steel cylinder instead of core (see configuration in In this measurement, three load-unload cycles are conducted in succession, as shown in The jacket retains the integrity of the core configuration inside the TEMCO vessel, isolates the sample from the confining fluid and also contains the interior fluid saturant, allowing the measurement of permeability. Thus, the jacket is an essential feature of the apparatus, but higher degrees of security with more cumbersome jackets result in elevated resistance and larger required corrections for jacket/membrane resisting force. Jacket resistance is defined as the extensile force of the latex sleeve when it is being stretched as center platen slides in shear under confining stress. An analysis of the shear platen system is presented in We use lubricated polished steel platens in lieu of the sample ( An illustrative example (Exp No. 1) under a confining stress of 2 MPa is shown in It is shown in In laboratory friction experiments, friction coefficient is usually recovered from the ratios of shear force to normal force as If we take jacket stiffness into consideration, the frictional coefficient can be expressed as Finally, we illustrate the importance of the jacket resistance correction ( We examine the response of F110 quartz sand to test the fidelity of friction measurements recovered from the mini-DDS. We shear-in the sample at a confining stress of 2 MPa and at a constant load-point velocity of 10 μm/s to steady state and then conduct velocity-stepping (VS) experiments with a repetitive velocity schedule of 1-3-10 μm/s. We then increase the confining pressure to 6 MPa and repeat the velocity step schedule. It is apparent that the F110 is frictionally strong ( A single velocity step on F110 is magnified in The mini-DDS is specifically designed for the rapid and simultaneous measurement of frictional properties and permeability. To identify the independence and reproducibility of the concurrent measurements we first measure permeability of F110 under static non-shearing conditions before extending to concurrent measurements. Permeability is measured under a constant effective stress, as before, but for null shearing velocity in the same configuration of We measure permeability continuously as pressure difference is incremented under constant confining stress of 6 MPa. For each step, flow rate stabilizes as the sample saturates with steady state reached >200 s as the confining pressure is incremented ( If the tested material is rigid, homogenous and isotropic, the permeability will be insensitive to effective stress – this is not the case for gouge. For example, the permeability of the reference gouge varies between 0.8 and 1.5 × 10 Maintaining both confining and pore pressures constant during experiments limits the impact on permeability from friction/shearing response. Thus, in the further concurrent measurement of frictional properties and permeability, constant effective stress is applied and permeability is then recovered from the assumed steady state with a constant pressure difference of 30 kPa. In this condition, flow rate is sufficiently low to limit the mobilization of fines and prevent local increases in porosity and permeability. In addition, applying a relatively low pressure difference limits the frequency of refilling pumps during the experiment that result in discontinuous recording of friction-permeability. We conduct two identical experiments to examine the reproducibility and robustness of the frictional and hydraulic properties recovered from shearing F110 at a confining stress of 5 MPa. We first fluid saturates the sample with de-ionized water (Pump C, constant upstream pressure) and initiate shear at a prescribed loading rate of 10 μm/s until steady friction is reached (peak shear stress). The sample is then subjected to a series of load point velocity-stepping experiments, followed by a slide-hold-slide (SHS) sequence with hold times of 100s, 300s, 500s, and 1000s. ( The evolution of permeability is monitored during the experiment and fluctuates around ∼1.2 × 10 Shear stress, velocity change and permeability evolution of SHS experiments are zoomed-in and shown in We describe the assembly, experimental procedure and response of the mini-DDS apparatus for the concurrent measurement of friction, stability and shear parallel permeability on analog fault gouge. The assembly allows the DDS to be deployed within a traditional cylindrical standard-triaxial core holder such as a TEMCO enabling coupled frictional-stability-permeability experiments to be completed with ease, rapidity and precision. Different form other devices, our mini-DDS is capable of conducting extended duration experiments (time scale order of months) to explore the long-term rheological and permeability behavior, representative of inter-seismic repose, without consuming significant resources. Additionally, the DDS is highly compatible for expansions such as dilation/compaction monitoring using sample mounted strain gages, active ultrasonic mapping of fracture propagation and passive acoustic emission of micro earthquakes. The setup is also capable of injecting high pressure or chemically reactive fluids to investigate fault response to abrupt reactivation and geo-chemical reactions. Despite thorough calibrations for jacket resistance, experiments at high confining pressure (greater than 10 MPa), and gouge samples with large grain sizes (greater than 200 μm) are difficult to accomplish. Additionally, in the current configuration, the shear loading direction is aligned to that of fluid flow, and flow-back occurs when the shear platen invades the fluid-filled supporting base. This effect may be calibrated out by compensating for this reflux – evaluating this from the product of shear velocity and cross-sectional area of the platen as the volume rate incursion of the platen intrusion. This makes permeability measurement problematic where the magnitude of this calibrated flow-back is greater than the measured Darcy flow rate across the sample i.e. where a low-permeability sample is sheared at a relatively high velocity. Thus, if we consider permeability is determined with sufficient accuracy when flow back is 1/10 of the measured flow rate, we present the maximum shear velocities for a range of permeabilities from the lowest measurable value (2.2 × 10 A novel miniature double direct shear (mini-DDS) apparatus has been designed and assembled within a standard TEMCO pressure vessel, to concurrently measure the evolution of frictional strength, stability, healing and along-fault permeability under The mini-DDS is capable of conducting long-term experiments at a high resolution with comparable samples to conventional DDS setups and is flexible to future expansions, such as dilation/compaction monitoring using sample-mounted strain gauges; acoustic mapping of micro fracture propagation and its impact on permeability; and injecting high-pressure or reactive fluids to investigate the corresponding evolution of frictional and transport properties. System stiffness is carefully calibrated as 0.067 kN/μm. Jacket resistance and confining stress are positively correlated. System reliability is validated via reference materials, including F110, which are consistent with those reported in the literature. At early stages of deformation, shear velocity change induced dilation/compaction dominates permeability evolution: permeability enhances as velocity increases and declines as velocity decreases. As shear displacement accumulates, grain comminution becomes a more dominant mechanism with the generation of wear products causing permeability decreases during slip by clogging the fluid channels. During hold periods, unclogging occurs by fluid flow flushing of wear products and results in permeability enhancement. High confining stress (greater than a 10 MPa ceiling, depending on the penetration resistance of the jacket) and low shear loading rates, due to the mandatory compensation of shear extrusion, are current limitations of the mini-DDS apparatus. This work is a partial result of support provided by