Nickel composite coatings have been prepared on mild steel substrates by sediment electro-co-deposition (SECD) technique. Silicon nitride, fly ash and calcium fluoride are used as the reinforcements. Metallographic studies, microhardness, friction and wear tests under various loads and sliding speeds have been carried out on these coatings. Optical and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) studies on the worn surfaces were conducted. A theoretical model was used to predict the wear rates of the composite coatings. All the composite coatings exhibited a lower coefficient of friction and better wear resistance when compared with nickel coatings at all loads and sliding velocities studied. However, nickel–calcium fluoride composite coatings possessed the lowest coefficient of friction and wear rates. Significant effect of load and sliding speed on both the coefficient of friction and wear rates of nickel, nickel–silicon nitride and nickel–fly ash coatings has been observed. SEM studies of the worn surfaces reveal delamination process at higher loads. The predicted wear rates are in reasonable agreement with the experimental values.Friction and wear are surface phenomena and are of high concern especially in industrial components resulting in huge economic losses and sometimes lead to catastrophic failure Metal matrix composite coatings possessing excellent tribological properties In recent years, a modified electro-co-deposition technique, namely, sediment electro-co-deposition (SECD) Wear properties can be improved by use of hard metal ceramic composite coatings obtained by dispersing refractory oxides, nitrides and carbides in nickel matrix Thoroughly cleaned mild steel of dimensions 30 Sediment electro-co-deposition technique Optical, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and scanning transmission electron micrograph (STEM) studies were undertaken. Friction and wear behavior of the coatings were evaluated using an axially loaded thrust bearing type wear test rig The optical micrographs for all the three nickel composite coatings are shown in Microhardness studies showed that nickel–silicon nitride and nickel–fly ash composites exhibited much higher hardness as compared to the nickel coating. The microhardness of both the above composite systems increased with increase in volume percent of the reinforcements as shown in The effect of volume percent incorporation of silicon nitride, fly ash and calcium fluoride in nickel matrix on coefficient of friction of composite coatings are shown in The reduction in coefficient of friction of nickel silicon nitride composite can be due to the formation of SiO In case of nickel–CaF The effect of contact pressure (loads) on the coefficient of friction of nickel and nickel composite coatings are shown in The variation of coefficient of friction of nickel and nickel composite coatings with sliding velocities are shown in The decrease in coefficient of friction of nickel–CaF The variation of the wear rates of nickel composite coatings with different volume fractions of silicon nitride, fly ash and calcium fluoride are shown in The improvement in wear resistance of nickel–silicon nitride, nickel–fly ash composite coatings can be attributed to the following factors: The microhardness of these coatings increases with increasing volume percent of the reinforcements. Increasing hardness reduces the wear intensity. Levy et al. Existence of excellent bond between the matrix and the particles as evidenced by SEM of the worn sample of nickel–silicon nitride composite shown in There exists a formation of inhomogeneous transfer layer, which may consist of a mixture of iron debris, nickel matrix and fragments of second phases on the sliding surfaces under steady state of wear as shown in The effect of contact pressure (loads) on wear rates of nickel and nickel composite coatings are shown in The effect of sliding velocity on the wear rates of nickel and nickel composite coatings are shown in Four different mechanisms do dominate the process of material removal in composite coatings: (a) wear of the matrix, (b) particle sliding wear, (c) particle cracking, and (d) wear by particle/matrix separation at the interface. Considering the above mechanisms, the wear rate of composite coatings ( Assuming The wear rates of all the composite coatings were predicted using the above A value of 1.0×10  Nickel–silicon nitride, nickel–fly ash and nickel–calcium fluoride composite coatings exhibited lower coefficient of friction and better wear resistance as compared to nickel coatings at all the studied loads and sliding velocities. However, nickel–calcium fluoride composites possess lowest coefficient of friction as well as the lowest wear rates. Delamination wear processes dominates at higher loads. The predicted wear rates are in reasonable agreement with the experimental wear rates.