Processing of sulfide concentrates with high iron content in the hydrometallurgy of zinc increases the amount of obtained cakes containing 15–20% Zn and 25–30% Fe. The main reason for this undesirable process is the presence of a part of the zinc as insoluble ZnF2O4.
                  In this regard, 6 zinc concentrates of different origins were investigated using Mössbauer spectroscopy as well as chemical, XRD, DTA and TGA analyses. The relation between the phase content and the received TG and DTA curves, as well as the behavior of the main phases in the concentrates during their oxidation was established. On the basis of the Mössbauer spectra, the iron containing phases and their influence on the oxidation process were determined.
                  The results are used to choose the charge of concentrates for optimal oxidative roasting in fluidized bed furnace and for minimizing ferrite formation.Zinc is produced from zinc sulfide concentrates and by-products (slag, zinc dross and cakes, etc.) using pyro- or hydrometallurgical methods. Currently, more than 80% of the world production of zinc is carried out by the hydrometallurgical method, the first stage of which is oxidizing roasting of zinc sulfide concentrates in a fluidized bed furnace (FBF) Roasting of zinc sulfide concentrates is one of the most important processes in zinc hydrometallurgy. During the roasting process the sulfur in the concentrate is removed at a temperature of about 930–980 This is important especially today because zinc concentrates of different origins are processed and most of zinc producing plants import concentrates from various countries around the world. KCM S.A., Plovdiv, Bulgaria, for example, has imported and processed concentrates from Canada, USA, Peru, Australia, Morocco, Iran, almost all Balkan countries and others. Sphalerite is the most common sulfide zinc mineral in nature. It almost always contains iron. Iron in the zinc concentrate can be in the form of FeS The increased iron content in the processed zinc concentrates is a significant technological problem for zinc plants In order to reduce this adverse ferrite formation, a complete preliminary characterization of the zinc concentrates is required. Different number of zinc concentrates (often 10–12) of different origins, chemical compositions and grain sizes are usually used simultaneously in the practice of oxidative roasting. Various zinc-containing raw materials can be successfully processed using suitable charging, thus optimizing the technological process of roasting in fluidized bed furnace. The processing of low-grade zinc concentrates containing more than 8% iron causes difficulties in the leaching of zinc from the calcine obtained at roasting Currently, there is strict input control of zinc concentrates in zinc hydrometallurgical plants. Over 20 components are analyzed in order to determine whether the material is suitable for use in processes of concentrates roasting and calcine leaching For a profitable zinc production, the use of high quality concentrates containing more than 50% zinc, and up to 8% iron is required In this connection, the purpose of this study is to characterize 6 zinc sulfide concentrates of various origins using chemical, XRD analysis, DTA, TGA and Mössbauer spectroscopy. The results can be used for selecting a charge of the concentrates in order to obtain zinc calcine with the most appropriate chemical and phase composition. To accomplish this, a WEB-based programming system In this study six sulfide zinc concentrate originating from Bulgaria, Macedonia, Peru, Bosnia and Herzegovina were analyzed by different methods. The XRD analysis of the concentrates was carried out with an apparatus “TUR-M62” (Dresden, Germany) equipped with a computer-controlled HZG-4 goniometer with Co-K Mössbauer spectra (MS) were obtained at room temperature with a Wissel electromechanical Mössbauer spectrometer (Wissenschaftliche Elektronik GmbH, Germany) at a constant acceleration mode. A Thermogravimetric and differential thermal analyses (TG–DTG–DTA) were performed on a Stanton Redcroft thermal analyzer STA 780 (England) in the temperature range 20–1100 The oxidation of sulfide concentrates was performed in a fix bed in tube furnace. The air flow was 0.8 The degree of desulfurization of the concentrates is calculated on the basis of sulfur content obtained by using the apparatus SC632 Carbon/Sulfur Determinator by LECO Corporation, USA. The analysis of sulfur is carried out in the range 0.001%–20% at 1% RSD. The sample mass is 0.1 To obtain the content of zinc soluble in sulfuric acid, 1 A Web-based information system for the calculation of the chemical compositions of the charges of concentrates is used. It is built on a modular principle using server programming language PHP. Its main modules allow the construction, management and use of Web-based database of zinc concentrates The chemical compositions of the zinc concentrates used in this study are presented in The content of Zn, S, and Fe is an important characteristic of zinc sulfide concentrates. Four of the concentrates have iron contents exceeding the upper limit of 8 Only two of the concentrates meet the requirement for zinc content. Difficulties can arise due to the high content of lead in the concentrates which results in the possible formation of low-melt eutectics. This results in calcine aggregation, which further results in disruption of the fluidization during roasting, and increased content of Pb in the zinc cake, etc. A high content of SiO The high content of Cu and Cd in the concentrates impose difficulties during the purification of the obtained zinc sulfate solution as they cannot be easily removed. Particular attention should be paid to the contents of Co, Ni, Sb, As, Ga, In, Tl, Ge, Cl and F, all of which negatively affect zinc electrowinning. The zinc concentrates studied were subjected to XRD analysis to determine their mineral compositions. The obtained X-ray patterns are shown in The main phase of zinc sulfide concentrates is sphalerite ( The crystal lattice of The studies reported in literature Other iron-containing phases are FeS Values obtained for the parameter of the crystal lattice of With the use of Mössbauer spectroscopy, the content of iron containing phases in the zinc concentrates can be determined. Mössbauer spectra of the studied concentrates are presented in All Mössbauer spectra contain quadrupole doublets. In four of the concentrates (C1, C2, C4, C6), the observed parameters of hyperfine interaction isomer shift (IS) and quadrupole splitting (QS) correspond to the phase of pyrite (FeS Based on the results obtained by Mössbauer spectroscopy of the iron-containing phases and chemical composition of the concentrates, the part When the iron is included in the crystal lattice of ZnS (marmatite, christophite), and an oxidation process is taking place, the sulfur of the sulfide is replaced with oxygen. The obtained ZnO and Fe The results of the differential thermal (DTA) and thermo-gravimetric (TGA) analysis of the zinc sulfide concentrates are shown in DTA and TGA curves of the concentrates show a difference in the course of oxidation of sulfides. In concentrates C1–C6, through XRD analysis The results from the thermal study are interpreted on the basis of published data FeSO There is a mass increase of concentrates C1 and C2 that continues up to 665 The formation of ZnSO The oxidation of zinc concentrates C3-C6 takes place in a different way. The main process in this case is the oxidation of sphalerite with the impurity of iron ions. On the DTA curve of concentrate C3 an intense exotherm with a maximum at 744 According to TG curves of the concentrates an intensive decrease of the sample mass begins over the temperature range of 620–690 Oxidative processes of metal sulfides are complex, multistage and exothermic. The conditions under which these processes take place determine to a large extent the type of end product - oxide, sulfate or metal. The oxidation of zinc concentrates conducted in this study and the following analysis allows calculation of the degree of desulfurization. Part of the results for both concentrates with the lowest and highest content of iron is presented in The results show that with an increase in both the temperature and the time of roasting, the degree of desulfurization increased, reaching almost 100% after 15 It is of great significance in zinc hydrometallurgy that during the processing of a large number of zinc concentrates, differing in their chemical compositions and origins, the obtained quantity of zinc ferrite be kept as minimal as possible. This can be done by suitable charging, using calculation methods specifically developed for the purpose. Charging of zinc concentrates is an important process in zinc hydrometallurgy, the goal of which is to obtain a charge suitable for subsequent roasting in FBF. Oxidative roasting of zinc concentrates is carried out at 900–980 The following reactions could also take place under certain conditions Various secondary reactions occur between the compounds formed, resulting in the formation of a calcine with a very complex composition: ZnO, ZnSO To avoid such undesirable processes it is necessary to use an appropriate method of charging to obtain a charge well balanced in its chemical composition. A Web-based information system, described in detail in There are 42 calculated charges of zinc concentrates that meet restrictive conditions referred to above. The recipes are sorted by an optimizing criterion of minimum zinc ferrite (maximum zinc soluble in 7% H The calculated recipe corresponds to the best charge obtained from the ratio of the concentrates. The prognostic chemical and phase compositions of zinc calcine are calculated on the basis of work of FBF (type Lurgi, surface 68 The results presented in The data in the tables show that the use of the Web-based information system allows calculating and recommending charges that have very good composition and good quality of the calcines. Using these zinc concentrates is significant for the high degree of direct leaching of zinc with only a minimum amount of obtained zinc cake. XRD, DTA, TGA and Mössbauer spectroscopy studies of six zinc sulfide concentrates with different iron contents are made. The basic phase in zinc sulfide concentrates is A method is developed to calculate charges from zinc concentrates of varying chemical contents and origins. It allows the obtaining of a calcine with the minimum possible quantity of zinc ferrite and the most appropriate chemical and phase composition. This guarantees a high degree of direct leaching of zinc, as well as a minimum amount of zinc cake. The investigation of the oxidation of zinc concentrates with higher iron content shows that the percentage of Zn in the form of ZnFe2O4 increases with the increasing of concentration of Fe in the concentrates. This study was conducted with financial help of Paisii Hilendarski Plovdiv University (project NI13-HF-006) and by the Ministry of Education, Youth and Science (project DFNI E01/7 of Bulgarian National Science Fund).