Recently, Deep Eutectic Solvents (DESs) have been demonstrated to be an effective analogue of ionic liquid in many applications. In our previous report, for the first time, two Chloride-based DESs were shown to have significant effects on different oil recovery mechanisms in heavy oil/formation brine/Berea sandstone system. In this report, the same DESs were used. The effects of DESs concentration, secondary and tertiary DES injections and brine salinity on recovery performance were examined through IFT measurements, contact angle measurements and core flooding experiments.
                  Results of capillary number calculations indicated that although DESs solutions increased the IFT value, the capillary numbers in DESs flooding due to viscous forces and wettability alteration were higher than brine flooding case. Results showed that for both DESs, although the heavy oil recovery factors decreased by diluting the DES solution with brine from 50vol% to 5vol%, they were still promising between 6.3 and 8.7% for DES1 and DES2 respectively at lower concentrations of 5vol%. Also, by reducing concentration from 50 to 25vol%, there were no changes in recovery factors from 14 to 13.6% for DES1 and from 23.2 to 23.1% for DES2. The same trend was observed during wettability alteration study by contact angle measurements between oil droplet and aged surface of rock samples in the both DESs solutions at different concentrations. It verified that wettability alteration during DES injection has significant impact on oil recovery and it could be dominant and governing mechanism of heavy oil recovery enhancement. The DESs flooding in tertiary stage led to higher total recovery factors. The total recovery at tertiary mode compared to secondary mode were around 16% higher at 50vol% concentrations and 3–6% higher at 5vol% concentrations for both DESs. In addition, Results confirmed that the DESs can tolerate wide range of reservoir’s salinities and there were no big changes in oil recovery at different brine salinity during tertiary DESs injection.Previous reports have shown that more than two third of original oil in place will remain unproduced in the reservoirs after primary stage of conventional production ( More recently, new group of chemicals called Ionic Liquids (ILs) have received interests as green alternative to conventional chemicals for EOR purposes ( Deep Eutectic Solvents (DESs) have been determined as a class of ILs which has more advantages than the common ILs. They have shown more “green” behavior such as biodegradability and biocompatibility, chemical compatibility with water, easy preparation process, non- toxicity and very low prices ( In our previous study ( In this study, we report results of further investigation to cover other important parameters affecting the performance of heavy oil recovery by DESs injection. The same DESs including Choline Chloride:Glycerol (1:2 Heavy crude oil with 15 ˚API and formation brine from an Omani oilfield were used for the experimental work. The heavy oil and brine properties are shown in Generally, DESs are categories into 4 types, each consisting of at least binary mixture as follows—(a) type1: metal salts+organic salts, (b) type2: metal salt hydrate+organic salt, (c) type 3: organic salts+ hydrogen bond donor, and (d) type 4: metal salts (hydrate)+hydrogen bond donor ( The IFT between heavy crude oil and different solutions were measured using Spinning drop video tensiometer (DATAPHYSICS—SVT-20). The IFT values between heavy oil and different solutions such as distilled water, formation brine, diluted formation brine, concentrated formation brine, solution of 50 Contact angle as a qualitative factor of reservoir wettability was measured to study the rock wettability alteration. The usual procedure for contact angle measurement involves measuring oil drop contact angle with the rock in the solution whose effect on wettability is to be determined ( A high temperature-high pressure core flooding apparatus was utilized for oil recovery experiments. The core flooding system consists of HP-HT Hassler type core holder to hold 1.5″ diameter core plugs up to 6000 Several core flooding runs were performed to study the effects of DESs concentration, tertiary and secondary DESs solution injection scenarios and brine salinity on oil recovery performance. The tests were performed as follows:    Two different DESs including Choline Chloride/Glycerol (molar ratio 1:2) called DES1 and Choline Chloride/Urea (molar ratio 1:2) called DES2 were examined for enhancing heavy oil recovery. Effects of key parameters such as DESs concentration, brine salinity and injection sequence (secondary and tertiary) on oil recovery and production efficiency were investigated through IFT measurements, contact angle measurements and core flooding experiments. IFT between heavy oil and different solutions were measured by spinning drop tensiometer at 45 The IFT values of the concentrated brine (TDS=154,000 contact angle measurements between oil droplet and aged rocks in different DESs solutions were done and reported as a qualitative indicator of rock wettability. In general, when the measured contact angle is between 0° and 60° to 75°, the system is defined as water-wet, whereas when it is between 180° and 105° to 120°, the system is defined as oil-wet. In the middle range of contact angles, the system is considered as neutrally or intermediately wet ( Different concentrations of 50, 25, 10 and 5  An interesting result that should be pointed out here is that for both DESs, the recovery factors remained the same (i.e. from 14 to 13.6% for DES1 and from 23.2 to 23.1% for DES2) when the concentrations of DESs were decreased from 50 to 25 Capillary number is a dimensionless group reflects the relative importance of viscous forces to capillary forces during immiscible flooding. Also, the higher capillary number will result in higher oil recovery during core flooding experiments ( Core flooding experimental conditions and results for tertiary and secondary DESs injections tests are shown in Another remarkable observation is the oil production rates which can be seen in Pressure drop results for tests 9 and 10 illustrate that a stable pressure drop was achieved during last pore volumes of injection when the oil recovery was not increasing any more. The pressure drop values decreased by decreasing oil saturation during DESs injection. Although the core permeability in test 9 was higher than test 10 (see In general, results indicate that using DESs solutions as chemical agents for heavy oil recovery enhancement from sandstone rocks have capability to recover oil from swept reservoirs and improve displacement efficiency of water flooding. Previous studies reported relatively good performance of chemical flooding at tertiary mechanisms compared to secondary mechanisms. Experimental condition and results of changing salinity on recovery performance are shown in  For both DES1 and DES2, the heavy oil recovery factors decreased, but still very much promising, by diluting the DES solution with brine from 50 to 5 Results of capillary number calculations indicated that although DESs solutions increased the IFT value, the capillary numbers in DESs flooding due to viscous forces and wettability alteration were higher than the brine flooding case. Reducing concentration from 50 to 25 DESs flooding in tertiary stage always led to higher total recovery factors and at higher concentration of DES solutions, there was a big difference between total recovery factors in tertiary mode and secondary mode. Changing the DES concentration from 50 to 5 Apart from the fact that increase in salinity increased the IFT, the IFT measurements between heavy oil and brines with different salinities showed that there was a critical brine concentration in which the IFT value would be lowest. Results of heavy oil recovery factors by DESs solution injection at different brine concentration showed that the DESs can tolerate wide range of reservoir’s salinities and there were no significant changes in oil recovery by changing brine salinity during tertiary DESs injection.