The kinetics of zinc dissolution from oxide mixtures in 0.5 M H2SO4 was studied. The oxide mixtures were prepared by acid leaching of galvanic sludge, precipitation of the extracts by NaOH followed by calcination of the produced Zn hydroxides. A series of experiments with synthetic oxide mixtures of zinc and other common metals were also performed. The phase composition of the oxide mixtures significantly affected the kinetics of the zinc leaching. The most reactive phases were ZnO and Zn2SiO4, less reactive were substituted CuO and NiO, and the least reactive were spinel-type oxides. Due to the different rates of dissolution of individual oxide phases, the described process can be used for purification of Zn from the galvanic sludge.The problem of recycling metal-containing industrial waste is not satisfactorily solved in the Czech Republic. Even the neutralisation sludges from Zn electroplating and mechanoplating plants are not recycled, although they contain as much as 5–10% of Zn mainly in the form of hydroxides. Nowadays, these sludges are only deposited in landfills as dangerous waste. Partial dissolution of the oxide mixtures obtained by heating impure Zn hydroxides or basic salts was recently proposed by Jandová and Maixner The aim of this work was to improve our knowledge about the phase composition of the oxide mixture obtained by calcining the contaminated Zn hydroxides and about the dissolution reactivity of the resulting oxides. The problem of the kinetics of the dissolution of the mixed oxides is a rather complex one Synthetic oxide mixtures for dissolution studies were prepared by precipitation of mixtures of metal salts with NaOH solution followed by filtration, drying and calcining (1000°C, 2 h) of the precipitate. Additionally, two samples of galvanic sludge were obtained from the landfill in Dolnı́ Roz̆ı́nka in the Czech Republic, and from a galvanic Zn plating plant in Letky in the Czech Republic. Each sludge sample was homogenised and its composition was characterised by semi-quantitative emission spectral analysis and by atomic absorption spectroscopy. The approximate elemental composition is summarised in Solid samples were characterised by X-ray powder diffraction (Siemens D5005) and specific surface area measurement (Coulter SA3100, Beckman Coulter). For the chemical analysis, the sludges and hydroxides were dissolved in diluted HCl. The insoluble residues after zinc leaching were decomposed by fusing them with NaOH or by evaporating with HF–H The flowsheet of the sludge process used to obtain the oxide mixtures and refined zinc hydroxide is given in Dissolution kinetics was performed in a glass reactor at 40°C in 0.5 M H Leaching the galvanic sludge at pH as high as 3–3.9 led to a significant decrease in the amount of dissolved Fe, and so among three-valent metals in the raw hydroxide, mainly Al and Cr dominated. The Mn content was significantly decreased if the sludge was extracted under strongly oxidising conditions by the addition of H An example of the kinetics of leaching of Zn, Al, Cu, and Fe from the calcined raw hydroxides is shown in To interpret the kinetics of leaching of the individual metal components from the calcines, a series of experiments with both Zn oxide mixtures obtained by processing galvanic sludge and synthetic mixtures of metal oxides with varying elemental composition was performed. The elemental and phase composition of the synthetic mixtures and their dissolution behaviour are summarised in Semiquantitative evaluation of the dissolution kinetics is shown in This latter approach was used in the case of spinel oxides. The definition of the rate coefficient is the same as in the former formula. The results of the quantitative dissolution data processing are given in As shown by the data in The reactivity of individual components of the oxide mixtures toward their dissolution in 0.5 M H In the dissolution experiments lasting for several tens of minutes, e.g. in times much shorter than 1/ The phase composition of the calcine depends on the original chemical composition. The silicates are transformed to Zn Due to the different reactivity and composition of the components of the oxide mixtures, partial dissolution of the oxide mixture can be used for purification of zinc hydroxide. An example of the content of Zn and the relative amount of four selected impurities in the species shown in This work was supported by the Grant Agency of the Czech Republic (grant No. 104/97/0705) and by the Research Intention CEZ: 19/28 22300002.