In this communication, we investigate the effect regioregularity of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) on the specific capacitance. P3HTs with regioregularities 96, 70 and 58% have been synthesized by Grignard metathesis (GRIM) and FeCl3 methods. The regioregularity of P3HTs are characterized by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), UV–Vis spectroscopy, differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) studies. Electrochemical characterizations of the P3HTs reveal significant increase in the specific capacitance with increase in regioregularity. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy analysis indicates that the charging process is facilitated by increase in regioregularity in P3HT. Stability of P3HTs during repeated charge–discharge cycles, also found to increase with increase in regioregularity.In recent years there has been a thrust on conducting polymers based supercapacitors because of two important points. First, in conducting polymer, entire bulk of the polymer is utilized for charge storage which results high specific capacitance and; second, conducting polymers are cheaper and easier to synthesize compared to noble metal oxides In the present paper, we have carried out a study of the effect of regioregularity on the specific capacitance of P3HT. Therefore, P3HTs with three different regioregularities have been synthesized and characterized. Structural analysis of P3HTs was performed by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), UV–Vis spectroscopy, differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) studies. Electrochemical performance of P3HTs was studied by cyclic voltammetry, galvanostatic charge–discharge and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy as a function of regioregularity. 3-Hexylthiophene and 2,5-dibromo-3-hexylthiophene were synthesized following the reported procedure Synthesis of different regioregular P3HTs by various routes is shown in P3HT-96 was synthesized by Grignard metathesis (GRIM) method from 2,5 dibromo 3-hexylthiophene following the procedure reported by McCullough and coworkers Synthesis of P3HT-70 was carried out by FeCl Into a dried 3-necked flask containing a dispersion of FeCl  Poly(3-methylthiophenes) (P3MT) and 3-flurophenyl polythiophenes like poly(3-(3,4-diflurophenyl)thiophene)(MPFPT), poly3-(4-flurophenylthiophene) (PFPT) are generally used for supercapacitor applications The synthesis of P3HTs with various regioregularities was performed by GRIM and oxidative polymerization methods.  The XRD pattern of P3HT-96, P3HT-70 and P3HT-58 is shown in  Cyclic voltammograms (CV)s of P3HTs with different regioregularities are shown in  The impedance spectroscopy of the P3HTs with different regioregularity is shown in The inclination of vertical line at low frequency towards In order to study the stability of polymers, galvanostatic charge–discharge were carried out for 1000 cycles at current density of 1.25 Although, specific capacitance of P3HT-96 is not as high as P3MT (220 P3HTs with three different regioregularities have been prepared chemically and characterized. The specific capacitance has been found to be dependent on the regioregularity of the polymers. It is found that increasing the regioregularity of P3HTs, the specific capacitance increases. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy indicates that during doping the ionic diffusion through the polymer matrix is facile with increase in regioregularity. Specific capacitance decrease has been observed during repeated charge–discharge cycles. Further, the rate of decrease of specific capacitance reduces with increasing regioregularity.