Thiobacillus Ferrooxidans bacteria are commonly used for bio-leaching and recently in biobeneficiation of sulfide minerals. In this study, the effect of Thiobacillus Ferrooxidans on the froth flotation behavior of Sarcheshmeh copper ore in Iran has been investigated. Pure strains of Thiobacillus Ferrooxidans were used to promote surface chemical changes in pyrite and chalcopyrite, and thus influence their flotation behavior.
                  In the presence of Thiobacillus Ferrooxidans, and xanthate as collector, pyrite was depressed, whereas chalcopyrite and other sulfide minerals were unaffected at natural pH. The present investigation shows that the surface chemical properties of bacteria can be manipulated successfully to achieve the desired effects on the flotation process. The results showed that recovery of pyrite in the presence of a depressant (Thiobacillus Ferrooxidans) is 50% lower than in the absence of any bacteria, demonstrating the depressing effect of bacteria on pyrite. It was concluded that the use of Thiobacillus Ferrooxidans would decrease the recovery of pyrite but would not changed the floatability of chalcopyrite.Thiobacillus Ferrooxidans is a gram negative, chemolithotrophic bacteria. Its ability to oxidize Fe In the present work, an attempt was made to use chemolithotrophic bacteria, namely Thiobacillus Ferrooxidans, as a pyrite depressant in the flotation of Sarcheshmeh copper ore. Since chemolithotrophs derive energy by dissolving sulfide minerals, this could change mineral surface properties. The growth kinetics of T. Ferrooxidans are slow, and a fully-grown culture of T. Ferrooxidans can be obtained after about 48 h, the bacterium surface properties depending on the growth conditions ( Two samples of porphyry copper ore, one sample each of pure pyrite and chalcopyrite from Sarcheshmeh mine, in the southern part of Iran, were used in this study (samples A and B). A pure strain of T. Ferrooxidans, which was isolated from the acidic water drainage of Sarcheshmeh mine, was used in this study. T. Ferrooxidans was cultured and maintained in 9 k medium (3 g/l (NH Adhesion experiments were carried out on all four samples (A, B, pyrite, chalcopyrite). In each case 0.5 g of sample was added to 2 ml cell suspension (0.5–3.5 The mineral flotation tests were carried out in 2.5-l Denver laboratory flotation cell, using 820 g of mineral samples. The mineral samples were first conditioned with predetermined bacteria for 15 min and then the collector and MIBC were added and conditioned for 5 min and floated for 6 min. The influence of initial cell concentration on the flotation of sulfides was examined. Tests were carried out with two different dosages of collector and some tests were also performed in the absence of both bacteria and depressant. All tests were conducted at the natural pH of the respective minerals. In all samples except chalocopyrite, T. Ferrooxidans adhesion increased with the number of cells added, although there were significant differences in the affinity of the bacteria for the samples ( The flotation results, using ferrous and sulfur grown T. Ferrooxidans, with increasing cell concentration and at two different xanthate concentrations are shown in The preconditioning of minerals with bacteria cells prior to the addition of collector reduced the floatability of pyrite, but did not affect the floatability of the sulfide copper minerals and their recoveries almost remained the same. The sulfur grown cells depressed the pyrite better compared to the ferrous ion grown cells. The ferrous grown cells reduced the pyrite recovery of sample A from 70% to 48% and sample B from 65% to 40%, but in sulfur elemental grown cells the decrease in recovery of pyrite was greater. The results demonstrated that the recovery of sulfide copper minerals, irrespective of their growth conditions, remains the same. Thus, T. Ferrooxidans bacteria can be used as a depressant for pyrite during sulfide copper flotation. Since bacterial cells obtain their energy by oxidizing iron ion and elemental sulfur, the cells might have strongly adsorbed on the pyrite surface and xanthate collector could not replace the adsorbed cells, but in the case of chalcopyrite, the copper ions are toxic to the cells and bacterial cells do not adhere on its surface, left unoccupied by cells, xanthate collector can be adsorbed on the surface of sulfide copper minerals and can be floated easily. Bioflotation process could be used for many sulfide minerals with different grades of pyrite, with no effect on the process. The surfaces of T. Ferrooxidans cells depend on their growth conditions. Since T. Ferrooxidans cells derive energy from the solid by adhering to and oxidizing Fe This work was conducted with the support of Research and Development Division of Sarcheshmeh Copper Complex.