The leaching of calcined magnesite using ammonium chloride has been tested in a pH-stat to ascertain the effect of process parameters viz. temperature, concentration of NH4Cl, pH, and particle size and reactivity of the solid. The main purpose of the approach adopted was to keep the lixiviant composition constant during individual measurements. A simple mathematical model has been used to describe the dissolution of magnesium during leaching and to analyse the kinetic data. The apparent activation energy of leaching was found to depend on the particle size of the solid — the values 57.8 and 48.5 kJ mol−1 were obtained for the leaching of particles of −100+90 and −180+160 μm, respectively. It was concluded that the leaching process is controlled by the chemical reaction of MgO with H+ ions at the liquid–solid interface and by pore diffusion.When solid magnesium oxide is added to an aqueous solution of ammonium chloride, the products magnesium chloride, ammonia and water are formed The reaction of calcined magnesite with ammonium chloride according to Tkacova et al. Glaser et al. Ranjitham and Khangaonkar The aim of the present work was to contribute to better understanding of the leaching behaviour of calcined magnesite by ammonium chloride. The experimental method applied in this study made it possible to keep temperature, concentration of NH Dissolution of the magnesium during the leaching of calcined magnesite in ammonium chloride solution according to In general, calcined natural magnesite is a The half reaction time Since the kinetics of leaching of oxide minerals is, in general, dependent upon the activity of hydrogen ions in the system The bulk raw magnesite (hydrocyclone concentrate) from Košice, Slovakia was ground, calcined in a muffle furnace using a static air atmosphere and different retention times, and dry-screened. The leaching tests were carried out using three samples of semi-calcined magnesite, designated MKK(800/20)95, MKK(800/20)170 and MKK(800/30)95. The conditions of calcination and physico-chemical characteristics of the samples are given in The experimental system for measuring the rate of leaching, shown in When the NH Originally, 15 mL samples of the reaction mixture were withdrawn from the reactor at appropriate time intervals, filtered and the contents of magnesium, calcium and iron in solution were estimated by atomic absorption spectroscopy. However, the results of these preliminary experiments have shown that, within the accuracy of the analytical methods used, further analyses of the product solutions may be excluded and an extent of Leaching behaviour of the latter three samples of calcined magnesite was tested under reaction conditions which were as follows: temperature from 30°C to 70°C, concentration of NH The rate of Two periods were observed in the dependence of the rate of  Measured data indicated the dependence of the rate of The effect of different particle sizes (−100+90 and −180+160 μm) was studied using the samples MKK (800/20) 95 and MKK (800/20) 170. From The effect of calcination time (20 and 30 min at 800°C) was studied using the samples MKK (800/20) 95 and MKK (800/30) 95. A typical result is shown in In selected experiments, 2–3 consequent runs were carried out under identical reaction conditions, using a product solution from each run as a lixiviant in the following one. It was observed that the rate of The main purpose of the approach adopted was to eliminate possible effects of the changes in lixiviant composition during individual measurements on the rate of leaching. In this study, the concentrations of H It was found that the values of conversion Three series of kinetic leaching experiments were carried out, each for one of the samples of semi-calcined magnesite specified in A Rotatable Central Composite Design (RCCD) for three factors (temperature, ammonium chloride concentration and pH) and some additional leaching runs were carried out. First of all, the values of parameter It was found by analysing the regression equation of the RCCD experiment mentioned above, that the effect of pH on the half reaction time is negligible if compared with effects of ammonium chloride concentration The accuracy was significantly improved when an Arrhenius-type regression model in the form of The values of model parameters When the measured values of From The half reaction time Ranjitham and Khangaonkar In the present study, the value of Observed values of the specific surface area of samples (see The external mass transfer coefficient Presence of diffusional limitations was tested by a method based on the Kinetics of the liquid–solid reaction between calcined magnesite and ammonium chloride solution (according to It was observed that the reaction rate: (a) is very sensitive to temperature in the range 30–70°C; (b) increases rapidly with increase in NH The kinetic data indicated that the overall rate of leaching is controlled by pore diffusion and surface chemical reaction under the conditions of the experiments in the present work. The apparent activation energy of leaching was found to depend on the particle size of calcined magnesite — the values 57.8 and 48.5 kJ mol  This work was supported by the Slovak Grant Agency for Science (Grant 2/4179/97 and 1/4361/97).