The composite catalysts of TiO2/SiO2 were prepared though a sol-gel process followed by the calcination crystallization process. The inexpensive precursors, titanium sulfate and fly ash acid sludge, were used as providing titania and silica sources, respectively. The decomposition of fly ash acid sludge was digested with NaOH to extract silica, and the obtained sodium silicate was used to prepare TiO2/SiO2 composite. The effect of calcination temperature on the structure of TiO2/SiO2 composites was studied by means of XRD, BET, FTIR, SEM, photocatalysis and adsorption test. It was found that the anatase-to-rutile phase transition temperature of TiO2/SiO2 composite powders was significantly higher than that of pure TiO2. The presence of the TiOSi bond was confirmed in the final products when the incorporation of titania into silica were performed. The photocatalytic performance of TiO2/SiO2 composite annealed at different temperatures was evaluated by Rhodamine B (RhB) as the target pollutant under visible-light irradiation. Results indicated that the sample exhibited the highest photocatalytic activity when the calcination temperature is up to 600 °C. After 4 h visible-light irradiation, about 90% of RhB was removed by this type of photocatalysts.Titania dioxide (TiO Fly ash acid sludge (FAAS) is a kind of industrial waste residue, which derived from circulating fluidized bed fly ash extracted alumina by acid leaching process. The main component of FAAS is amorphous silica. The high silica content of FAAS makes it an ideal raw material for preparing silico-based products, such as white carbon black, 4 A molecular sieve, silica aerogel [ In the present study, TiO Fly ash was hydrothermally reacted with HCl solution and then the obtained mixture was filtered using a vacuum filter. The resulting residue was FAAS. The FAAS consists mostly of SiO Firstly, FAAS (10 g) was mixed with NaOH solution (15 wt.%, 45 g), and then the mixture added to a reaction kettle heated and stirred at 90 °C for 2 h. Then, the mixture was filtered and washed. The filtrate was the Na The above resulting Na The crystal structure of the samples was characterized by X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD, DX-2700, China). The light absorption behaviors of the samples were investigated by a UV–vis diffuse reflectance spectrometer (UV–vis DSR, TU-1901, China). The chemical bonding state of the samples was confirmed with Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR, Nicolet 380, US). Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) method on the nitrogen adsorption apparatus (ASAP 2010, USA) was applied to determine the specific surface area of the samples. The microstructure of the samples was investigated by ﬁeld emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, FEI, XL30, US). Rhodamine B (RhB) was chosen as a model organic pollutant to evaluate the photocatalytic activity, and the experiments were performed under a 250 W high-pressure mercury lamp (Philips). The light beam was passed through optical filter to cut-off wavelengths shorter than 400 nm. Briefly, 0.040 g of the composite photocatalyst was dispersed in 10 mL RhB solution (30 mg/l), while the amount of pure TiO The decolorization percentage (η) of RhB can be calculated by the following equation: The crystal phase of TiO   The effect of calcination temperature on the specific surface area of the synthesized samples was discussed, as shown in The morphology of TSC-600 and TT-600 sample is studied by using scanning electron microscopy displayed in We now turn to the main subject of this paper: the study of the effect of calcination temperature on the photocatalytic activity and adsorption of the synthesized samples. The photocatalytic and adsorption test results are shown in The spectral changes during TSC-600 photodegradation of RhB were obtained, as shown in For studying the durability test of the catalyst, the TSC-600 photocatalyst was reused in four successive photocatalytic experiments, and the experimental conditions remained unchanged. The results obtained from the test are displayed in In conclusion, the TiO The authors are grateful for the financial support of Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: