Larynx and upper airway trauma are uncommon but potentially devastating injuries. These injuries may rapidly progress with lethal consequences. In the United States, the incidence of laryngeal trauma is estimated to be between 1 in 5,000 to 1 in 137,000 emergency room visits. The most common etiology of airway trauma is a blunt force impact to the anterior neck. With penetrating wounds there may be associated tissue loss, injury to the nearby carotid sheath structures, or injury to the esophagus and pharynx. There is an overall mortality of 40% for blunt injuries and 20% for penetrating injuries. Evaluation and treatment are directed at preserving life and maintaining and restoring laryngeal function.Larynx and upper airway trauma are uncommon but potentially devastating injuries. These injuries may rapidly progress to lethal consequences in a somewhat unpredictable fashion. In the United States, the incidence of laryngeal trauma is estimated to be between 1 in 5,000 to 1 in 137,000 emergency room visits. Patients should be evaluated in accordance with basic trauma principles, as delineated by the American College of Surgeons’ Advanced Trauma Life Support protocol. For patients with an unstable airway, priority must be given to the establishment of a definitive one by performing a tracheotomy. Typically, computed tomography without contrast may be performed to establish the extent and location of injury and provide information for definitive treatment planning For patients with type I injuries consisting of a greenstick fracture or a nondisplaced fracture of the thyroid cartilage and without significant mucosal tear, conservative treatment may be considered, consisting of observation for at least 24 hours with continuous oxygen saturation monitoring. Type II injuries consist of patients with a linear fracture of the thyroid cartilage and, without evidence of significant endolaryngeal injury, should be explored via an open approach to best expose, reduce, and fixate the fractured airway skeleton. This can be done through a horizontal skin incision at the level of the cricothyroid membrane, with the creation of subplatysmal soft-tissue flaps. The lateral limits of these soft-tissue flaps may be extended to explore the pharynx, esophagus, and carotid sheath structures. Exposure of the thyroid cartilage then proceeds in a subperichondrial plane ( For type III injuries, including significant injury to the endolaryngeal mucosa, involvement of the anterior commissure, or extensive comminution of the thyroid cartilage, open exploration by laryngofissure is indicated. This exposure is performed in the same way as described above but includes a vertical thyrotomy made in midline, extending through the entire thyroid cartilage ( Large areas of exposed cartilage should be avoided because of the risk of granulation or subsequent scar and synechiae formation. Free grafts consisting of buccal mucosa, dermis, or split-thickness skin grafts may be used where mucosal advancement is impossible but may themselves lead to the increased formation of granulation tissue. Thyroid cartilage loss and fractures with comminution should generally be corrected or supported because of the risk of a poor voice or difficulty with decannulation. Correction of loss of skeletal support may be performed with autogenous cartilage grafts, alloplastic stents, or titanium mesh. Some authors recommend simply using titanium mesh to span gaps, thus stabilizing the cartilage without the use of stents and their associated risk of granulation tissue formation. The above principles of evaluation and treatment are designed to give an overview of safe and effective treatments for both preserving life and maintaining and restoring function in patients suffering from blunt and penetrating injury to the larynx.