Cheese is a highly versatile dairy ingredient that can be used directly in an array of culinary dishes, formulated food products, and ready-prepared meals. In these applications, it contributes to structure, texture, flavor, mouthfeel, cooking properties, and/or nutrition. The functionality of cheeses can be extended through secondary processing. The interactive effects of various factors, including make procedure, cheese composition, degree of fat emulsification, proteolysis, and lipolysis, affect cheese functionality. Many of the rheological and cooking functions may be viewed as displacement of adjoining layers of the casein matrix. Hence, these factors exert their effect mainly by affecting the microstructural distributions of fat and protein, and the degree of hydration (or aggregation) of the protein matrix in raw and heated cheeses.
               Cheese may also be used in the preparation of an array of dehydrated cheese-based ingredients (DCIs), including dried cheeses, cheese powders, and enzyme-modified cheeses. Compared to natural cheeses, these products are more stable and more convenient to use in food formulation; they can be designed to ensure very diverse flavor profiles. Hence, DCIs find ubiquitous use as flavoring agents and/or nutritional supplements in a wide range of formulated and assembled foods such as bakery products, biscuits, sauces, snack coatings, and soups.A total of 500–800 different cheese varieties are manufactured globally; they differ to varying degrees in nutritive value, appearance, flavor, texture, and cooking properties. Consequently, cheese is capable of satisfying a diverse range of sensory and nutritional demands and, therefore, has very wide appeal. The functionality of cheese is extended when it is subjected to secondary processing to create an array of ready-to-use grated and shredded cheeses, pasteurized processed cheese products (PCPs), cheese powders (CPs), and enzyme-modified cheeses (EMCs) ( Cheese is delivered to the consumer through three main sectors, namely the commodity or retail sector, where cheese is mainly in the form of portions (e.g., blocks, slices) that are consumed in the home directly as a table food or indirectly as an ingredient in various dishes; the food service sector, where cheese is presented in the form of cheese board/cheese plate, or incorporated as an ingredient in various dishes (e.g., lasagne, pizza, omelette, cheese panini, sandwich); the industrial sector, where cheese is used as an ingredient in the manufacture of a vast array of assembled food products (e.g., pizza, sandwiches) or formulated foods (e.g., gratins, prepared meals, dried soups) ( The percentages of total cheese delivered via the commodity/retail, food service, and industrial sectors amount to 60, 20, and 10% respectively, in the European Union and 33, 33, and 33%, respectively, in the United States. These trends suggest that an estimated 35–45% of total cheese is consumed as an ingredient in other foods; moreover, recent market analyses indicate that the consumption of cheese as an ingredient is rapidly growing. Cheese is used directly as an ingredient in the preparation of an extensive array of culinary dishes in the home/catering (food service) sectors and prepared foods in the industrial sector ( While any cheese may be used as an ingredient, the most widely used varieties include Mozzarella (in pizza), Cheddar (in CPs), fresh acid-curd varieties (in cheesecake and dairy desserts), and pasteurized processed Cheddar (as slices in burgers). The major cheese ingredients are defined in more detail below. PCPs are produced by comminuting, melting, and emulsifying, into a smooth homogeneous molten blend, one or more natural cheeses and optional ingredients using heat, mechanical shear, and (usually) emulsifying salts ( Dehydrated cheeses were first developed during World War II as a means of preserving cheese solids under unfavorable conditions to which natural cheese would not be subjected, for example, holding at >21 Convenience of use by formulated food manufacturers. DCIs can be applied easily to the surface of snack foods (e.g., popcorn, potato crisps, nachos) or incorporated into formulated foods, for example, by dry mixing with other ingredients such as skim milk powder (e.g., as in dried soup, sauce, or cake mixes) or by blending into wet formulations. Natural cheeses require size reduction prior to their use in these applications. Moreover, CPs lend themselves to easier inventory management, set-manufacturing methods, and end products with consistent quality in large-scale manufacturing operations. Longer shelf life than natural cheese, owing to their lower water activity ( Greater diversity of flavor that can be obtained compared to natural cheese, made possible by the use of different cheese types, EMCs, and other ingredients in their preparation. Dehydrated cheese products may be arbitrarily classified into four categories: Dried grated cheeses (e.g., Parmesan, Romano), which are used as highly flavored sprinklings (e.g., for pasta dishes, soups) and in bakery products (e.g., biscuits). CPs, which may be natural (made using natural cheeses, emulsifying salts, and, optionally, natural cheese flavors) or extended, which incorporate other ingredients, such as dairy ingredients (e.g., skim milk solids, whey, lactose), starches, maltodextrins, flavors, flavor enhancers, and/or colors. Alternatively, CPs can be classified according to the proportion of cheese solids, as a percentage of total dry matter: high cheese solids (∼95%, w/w), medium cheese solids (>50%, w/w), or low cheese solids (<50%, w/w). CPs are used in numerous applications, especially in formulated foods prepared by dry blending different ingredients (e.g., dry soups, sauces, cake mixes) and as snack coatings (e.g., popcorn, nachos, tortillas). Dried EMCs, which are essentially cheese curds that are modified, through the addition of water, enzymes, starter culture, and/or other ingredients (e.g., lyophilized butter oil), and by processing (as for PCPs), to accelerate the development of intense cheese flavors that mimic those of specific natural cheese varieties (e.g., Cheddar cheese). Following flavor development, the curd (usually referred to as paste) is pasteurized and dried. Compared to natural cheeses, EMCs offer certain advantages as flavoring agents: (1) high flavor intensity, which enables small quantities to impart strong cheese flavor, (2) high flavor consistency and stability, and (3) the suitability of dried EMCs for dry blending makes them suited for an array of applications, for example, bakery and snack foods. Production involves fine grinding of hard cheeses and conveyance of the ground cheese to a dryer (usually fluidized bed type) where it is exposed to low-humidity air (e.g., 15–20% relative humidity) at air inlet temperatures <30 High-moisture (82%, w/w) cheeses, such as Cottage cheese, may also be dried directly to 3–4% (w/w) moisture by first pulverizing and then subjecting them to specialized spray-drying operations (e.g., Silo spray drying using the Birs dehydration process). These low-moisture, dried natural cheeses are generally used for nutritional supplementation of foods, for example, dried baby meals. Freeze-dried formats of a number of different cheeses such as mature Cheddar, Gloucester, Stilton, and oak-smoked Cheddar have been developed since the late 1990s. Their manufacture involves size reduction to the required format (e.g., cubes), layering onto trays, freeze-drying to ∼3% (w/w) moisture, and packaging. The benefits of freeze-drying, compared to air-drying or spray-drying, include higher retention of volatile flavor compounds (e.g., methyl ketones, dimethyldisulfide); and ability to dry cheeses in the form of shapes (croutons, cubes) that convey an image of cheese pieces and more naturalness compared to powder The crunchy light texture of the dried cheese pieces makes them easy to disperse (by rubbing between the fingers) as a topping and to rehydrate, allowing fast flavor release in the mouth. The manufacture of CPs essentially involves the production of a pasteurized processed cheese slurry (40–45%, w/w), which is then spray dried. A generalized manufacturing protocol, as described in formulation, selecting the different types and levels of ingredients (including cheese, water, emulsifying salts, and others) to give the desired powder composition and characteristics; processing the blend, involves heating the blend to ∼80 homogenization of the hot molten blend, typically at first- and second-stage pressures of 15 and 5 drying of the hot molten blend, using any one of several spray-drying processes (single-stage or two-stage) and dryer configurations (e.g., tall-form, Filtermat) available. The blend usually consists of comminuted natural cheese(s), water, emulsifying salts, flavoring agents, flavor enhancers, colors, antioxidants (e.g., propyl gallate or butylated hydroxyanisole), and/or filling materials such as whey, skim milk solids, starches, maltodextrins, and/or butterfat. The flavor profile and intensity of the final CP are determined by the characteristics of the cheese (variety, degree of maturity) and the types and concentrations of different flavoring agents. Generally, mature cheese with an intense flavor is used to impart a strong flavor to the final product. Young cheeses are generally not used because of their lack of flavor and high concentration of intact casein, which imparts high viscosity to the slurry, making it difficult to atomize and dry efficiently. Filling materials in extended CPs are usually added to replace cheese solids and thereby lower the formulation costs. However, they may influence flavor, wettability, and mouth-coating characteristics of the product in which the cheese powder is used. The type and level of ingredients are determined by the type of CP (natural, extended, flavor intensity) and its application (e.g., whether intended for sauce, soup, snack coating, or cheese dips). The processing of the blend is similar to that for PCPs in both principle and manufacturing technology ( Natural cheeses may have certain limitations as a food ingredient, including low flavor stability due to ongoing biochemical/microbiological changes during storage, flavor inconsistency, insufficient flavor strength to enable small quantities to impart a strong cheese flavor, relatively high cost, and the need to comminute prior to their application. These deficiencies led to the development of EMCs, by exploiting the natural biochemical cheese flavor pathways through enzyme technology, which resulted in cheese flavor intensities of up to 30-fold that of the corresponding natural cheese. EMCs can be defined as concentrated cheese flavor ingredients, which offer a cost-effective alternative to natural cheese as a source of cheese flavor. A generalized manufacturing protocol for EMC involves: comminution of fresh cheese curd to a slurry or paste (typically ∼40–50%, w/w, dry matter), by blending with water and emulsifying salts, and subjecting the blend to heat and shear; pasteurization of the paste, at temperatures of 72–80 treatment of the paste with ripening agents, which involves cooling the paste and the addition of a cocktail of enzymes (e.g., lipase, peptidase, proteinase), starter cultures, and/or starter culture adjuncts to give the required flavor profile and intensity; incubation of the paste, at 25–35 optional addition of other materials, such as flavor enhancers (e.g., NaCl); pasteurization of the enzyme-treated paste, to inactivate added enzymes and preserve the generated characteristics with minimum change on storage; and homogenization of the hot pasteurized paste, to reduce the tendency of phase separation on subsequent storage and thus to ensure product homogeneity. The cheese paste, known as EMC paste, may then be packaged and stored at refrigeration temperatures. The paste is usually stored in opaque containers to minimize the risk of oxidative rancidity and development of associated off-flavors. The paste may be dried to give EMC powder, which has a longer shelf life than the paste and is better suited to applications involving dry blending with other ingredients ( When used as an ingredient in other foods or in the preparation of cheese ingredients, cheese is subjected to an array of treatments such as comminution (e.g., portioning, shredding, grating, grinding), cooling, freezing, thawing, heating, and/or reheating. In the home and food service sector, the cheese-containing dish, once pre-prepared, is generally cooked and consumed immediately. In contrast, following assembly or formulation in the industrial sector, cheese-containing foods are frequently heated or preheated (precooked) and frozen, and are then reheated prior to consumption. The treatments of cheese during the manufacture of cheese-filled coextruded products (CFCPs) (e.g., cheese-filled croquette or meatballs) are typical of those applied during the manufacture of many formulated foods. They include preparation of a cheese filling by dicing, grating, blending, and/or processing (as in PCPs); preparation of other food materials, for example, coarse meat emulsion (burgers), fine meat emulsion (sausage), potato mash (croquette), and another cheese (e.g., where two different cheeses are coextruded); placing the prepared materials in two separate robotic-controlled filling machines of the coextruder unit (e.g., Vemag Verdener Maschinen-und Apparatbau, GmbH; Rheon Automatic Machinery Co. Ltd.), which enables the correct proportions of the two materials to be ejected together, one as a filling inside the other, as a continuous filled cylinder; and automated portioning of the cylinder (to create cylindrical or ball-shaped portions) and sealing of the inner filling. The treatment of the filled materials varies according to the type of product. Cheese-filled sausages are filled into casings and are then cooked or smoked and subsequently cooled. Cheese-filled meatballs are typically dispatched onto a system of rotating belts and conveyed sequentially through a batter-depositing unit, a breading unit, a deep-fat frying chamber, a draining unit (to allow drainage of excess oil), a continuous freezer, and a cartoning unit. Consideration of the various processes indicates that size reduction (comminution) and heating are the most common processes to which cheese is exposed when used as an ingredient. Hence, the behavior of the cheese during these processes is a major determinant of its functionality and its suitability as an ingredient. When used as an ingredient in food applications, cheese is required to perform one or more functions, which may be arbitrarily categorized into three main headings: flavor, functional properties of raw cheese (e.g., texture), and functional properties of heated cheese (e.g., cooking properties). The flavor of cheese is an important quality factor in most applications where cheese is used as an ingredient. The importance of the flavor contribution is highlighted by increase in the use of highly flavored EMCs for a range of products such as PCPs, imitation cheese products and CPs, ready-prepared meals, snacks, soups, and sauces; and increase in the use of cheeses, such as mature Cheddar and Colby, with poor stretchability (compared to low-moisture Mozzarella) when baked, in pizza toppings. The biochemistry of flavor generation in cheese is complex and has been reviewed extensively ( In all applications, whether as a consumer product or as an ingredient, cheese is subjected to size-reduction operations involving a combination of shear and compressive stresses that result in fracture. Cheese may be portioned (e.g., for consumer packs), sliced, crumbled (e.g., Feta, Stilton; salads), shredded (e.g., sandwiches, pizza), diced (salads) or grated (e.g., dried Parmesan), comminuted (e.g., in the preparation of sauces, PCPs), or compressed and sheared during mastication and consumption. The behavior of cheese when subjected to different size-reduction methods constitutes a group of important functional properties, which are summarized in magnitude of the stress required to fracture (fracture stress), the degree of strain (e.g., change in dimensions) at fracture (fracture strain), the ease with which the cheese fractures, and the type of fracture (i.e., clean or jagged). Certain rheological characteristics of the cheese are critical so that it behaves optimally as an ingredient in the specific application. Hence, it is difficult to portion hard cheeses, which have a relatively low fracture strain (Parmesan) or which fracture in a jagged fashion (e.g., an over-acid Cheddar, Cheshire), owing to the tendency to break at the edges. Similarly, these cheeses are unsuitable in applications where shredded cheese is required (e.g., pizza) because of their susceptibility to fracture/shattering and the resultant formation of high levels of curd fines/dust, which are aesthetically unappealing. Cheeses that are semisoft and adhesive (e.g., mature Raclette, Camembert, or Brie) are also unsuitable in applications requiring shredded/diced cheese because of their tendency to stick to the shredding equipment and the tendency of the shredded cheese to form balls and clumps. However, the ability of these cheeses to undergo plastic fracture and flow under shear (i.e., spread) makes them ideal for blending with other materials in the preparation of fondues and sauces. The brittleness and tendency of hard cheeses such as Parmesan and Romano, with low levels of moisture and fat in dry matter, to undergo elastic fracturability endows them with excellent gratability and suitability as a free-flow condiment for sprinkling onto pasta dishes. Swiss cheese (e.g., Emmental) is capable of being sliced quite thinly making it suitable for use in sandwiches. Low-moisture, part-skim (LMPS) Mozzarella shreds particularly well to give pieces of uniform size that are relatively nonadhesive; these properties facilitate its distribution over pizza base. Other varieties (particularly Feta, Cheshire, and Caerphilly) are very crumbly and are principally used in tossed salads. There is relatively little information in the literature concerning the functional properties of unmelted cheese (e.g., spreadability, brittleness, sliceability) and the factors affecting them. However, owing to the envisaged dependency of these functional properties on the rheological characteristics of cheese, it is likely that they are also influenced by factors such as cheese macrostructure, composition, temperature, and extent of ripening ( Cheese is used extensively in cooking, that is, baking, grilling, frying, and microwave cooking. A key aspect of the cooking performance of cheese is its heat-induced functionality, which is a composite of different attributes, including softening (melting), stretchability, flowability, apparent viscosity, and tendency to brown. The different functional attributes are given in Heat-induced flow (spread) and stretchability involve strain displacement of adjoining layers of the protein matrix as a result of stresses on the Further displacement can occur in the form of strings or sheets when the molten cheese mass is pulled and extended during consumption, as in the case with molten cheese on freshly cooked pizza. The degree to which the cheese stretches when pulled appears to be controlled by the same factors that affect flowability. The effects of different parameters on the functional attributes are summarized in direct addition of whey powders (e.g., whey protein concentrates and isolates) to milk, for cheese manufacture, or to the blend for PCPs and cheese analogues; the high-concentration ultrafiltration of cheese milk; and the inclusion of acid-heat-coagulated cheeses in blends for PCPs. There are marked differences in the functional characteristics of different cheese types ( aggregation and contraction of the planar orientation of fibers; and a limited degree of fat coalescence and free fat. The functional properties of Some cheeses are characterized by high flowability (e.g., mature Cheddar and raclette cheeses, double cream cheeses), while others (e.g., acid–heat-coagulated cheeses such as Queso-blanco types and paneer) are noted for their low flowability or flow resistance. The former cheeses are particularly suited to applications where flavor and flowability are important quality criteria, for example, sauces, omelettes, chicken 