Research conducted over the last few decades have acknowledged the importance of blast-induced fragment conditioning on the comminution and concentration stages. These studies demonstrate that blast-induced conditioning can be considered as a highly relevant factor in the value chain of the mining industry. Despite the significant benefits awarded to this phenomenon, there are few comprehensive studies about the topic and, in contrast, many questions have been asked regarding the mechanisms of generation and extension.
                  This paper presents a critical review on microfracturing induced by blasting which intends to summarise the current knowledge by presenting the key identified factors related to the phenomenon and discussing its impact on downstream processes.Concepts such as ‘global cost’ and ‘mine to mill’ have properly identified the value chain in extractive metallurgy and showed the improvements that can be achieved by the positive interaction between the different processes involved in minerals production ( Blasting has been demonstrated as the most energy efficient stage in the comminution process. Blasting can achieve an energetic efficiency between 15% and 30%, in contrast to grinding which is approximately 2% efficient ( Additionally, Over the years, the effect of blasting on the subsequent mining stages has been only attributed to the impact of size distribution. However, studies undertaken in the last decade have shown that fragment conditioning has a measurable impact on crushing, grinding and leaching performance, not only in terms of operational efficiency but also in terms of associated costs ( Microfractures and microcracks correspond to small fractures which, in general, are not possible to be seen through the naked eye as their common size is in the range of few millimetres and microns. In this paper, the terminology of microcracking and microfracturing intend to distinguish between fractures generated by rock geological processes and fractures induced by mining-related processes (such as blasting, crushing and grinding), respectively. Therefore, fragment conditioning can be defined as the alteration of the physical properties of the fragments resulting from blasting due to the extension of microcracks and the creation of microfractures. Formation and geological processes such as earthquakes, volcanic eruptions or thermal contractions, all generate macro and microcracks on the rock mass which can be associated to specific boundary conditions and mechanisms. The induced stress in conjunction with rock properties (such as mineralogy and porosity) influences the propagation patterns and the degree of microcracking ( Fragment conditioning is expected to affect all stages of mineral processing. During comminution, the phenomenon causes a reduction in energy consumption and an increase of throughput because of a reduction in fragment strength ( Currently, microscope imaging and X-ray computed tomography are the only techniques that provide a direct measurement of microfracturing. In both cases, dye impregnation is usually applied to highlight the fractures and facilitate their visualisation. Microscopy is a 2D analysis based on a number of techniques including optical microscopy, light microscopy, electron scanning, stereoscopic imaging and confocal laser scanning. Using a confocal laser scanner, Other techniques have been developed to measure microfracturing indirectly; these are mainly based on the variation of physical properties of rock such as p-wave and s-wave velocity measurements, bond tests and drop weight tests. In general, the direct techniques are more suitable to be applied in small scale analysis since they provide an accurate measurement of the phenomenon and are limited by the size of the samples. On the other hand, indirect techniques are suitable for large scale analysis where considerable rock volumes are characterised. Three types of microfractures have been identified in the literature, they include intergranular, transgranular and intragranular ( Various studies have focused on the generation of microfractures by blasting; however it is not yet possible to indentify neither all the factors involved in the process nor the mechanisms of creation and extension. The majority of tests conducted in this area have been implemented in small scale, using impact testing and controlled blasting on synthetic materials such as concrete or plexiglass and competent rock samples such as granite and granodiorite ( A number of studies have established that a direct relationship exists between induced stress and degree of conditioning. The stress intensity and direction are not the only aspects that affect fragment conditioning; loading rate also plays an important role, particularly on the type and length of fractures (   With regard to comminution processes,   In terms of rock properties, Regarding elastic properties, Another important factor associated with microfracturing susceptibility is natural porosity and cracks. The generation of microfractures is a physical phenomenon controlled by factors such as the shape and size of grains, mineralogical structure, elastic and mechanical rock properties, natural porosity and the induced stress field. However, the mechanisms involved in the generation of microfractures by blasting have not been comprehensively studied. An important challenge to be addressed in future work is the study of the fragment conditioning process by blasting in isolation, eliminating the influence of the fragment size distribution and without the inclusion of other stages of comminution. Currently, there is a lack of quantification of the main mechanisms involved in this process with respect to induced stresses. It can be expected that certain stress intensities would generate preferential types of microfractures. This correlation ensures that a given fragment conditioning could be linked to specific blast design parameters (i.e. drilling pattern, explosives, timing and sequence). A better understanding of the mechanisms would allow the generation of a conditioning model which may enable the scale up of the process as well as the prediction of the degree of conditioning, considering different blasting practices. Based on evidence found in the literature, it is possible to infer a priory that some of the mechanisms involved in macrofracturing and damage are also associated to microfracturing by blasting. Several investigations have demonstrated that microfracturing can have a direct impact on downstream processes such as crushing and grinding. However, the impact of blast-induced fragment conditioning on leaching has not been comprehensively studied. Prior research concluded that the greater the powder factor, the greater the ore recovery. However, a direct relationship between the degree of microfracturing and leaching performance is required. Also, it is of interest to define if ore recovery is influenced by a predominant type of microfracturing. The importance of studying this phenomenon, not only lies in the opportunity to optimise current comminution and hydrometallurgical processes, but it can also provide the basis for understanding mechanisms associated with preconditioning by blasting for geotechnical and in situ leaching purposes.