Final concentrates and furnace feeds from Anglo American Platinum are routinely monitored for quality. Merensky Reef, UG-2, and Platreef concentrates are sampled at the concentrators, as well as blended feed at the smelters, and the composition and mineralogy of these samples are determined at Anglo American Research.
                  This information allows the smelting characteristics of the concentrates to be predicted. Parameters such as the matte fall, spinel formation, and smelting energy requirement can be calculated by modelling.
                  The concentrates are characterised by chemical analyses for base metals, precious elements and trace elements. Various QEMSCAN techniques are used to determine the mineralogy of the samples and the abundance of gangue minerals and base metal sulphides (BMS), as well as the mineral association, are reported.More than 80% of worldwide platinum group element (PGE) reserves are found in South Africa ( Anglo American Platinum operates three smelters which process the final product from 15 concentrators and one tailings retreatment plant. At the smelters, material received from the concentrators is blended and fed to the flash driers to remove moisture contained in the concentrates. The blend is conveyed to furnaces where it is melted, and matte and slag are formed. The sulphide matte contains iron, nickel, copper, cobalt and small amounts of PGE. This proceeds to the converters where the iron and sulphur contents are reduced. The slag consists mainly of silicates and oxides and this is largely discarded. The processes of smelting and converting at Anglo American Platinum have been described in detail in the literature ( A simplified process flow sheet, illustrating the path of a concentrate to the furnaces, is shown in As can be seen in Levels of elements such as calcium, sulphur, magnesium and chromium have to be considered when blending the concentrates for smelter feed, as does their mode of occurrence (mineralogy). Minor to trace elements are also important, especially PGE, base metals, and any element which may cause environmental or process problems in the furnaces or downstream. The type and modal amount of gangue minerals and BMS in the feed determine the smelting energy requirement (SER), matte fall, sulphur emission, and liquidus temperature during smelting. The mineralogy of the samples, therefore, must be input into any modelling program that is to predict these properties. Chromium chemistry and mineralogy is used in addition to predict the level of slag spinel formation in the furnaces. Selected examples of the effect of concentrate composition and mineralogy are discussed in the following sections. The formulae of the minerals mentioned in this paper are given in Apart from the platinum group metals, nickel, copper and cobalt are also produced and marketed by Anglo American Platinum. The main mode of occurrence of these elements in the concentrate is in sulphide minerals, but they are also contained in trace amounts in silicates and oxides. Other phases reported as BMS are the iron sulphides pyrrhotite and pyrite. The nickel to copper ratio plays an important role in the furnace feed, as an imbalance can affect the downstream processing. For example, the value of Ni/Cu for 2009 concentrates varied from 1.5 to 2.0 (Merensky and Platreef) and 1.7 to 2.4 (UG-2). Nickel and copper levels, as well as those of sulphur and Cr Sulphur occurs exclusively as sulphide minerals in ores and concentrates from Anglo American Platinum. The variation in sulphur levels in selected final concentrates and FD feeds is shown in Chromium occurs predominantly in chromite, and so derives mainly from the UG-2 concentrates. Concentrates high in chromium cause problems during smelting because high-melting chromium-rich spinel crystallizes out of the slag and forms a layer at the slag/matte interface. This impedes matte fall and reduces recovery ( A plot of Cr The gangue minerals in the concentrates consist mainly of silicates, that is, pyroxene, feldspar and alteration silicates. The level of gangue minerals is higher in UG-2 concentrates. Some silicates and oxides have high melting points, and feeding too much gangue to the furnace will increase the smelting energy required by the furnace. A number of different software packages are available to smelter personnel in which they can predict smelting behaviour and energy requirements. The degree of spinel formation and the matte fall can be predicted by the input of feed chemistry, and the smelting energy requirement by the modal analysis results, especially of gangue minerals, which melt at relatively high temperatures. Each bulk unscreened sample is split into representative samples and then sent for chemical and mineralogical analyses. The samples are prepared as polished sections for QEMSCAN examination. Chemical analyses of the concentrates and flash drier feed samples are performed by the Analytical Services Department at Anglo American Research. The methods used are shown in Although the chemistry of the concentrates is important for the determination of value metal grade and problem element levels, it is also vital to supplement the mineralogical information acquired as shown below. For the smelter feed concentrates, three types of measurements are performed on a QEMSCAN, which is a computer-controlled scanning electron microscope equipped with stage automation and processing software ( QEMSCAN uses electron beam technology with backscattered electrons (BSE) for imaging and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) to analyse mineral composition. The elemental patterns produced are matched against standard pattern libraries. Different types of measurement can be run using QEMSCAN. The measurements run on smelter feed concentrates are bulk modal analysis (BMA), trace mineral search (TMS) and particle mineral analysis (PMA), as detailed below. Line scanning is used for BMA measurement. This measurement scans by lines in a horizontal direction only. The vertical direction line spacing is defined in such a way that each particle is intersected at approximately once, depending on the size of the particle. A modal analysis is provided from this measurement from which the mass percentage of all minerals in a sample is calculated. This measurement is used to determine the bulk mineralogical composition of each sample. Elemental compositions calculated from the bulk modal results are often used to verify assay results from the Analytical Services Department (and The bulk mineralogical composition is reported in graphical format, reporting gangue and base metal sulphides (BMS) separately as shown in In TMS and PMA measurements, the entire area of the particle is measured and the number of particles to be measured is pre-defined. The particles are analysed by X-ray points that could be as close as 1 The difference between the two measurements is that, in the TMS measurement, each particle is scanned for a target phase and only particles with the target phase are fully analysed, whereas in the PMA measurement all the particles are fully analysed. In order to provide results which are applicable in three dimensions, many two-dimensional fields are processed and this is used to predict particle characteristics with minimum stereological error ( In furnace feed samples, gangue liberation and association is determined by PMA measurement, and BMS distribution by TMS. The full association of minerals in the concentrates is reported in pie charts such as the one shown in The results of chemical and mineralogical analyses are combined and reported to personnel at Anglo American Platinum Head Office and Smelters. Interpretation of the data can involve spreadsheet calculations and/or modelling and this allows prediction of feed behaviour during the smelting process, and the documentation of trends in smelter feed composition. Making use of specialized techniques and regular sampling, therefore, facilitates the quality control of feed to the smelters. The authors would like to thank Anglo American Platinum for permission to present this information. See