A pilot-scale experiment of extracting zinc from spent catalyst of vinyl acetate synthesis by pretreatment using microwave irradiation was investigated. A variety of factors that affect zinc leaching were evaluated systematically. The experiment results indicated that the pretreatment with microwave irradiation could improve the zinc leaching rate greatly. Taking into consideration the experimental results and the industry production practice, the optimum conditions were obtained as follows: the temperature of pretreatment with microwave irradiation was 950 °C; the leaching agent was a mixture of ammonium bicarbonate, ammonia and water; the dose of leaching agent was 2.5 times more than the theoretical dose; the ratio of liquid to solid was 2:1; leaching time at room temperature was 3 h; the residue was washed 4 times. The average zinc extraction was 93.45% under the optimal conditions. The surface morphology and compositions of spent catalyst before and after microwave irradiation, and before and after being leached using the leaching agents were observed and characterized by SEM and XRD techniques. The results showed that the spent catalyst untreated by microwave irradiation was mainly composed of zinc acetate and activated carbon, but that of being treated by microwave irradiation was mainly composed of carbon and zinc oxide, and furthermore the pores of activated carbon were opened. The zinc oxide was adsorbed onto the surface and pores of spent catalyst, so the leaching agents could react with zinc oxide effectively. The spent catalyst after being leached was mainly composed of carbon; indicating the extraction of zinc from spent catalyst was very effective.Fresh catalyst used in vinyl acetate production contains up to 35 wt.% zinc acetate on the surface of activated carbon. After its use, the catalyst becomes a waste that contains approximately 26 wt.% zinc occurring in acetate, oxide or a metallic form as well as organic compounds, which are by-products of vinyl acetate synthesis. The catalyst is composed of granular activated carbon of high mechanical resistance and porosity. Spent catalysts are, on one hand, dangerous wastes, but, on the other hand, they are valuable secondary materials. Efficient regeneration systems are required to permit a wider application of carbon adsorption processes and to ensure their economic feasibility ( Microwaves are now being used in various technological and scientific fields in order to heat dielectric materials ( The objective of this paper was to investigate the feasibility of zinc extraction from spent catalyst of vinyl acetate synthesis pretreated by microwave irradiation, using NH Spent catalyst of vinyl acetate synthesis was obtained from a chemical plant in Yunnan province, China. The composition of the spent catalyst was presented in Scanning electron microscopy (SEM, EMPA-1600) was used to investigate the microstructure of the catalyst. XRD patterns were obtained with a Rigaku diffractometer (D/max 2500) using Cu K A microwave system typically consists of a generator to produce the microwaves, a waveguide to transport the microwaves and an applicator (usually a cavity) to manipulate microwaves for a specific purpose and a control system (tuning, temperature, power, etc.). A schematic diagram of the pilot-scale microwave heating equipment is shown in Microwave can be generated by either thermionic devices such as magnetron, klystron, back wave tube (BWT), and gyrotron; or solid-state devices such as microwave transistors and diodes. Among these generators the magnetron is most widely used for the industrial applications due to their availability and low cost. The main components of the magnetron include filament, inside cylindrical cathode, outside tubular anode, magnet, exit passage, antenna, vane, and strip ring. Power conversion and control are realized by power regulator. The main components in the power regulator are power switches. The first component is the power unit where microwaves are generated at the required frequency band. Magnetron tubes are used to generate microwave power. The energy is coupled into the applicator (cavity) through a slot, an array of resonant slots, where the material is subjected to intense microwave fields, and to which any additional ancillary process equipment such as pumps for operation under moderate vacuum conditions, steam or hot air injection, must be connected. The power supply of the microwave heating equipment was sixty magnetrons at 2.45 GHz frequency and 1 kW power, which was cooled by water circulation. A control system maintains the inert atmosphere in the reactor cavity of the microwave unit, whose size was accurately calculated by microwave theories addressing materials that preferably absorb microwave energy. Raw materials were charged into a special ceramic tube inclining in the reactor cavity by a screw feeder and those products were discharged by turning of the tube. The rate of charge varying from 0 to 70 kg/h was controlled by rotational speed of the screw and the rate of discharge ranging from 0 to 0.9 kg/min. was controlled by the tube's turning speed. Steam was introduced into a stainless steel pipe at the bottom of the ceramic tube and distributed through many proportionally spacing holes, which could uniformly activate raw materials. The flow rate of steam was controlled by adjusting the pressure of the steam between 0 and 0.3 MPa. The temperature measurement system, consisted of a temperature indicator and thermocouple fixed in the middle of the stainless steel pipe. Thermocouple provides feedback information to the control panel that controls the power to the magnetron, controlling the temperature of the sample during the regeneration process in order to prevent the sample from overheating. The input power of microwaves, rate of charging and discharging, flow rate of steam and the atmosphere were controlled by a control system, which is a on-line automatic control system. For the present study, the experimental equipment for the microwave pretreatment of spent catalysts consisted basically of a microwave magnetron of a maximum output power 6000 W (using only 1/10 of all magnetrons) at 2450 MHz and a single mode cavity where the sample was exposed to microwave heating. The process parameters used in the present study were as follow: The rotation speed was 50 rpm; the rate of discharge was 0.4 kg/min; the steam pressure was 0.005 Pa. Weighed a certain amount of spent catalyst (1, 5, 8, 10 kg) pretreated using the self-made microwave heating equipment and un-pretreated by microwave irradiation, added leaching reagents (every 1 kg spent catalyst adding 387.5 g NH The zinc extraction was determined by analyzing zinc concentration in solution and in residue using EDTA complexometric titration method. According to the interaction with microwave, materials can be categorized into three principal groups: transparent which are low loss materials, where microwaves pass through without any losses; conductors where microwaves are reflected and cannot penetrate; and absorbing which are high loss materials, where microwaves are absorbed depending on the value of the dielectric loss factor. We investigated the relationship between temperature and microwave heating time in order to know if the spent catalyst can be heated by microwave heating. Different masses of spent catalysts (5, 8, 10 kg) were treated using the self-made microwave heating equipment ( The effect of different pretreatment modes on the leaching rate is presented in Microtexture of activated carbon is often evaluated by X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurement, as well as TEM/SEM observation. In general, TEM/SEM brings information mainly on the microscopic crystallographic structure, while XRD measurement introduces the averaged knowledge about the structure of the sample. Characterization of activated carbon is effectively carried out by combination of these techniques ( In the present study, the spent catalyst untreated by microwave irradiation was characterized by XRD and SEM techniques, as shown in The spent catalyst was pretreated by microwave irradiation to 950 °C and also characterized by XRD and SEM techniques, as shown in Nine portions of spent catalyst were weighed, and pretreated using different microwave temperatures. The charge included 387.5 g NH The best charge was 1000 g spent catalyst that had been pretreated by microwave irradiation, 387.5 g NH This is a reversible reaction, the complex is Zn(NH In the baseline test, 1000 g spent catalyst pretreated by microwave irradiation was combined with 387.5 g NH In each leaching test 1000 g spent catalyst pretreated by microwave irradiation was combined with 387.5 g NH 1000 g spent catalyst being pretreated by microwave irradiation was combined with a certain amount of NH Experimental conditions were as follows: the ratio of liquid to solid 2:1; stirring at room temperature 3 h; the filter residue washed with water 4 times and then dried. The spent catalyst with microwave irradiation pretreatment after being leached was characterized by XRD and SEM techniques, which are shown in Through the above experiments the optimal conditions were obtained as follows: microwave pretreatment temperature: 950 °C; leaching agent: NH From the experimental results, the following conclusions could be drawn: Spent catalyst of vinyl acetate synthesis pretreated by microwave irradiation exhibits enhancement of the leaching of zinc. Spent catalyst vinyl acetate synthesis untreated by microwave irradiation was mainly composed of zinc acetate and activated carbon. There was a certain amount of porosity in spent catalyst, but adsorbates blocked the pores of the catalyst, giving rise to a low leaching rate of zinc. Spent catalyst of vinyl acetate synthesis after being pretreated by microwave irradiation contained zinc oxide, which was obtained by the pyrolysis of zinc acetate and thus spent catalyst was mainly composed of zinc oxide and carbon. Adsorbates inside the pores were removed, and the pores of activated carbon were opened. The zinc oxide was adsorbed onto the surface and pores of carbon, so that the contact area with leaching agent was increased. Zinc oxide adsorbed onto the carbon could be leached out easily using NH Spent catalyst was mainly composed of carbon after being pretreated by microwave irradiation and leached using NH Financial support for this work from specialized research fund for international cooperation project of science and technology in China (2006GH01) is gratefully acknowledged.