Current synthetic methods of biomass-derived activated carbon call for a costly chemical or physical activation process. Herein, we report a simple one-step annealing synthesis yielding a high surface area cellulose-derived activated carbon. We discover that simply varying the flow rate of Argon during pyrolysis enables ‘self-activation’ reactions that can tune the specific surface areas of the resulting carbon, ranging from 98m2/g to values as high as 2600m2/g. Furthermore, we, for the first time, observe a direct evolution of H2 from the pyrolysis, which gives strong evidence towards an in situ self-activation mechanism. Surprisingly, the obtained activated carbon is a crumbled graphene nanostructure composed of interconnected sheets, making it ideal for use in an electrochemical capacitor. The cellulose-derived nanoporous carbon exhibits a capacitance of 132Fg−1 at 1Ag−1, a performance comparable to the state-of-the-art activated carbons. This work presents a fundamentally new angle to look at the synthesis of activated carbon, and highlights the importance of a controlled inert gas flow rate during synthesis in general, as its contributions can have a very large impact on the final material properties.Annually around 50 million tons of forestry residues are produced as ‘waste’ in the U.S. alone Currently, there are primarily two routes to synthesize ACs from biomass: “physical” activation and chemical activation. Physical activation requires two steps, where the first is pyrolysis and the following step is activation through gaseous etchants, e.g., CO Recently Luo et al. first discovered a one-step activation of cellulose under NH Herein, we report that one-step pyrolysis of cellulose results in carbon surface area as high as 2600 We use filter paper (Whatman Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area and Density Functional Theory (DFT) pore volume calculations are based on N The electrodes are prepared by mixing 80 The impact of Argon flow rate is evident from the N Following the N We further investigate the microstructure of the resulting carbons by TEM. As Raman spectroscopy provides further structural insights of the amorphous carbon materials, particularly, the disorder degree in the graphene sheets (ab plane). A higher Up to this point, from the XRD, TEM and Raman results, it is evident that activation of the resulting carbon does occur through two distinct routes: thinning the thickness of the graphitic nanodomains, To elucidate the mechanism behind the inverse correlation of the activation process and the Argon flow rates, we monitored the evolved H To answer this question, we pretreated cellulose at 450 The above results provide two important insights. Firstly, it confirms that the species released below 450 The occurrence of these two activation reactions are supported by the TGA-MS results, as they show a stable evolution of H Despite the possibility of self-activation via Eqs. IR spectra provide insights on the activation mechanism as well. As When a low flow rate is used, evolved activation gas molecules, e.g., H We investigated the electrochemical properties of the C-10 of a surface area of 2600 We demonstrate that high-surface-area nanoporous carbon can be synthesized in a single step pyrolysis reaction without the use of any chemical or physical activating reagents. We record strikingly linear relationships between the flow rates of Argon in the reaction and key properties of the resulting nanoporous carbon, including specific surface area/pore volume and degrees of short-range order. We identify that the high nanoporosity of the resulting carbon is due to the in-situ activation reactions between the resulting carbon and the gases, e.g., H X.J. acknowledges the financial supports from Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 