Fractures occurring within the 1.5-cm proximal portion of the fifth metatarsal are commonly considered avulsion fractures. The exact mechanisms of such fractures are controversial. The present study focused on determining the likely mechanism of fracture according to the exact anatomy to allow for more successful treatment. The research sample included 10 frozen cadaveric specimens. The lateral band of the plantar fascia, peroneus brevis, and articular surface were identified and separated from their attachments, thereby splitting the fifth metatarsal base into zones A, B, and C. In zone A, the attachment of the plantar fascia was 6.6 ± 2.2 mm from the inferior aspect, 9.5 ± 2.9 mm from the proximal aspect, and 11.5 ± 0.9 mm from the lateral aspect. In zone B, the attachment of the peroneus brevis was 12.0 ± 2.2 mm from the inferior aspect, 10.2 ± 2.2 mm from the proximal aspect, and 11.5 ± 0.9 mm from the lateral aspect. Zone C was measured from the border of zone B and encompassed the articulation of the fifth metatarsal to the cuboid. We propose that fractures occurring in the most proximal end of the fifth metatarsal, zone A, are caused by a lateral band of plantar fascia and might be able to be treated conservatively by immobilization with weightbearing. We also propose that fractures occurring in zones B and C result from traumatic tension on peroneus brevis and might need to be treated with strict immobilization and non-weightbearing or open reduction internal fixation.Among the fractures of the foot, the proximal portion of the fifth metatarsal is a common site The cause of fifth metatarsal avulsion fractures has been widely studied; however, the exact mechanism of this fracture is controversial. Previously, the fracture was believed to be caused by contraction of the peroneus brevis tendon during hindfoot inversion To more fully understand the fracture mechanism and subsequent treatment, we undertook a cadaveric study of the anatomy. Our hypothesis was that a better understanding of the exact local anatomy would help physicians to better understand the fracture mechanisms and patterns and could lead to evidence-based treatment plans. Ten fresh-frozen adult below-the-knee cadaver limbs were obtained for the San Diego Cadaveric Anatomy Research Symposium. The demographic data included race. The right versus left leg was recorded, and the specimens were numbered 1 through 10. A lateral incision was taken to the fifth metatarsal. All distal soft tissue attachments were removed. Proximally, the lateral band of the plantar fascia and the peroneus brevis tendon were identified and cut several centimeters from their respective attachments on the fifth metatarsal base. The base was then disarticulated from the cuboid and fourth metatarsal and removed from the specimen. The specimen was then freed of any remaining soft tissue adherence, except for the peroneus brevis tendon and plantar fascia. A digital caliper was used to measure the dimensions of the fifth metatarsal, peroneus brevis tendon, and plantar fascia. After measuring the soft tissue structures as they inserted on the base of the fifth metatarsal, they were dissected off the bone to perform additional measurements of the insertion and how it related to the local anatomy. The analysis of the data collected was performed using Excel (Microsoft, Redmond, WA). Ten cadavers from unmatched limbs were used. All the specimens were skeletally mature. Of the 10 specimens, 5 were right and 5 were left; no information was available regarding the precise age or sex of the cadaver specimens. The overall length of the metatarsals, from the head to the tip of the tuberosity was 75.1 ± 8.0 mm, and the length medially from the metatarsal head to the cuboid articulation was 69.7 ± 6.7 mm. The base was in all cases triangular and was examined for the articulation with the cuboid bone, the attachment of the plantar fascia, and the insertion of the peroneus brevis tendon. The height of the base at the level of the cuboid articulation was 13.7 ± 2.3 mm, and the width of the articulation was 15.2 ± 2.4 mm. The height of the nonarticular base adjacent to the articulation was 12.4 ± 1.7 mm, and the width of the nonarticular base was 11.5 ± 0.9 mm ( The attachment of the plantar fascia was also described. The height of the soft tissue was measured as it attached to the fifth metatarsal and was 7.2 ± 2.1 mm. The plantar fascia was then removed and the attachment examined. The width of the attachment was 4.0 ± 0.9 mm, and the height was 5.5 ± 1.4 mm. The length of the attachment from posteriorly to anteriorly was 9.5 ± 2.9 mm when measured from the lateral view. The shape in all cases was oval. When measured from the most inferior portion of the metatarsal base, the attachment went from 0.5 ± 1.0 mm inferiorly to 6.0 ± 2.0 mm superiorly. The distance from the lateral aspect of the articular surface to the medial most portion of the attachment was 6.9 ± 1.9 mm ( The insertion of the peroneus brevis tendon was described in a similar fashion. The height of the soft tissue was again measured as it attached to the fifth metatarsal and was 6.9 ± 1.8 mm. Similarly, the peroneus brevis tendon was detached and the insertion examined. The width and height of the insertion was 3.5 ± 1.0 mm and 5.2 ± 1.2 mm, respectively. The length was also measured, just as with the plantar fascia, and was 10.2 ± 2.2 mm. The shape in all cases was again oval. When measured from the most inferior portion of the metatarsal base, the insertion increased from 6.7 ± 2.6 mm inferiorly to 12.0 ± 2.2 mm superiorly. The distance from the lateral aspect of the articular surface to the medial most portion of the insertion was 4.7 ± 2.1 mm ( From these data, 3 zones of the tuberosity were identified. Zone A comprises the attachment of the plantar fascia only and is nonarticular. It measured 6.6 ± 2.2 mm from the inferior aspect, 9.5 ± 2.9 mm from the proximal aspect, and 11.5 ± 0.9 mm from the lateral aspect. Zone B entails the attachment of the peroneus brevis tendon and is nonarticular. It measured 12.0 ± 2.2 mm from the inferior aspect, 10.2 ± 2.2 mm from the proximal aspect, and 11.5 ± 0.9 mm from the lateral aspect. Zone C involved the articular surface of the fifth metatarsal–cuboid joint. It was measured from the border of zone B and encompasses the articulation of the fifth metatarsal to the cuboid ( The specific anatomy of the base of the fifth metatarsal is important for several conditions. The classic Jones fracture is a fracture 1.5 cm distal to the articular surface of the fifth metatarsal and is very well described From the cadaveric research we have performed, traumatic tension of the lateral plantar fascia is the anatomically logical cause of fractures to the most proximal end of the fifth digit, the area defined as zone A. Because of the limited motion allowed superficially and laterally by the plantar aponeurosis, the fracture should not be subject to significant dynamic force. This might allow for treatment consisting of immobilization with weightbearing Most of the published clinical data have favored nonoperative treatment of avulsion injuries to the fifth metatarsal base. Polzer et al If internal fixation is to be undertaken, the anatomy and mechanics should be considered. Previous data have explored various hardware configurations; however, most research has considered the strength of fixation using bench testing. Bicortical screw fixation Although the present investigation was useful in describing the anatomy and treatment considerations for fifth metatarsal avulsion fractures, the study had a number of weaknesses that must be addressed. First, the use of only 10 cadaveric specimens could be considered a small number. However, Theodorou et al From the cadaveric research findings in the present study, 3 zones of fracture pattern were identified at the fifth metatarsal tuberosity, and these were determined from the anatomic considerations for the mechanisms of injury. Zone A fractures do not appear to be subjected to dynamic tension forces. Zone B fractures likely are subjected to the dynamic tension force of the peroneus brevis, and the treatment chosen could be required to account for this muscle action. Zone C fractures involve the articular surface, and care should be taken to assess the articular surface. All the data and conclusions drawn must be tempered because our study was only a cadaveric study, and clinical correlations must be made to assess the value of these recommendations. However, the presented information should prove useful to foot and ankle surgeons when faced with these fractures.