 Wearing, grinding or rubbing away of a coating or material. The diameter of the largest spherical particle that will pass through a filter under specified test conditions. Attraction of one substance into another, so that the absorbed substance disappears physically. Porous carbon obtained by roasting material of vegetable origin, activated to incorporate a large surface area per unit volume and, thus, create strongly absorptive properties. The attraction of particles onto the surface of a solid, for example fine particles onto a fibre in a filter mat. A colloidal system in which fine particles (solid or liquid) are dispersed in a gas. Particles that are joined or clustered into a group. A component or system that mixes the contents of a tank or pipeline. In the context of solid–liquid systems, this is normally to keep particles in suspension. Used in air filtration. The amount (mass) of dust retained by a filter versus the amount of dust fed to the filter. Passing fluid through a filter in the opposite direction from the filtering flow. Used to dislodge solid matter or clean the filter medium. A process stream that has been stripped of the substance of interest. The term is most commonly used in metallurgy. The ratio between the number of particles per unit volume above a specific size, Solid matter added to a suspension to improve filtration performance, usually by increasing the porosity of the resulting cake. Random motion of small particles suspensed in a fluid. The result of tiny eddies or impact from invisible particles. Washing away of a filter cake by slurry, wash liquid or drying air. Can affect the uniformity of the cake and, therefore, the evenness of the washing or drying process. A sealed, replaceable filter element, usually with standardized geometry and coupling. Normally classified according to certain standards. Polysaccharide composed of glucose monomers. Abuntant in nature (e.g. plant cell walls) and with many industrial applications, for example in paper manufacture. From a filtration point of view, can be used in the form filter paper or as a celluloid-like membrane. Cleaning of the filter to ensure that product from previous batches (solid or liquid) cannot contaminate subsequent batches. The separation of species according to physical characteristics. An example would be the classification of solid particles in a suspension into large and small particles. Room or enclosed space designed to provide a specified standard of air quality. Usually delivered using a high performance air filtration system. Liquid particles coming together, breaking surface tension to combine, making a larger liquid particle or drop. Either the number of particles in a specified volume (typically for air filtration) or the mass ratio of solid to total slurry for solid–liquid filtration. Any substance (solid, liquid or gas) that reduces the quality, safety or suitability of a fluid. A valve used to control flow conditions. In the filtration sense, this may be to control the flow or pressure in a filter device. Diethylhexyl Sebacate, used to generate test aerosols for testing purposes. A filter that captures and retains particle throughout its thickness and not only on the surface. Conditions of temperature or pressure at which water vapour begins to condense. See Movement of molecules or small particles caused by a concentration gradient. The collision of a particle with a filter fibre or collection site that is in its direct path. The diameter of a circle having an area equal to the smallest projected area of the particle Perhaps the most important parameter that can be applied to a filter medium or system – its performance in capturing particles with defined properties. For example, a filter with 100% efficiency will capture all particles, with 0%, no particles at all are captured. The recovery of metals from a solution, used to recover pure copper, nickel, zinc etc. in a hydrometallurgy plant. Loss of material caused by impingement of a fluid, often containing an abrasive material. Flow rate divided by face area of filter device (usually limited to air filters). An individual strand of material, usually orders of magnitude longer than it is thick. An apparatus for the separation of solid or liquid particles from a fluid stream in which they are carried. Generally an assembly of porous or fibrous material. The term is sometimes synonymous with the filter medium – ‘we need a new filter’. A permeable material upon, or within, which particles are deposited during filtration, but which allows the flow of fluid relatively freely. The change in concentration of particles across a filter divided by the upstream concentration. High Efficiency Particulate Air filter. Sometimes known as a HESPA (the S standing for sub-micron). A well-defined class of filter. Heating Ventilation Air Conditioning. General term, often used for the provision of air in dwellings and public spaces. The branch of metallurgy that used dissolution and precipitation, crystallization or electro-winning to produce metals. Such processes usually employ a great deal of solid–liquid filtration for purification of liquors or recovery of solids. The interception of a particle onto a fibre or collection site due to its own mass. Fossilized prehistoric algae (Diatoms), used as a pre-coat or body-feed in difficult filtration duties. Permeable or semi-permeable material, usually polymer, inorganic or metallic, which restricts the passing of certain particles or molecules. Common term for one millionth of a metre. 1000 μ=1 Generally meaning a percentage removal of a certain size of particle. A measure that can lead to a certain amount of controversy. In this context, a minute piece of matter, with observable size and density. Particles in filtration are usually highly active in terms of surface charge relative to their inertia. Particles that are not retained after impinging upon a filter medium. Number of particles in a certain volume, the apparatus used to measure this number (often exploiting the light-scattering properties of the particles). The ratio of particle concentrations upstream and downstream of a filter or filter system. A highly porous, naturally occurring volcanic rock, also used as a filter-aid or body-feed. Removal of small amounts of contaminant from a fluid stream. The output, within the requirements of the process, is effectively particle-free. Abbreviation for Parts Per Million, either in terms of mass or volume. Closely equivalent to mg/l in water. Appearance of solid particles, through condensation, usually in a liquid (sometimes also known as the pregnant liquor). A precipitation process is often followed by a separation process. A bed of filter-aid (often diatomaceous earth, perlite, cellulose or other coarse or porous particles) laid onto a filter medium to improve filtration (capture efficiency), throughput or to slow down blinding. A process stream that contains a substance in solution, the substance is normally a product. The final product is often recovered from pregnant liquor through precipitation, crystallization or electro-winning. See Change in pressure. In this context, usually referring to the drop in pressure across a filter medium or filter cake. The branch of metallurgy that uses high temperature (roasting, smelting) to produce metals. Usually, these processes produce off-gas that must be filtered to remove harmful particles or recover product. Ratio of the partial pressure of water vapour to its saturation pressure at the same temperature. Support mesh incorporated into some non-woven filter media for support or rigidity. Release of particles from an air-filter. Common description of a solid–liquid suspension. There is no universal definition, but if a suspension is described in terms of a few hundred ppm, then it is not a slurry, on the other hand, 5% and above is certainly a slurry. A filter designed to remove bacteria, viruses or other pathogens from a fluid. Filter medium that retains particles almost entirely on the surface only. An Ultra-Low Penetration Air filter, according to EN 1822-1 (classes U15 to U17). A crucial component on a vacuum belt filter (carrier belt or rubber-belt filter). Attractive or repulsive forces between molecules. The sum of the effects of the electric fields of electrons and protons. A gas that becomes a liquid below a certain temperature or above a certain pressure. Further definitions, in other European languages, are available in the Dictionary of Filtration and Separation, by R. J. Wakeman and E. S. Tarleton.