Epidemiological studies have established a significant association between two major health problems, osteoporosis and atheroma, which is independent from age, gender, and other cardiovascular risk factors. Bone loss and the development of calcific deposits within vessel walls occur concomitantly. Proteins formerly thought to be specific of bone have been identified in atheroma lesions; and associations linking vertebral and proximal femoral fractures to aortic calcifications have been reported. Bone loss may be a marker for the risk of stroke and cardiovascular death. Bone loss may occur as a consequence of ischemia related to vascular disease. Despite numerous published studies, the mechanism underlying the osteoporosis-atheroma association remains controversial. Factors that perpetuate the debate include the often retrospective design of the studies, small sample sizes, and known limitations of absorptiometry as a tool for measuring osteoporosis severity. We reviewed the available clinical, epidemiological, and animal data on the mechanisms underlying the association between osteoporosis and atheroma. The possible effect of osteoporosis medications on the blood vessel wall is discussed. These issues remain a matter of debate, indicating a need for vast prospective studies to look for a causal link between osteoporosis and atheroma. The results of these studies may lead to new treatment strategies.Population aging is leading to a steady increase in the prevalence of osteoporosis in occidental countries. Co-morbidities are common, with a high prevalence of cardiovascular risk factors and established cardiovascular disease. Although definitive proof of a pathophysiological link between osteoporosis and atheroma is lacking, many studies in animals and in humans support an association between these two conditions that is largely independent from age, cigarette use, and physical activity. The mechanisms underlying this association are unknown. Calcification of the abdominal aorta is a well-established risk factor for cardiovascular death. The prevalence of calcific deposits in the abdominal aorta increases with age in postmenopausal women, from 15% between 50 and 55 years to 80% at about 80 years of age. Although calcifications are more common in males than in females between 50 and 60 years of age, they are more common in females between 70 and 80 years, suggesting a role for estrogen deprivation. As early as 1957, an association was reported between bone loss in women and calcification of the abdominal aorta A 1992 study in 200 women older than 50 years showed that the decrease in vertebral bone mineral density (BMD) correlated with aortic calcifications, independently from age Studies of associations linking bone loss to clinical manifestations of atheroma also produced somewhat conflicting results. In the Framingham study population, metacarpal cortical thickness was negatively correlated with the risk of coronary events, even after adjustment for cardiovascular risk factors An increase in all-cause mortality has been reported in patients with a history of proximal femoral and/or vertebral fractures. In one study, for instance, relative risks of death were 6.68 (95% confidence interval [95%CI], 3.08–14.52) after a proximal femoral fracture and 8.64 (95%CI, 4.45–16.74) after a vertebral fracture In sum, clinical studies support an association between osteoporosis and atheroma. Whether a causal link underlies this association cannot be determined from available data. The high rates of both osteoporosis and cardiovascular disease in the population at large complicate investigations of causality, as does the large number of shared confounding factors such as age, gender, smoking, and physical inactivity. Experimental studies conducted in vitro and in vivo in animals are therefore valuable for generating pathophysiological hypotheses.  Atheroma may result in a chronic blood flow decrease within bone tissue, which may promote bone loss. This mechanism is among the hypotheses suggested to explain the lower-limb bone loss seen in patients with peripheral occlusive arterial disease. On the other hand, evidence suggests that bone loss may worsen the vascular disease Vessel wall calcification is an active process whose mechanism may resemble bone formation. During embryogenesis, bone precursor cells develop within a calcified and highly vascular cartilaginous matrix. Once neoangiogenesis is established, osteoblast precursors develop from stem cells, undergo differentiation, and initiate the mineralization process, thus reflecting early cross-talk between bone cells and vascular cells. Furthermore, mesenchymatous cells within vessel walls can differentiate into osteoblast-like cells or calcifying vascular cells under the influence of stimuli such as TNFα, oxidized lipids, and lipoproteins. Inflammation-induced increases in these compounds may promote bone resorption. Vessel walls affected with atheroma contain calcium, phosphate, and hydroxyapatite. Histological slides of calcified arterial wall resemble bone, with osteoblast-like and osteoclast-like cells. Proteins believed at first to be specific of bone, such as osteopontin Targeted deletion of the OPG and MGP genes is followed by the development of vessel wall calcifications, indicating a key role for the corresponding compounds. The underlying mechanism within the vessel wall may combine loss of a natural mineralization inhibitor and acquisition of an osteoblast-like phenotype. The RANK-L/OPG system may be involved in the association between bone loss and cardiovascular disease Vitamin K is a carboxylase activity cofactor that facilitates the conversion of glutamyl to gamma carboxyl glutamate, thereby enhancing the production and release of the active gammacarboxylated forms of osteocalcin and MGP, two vitamin K-dependent proteins produced by osteoblasts. MGP is expressed not only in bone, but also in smooth muscle cells and chondrocytes, two cell types involved in extracellular matrix production. The role of MGP in atheroma is unclear. Keutel syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disease related to a mutation in the MGP gene. Multiple pulmonary stenoses, ectopic cartilage calcifications, hearing loss, and facial dysplasia are the main manifestations. In mice lacking the MGP gene, calcifications develop in the vessels and cartilage, most notably the physeal plates, leading to defective growth, bone fragility, and fractures Vitamin K deficiency was found in postmenopausal women who had vascular calcifications and low BMD values. Elevation of noncarboxylated osteocalcin levels occurred as a result of the vitamin K deficiency Epidemiological studies have documented associations linking hyperlipidemia to vascular calcification and LDL-cholesterol elevation to low BMD values at the radius The effects of ApoE gene polymorphisms on bone in humans are controversial Osteopontin is produced by osteoblasts and found in bone matrix. Osteoclasts strongly express osteopontin. The role for osteopontin in bone remodeling and atheroma remains obscure. Data from mice that lack osteopontin indicate that this compound enhances vascularization, osteoclast accumulation, and resorption of bone tissue In contrast, a number of studies suggest that OPG may protect the vessel wall. In mice lacking GMP, the vascular calcifications worsen after inactivation of the OPG gene Fetuin (also known as α2-HS-glycoprotein) is a ubiquitous protein found in high concentrations in the bloodstream and present also in noncollagenous bone matrix. Fetuin powerfully inhibits phosphate and calcium precipitation within the vessel wall, leading to the formation of a fetuin–hydroxyapatite complex. Fetuin also inhibits TGFβ. In vivo, fetuin was shown to inhibit osteogenesis in rat marrow cell cultures Leptin (from the Greek word “leptos”, which means “thin”) is a protein hormone identified in 1994 that decreases hunger and regulates body weight Vessel wall cells carry receptors for leptin, and in vitro leptin induces the development of vascular calcification Mice carrying a mutation in the klotho gene experience accelerated aging with atrophic wrinkled skin, white fur, kyphosis, decreased motility, balance disorders, bone loss, and ectopic calcifications at several sites including the blood vessels As early as 1957 In rats, administration of high-dose vitamin D, calcium, and nicotine induced the development of vascular calcifications Raloxifene is a selective estrogen receptor modulator that decreases LDL-cholesterol and lipoprotein and increases HDL-cholesterol in postmenopausal women without osteoporosis, suggesting a potential for preventing atheroma plaque development Many in vitro and animal studies have established that bisphosphonates inhibit the development of experimental atheroma, and a review article on this topic was published in 2000 Parathyroid hormone (PTH) plays a central role in regulating the metabolism of phosphate and calcium. Continuous PTH release stimulates bone resorption, thereby elevating serum calcium levels. In contrast, sequential administration of teriparatide (the 1–34 segment of PTH) powerfully stimulates osteoblastic bone formation and is used as daily injections in patients with osteoporotic fractures. In an experimental mouse model of diabetes, teriparatide inhibited the development of vascular calcifications induced by a high-fat diet Statins are cholesterol-lowering drugs that inhibit the enzyme hydroxymethylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase, thereby preventing conversion of HMG-CoA to mevalonate. Data obtained in rats indicate that statins stimulate bone formation. Conflicting results on the effects of statins on bone turnover markers have been reported Strong data indicate a cardiovascular risk increase in patients with osteoporosis, although the underlying mechanisms remain unknown. Obstacles to the demonstration of causal relationships include the high frequency of both conditions, their increasing incidence with age, and the existence of shared risk factors. Vast prospective longitudinal studies are needed. Their results may have a major impact on the management of patents with osteoporosis and on the development of new treatment strategies. At present, the identification of vascular calcifications in a patient with osteoporosis indicates a need for evaluating the cardiovascular risk profile and perhaps for referring the patient to a cardiologist.