Polysiloxane films were deposited on an AISI316L stainless steel by remote plasma assisted chemical vapour deposition from 1.1.3.3-tetramethyldisiloxane. Thicknesses up to 5 μm were developed at a maximum growth rate of 400 nm min−1. The organosilicon films were then treated by remote plasma assisted oxidation and thermal treatment under air.
                  The remote plasma assisted oxidation modified the surface composition of the coatings but left the bulk properties unchanged. The thermal treatment allowed a full mineralization of the coatings. Below 450 °C the mineralization was partial and oxygen could not reach the coating core. This oxygen diffusion limitation was removed only for temperature of circa 600 °C. The final surface composition appeared to be SiO1.8 which might represent a structure close to amorphous silica. After the most severe thermal treatment (600 °C), neither desquamation nor cracking of the deposit occurred. The final composite is a steel substrate covered by a coherent layer of silica glass material. The steel underneath remained non-oxidized which testified of a strong diffusion barrier role vs. O2.The development of catalytic layers grafted over various kinds of metallic substrates is extensively studied: indeed it is a decisive step for the development of micro- In order to be considered as sound alternatives to conventional technologies of catalytic reactors, the structured devices must be designed from engineered catalytic layers that remain stable under the considered reaction conditions. These layers must therefore often fulfil various duties, from ensuring the mechanical steadiness of the active phase to protecting the reactor material or substrate from an aggressive media. The development of materials and interfaces that allow these roles therefore becomes a keystone of the reactor engineering The Fecralloy substrates appeared to have been the most used whatever reaction is considered In this paper a process and a material to coat AISI316L sheets with a layer fully covering the steel are presented The overall coating and plasma treatment steps use a late afterglow of nitrogen plasma. This afterglow is a reactive medium mainly composed of N atoms as energy carriers. These are generated up-flow the treatment chamber by exposing the flowing N The first step is an ageing of the substrate under CRNP conditions only. It induces a cleaning of the surface of the metal from eventual organic contaminants; it does not cause any significant sputtering of the surface under CRNP conditions. The roughness of the exposed samples remains therefore unchanged. It was found that such a pre-treatment contributed to strengthen the mechanical resilience of further coatings to be deposited The next step is the RPECVD. It consists in a polymerization of a selected gaseous compound (monomer) which is injected in the CRNP. It is eventually accompanied by a stream of oxidant or a carrier gas flow. The reactivity is obtained by a partial breaking of the chemical bonds of the monomer under the influence of the N atoms from the afterglow. The resulting activated monomers might then react and rearrange into a condensed form such as a polymeric film, depending on the hydrodynamic in the RPECVD treatment chamber The RPAO treatment uses the same apparatus than for the previous steps. It is used without any unload of the pTMDSO coated samples. The only difference with the RPECVD step is that the flow of monomer is switched off. The advantages of this preparation sequence are: A high deposition rate No or little etching due to the low aggression of N An increased adhesion of the deposited layer on the surface of the target An accurate control of the hydrodynamic conditions and an associated homogeneity of the samples An eased scaling up of the process to large samples, even with complex shapes. The general process flow sheet can be summarized as shown in The The pTMDSO films deposited on AISI316L stainless steel samples were treated in air under a natural convection at atmospheric pressure in a Maton programmable furnace. The power and temperature ramp were controlled with a Nabatherm C6 thermal regulator. The samples were characterized by Fourier Transform Infra-Red spectroscopy (FT-IR), micro-Raman spectroscopy and X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS). FT-IR apparatus was a Perkin-Elmer Spectrum One. Spectrum acquisition was done under reflective mode. The micro-Raman spectroscopy was done with a LabRAM Infinity spectrometer (Jobin-Yvon) equipped with a liquid nitrogen cooled detector and a frequency-doubled Nd–YAG laser supplying the excitation line at 532.18 nm. The power applied on the sample was less than 5 mW. The spectrometer was daily calibrated using the silicon line at 521 cm The XPS analyses were done with a Leybold VG ESCALAB 220XL spectrometer. The Al Kα monochromatized line (1486.6 eV) was used for excitation with a 200 W applied power giving an 800 μm diameter circular spot on the sample. The spectrometer was operated in a constant pass energy mode ( The thermogravimetric analysis was done up to 450 °C and 950 °C. A SDT 2960 simultaneous differential scanning calorimeter/thermogravimetric analyzer by TA-Instrument was used. It has a precision of 0.1 μg on the evaluation of mass and of 0.001 °C on the evaluation of the temperature. An excess of air and a temperature programmed treatment were used. These analyses are meant to set up a further heat treatment to be applied in a furnace. The event gases were analyzed by mass spectrometry and show only CO, CO The characterization of the material was done by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) micrographs, thickness measurement. The SEM micrographs were done using a Hitachi S-3600/N scanning electron microscope in secondary electron mode. The thicknesses were measured using a Foucault current probe (ED-M, Sigma Lab. Inc.) calibrated with polyethylene films of various thicknesses coated on AISI316L steel foils. Each given thickness is a mean value obtained from five measures, one in the middle of the sample the others at each corner of a virtual 1 cm large square centred on the first measurement point The samples are 40 The CRNP pre-treatment was done at room temperature. The N The RPECVD step was carried out at room temperature. The N The RPAO treatment was also carried out in a gaseous atmosphere at room temperature. The N The thermal treatment was applied to sample having been prepared as follows: RPECVD leading to the deposition of a 5 μm thick pTMDSO film Ageing under RPAO conditions for 15 min Unloading and storage in a dessicator Thermal treatment under air with a temperature programmed ramp at 5 °C min The influence of the exposure duration of the samples to the RPECVD on the thickness of the deposited film was previously studied The spectral characterization of fresh pTMDSO films under FT-IR and micro-Raman spectroscopy ( A SEM micrograph reveals a more or less smoothed film ( The RPAO ageing of various 5 μm thick pTMDSO coatings over AISI316L samples showed that composition and structure of the modified materials underwent only minor modifications. As seen in In absence of an in-depth analysis of the composition only temptative models can be proposed to qualitatively describe the evolution of the material from the estimated values of the surface composition. By considering the XPS analysis depth (denoted by A FT-IR analysis of RPAO treated samples showed that the nature of the deepest layers of the film remained unchanged after 5, 15 and 25 min of exposure to the RPAO ( After 35 min of RPAO treatment, the micro-structure and the aspect of the films remained globally unchanged ( The thickness measurements using the Foucault current probe did not show any modification vs. a non-RPAO treated sample. All the RPECVD+RPAO aged samples were found to be 5 The RPAO treatment was selected as it was potentially less intrusive than thermal oxidation of grafted pTMDSO. It was believed to cause less residual tensile stress within the coatings. Such a stress can cause deformations and defects within the coating that can contribute to jeopardize the efficiency of the barrier effect looked for these materials. The RPAO ageing used is however not efficient enough to allow a satisfying result: the penetration of O A partial mineralization of the sample does not allow satisfying enough conditions for a further grafting of any kind of mineral catalyst. Moreover, under high temperature application, the stability of the half-oxidized coatings is likely to evolve. A full mineralization of the coating is therefore considered as being mandatory. A first thermal treatment was applied at 450 °C over samples that had been preliminary exposed to RPAO for 15 min. As soon as treatment was applied for at least 1 h, the carbon surface content estimated by XPS disappeared. By applying the same analysis as in The FT-IR spectral data showed a slightly different material: an organic contribution was still detected and the overall aspect of the spectrograms did not deeply differ from a pTMDSO film. The organic contribution of –Me groups remained important: the symmetric and asymmetric stretching peaks for –Me around 2950 cm Similar to the RPAO aged films, the thickness measurements over thermally treated samples using the Foucault current probe did not show any modification vs. a non-RPAO treated sample. All samples were found to be 5 The thermogravimetric study was performed on pTMDSO to check out the behaviour of the polymeric material at 450 °C. A mass of 7.119 mg of polymer was mechanically striped as ribbons and chips from pTMDSO films. The thermal profile and the mass variation are reported in A second thermogravimetric analysis up to 950 °C was used to qualify the evolution of the material at higher temperatures. 9.584 mg of polymer was used ( To check out the absence of mechanical degradation caused by mineralization process, a sample was treated at 600 °C in the furnace with a 5 °C min Some pTMDSO films were deposited on a AISI316L stainless steel substrate by RPECVD from TMDSO liquid precursor. Under the conditions considered, the film was deposited at a rate of 300–400 nm min For an implementation as a functionalized layer for catalyst grafting in tube wall reactors, the pTMDSO films therefore require to be treated in such a way that they are fully mineralized. A thermal treatment had to be used on purpose. For temperatures below 450 °C it removed the surface organic contribution and partially modified the deepest layers of the material. The current assessment is that strong O The resulting estimated surface composition was close to silica. The final coating therefore presents some characteristics suitable to make it a satisfying seeding layer for further catalyst grafting. It was successfully used in that sense in a consecutive work in the 150–400 °C temperature range The XPS measurements done by M. Frère and the fruitful discussions with L. Gengembre are gratefully appreciated. Dr J.-Y. Dauphin (Ecole Centrale de Lille) is acknowledged for his contribution for the SEM micrographs. Dr. Guillou gratefully acknowledges the financial support of the Ministère de l'Education Nationale, de l'Enseignement Supérieur et de la Recherche. Dr. Le Courtois and Pr. Supiot acknowledge the funding by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche (MILLICAT program, ANR-06-BLAN-0126-02).