Electrochemical noise (EN) is a generic term describing the phenomenon of spontaneous fluctuations of potential or current noise of electrochemical systems. Since this technique provides a non-destructive condition for investigating corrosion processes, it can be useful to study the electrochemical oxidation of mineral sulfides by microorganisms, a process known as bacterial leaching of metals. This technique was utilized to investigate the dissolution of a bornite electrode in the absence (first 79 h) and after the addition of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans (next 113 h) in salts mineral medium at pH 1.8, without addition of the energy source (Fe2+ ions) for this chemolithotrophic bacterium. Potential and current noise data have been determined simultaneously with two identical working bornite electrodes which were linked by a zero resistance ammeter (ZRA). The mean potential, E
                     coup, coupling current, I
                     coup, standard deviations of potential and current noise fluctuations and noise resistance, R
                     n, have been obtained for coupled bornite electrodes. Noise measurements were recorded twice a day in an unstirred solution at 30 °C. Significant changes in these parameters were observed when the A. ferrooxidans suspension was added, related with bacterial activity on reduced species present in the sulfide moisture (Fe2+, S2−). ENA was a suitable tool for monitoring the changes of the corrosion behavior of bornite due to the presence of bacterium.Bioleaching or bacterial leaching is a process of dissolution of metal sulfides due to the oxidative activity (direct or indirect) of some bacterial species, mainly The mineral bornite (Cu Electrochemical noise analysis (ENA) is a relatively new technique which may be combined with EIS to overcome the difficulties associated with EIS. Electrochemical noise measurements take data points continuously and can have very fast sampling rates (e.g. two or more data points per second), and so ENA may be able to monitor a corrosion process continuously. Electrochemical noise technique works in a free corrosion condition and it is not necessary to apply a perturbation on the test system by an externally imposed polarization which will lead to inevitable changes of the system-specific properties such as the surface structure and roughness, adhesion of bacteria, etc. Thus ENA might be applicable to the study of various corrosion processes, such as bioleaching process, which is difficult to be investigated by other techniques. Furthermore, electrochemical noise recording requires only simple instruments and thus offers greater convenience for in situ applications This paper examines the possibility of using ENA to monitor continuously the bacterial and chemical dissolution of bornite. In spite of ENA being utilized to monitor microbiologically influenced corrosion (MIC), the use of this technique to evaluate the bioleaching of sulfide minerals has no precedent on the literature.  Research-grade bornite (Cu The experimental approach for simultaneous collection of potential and current noise data is shown in A Tait type electrochemical cell that allows using working electrodes of different size and shape, including sheet, was used in this work. This cell type eliminates the need for machining or special mechanical preparation of the samples and facilitates the microscopic observation after electrochemical studies. In this cell the working electrodes (bornite) were fixed at the bottom of the cell with an O-Ring and the other electrodes were fixed at the cell top. The electrochemical cell was provided with a jacket connected to a thermostatic bath and a recirculation pump to maintain the temperature at 30 °C during the test. An Ag/AgCl/KCl In a noise experiment the potential and current are measured simultaneously at a fixed rate for a chosen time interval. A typical record of experimental potential and current noise data for bornite electrodes is given in The standard deviations of potential As can be observed in After the addition of bacteria an abrupt increase of the The highest values of The decrease observed in the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) of experimental electrochemical noise data from the time domain to the frequency domain allows observation of the frequency dependence of the noise phenomena under investigation Spectral noise plots can be constructed in which The spectral noise resistance The noise data sets of Potential and current PSD plots have the general frequency dependence: For a system which has a capacitive impedance in the bandwidth of the noise measurements ( PSD slopes can be considered as a source of mechanistic information and they are utilized to discern between general and localized corrosion. The general corrosion is considered for high values, close −  Electrochemical noise analysis utilized in this study was adequate to evaluate the oxidative dissolution of bornite in the absence and presence of We are very grateful to Vale do Rio Doce Company (CVRD), Brazil, which is funding a project to our Biohydrometallurgy Group. Acknowledgements are also due to FAPESP for post-doctoral research to HAA and CNPq for research fellowships to DB, OGJ, AVB and GTF.