We studied 45 dry cadaveric humeri to determine whether the bicipital groove of the humerus can be used as a landmark for a proper, individualized orientation of a humeral prosthesis, especially in the case of a fracture. We performed 3 computed tomography sections (at a level just below the lower portion of the head, at the middle of the humeral head, and at a distance 5 cm below the first section), and we used special software for 3-dimensional image processing. To reproduce the individual posterior version of the head, when a humeral prosthesis is implanted for fracture, the lateral fin of the prosthesis should be a mean distance 5.2 ± 2.6 mm (−1.5 to 10.7 mm) from the posterior edge of the bicipital groove. If the lateral fin of the humeral prosthesis seats just behind the posterior edge of the bicipital groove, a difference of −6.3° to 41.7° from the normal posterior version occurs. A new, simple methodology for an individualized posterior version of a humeral prosthesis in cases of fracture is proposed. We applied this in 6 consecutive patients with fracture of the humeral head that required hemiarthroplasty. (J Shoulder Elbow Surg 2001;10:136-9.)Prosthetic replacement of the humeral head is indicated in certain cases with fractures or fracture-dislocations of the shoulder. The goal of this procedure is the re-establishment of the normal anatomy. Forty-five dry cadaveric humeri, without evidence of degenerative changes or previous fracture, were used for this study. A thin, flexible wire was used to mark the periphery of the articular segment of the humeral head, and a similar one delineated the posterior edge of the humeral bicipital groove for a distance 10 cm from its origin at the top of the humeral head. The wires were kept in their position with the aid of an adhesive substance. Each specimen was put on a flat horizontal surface with its tangent elbow axis (the line tangent to the trochlea and the condyle) parallel to the horizontal plane, and in this position, 1.5-mm computed tomography (CT) sections were obtained at the following sites: (1) at a level just below the lower portion of the head (a common site where fractures requiring prosthetic replacement occur), (2) at the middle of the humeral head, and (3) 5 cm below the first section, at the metaphyseal cylinder area (Figure 1). All images were electronically transferred and reanalyzed on an IBM-compatible personal computer that ran Image Pro Plus version 4.0 (Media Cybernetics, LP, Silver Spring, Md) software. The 3 images for each specimen were overlaid on a pixel-by-pixel basis. The points Intraobserver and interobserver variation was evaluated by using the data of 3 operators. All operators measured each variable 5 times using the complete data set of 5 specimens. Each operator was blinded to the results obtained by the others. Intraobserver coefficient of variation values were calculated by using the consecutive measurements of operator 1. The average values for each variable obtained from the 3 operators were used to evaluate interobserver variation. We applied the previously described methodology preoperatively on 6 consecutive patients with a fracture of the humeral head that required hemiarthroplasty. In all these fractures, there was no comminution of the humeral metaphysis affecting the distal continuation of the bicipital groove. With the sound humerus parallel to the sagittal plane in a determined angle of elevation, 1.5-mm CT-scan sections were obtained at the 3 above-described sites. The posterior edge of the bicipital tendon was used to define the posterior edge of the bicipital groove at the subcapital level, where the bicipital groove is shallow. With use of the same software, the 3 images for each patient were overlaid on a pixel-by-pixel basis, and calculations were made accordingly. In each patient, we implanted the humeral prosthesis with the lateral fin placed the measured distance from the posterior edge of the bicipital groove at the subcapital level of the sound humerus. The values (mean ± SD) of the angle of posterior version of the humeral head, the offsets, and the distance measured are presented in Table I. The distance (mean ± SD) of the supposed lateral fin from the posterior edge of the bicipital groove was 6.3 ± 2.3 mm (range 2.5 to 9 mm). It was not difficult to clearly determine the posterior edge of the groove in the subcapital CT-scan sections of these patients. The prosthesis was implanted in each patient, taking into account the corresponding distance from the measurement of the sound humerus. The retroversion of the proximal humerus is highly variable. The lateral fin of the prosthesis should be positioned just at the posterior aspect of the groove for a retroversion between 30° and 40°, which has been recommended and widely used. Recent studies have examined the bicipital groove in relation to humeral head retroversion, but they did not consider the groove at the subcapital level. The reproducibility of our measurements was also investigated. When repeated measurements of a variable are performed on the image of the same specimen with the same equipment, errors arise from inaccurate determination of the position of lines or angles by the operator. Evaluation of intraobserver and interobserver variation in measurements performed in the present study showed that our technique provided reproducible results. Operator error is a rather negligible source of variability, with a mean intraobserver and interobserver variation from 0.018% to 0.14% on repeated calculations of the parameters estimated in the present study. Data of this study showed a considerable variation in measurements of the distance from the posterior edge of the bicipital groove to the perpendicular to the anatomic neck line through the center C′. This distance indicates the point where the lateral fin of a humeral prosthesis should sit to allow the posterior version of the head to be individualized. When we deal with a fracture, it is rather a simplification to say that we can orientate the prosthesis simply by putting the lateral fin of the prosthesis at the estimated mean distance. However, it is possible to measure the respective distance from the groove on the sound humerus in a way similar to the technique we used for calculations on cadaveric bones. For this purpose, the use of CT-scan images of the sound upper humerus (3 sections) is proposed, followed by image processing to estimate the critical point for the individualized retroversion in the opposite fractured humerus. A prerequisite is that there is no comminution of the humeral metaphysis in the fractured side, which would affect the distal continuation of the bicipital groove. In a recently published article, there were reported differences in retroversion between the right and left humerus (average 5.8° and 2.8° more in right side in men and women, respectively). We would like to thank Dr Alexander G. Hadjipavlou, Professor of Orthopaedics at the University of Crete and Clinical Professor of Orthopaedics at the University of Texas (UTMB at Galveston), for his advice.