With an increase in number of waste nickel-metal hydride batteries, and because of the importance of rare earth elements, the recycling of rare earth elements is becoming increasingly important. In this paper, we investigate the effects of temperature, hydrochloric acid concentration, and leaching time to optimize leaching conditions and determine leach kinetics. The results indicate that an increase in temperature, hydrochloric acid concentration, and leaching time enhance the leaching rate of rare earth elements. A maximum rare earth elements recovery of 95.16% was achieved at optimal leaching conditions of 70°C, solid/liquid ratio of 1:10, 20% hydrochloric acid concentration, −74μm particle size, and 100min leaching time. The experimental data were best fitted by a chemical reaction-controlled model. The activation energy was 43.98kJ/mol and the reaction order for hydrochloric acid concentration was 0.64. The kinetic equation for the leaching process was found to be: 
                        
                           1
                           −
                           
                              
                                 (
                                 1
                                 −
                                 x
                                 )
                              
                              
                                 
                                    1
                                    /
                                    3
                                 
                              
                           
                           =
                           A
                           /
                           ρ
                           
                              r
                              0
                           
                           
                              
                                 [
                                 HCl
                                 ]
                              
                              
                                 0.64
                              
                           
                           exp
                           
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       −
                                       439,800
                                    
                                    
                                       8.314
                                       T
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           t
                        
                     . After leaching and filtration, by adding saturated oxalic solution to the filtrate, rare earth element oxalates were obtained. After removing impurities by adding ammonia, filtering, washing with dilute hydrochloric acid, and calcining at 810°C, a final product of 99% pure rare earth oxides was obtained.China is one of the largest global producers of batteries at almost one third of the global output. The annual output of small nickel-metal hydride (Ni-MH) batteries alone reaches 0.16 billion per year. Generally, Ni-MH batteries have a useful life of two years Eq. Therefore, a new method was proposed, which includes hydrochloric acid leaching and oxalic acid precipitation. In this method, hydrochloric acid and oxalic acid replace sulfuric acid and sodium carbonate and sodium hydroxide or anhydrous sodium sulfate, respectively. The reaction equations are as follows: According to the above analysis, the processing flow to recover rare earths from waste nickel-metal hydride batteries is proposed, as shown in We collected waste Ni-MH batteries from Jiangxi, China. The chemical composition of the unwanted material in the waste batteries as analyzed by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy is shown in Hydrochloric and oxalic acids (both analytical reagent grade) were supplied by Ganzhou Chemical Reagent Company, Jiangxi, China. Distilled water was used in the experiments. The flow chart of the proposed method for recycling REEs from waste Ni-MH batteries is shown in The leaching efficiency was calculated from: To examine phase changes of unreacted and reacted unwanted material in waste Ni-MH batteries, samples were analyzed by Philips X-ray diffractometry with Cu Kα radiation generated at 40 The effect of temperature on REE leaching rate was tested for the −74 To obtain the kinetic equation and apparent activation energy, experimental data were correlated to various kinetics models for liquid/solid reactions. For a liquid/solid reaction system, the reaction rate is generally controlled by diffusion through the liquid film, diffusion through the product layer, chemical reaction at the solid particle surface or a mixture of diffusion and chemical reactions To determine the main controlling step, the experimental data in The apparent activation energy was determined based on Eq.   Highest REE extractions were obtained for experiments carried out for 100 To determine the reaction order, the experimental data in According to Eqs. Based on the activation energy and reaction order obtained, the kinetic equation for the hydrochloric acid leaching of REEs can be expressed as follows: To obtain the REE oxides, after leaching and filtering, saturated oxalic acid was added gradually into the classified filtrate. NaOH solution (0.8%) was used to adjust the solution to a final pH of 0.4–0.6. NaF (1.0 The following conclusions, can be deduced from previous results and discussions: Temperature, hydrochloric acid concentration, and leaching time had a significant effect on REE recycling from waste Ni-MH batteries. A maximum REE recovery rate of 95.16% was obtained from the sample of particle size −74 According to the kinetic study, the leaching process was controlled by chemical reaction. Under experimental conditions, the activation energy and reaction order with hydrochloric acid concentration were 43.98 This work was financially supported by