In order to achieve high-quality coal resources in western China, this study focused on a coal sample from the Shangwan Coal Mine, owned by the China Shendong Group, and employed scanning electron microscopy (SEM), mineral liberation analysis (MLA), and maceral component quantitative analysis for investigating the coal sample’s liberation characteristics and crack distribution patterns after pre-grading and microwave processing. The results show that the physical properties of coal maceral components significantly affected the related enrichment performances, and many intra-group and inter-group cracks were produced under the induction of microwave radiation. The cracks then developed and stopped growing among the different maceral components and mineral components, thereby inducing selective and random pulverization along the crack growth direction in further pulverization process and effectively enhancing the liberation properties of different components. Using the Sandbox method, the fractal dimension of the cracks on the particle surface was calculated to be 1.01, which confirmed the self-similarity of the cracks on the coal surface. Multi-intensification maceral liberation also yielded favorable grading performances. The inertinite content was the highest (75.23%) in grade-3 product, while the vitrinite content was the highest (66.3%) in grade-1 product; the corresponding enrichment ratios were 2.15 and 1.59, respectively. Moreover, the ash content in grade-2 product was the lowest, which dropped by 3.61% compared with that in raw coal sample.Coal is a kind of sedimentary substance with both organic matter (macerals) and inorganic matter (minerals) and exhibits a complex porous structure and strong heterogeneity Owing to several advantages including speediness, high efficiency, low cost, and selectable heating, microwave radiation is extensively used for processing, drying, and heating in industry, scientific research, and medicines First, pre-grading and microwave preprocessing were conducted on the coal sample for investigating the related maceral liberation characteristics. Next, multi-intensification was performed for liberation and enrichment of the objective components. Multiple intensification technology mainly includes the following three procedures, namely, pre-grading, microwave-assisted crack formation, and superfine pulverization and fine grading; the detailed technological process is displayed in Air-jet pulverization-grading system, developed by Xi’an University of Science and Technology, was used for superfine pulverization and fine grading. Here, Next, to characterize the enrichment performances of various maceral components in the graded products, heterogeneous ratios (D and D′) and enrichment ratios (| Here, A mineral liberation analyzer 250 (FEI, USA) from the Oil Sands and Coal Interfacial Engineering Facility of the University of Alberta, Canada, was used to examine the liberation characteristics and crack distribution of each coal component. In this study, coal samples were collected from the Shangwan Coal Mine (henceforth referred to as SW), owned by the Shendong Coal Group. SW coal samples were collected beneath the surface at a depth of 1 mm. Djordjevic enhanced the coal pulverization efficiency by reducing the heat consumption and proposed that the net pulverization energy in the crushing process can be improved by decreasing the grade of the fed materials  Based on previous research From the MLA results  Based on a large number of MLA images of the microwave-processed coal sample, it was clear that the crack distribution pattern on the particle surface exhibited self-similarity. Next, the fractal theory was introduced for quantitative characterization to further validate the self-similarity. Fractal dimensions can be a reasonable indicator of the extent of roughness of the material’s surface. After pre-grading, coal samples with different sizes (>0.5 mm, 0.25–0.5 mm, and  l < 0.25 mm) were prepared and subjected to microwave preprocessing at a power density of 1.2 × 10 Additionally, after multi-intensification liberation, the ash content first decreased and then increased as the particle size decreased. The ash content in the grade-2 product was the lowest (6.77%), and the ash content gradient among various grades of products reached 5.15%, which was reduced by 3.61% as compared with that in the raw coal sample. This further demonstrated that different minerals show different degrees of microwave absorption, while pulverization and grading promoted the separation between the coal and the minerals. Further grading led to a marked difference in the liberation properties, mainly particle size and density between the coal and the minerals, thereby enhancing the liberation performance.   Based on the above analysis results, a multi-intensified coal maceral liberation model was proposed, as shown in The pre-existing cracks in the raw coal particles and the difference in physical properties among different components play a dominant role in the enrichment of the maceral components in pre-grading. As shown in  The physical properties of coal maceral components, including microhardness, brittleness, and toughness, significantly affected particle-size-based enrichment performance. The particles with different sizes in different mineral and maceral components exhibited varying degrees of responses to microwave radiation, which induced the formation, growth, and termination of many cracks in and among different mineral components and groups. Further, this led to changes in the pulverization modes of different components. After microwave processing, the cracks on the coal surface showed some self-similarity. Using the Sandbox method, the fractal dimension of the cracks on the surface of the SW coal sample was determined to be 1.01. Under multi-intensification technological conditions, the maceral components exhibited favorable enrichment performance. The maximum inertinite and vitrinite contents in the graded products were 75.23% and 66.30%, respectively. Using the enrichment ratio as the evaluation index, we found that the grade-3 products in G2 and G3 showed the best enrichment performance, with the corresponding enrichment ratios of 2.15 and 1.59. Financial supports for this research, supported by