Mass transfer coefficient is an all-important parameter for the design of columns. This paper was aimed at analyzing mass transfer in the columns with counter-current flow. Considering that the available theoretical models have focused on the prediction of a single drop diffusion in nonionic systems and show poor agreement with the experimental data of an ionic or reactive extraction system, it is of interest to develop a new correlation for effective diffusion coefficient. In this regard, ZnSO4/D2EHPA (Zinc sulphate/Di(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid)/Kerosene extraction system, involving chemical reaction, was investigated in spray and packed columns with counter-current flows. This proposed correlation was derived in the form of dimensionless parameters, in which the effects of operational parameters, e.g. dispersed phase flow rate, and packing height (for packed column) or nozzle inner diameter (for spray column), were taken into account. Interestingly, for the first time, the effect of temperature was explored and incorporated into the final correlation. The promising results of our model with R-square of ∼98% and 95% for spray and packed column respectively, suggest its applicability for the prediction of mass transfer coefficient in similar systems and, subsequently, improving the column design.column cross sectional area, solute concentration in dispersed phase, equilibrium concentration of solute in dispersed phase, Taylor constant initial concentration of solute in dispersed phase, diffusion coefficient at infinite diluent, based on molecular concentration, diffusion coefficient, effective diffusion coefficient, overall effective diffusion coefficient, drop diameter, mean diameter of drop, local efficiency enhancement factor for mass transfer Eotvos number ( Eotvos number for drop with critical diameter faraday = 96500 fractional segmental volume of stagnant drop gravitational constant, overall mass transfer coefficient based on dispersed phase, contamination coefficient varied between 0 to 1 column length, stoichiometric constant of the heterogeneous reaction volume flow rate of continuous phase, volume flow rate of dispersed phase, gas constant, 8.314, Reynolds number ( Coefficient of determination Schmidt number ( Temperature contact time, terminal velocity, slip velocity of drop, interfacial tension, dispersed phase holdup valences of cation and onion, respectively viscosity ratio (dispersed/continuous phase) eigen value limiting (zero concentration) ionic conductance continuous phase viscosity, dispersed phase viscosity, continuous phase density, dispersed phase density, difference of dispersed and continuous densities, Liquid-liquid extraction is of great significance in various industries including oil, food, hydrometallurgy, pharmaceutical and chemical separation processes. The main advantages of extraction columns are their high efficiency, simple operation, and their capacity for holding a high flow rate of the dispersed phase up to 10–15 times more than that of the continuous phase [ Metal extraction, as a conventional industrial process which has a substantial role in metal recovery and purification, can be a general framework for studying mass transfer occurring with reaction in columns with counter-current flows. The present investigation deals with the system, ZnSO The kinetics of chemical reactions occurring during the process as well as components mass transfer rates between the two liquid phases have direct bearing on the reactive metal extraction [ Mass transfer coefficient is an essential parameter as long as the design of columns is concerned. All factors influencing the mass transfer coefficient can be empirically obtained and put into the theoretical models in order to get an accurate mass transfer. Over the past years several correlations have been introduced for estimating the dispersed phase mass transfer coefficient based on a single drop model, the most prominent of which are: Molecular diffusion in a stagnant drop (Newman equation) [ This equation was constructed applying the mass balance inside the drop and solving the partial differential equation equation with appropriate initial and boundary conditions. Laminar diffusion accompanied by circulation owing to relative motion of the drop in the continuous phase (Kronig and Brink equation) [ Eddy diffusion where drops with toroidal circulation exist (Handlos and Baron equation) [ The prediction of mass transfer coefficient can be enhanced by replacing the molecular diffusion ( Several literatures have been reported for the determination the enhancement factor (E), the most promising expressions are summarized in Most of these models considered nonionic systems for the evaluation of the effective diffusivity. Thus a paucity of suitable models for the extraction systems with chemical reactions can be found in the related literature. In this study, an attempt was made to establish a new correlation for effective diffusion coefficient and understanding its dependence on several experimental parameters in order to optimize the design of experiment for bulk scale separation of Zn The ZnSO For all the experiments, the initial zinc concentration in the feed stream (continuous phase) was the same –that is, 1 g/L. The mass transfer direction was from the continuous phase to the dispersed phase. Physical properties of the system are reported in Experimental set-up which is illustrated in The continuous phase pH, after the saturation of two phases with each other, was set at 2 by pure sulfuric acid (Merck, Germany) using a pH meter (Lutron, model pH-201). Before each run, the column was filled with the continuous phase above the sampling valve –i.e. to the height of 55 cm. Drops were collected from four valves with a 12.5 cm distance apart from each other, and therefore sampling was accomplished at four different heights. The zinc concentration in the samples was measured by UV spectroscopy visible (Unico-21000, USA). The Sauter mean diameter, d Drops form individually at the nozzle at low flow and the drop size increases until releasing by overcoming interfacial tension through buoyance force. At high flow rates, a very short continuous form of liquid is between the nozzle and the point of drop detachment. In each test for a specific column height, L, and certain flow rates of the dispersed and continuous phases, the slip velocity (V Having determined the zinc concentration (C) and the contact time (t) (by recording drop rising time, Molecular diffusion coefficient ( In order to incorporate the effects of different operational conditions into the mass transfer coefficient results in a functional way, experiments for both spray and packed columns were designed by Design-Expert  In The values of theoretical calculated mass transfer coefficients were much lower than the standard error line drawn in the figure. In view of these poor correlation, they were not taken into account further. The results of spray column indicate that the equations estimate Considering the results, it is required to derive a favorable expression for the effective diffusion coefficient which can serve as a substitute for the molecular diffusion coefficient ( One of the correlations that can be applied to find the effective diffusivity is the Newman equation featuring a coherent background based on the continuity equation with the proper initial and boundary conditions. The Newman correlation takes precedence over the other correlations which are predicated on physical properties; thus, this equation was employed to calculate The values of  An improvement in correlation of effective diffusion coefficient with the experimental parameters has been achieved for separation of Zn