A technology has been developed for extracting tungsten from scheelite concentrate with caustic soda by an autoclaving process. In this process, the effects of different variables on the digestion of scheelite, and on the evaporation of the crude sodium tungstate leach solution, has been investigated. The results showed that 98.8% W was leached in 2h at 160°C under the conditions of 2.2 stoichiometric ratio of NaOH and liquid /solid ratio 0.8:1 stirred at 400rpm. After evaporation, about 90% sodium tungstate was crystallized, leaving impurities of PO4
                     2-, AsO4
                     2− and SiO3
                     2− in the mother solution. The filtered mother solution contained about 93% of the unconsumed caustic soda which can be recycled for a new round of leaching. This technology has been successfully put into industrial practice and can treat almost any tungsten ore, including scheelite middling and wolframite–scheelite mixed concentrates.The chief economic minerals of tungsten are wolframite [(Fe,Mn)WO At present, digesting scheelite with soda through an autoclaving process is mostly applied in western countries ( Some metallurgists working in this field thought that scheelite cannot be digested well with NaOH under industrial conditions; based on the small value of equilibrium constant However, the successful commercial application of a specially designed thermo-milling process has clearly shown that scheelite concentrate can actually be digested well with caustic soda ( So, if a high concentration is provided, scheelite can be digested by NaOH in a standard autoclave as our earlier studies showed ( In this paper, the conditions for the extraction of tungsten from scheelite concentrate with caustic soda in an autoclave is described, together with the method of recovering unconsumed caustic soda from crude sodium tungstate leach solution as it is industrially applied in China. The scheelite concentrate used in this study was taken from Shizhuyuan Mine of Southern China. After crushing and grinding, the particle size of the ore was mainly distributed around 0.074 The experiments of scheelite digestion were carried out in an autoclave (FYXD1 style produced by Dalian Meter Co., Ltd.) equipped with a temperature and stirring speed controller. Firstly, scheelite concentrate, caustic soda and water were added into the autoclave in a certain proportion. Secondly, after digesting for 2 To investigate the effect of temperature on digesting scheelite, experiments were carried out in the range from 100 As shown in The experiments of digesting scheelite concentrate with different dosage of caustic soda were performed under the same standard conditions. Under these conditions, most of the sodium tungstate (Na So the increase of NaOH concentration had a beneficial effect on the extraction of tungsten as shown in Under standard leach conditions, the liquid/solid ratio was varied from 0.6:1 to1:1. The results in Therefore, in order to obtain a satisfactory recovery of tungsten, the liquid/solid ratio should be kept at an optimal liquid/solid ratio of 0.8:1. Experiments were carried out to study the effect of stirring speed under standard conditions. However, as seen from The crude sodium tungstate leach solution in our experiments was from Taiheyuan Tungsten Co., Ltd (Shaoguan, Guangdong province) and contained the unconsumed caustic soda and other impurities, such as P, As and Si. The constituents of the crude sodium tungstate solution are shown in In view of the solubility of Na The crystallization process of sodium tungstate is shown in In order to investigate the behavior of Na The unconsumed caustic soda remaining in the mother solution which contained PO Based on the basic study mentioned above, the technology for digesting scheelite with caustic soda in an autoclave has been developed. This technology had been put into industrial practice successfully and extended gradually in Chinese tungsten companies, such as Xiamen Tungsten Co., Ltd, Zhangyuan Tungsten Co., Ltd, Ganbei Tungsten Co., Ltd and Chaozhou Xianglu Tungsten Industry Co., Ltd, etc. This technology can treat almost any sort of tungsten ores, including scheelite middling and wolframite–scheelite mixed concentrates. Some typical results of industrial practice from a number of small plants around China are given in The experimental results showed that finely ground scheelite concentrate can be digested successfully in an autoclave with caustic soda. Approximately 99.0% W can be extracted in 2 Upon evaporation of the leach liquor, about 90% sodium tungstate can be crystallized leaving PO The technology of extracting tungsten from scheelite with caustic soda by autoclaving process has been put into industrial practice successfully and can treat a variety of tungsten ores, including scheelite middling and wolframite–scheelite mixed concentrates. This work has been jointly supported by the