Data is presented on the nickel(II) extraction from sulfate solutions with bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid (HR) (Cyanex 301) diluted with nonane in the presence of electron donor additives (L). Well-known extractants and modifiers, widely used in industry, trioctyl amine (TOA), trialkyl amine (TAA), trioctyl phosphine oxide (TOPO), trialkyl phosphine oxide (TAPO), tributyl phosphate (TBP), and n-octanol, were used as additives.
                  The interaction between nickel-loaded extracts in nonane (NiR2) and various electron donor additives was studied using an electronic spectroscopy method. It is shown that n-octanol and TBP do not interact with NiR2 in the organic phase, as a result of no change in the square planar configuration of the initial nickel complex, while TOPO, TOA, and TAA form mixed complexes with nickel dithiophosphinate. For the NiR2 and organic amine mixtures, the composition of the ternary complex having an octahedral configuration was found to be [NiR2•2TOA] or [NiR2•2TAA].
                  The introduction of additives into the organic phase results in a decrease in nickel extraction. The degree of extraction decreases in the series TAA>TOPO, TAPO>>TBP>>
                     n-octanol. A decrease in the extractant activity resulting from the interaction between HR and L is the determinant factor during nickel extraction with bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid in the presence of additives despite the formation of mixed nickel complexes in the HR and TOPO (TAPO) and TAA (TOA) mixtures in the organic phase. The most effective system, based on a mixture of Cyanex 301 and TAA, was proposed for nickel extraction from sulfate media, including leach liquors of oxidized nickel ores.Cyanex 301, the active component of which is bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid (HR), is of undoubted interest for nickel hydrometallurgy ( Along with the investigations on nickel extraction with bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid alone, investigations on nickel extraction with mixtures of HR and other reagents (long-chain alcohols, trioctyl phosphine oxide (TOPO), organic amines of various structures) have been carried out. In the work by In other work ( In our view, it is difficult to accept this choice since the loading capacity of the organic phase containing Cyanex 301 for nickel is much higher compared to that of the Cyanex 301/Aliquat 336 system. When the individual 0.47 As seen from the above, only a very limited amount of data on the solvent extraction of nickel from solutions of various compositions with Cyanex 301 and other extractant mixtures are available. Besides, in our view, such investigations have not been systematic. Taking into account the interest in such mixtures, it is necessary to continue such investigations and to search for effective extraction systems for nickel recovery from sulfate media. This article presents the results of an investigation of nickel extraction from sulfate media with bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid diluted in nonane in the presence of commercially available additives which are used in industry as extractants and modifiers: tertiary amines, trioctyl and trialkyl phosphine oxides, tributyl phosphate, and Bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid, purified through the formation of its ammonium salt according to the published procedure ( The reagents used as additives were trioctyl amine (TOA) of 99% purity, trialkyl amine of C Nickel dithiophosphinate (0.2 The liquid–liquid extraction testwork was carried out by mechanical mixing of the phases for 20 The aqueous phase acidity was varied by adding appropriate amounts of sulfuric acid. Adjustment of the pH of the aqueous solutions was carried out using the sodium salt of the extractant. To obtain the extractant in the Na-form, it was treated with the sodium hydroxide solution (C The aqueous phases were analyzed for nickel while the nickel contents of the organic phases were calculated from the mass balances. In several cases, to ensure accurate results, the nickel-containing organic phases were completely stripped by mixing with 5.5–6.0 The concentration of sulfuric acid in the aqueous solutions was analyzed by titration with sodium hydroxide—potentiometrically or in the presence of the indicator methyl orange. The concentration of sulfate ion in the organic phases was determined by titration with barium nitrate in the presence of the indicator nitchromazo ( Earlier, it was shown ( The extraction constant is as follows: At constant ionic strength (I) in the aqueous phase (7.5 In this case, the nickel distribution coefficient ( As seen from Eq. Earlier, by means of IR spectroscopy, the state of nonane-diluted bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid solutions in the presence of various electron donor additives (L) was investigated ( The interaction between nickel-loaded extracts and additives was studied using electronic absorption spectra (EAS). In this case, only interactions between the extracted nickel compound (NiR In Unlike Sequential introduction of TOA into the solution containing nickel dithiophosphinate leads to a color change of these solutions from indigo blue (NiR An isosbestic point is observed for both the NiR The IR spectra of nickel (NiR Accordingly, the formation of the mixed complex in the organic phase may be described by Eq. It should be noted that there is much in common between the nickel bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinate and the nickel di(2-ethylhexyl)dithiophosphate systems. In particular, the formation of mixed complexes of NiR The data obtained on the interaction of the electron donor additives with HR and the extracted nickel compound (NiR The data on nickel extraction in dithiophosphinic acid systems are given in The dependences of nickel extraction with dithiophosphinic acid in the presence of various additives upon the acidity of the initial aqueous solution are presented in Earlier ( As TBP does not interact with the extracted nickel compound but reacts markedly with HR, then, according to Eq. The interactions in the systems containing TOPO (TAPO) and TOA (TAA) are much more complicated. These additives, particularly TOA and TAA, as shown above, interact with NiR Since significant nickel extraction with the HR and TAA mixtures from acidic solutions does not occur, nickel recovery can be achieved by increasing the pH value ( With regard to the loading capacity of the HR The presence of the basic reagents in the system containing HR leads to partial extraction of sulfuric acid, however, when the acid content in the aqueous phase is moderate (up to 0.5 Taking into account the formation of the [TOAH At pH The data on nickel stripping from the HR and TAA mixture with sulfuric acid solutions are given in As seen from The other systems containing HR extract nickel much more strongly than the HR In our view, the HR and TAA mixtures are the most effective systems for nickel recovery from various technological solutions, including leach liquors of oxidized nickel ores. When using the mixtures, both effective extraction and stripping of the nickel with sulfuric acid are possible. That is quite difficult or impossible when using other HR and L mixtures, particularly, when using the individual dithiophosphinic acid. However, the data obtained for the HR The interaction between nickel extracts (NiR In all cases, when introducing the additives into the organic phase containing HR, a decrease in nickel extraction is observed. The degree of extraction decreases in the series TAA Thus a decrease in the extractant activity resulting from the interaction between HR and L is the determinant factor during nickel extraction with Cyanex 301 in the presence of additives, despite the formation of the mixed nickel complexes in the mixtures of HR with TOPO and TAA in the organic phase. The extraction system based on the Cyanex 301 and TAA mixtures was found to be most effective for nickel extraction from sulfate media, including oxidized nickel ore leach liquors. Our special thanks go to Cytec Industries, Inc., Canada for free samples of Cyanex 301. Appreciation for valuable remarks is extended to Dr. D. Flett.