 Professor Nathaniel Arbiter was born January 2, 1911 in Yonkers, NY and died in Tucson, Arizona October 5, 2008 at the age 97. He will be missed by many friends and colleagues. He received many honours and awards the last one was at the International Mineral Processing Congress in Beijing in September 2008. I met Arbiter for the first time in 1968 when he joined the newly-established Extractive Metallurgical Research Division of the Anaconda Company on Kolb Street in Tucson, Arizona as a consultant after taking an early retirement from Columbia University. He introduced himself as a handicapped Jew. I do know why he mentioned this but since then we became good friends and he used to drop in my office to chat and talk about copper metallurgy. Before I left Anaconda in October 1970 he became Assistant Director, then a few months later Director — a position he occupied until 1977. When I visited him at his home in Vail, Arizona in June 1978 he told me that it was Charles M. Brinckerhoff (1901–1987) a Columbia graduate and Chairman of Anaconda from 1965 to 1969 that had invited him to Anaconda's New York Office on Broadway in 1968 and asked him to prepare himself to become Director of Research to take over from Francis L. Holdereed the actual Director. It was a turbulent time at Anaconda because the large and costly pilot plant built in Tucson for testing the so-called Treadwell process was not functioning properly. Essentially the process consisted of treating chalcopyrite concentrate with concentrated sulfuric acid at 200 °C. Copper and iron in the mineral are converted to water-soluble sulfates, while the sulfur values are converted into elemental sulfur. The sulfur dioxide formed during the reaction must be converted to sulfuric acid, for recycle. The process was conducted in two-stage whereby the concentrate was first agitated with a stoichiometric volume of 98% sulfuric acid. Since no excess of acid was present, the water of reaction distilled off and the solid-to-liquid ratio gradually increased until the reaction mixture solidified. This step was quite short, taking only a few minutes. In the second stage, the solidified mass was heated further until the reaction was complete and the product then leached with water to remove the soluble sulfates from the gangue and elemental sulfur. The process was criticized by many metallurgists because SO Further, as a part of the flowsheet, the solution of sulfates was treated with SO Then came the nationalization of the Anaconda properties in Chile in July 1971 that cost the Company a great deal. One of the first actions the new Anaconda management took was firing Holdereed, appointing Arbiter as Director, and demolishing the Research Department. In the mean time Arbiter was secretly developing with a small team of research workers what became known later as the Arbiter process. To improve the image of Anaconda, an intensive public relations campaign was underway claiming that the Arbiter process was a great success and immediately a 91 tonnes/day copper commercial plant was built in Anaconda, Montana. The process was based on leaching chalcopyrite concentrates with ammonia at 75–80 °C in presence of oxygen to form copper ammine sulfate and iron hydroxide. The leaching plant was composed of 10 intensely agitated vessels, 14 m Just before leaving Anaconda in October 1970 I was attracted in studying Chevreul salt and the other copper sulfites. It was a fascinating chemistry because it was possible to precipitate easily hexagonal crystals of copper ammonium sulfite, Cu A pilot plant was built but shut down because it was undesirable to have SO In April 1981, Arbiter together with Richard J. Borg of Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, and Henry E. Cohen of Imperial College in London wrote to me to join the Editorial Board of a new journal entitled Before coming to Anaconda Arbiter worked at Battelle Memorial Institute in Columbus, Ohio from 1943–44 immediately after graduation from Columbia, at Phelps Dodge from 1944–51, then at Columbia University from 1951–68. When he left Anaconda he was consulting for Phelps Dodge and used to call me from time to time and asking for some publications to be sent to him. I enjoyed very much his company.