Bibliometric techniques (i.e. citation analysis) are used to evaluate the impact and standing of Solid State Communications (SSC) among its competitor journals covering the field of condensed matter. In most cases, the analysis covers all issues dating back to the journal's inception in 1963. In some cases, however, the analysis only covers articles published after 1973 because of limited access to the previous data under the available search system. A listing of the most cited articles appeared in SSC since its inception is given. Several of them include Nobel laureates among their authors. An analysis of the articles which remained uncited is also presented. Bibliometric data from the Institute for Scientific Information (ISI) such as the Journal Impact Factor (JIF), the Citing Half-Life as well as the Cited Half-Life are compared with those for other journals covering condensed matter and related fields. Furthermore, an analysis of the impact according to the countries of origin of authors is presented. A discussion of the results exhibited in Tables and Figures is given.Citations in the actual sense are common practice in scientific literature since the middle of the 19th century. Metaphorically speaking, the citation network of scientific articles is the glue that links publications with related content. The number of citations is seen as a direct measure for the (documented) resonance or the impact an article, a journal or a scientist has generated so far A scientific journal can be considered as an appropriate unit for bibliometric analysis. It has a well-defined scope with specific publication characteristics and is associated with a specific group of authors and readers SSC arose from discussions between Elias Burstein (the founding editor), Harvey Brooks (the editor of the Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids) and Robert Maxwell (the then owner of Pergamon Press). They recognized the need, in the middle of the ‘cold war’, for a truly international rapid publication journal covering the whole field of Condensed Matter Science: authors from the communist countries found it difficult to obtain permission from their governments to publish articles in the international journals of the West. Accordingly, SSC was launched as an international journal with a board of editors which contained a Soviet scientist (Prof. Zhdanov) and a Czechoslovak scientist (Prof. Tauc). Speed of publication was achieved largely through the device of ‘camera ready manuscripts’. The search options available under STN International ( After the launching of the journal in 1963 the number of published manuscripts increased nearly linearly from 1963 to 1978, reaching a saturation at around 1000 articles per year. They fluctuated around this number till 1989 when the number of manuscripts began to decrease, reaching less than 500 in the year 2002 (see The increasing pressure for publishing in only a few, highly prestigious journals, in particular the competition from the American Physical Society (APS) journals, might be one reason for the decrease. The launching of a number of closely related journals (Physical Review B—Rapid Communications, Nature: Materials) must also have contributed. We hear that several measures are being implemented by editors and publishers to reverse this disturbing trend. The data of The number and percentage of SSC articles and articles citing SSC articles from the 20 countries most frequently publishing in SSC or citing SSC articles are listed in  Co-citations (here: the simultaneous citation of SSC with other journals) by the same citing articles may be estimated to find out the degree of relationship of SSC to other journals. The overall impact of all SSC articles since 1963 and the 30 most frequently cited SSC articles (also since 1963) were determined by citation analysis (see As mentioned above, The analysis of large ensembles of publications (like those from individual scientists, research groups, research institutes or journals) always shows a highly uneven or skewed citations distribution The SSC articles are no exception (see  The question of whether experimental and theoretical articles reach substantially different mean citation counts has been repeatedly asked. For a preliminarily answer 1234 SSC articles (theory) and 977 SSC articles (experiment) with comparable age distribution were selected by title word searching: the theoretical articles received 11.8 citations per article and the experimental articles received 12.8 citations per article (see for comparison the overall value of 12.3 citations per article). Thus, there is no significant difference between experiment and theory in the case of SSC articles. But this question is of general interest and can only be answered on the basis of larger ensembles of articles (not only of articles from a single journal). Some interesting information is obtained from the time dependence of the citations. This time dependence for a single article is sometimes called its citation history and may be viewed as the ‘sales Figure’ of that article. Each publication develops its own life span as it is being cited (see   Quite a different pattern is shown in  Compared to the mean citation pattern in  Beside analyzing the time dependent citations of a single article or those of the journal within a specific publication year (see Beside the Journal Impact Factors (JIFs), which are published yearly in the Journal Citation Reports (JCR) by the ISI (see below), the Cited Half-Life and the Citing Half-Life are given From the data in Instead of looking at the age distribution of SSC articles (see The oldest reference cited in SSC articles from 2002 was published in 1903 (outside the frame of These references belong to the non-negligible fraction of erroneous citations, which can be usually observed (errors in publication year, volume and/or starting page number): Based on the citation variants of frequently cited articles it can be shown that on average about 5% of all references are incorrect with regard to the numerical data they contain (volume, starting page, and publication year). A certain fraction of articles contain errors in the authors names and/or addresses, causing an additional loss of citations. There are 8327 references within the 468 SSC articles published during 2002. That is about 18 references per article. During the same time (2002) SSC articles were cited altogether 8385 times. Thus, the number of citations of other articles (published in any journal) received from SSC articles approximately equals the number of citations of SSC articles received from other articles. From the data in The Citing Half-Life is defined by ISI as ‘The number of journal publication years, going back from the current year, that account for 50% of the total citations (references) given by the citing journal in the current year. ISI developed this calculation to provide an indicator of the subtle changes in scope of a publication over the course of time. Evaluation of this factor can provide information on the cross-disciplinary nature of research in a specific field of interest.’ The Cited Half-Life provides information about the citation of SSC articles by other articles and reflects how long SSC articles are remembered in the scientific community. The Citing Half-Life reflects the citation practice of SSC authors concerning other articles and informs about the timeliness of the publications cited within SSC articles. Both Cited Half-Life and Citing Half-Life inform about the aging of publications. From the point of view of SSC articles, the Cited Half-Life can be regarded as passive (performed by colleagues) whereas the Citing Half-Life is active (performed by authors of SSC articles). A considerable fraction of scientific articles remains uncited for many years after publication  The uncitedness of journals anti-correlates with their Journal Impact Factors (see below). Thus the degree of uncitedness after a period of some years might be used in addition (or instead of) the JIFs to quantify the impact of journals. The citing publications of SSC articles can be further analyzed. Scientific journals can be ranked by their Journal Impact Factors (JIFs), which are published yearly in the Journal Citation Reports (JCR) by the ISI since 1975. To establish the JIFs the publications of a journal are taken into consideration over a period of 2 years and their citations are determined over the following year. The number of citations is then divided by the number of citable publications (articles and general reviews) in the 2 preceding years. The current JIF-2001 of SSC, for example, considers the publications from 1999 and 2000 and their citations only in the year 2001. The JIFs are determined by Journal Title Matching: for calculating the JIFs-2001 the references from all articles published in the year 2001 in any journal are considered. It is determined how often a specific journal name/journal title occurs (in all the different citing variations) in combination with the reference publication years 1999 or 2000. This number of citations is divided by the number of citable publications of that journal published in the years 1999 and 2000. Alternatively, the JIFs could be determined by Citation Matching: the exact references to the articles from a specific journal within 1999 or 2000 could be matched with all references in the year 2001. The method of Journal Title Matching has the advantage that erroneous citations are included, since the first author name and the numerical reference data are not taken into consideration. The method of Citation Matching works more selectively and, correspondingly, provides lower citation numbers. The ISI formula for calculating JIFs indicates the mean number of citations per year of a typical article from a specific journal about 2 years after publication. The highly skewed distribution of citations to the articles of a journal (see The JIFs are therefore not representative for the mass of articles in a given journal: less influential articles are overestimated and more influential articles are underestimated. That is why the JIF of a journal should not be taken as a measure of impact or quality of articles published in it, although it often is when the institutions do not have access to detailed bibliometric data. Such a practice leads to unreasonable pressure to publish in journals which may not be the most suitable ones for the work at hand. There is a kind of ‘one-way correlation:‘ the high impact of a few articles helps a journal to reach a high JIF—publication of a certain article in a high impact journal does not cause distinctly higher citation numbers As illustration the JIF-2001 was determined for SSC by both methods. First the above procedures were used both including all SSC articles as done by ISI. Then the top 100 most cited articles (out of 1089 articles in 1999 or 2000, that is less than 10%) were removed. The SSC JIF drops back from 1.33 to 0.80 and from 1.20 to 0.69, respectively (see The time dependent JIF of SSC shows a significant decrease from about 2.0 to about 1.5 between 1975 and the present (see The steady JIF decrease of SSC first seems to indicate a decrease in the quality of the journal as measured by its impact. However, the short citation time window in the standard JIF formula affects the JIFs in a specific way: The JIF is very sensitive to the amount of citations a journal collects within the first few years after publication. The portion of immediately received citations could be time dependent. As a rough check, two ‘JIFs‘ were determined on the basis of a 5 years citation time window (instead of only 1 year as done by ISI). The 1974 and 1975 SSC articles were compared with the 1994 and 1995 articles. Within 20 years the alternatively defined JIF decreased only by 5.6%, whereas the ISI-defined JIF decreased by about 25% (see It may be assumed that SSC articles of authors from different countries contribute differently to the overall SSC impact as expressed by the JIF. Unfortunately, the method of Journal Title Matching does not allow to process country related sub-JIFs. The method of Citation Matching, however, makes it possible, whereas the lower absolute impact values do not affect the comparison of relative values. Alternatively, both the publications and citations since 1995 (included) were taken into account.  We have presented a rather exhaustive bibliometric analysis of Solid State Communications. The results contain considerable information concerning the ranking of the journal and its evolution with time since its inception in 1963. Many of the results obtained are not limited to the journal: they can be carried over to most journals in the field of condensed matter and also, in some cases, to the general field of physics and even beyond. While this article was being printed, the JIFs for 2002 were released by the ISI. We are happy to announce that