Chalcopyrite dissolution under environmental conditions has been one of the major challenges facing researchers. The current processes for obtaining copper have pollution issues, which will severely limit their application as environmental controls become stricter. Faced with this problem, a number of eco-friendlier methods, such as GALVANOX and HydroCopper (Outokumpu), have been proposed, although they have not been industrialized, mainly due to their high operating costs. The authors previously proposed an alternative system to leach chalcopyrite, which is based on the use of aqueous polar organic solutions. In the process, copper extraction increases in mixtures of acetone or ethylene glycol with aqueous sulfuric acid solutions. The drawback is the large concentration of oxidizing agents needed to obtain high percentages of chalcopyrite dissolution, which can make the process lose viability. In this investigation, the effect of acetic acid, formic acid, methanol and ethanol, whose chemical characteristics are similar to those previously proposed, were evaluated by cyclic voltammetry. It was found that, in the presence of these organic solvents, higher electrochemical responses were obtained compared with those found with sulfuric acid alone, a similar behavior to that obtained with acetone. Leaching experiments results coincided with the corresponding findings of the electrochemical study and X-ray diffraction results provided evidence to support the proposed reactions.Chalcopyrite is the most abundant copper mineral world-wide Several improvements to chalcopyrite dissolution have been suggested in the literature; however, very few involve the use of polar organic solvents. Solís-Marcial and Lapidus A copper concentrate, from the Sabinas mine in Sombrerete, Zacatecas, Mexico (provided by Servicios Administrativos Peñoles, S.A.) and a relatively pure chalcopyrite sample (supplied by Excalibur Mineral Corporation Inc.) were employed in this study. In all experiments, an average particle size of 0.163 The electrochemical experiments were performed using cyclic voltammetry studies on chalcopyrite carbon paste electrodes (CPE-CCp). These were constructed using chalcopyrite concentrate (0.1 The experiments were carried out with two media: only H For the leaching studies, a 1 L Pyrex® resin kettle, equipped with a condenser, was employed with magnetic stirring. Reagent grade chemicals and deionized water were used to prepare the solutions. The leaching tests were performed with mixtures of sulfuric acid and the polar organic solvent as the medium and hydrogen peroxide (30% v/v) or cupric sulfate as the oxidant. Three grams of pure chalcopyrite were added to the leaching solution. During the experiment, samples were taken of the leaching liquor for determination of dissolved copper and iron by atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS, Varian SpectrAA 220FS). Once finished, the residue was filtered and left to air-dry. In order to determine the remaining phases, the solid residues were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (D8 Advanced), using a step of 0.1 degrees per second at 25 In recent years, electrochemical characterization experiments, especially cyclic voltammetry, have been employed to determine the redox behavior of mineral phases in different media Two of the most commonly used organic acids are formic and acetic acids. Their structures are chemically similar to those organic solvents used by Solís-Marcial and Lapidus It is interesting to emphasize that several processes occur simultaneously in this reaction: a part of the sulfide is oxidized to elemental sulfur and Cu(I) to Cu(II), while the Fe(III) in the chalcopyrite structure is reduced. Therefore, the current response results from the oxidation of the sulfur and copper. Nava and González Elemental sulfur, produced in the oxidation, can be reduced and combine with Cu Peak III is associated with the formation of chalcocite (equation 4), which several research groups coincide is the principal phase generated at cathodic potentials Near the end of the cathodic scan, chalcocite undergoes the reduction process to metallic copper, evidenced by the small oxidation peak at -0.25 In solutions containing polar organic solvents the current response was so much larger that they dwarf the response obtained in organic-fee sulfuric acid solutions. In this manner, the beneficial effect of the organic acids on chalcopyrite oxidation is implied and was tested in the leaching experiments, as will be shown below. It is important to clarify that the leaching potentials were all below 1 Other substances that have similar chemical characteristics are the short-chain alcohols. The electrochemical study demonstrated that the use of short-chain organic acids and alcohols lessens the surface passivation that chalcopyrite experiences upon oxidation. Consequently, the next step is to test this hypothesis in leaching tests. In Furthermore, a disadvantage that has limited the implementation of hydrometallurgical processes is the iron and copper co-dissolution, which implies the requirement of additional stages to the overall process scheme. For this reason, iron dissolution was also monitored. In Although this is a desirable result, it leaves doubts regarding the leaching mechanism. X-ray diffraction was performed on the H On the basis of the results, the following reaction for leaching chalcopyrite may be proposed: It may seem odd that iron would be reduced in an oxidizing medium. However, the combination of reductive and oxidative reactions in copper phases is a well-known phenomenon in pyrometallurgy, where the oxidation of sulfides to SO It could also be speculated that this is the same principle observed in chloride media The use of organic acids and alcohols, together with sulfuric acid, was shown to have a beneficial effect on the oxidative leaching of chalcopyrite, allowing high percentages of copper extraction at near ambient temperatures and atmospheric pressure. Under these conditions, neither covellite nor non-stoichiometric copper phases are formed. The stabilization of the cuprous ion by the organic solvents probably permits the internal redox reaction between the Cu(I) and Fe(III) of the chalcopyrite. In the leaching tests, iron was scarcely dissolved, despite significant copper extractions, which could lessen the problems of solution purification. In general, mixed aqueous-polar organic media could constitute an alternative hydrometallurgical route to obtain copper from chalcopyrite.