Purpose
                  The aim of present study is to evaluate the outcome of bone marrow instillation at the fracture site in fracture of intracapsular neck femur treated by head preserving surgery.
               
                  Methods
                  This study included 32 patients of age group 18–50 years with closed fracture of intracapsular neck femur. Patients were randomized into two groups as per the plan generated via www.randomization.com. The two groups were Group A (control), in which the fracture of intracapsular neck femur was treated by closed reduction and cannulated cancellous screw fixation, and Group B (intervention), in which additional percutaneous autologous bone marrow aspirate instillation at fracture site was done along with cannulated cancellous screw fixation. Postoperatively the union at fracture site and avascular necrosis of the femoral head were assessed on serial plain radiographs at final follow-up. Functional outcome was evaluated by Harris hip score.
               
                  Results
                  The average follow-up was 19.6 months. Twelve patients in each group had union and 4 patients had signs of nonunion. One patient from each group had avascular necrosis of the femoral head. The average Harris hip score at final follow-up in Group A was 80.50 and in Group B was 75.73, which was found to be not significant.
               
                  Conclusion
                  There is no significant role of adding on bone marrow aspirate instillation at the fracture site in cases of fresh fracture of intracapsular neck femur treated by head preserving surgery in terms of accelerating the bone healing and reducing the incidence of femoral head necrosis.Femoral neck fracture remains the unsolved problem in terms of union rate and avascular necrosis (AVN). Lu-Yao et al. There has been scanty literature available using bone marrow aspirate at the fracture site in fresh fracture of ICNF. Thirty two patients who fulfilled the inclusion criteria were included in this study and were operated upon during the period of December 2011 to April 2013. Inclusion criteria were: patients of 18–50 years old and either sex with closed, traumatic fracture of ICNF injury duration <3 weeks. Patients with polytrauma, ipsilateral fracture of shaft femur, open injury, pathological fracture, patient on oral/injectable steroids, clinically detectable major illness, fracture of neck femur not suitable for CCS fixation, and patients not willing to give consent/participate in the study were excluded from the study. All patients fulfilling the inclusion criteria of the study were included after taking informed consent in writing. After clinical assessment and appropriate stabilization of the patient, an X-ray of anteroposterior (AP) and lateral views of bilateral hip and AP view of involved hip in 20° internal rotation were taken for documentation of fractures. The fracture was classified according to Garden Classification A total of 32 patients who met the inclusion criteria were operated upon during the study duration. Two patients from Group A were lost to follow up after 11 months; the rest were followed up for mean follow-up period of 19.6 months (range 16–28 months). There were 25 males (79%) and 7 females (21%) in the study population. The mean age of the patients was 39.5 years (range 18–50 years). Eighteen patients had fracture due to fall from height, 13 following road traffic accidents and one due to physical assault. Eleven patients had Garden type III and 3 patients had Garden type IV fractures in Group A; while Group B had 8 Garden type III and 6 had Garden type IV fractures and rest of the patients had Garden type II in both groups. There was no statistically significant difference in both groups in terms of Garden classification (fracture subtypes, In both groups, union was seen in 12 patients out of 16 with mean union time of 29 weeks (24–36 weeks) in Group A and 32 weeks in Group B (24–36 weeks, Nonunion was seen in 4 patients in each group. One patient out of 4 nonunion cases in Group B had undergone implant failure at 12 weeks of follow-up and was reoperated upon with Valgus osteotomy using double angle osteotomy blade plate. Subsequent follow-up of 12 months showed no signs of union and patient had developed implant failure with AVN changes in femoral head. Thus underwent total hip replacement (THR) subsequently. One patient from each group had developed AVN of the femoral head. Group A patient was Garden type IV and had closed reduction at 6th day after injury, and had AVN at 18 months of follow-up. The patient was having good functional outcome and he was able to squat and sit cross legged and was able to manage his daily living activities with mild pain. Patient was not willing for any intervention. The other patient from Group B was Garden type III and developed implant failure at 12 weeks thus went for Valgus osteotomy procedure, and then developed nonunion with AVN changes in femoral head at 12 months of follow-up and finally underwent THR. The average Harris hip score at final follow-up in Group A was 80.50 and in Group B was 75.73, which was found to be not significant. In both groups there was no surgical site infection in any of the patient during postoperative follow-up. The proportion of nonunion and AVN was compared between the two groups using a relative risk, which was 1.0667 and its 95% confidence interval was ±0.16001, ranging between 0.9067 and 1.2267 using the software of This study aims to find out the outcome of add on bone marrow instillation at fracture site in cases of fracture of ICNF managed by head preserving surgery. Our hypothesis was to justify the role of bone marrow instillation in cases of fracture of ICNF in terms of union and reducing AVN. As there are recommendations available in the literature about the role of autologous bone marrow instillation in delayed union and nonunion of long bone diaphyseal fracture. There is a paucity of literature on the role of autologous bone marrow aspirate in fracture of ICNF. To best of my knowledge there is only one study done by Lin et al. Limitation of the study was small sample size taken with mean follow-up was around 19.6 months only and the exact technique and amount of bone marrow aspirate instillation at fracture site in fracture of ICNF were not known. In our study of 16 patients in each group, 12 (75%) patients showed union and 4 (25%) patients in both groups had nonunion at final follow-up of 19.6 months, thus no significant difference was seen in terms of union in both groups ( However, our results of both groups were better than those of Rawal et al. In our study one patient from each group had AVN (6.25%) of femoral head at final follow-up. AVN of femoral head occurs due to several factors that are not in surgeon's control. AVN can occur even with early anatomical reduction and rigid fixation of fracture of ICNF. Factors like raised intracapsular pressure, Rawal et al. Another study done by Mohammad et al. The functional outcomes in our study in terms of Harris hip score at final follow-up was 80.50 in Group A and 75.73 in Group B, which was also found to be not statistically significant. Compared to above all studies we concluded that there is no significant role of add on bone marrow aspirate instillation at fracture site in cases of fresh fracture of ICNF treated by head preserving surgery in terms of accelerating the bone healing and reducing the incidence of femoral head necrosis. However, this study included small group of patients (sample size). We need studies with larger group of patients with better methodology (exact technique and amount of bone marrow aspirate instillation) with longer follow-up to assess the role of add on marrow instillation at fracture site in fresh fracture of ICNF treated by head preserving surgery.