A grain comminution process is based on a gradual size reduction approach, through repeated milling and sieving units that increase the flour yield. In this study we use latent variable modeling techniques to link process parameters and grain properties to the final product quality. Using experimental data, it is shown how the use of models in their direct form allows one to improve process understanding and to predict the product quality from the process settings and grain properties. Additionally, it is shown that, by inverting the latent variable models, the optimal combination of process parameters and grain properties leading to a desired product quality can be determined.Through direct consumption and indirectly via animal feed, cereals supply more than half of global food consumption. Around 2 billion tons of cereals are produced annually, with wheat contributing around 600 There is a great interest in finding systematic approaches that can be used to improve process understanding, to support the process operation by predicting the product quality, and to optimize the process operating conditions by suggesting how the process parameters should be set to counteract the changing characteristics of the input materials, as well as to ensure a consistent product quality. Modeling the process by first principles is still a very challenging and unresolved issue. A data-based modeling approach, namely partial least-squares regression (PLS; The dataset used in this study was obtained from an experimental campaign carried out in a pilot-scale roller mill fed with material entering the second break stage of an industrial-scale mill. Experiments were designed following a central composite face-centered design of experiments (DoE) strategy applied to the most important parameters of the process: wheat kernel moisture content (MC), mass flow (MF) to the roller mill and milling gap (MG). The ranges for MC, MF and MG were chosen in such a way as to match typical industrial ranges. In addition, for each experiment, ambient humidity (MC The experimental data were organized in a regressor matrix PLS ( A PLS model correlating Letting R Note that the designed input set A PLS model using 3 The PLS model is used to:  The first latent variable (top plot of The second LV (lower plot of The loading plots for third LV are not reported because, even though this LV is explaining a reasonably large amount of data variability for matrix It is interesting to notice that a threshold diameter range exists around 751-1081 μm, where all PSDs show an “inversion” pattern (namely, the relevant loadings change sign). The physical explanation for this behavior is the difference in the shape of the milled particles. Particles bigger than 1081 μm are identified as bran and are characterized by flat large particles (two-dimensional particles); smaller particles are made of endosperm and have a more spherical shape (three-dimensional particles). In fact, the difference in shape can explain why the PSD bins behave differently when a process parameter is changed. In this subsection the main idea is to evaluate how the product quality can be predicted once process parameters, wheat properties and ambient conditions are known. A jackknife approach was used (  PLS model inversion can be used to calculate the best combination of process parameters and wheat properties that are needed to obtain a product with assigned PSD. As an illustrating example, the observation related to a product with desired PSD In this study, how PLS modeling can be used in different ways to support the operation of the second break step in a wheat milling process has been discussed. A loadings analysis improved process understanding, by studying and quantifying the correlation between process parameter, wheat properties and product PSD. The study supported the evidence that the product PSD is mostly affected by the milling gap, but it was found that the correlation between input parameters and output PSD depends on how the different constituents distribute in the milled product, as endosperm and bran have different breakage behavior. The range of particle diameters separating different breakage behavior was found to be around 751–1081 μm. Latent variables models have been used to predict the product PSD with very promising results. This kind of prediction can greatly support process optimization, allowing one to predict product quality profile reducing costly and time expensive experimental campaigns. Furthermore, it was shown how the same models can be inverted and used to calculate the best combination of input parameters (milling gap, moisture content and wheat mass flow) that leads to a desired PSD. Although this study concentrated on the second break stage, it can be extended to other break and reduction passages.