Biomining of base and precious metal-containing sulfidic ores and concentrates is an important global biotechnology. Currently, mineral bio-processing is carried out in dumps, heaps and stirred tanks located on the land surface. An alternative approach, “deep in situ biomining”, would solubilise target metals from fractured ore bodies buried deep (>1km) underground, using a microbially-generated acidic, ferric iron-rich lixiviant. Pregnant leach solutions (PLS) generated are pumped to the land surface where metals are extracted and recovered, ferric iron regenerated in a bioreactor and the oxidised lixiviant re-injected underground. To examine the feasibility of using an indirect bioleaching approach to extract metals from an ore body, a laboratory test was carried out using a polymetallic sulfidic black schist ore (from Talvivaara, Finland) in a non-aerated column reactor, maintained at 30°C at atmospheric pressure. Following an initial acid leaching phase (using 100mM sulfuric acid) the ore was subjected to ferric iron-catalyzed oxidative dissolution using a lixiviant generated in a laboratory-scale ferric iron-generating bioreactor (FIGB). During the 16week time course of the experiment, 93% of manganese, 88% of cobalt, 79% of nickel, 75% of iron, 75% of zinc and 55% of copper present in the ore was extracted. The planktonic microbial populations in the FIGB and those in the PLS were similar, and dominated by Leptospirillum ferriphilum, iron-oxidising Acidithiobacillus spp. and the archaeon Ferroplasma acidophilum.Using the microorganisms to accelerate the oxidative dissolution of sulfidic minerals in ores and minerals (“biomining”), has developed into an global biotechnology for extracting and facilitating the recovery of copper and gold, and to a lesser extent of cobalt, nickel and zinc ( Conventional biomining is carried out in dumps, heaps and stirred tanks ( The polymetallic sulfidic black schist which outcrops at the land surface at Talvivaara, Finland, has been processed using heap bioleaching during the past decade ( A laboratory-scale biofilm reactor was commissioned to generate an acidic ferric iron lixiviant. A 2 A column bioreactor, comprising a Perspex tube (32 Concentrations of ferrous iron in the effluent liquors were determined using the Ferrozine colorimetric assay ( The transition metal contents of the Talvivaara ore were obtained by fine-grinding of 100 Planktonic microorganisms in lixiviant and leachate samples were enumerated using a Thoma counting chamber and a Leitz Wetzlar 766200 (Germany) phase contrast microscope, at ×400 magnification. Cultivatable bacteria and archaea were detected by plating samples onto selective solid overlay media ( Ferric iron-rich lixiviants were readily generated by the FIGB following the build-up of biomass on the porous glass beads. With HRTs of 10 Significant amounts of ferrous iron, but little ferric iron, was leached from the Talvivaara ore by sulfuric acid ( Over 90% of the ferric iron present in the lixiviant generated by the FIGB was reduced to ferrous in the early phase of indirect bioleaching of the Talvivaara ore ( Cumulative percentages of metals (Fe, Mn, Zn, Cu, Ni, and Co) leached from the polymetallic ore are shown in Numbers of planktonic microorganisms in the lixiviant produced by the FIGB varied between 1 and 3  The polymetallic ore was subjected to a two-stage leaching process, the first with sulfuric acid (primarily to remove acid-labile gangue minerals) and the second with an acidic ferric iron-rich lixiviant. Acid leaching solubilised significant concentrations of some, though not all, of the base metals present in the ore. However, much more, and a greater variety of metals, was leached with the microbially-generated lixiviant. In contrast to previous columns leaching tests with Talvivaara ore, where the columns have been actively aerated to promote strongly oxidising conditions, the column in this test was not aerated. Some oxygen would be present in the FIGB lixiviants, but this would have been anticipated to be rapidly consumed in the ore column by bacteria oxidising both ferrous iron and reduced sulfur generated by ferric iron-catalyzed dissolution of the sulfide minerals present. Although concentrations of dissolved oxygen were not measured, the fact that redox potentials were far less positive in liquors pumped out of the column compared to those that were pumped in (especially during early period of indirect bioleaching) reflecting the predominance of ferrous rather than ferric iron, strongly suggests that oxygen consumption in the column was extensive. Even with a pre-acid leaching phase, the pH of the percolating liquors increased during indirect bioleaching, causing some precipitation of secondary ferric iron minerals (most probably jarosites), which would have probably negatively impacted mineral dissolution both by forming passivation layers and by removing the soluble ferric iron oxidant. The percentages of base metals extracted by indirect bioleaching in the current experiment compare favourably with those reported previously in aerated columns. The latter were summarised by Another potential advantage of indirect bioleaching of this ore was that less silicon was solubilised than in some previous reports. The dissolution of silicate minerals brings silicon into solution, which can increase the leach liquor viscosity, form diffusion barriers and lower metal extraction. Solution pH, though not temperature has a significant effect on silicate dissolution ( The apparent absence of microorganisms during acid leaching of the polymetallic ore suggests a zero biological input during that phase. In contrast, acidophilic bacteria and archaea had a very significant role in indirect leaching. Most of the bacteria used to inoculate the FIGB were not detected subsequently, and the dominant organisms comprised a narrow range of acidophilic microorganisms. No major time-related changes in the microbial populations, in either the FIGB or the ore column, were observed over the course of the leaching experiment. While most of the acidophiles would be anticipated to be retained in biofilms attached to the porous glass beads in the FIGB, the fact that some were continuously inputted into the column reactor may have impacted the dynamics of ore dissolution. As would be anticipated, most of the bacteria in lixiviants generated by the FIGB were iron-oxidising acidophiles, as ferrous iron was the only electron donor present. Interestingly, Base metals were successfully extracted from a polymetallic black schist sulfide ore by indirect leaching, using an acidic ferric iron lixiviant generated in a bioreactor containing a mixed culture of iron-oxidising acidophiles which was delivered to a non-aerated column containing 2.0–6.7 This work was supported by the