The phase behaviour of Fe and Co particles, supported on CaCO3 was studied using mainly in 
                     situ PXRD and Mössbauer spectroscopy. This is of interest as these systems can be used as catalysts to produce multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) following appropriate heat treatment and reduction. The Fe–Co/CaCO3 samples were prepared by deposition of the metallic particles from solution onto the support. The study indicated that the CaCO3 support reacted in air or N2 with the iron and cobalt present in all three samples studied (10% Fe/CaCO3, 10% Co/CaCO3 and 10% Fe–Co/CaCO3) to give a brownmillerite structure with the general formula Ca2M2O5 (M=Fe, Co or Fe+Co). Reduction of the bimetallic catalyst gave Fe2Co alloy and Co. This confirms earlier reports by other authors that implicated this alloy as the active phase in the synthesis of the MWCNTs. The bimetallic catalyst was easier to reduce than the mono-metallic catalysts.Multi walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) have received most interest of the many carbon nanostructures made because they find use in numerous applications such as catalysis, drug delivery and electronic devices Hence there is a need to understand the carbon nanotube (CNT) synthesis processes in depth; this will ultimately lead to the optimisation conditions for their production. Catalytic chemical vapour deposition has been found to be a promising route for synthesising CNTs in bulk and is the method of choice to make MWCNTs A large number of catalysts have been used to make MWCNTs and the catalyst composition can vary widely. In general, however, the catalysts that have given the best yields and MWCNT quality have been made from Fe, Co or Ni, with bimetallic catalysts consisting of Fe/Co In particular, the bimetallic catalyst made from Fe and Co and supported on CaCO A 10% by weight (5% Fe and 5% Co) Fe–Co (1:1) catalyst was synthesised by the incipient wetness impregnation method The thermal response and reducibility of the catalyst were investigated by XRD using a Brüker D8 advance diffractometer with an Anton Paar X-ray reactor chamber (XRK-900) as an attachment. It was equipped with a copper tube ( A number of studies have been reported on the synthesis of MWCNTs using an Fe–Co/CaCO  Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images revealed that iron and cobalt oxides had successfully been loaded onto the CaCO  10% Fe/CaCO When 10% Co/CaCO The result of a VT-PXRD study on 10% Fe–Co/CaCO Interestingly, this is different to what other authors have reported on heating Fe and Co supported on CaCO It is speculated that CaCO It is to be noted that both Magrez et al. and Li et al. added ammonia to their CaCO The growth of Ca It can therefore be concluded that in all three catalysts, the active metals (Fe and Co) react with the support (CaCO The variation in the concentration of the Ca The catalysts were also analysed for their thermal response by TGA. CaCO The three catalysts had a higher residual mass % at 900 Mössbauer data were collected at room temperature for the as-synthesized 10% Fe–Co/CaCO  This confirms that Ca A clear increase in the occupation of lattice sites of D1 (88%–97%) occurs with increasing annealing temperature which is accompanied by a corresponding decrease in the area fraction of doublet 2 (12%–3%). This trend has also been observed in Sr  In addition to calcination at 400 A 5% H After 3 Magrez et al. studied a series of Fe Fe–Co/CaCO It appears that the reaction sequence to generate the catalyst is as follows. Fe and Co ions are readily dispersed on CaCO The authors would like to thank the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: