Hydrocyclones are used in the classification of solids for instance in the mining and minerals processing industries for modifying the particle size distribution of solids, as well as for ore concentration purposes. Improvement in the filtration properties of the slurry is usually achieved as a result of the classification process when only the underflow is evaluated, owing to the coarse and narrow particle size distribution. However, overall comparisons of the filtration properties incorporating filtration of both the underflow and overflow streams have not been discussed a lot in the literature. The objective of this study is to investigate hydrocyclone classification of a calcite slurry, to evaluate the resulting pressure filtration properties of the underflow and overflow streams, and to compare the required total filtration areas for a constant solids production capacity. The results show that the average specific cake resistance depended primarily on the fine particle content of the slurry, and therefore the Kozeny-Carman equation was not suitable for the prediction of the specific cake resistance. The specific resistances of feed and underflow filter cakes were underestimated consistently. Wide particle size distribution was one of the most apparent factors reducing cake porosity. The main outcome of the comparison of the required filtration areas was that a low specific cake resistance and high solids concentration of the underflow caused the total area requirement to decrease almost in all cases, compared to the area required for the filtration of the feed slurry. Moreover, as high as 99% reduction in the total filtration area, compared to the feed slurry, could be achieved by filtering only the underflow streams, omitting the dewatering of the overflow streams. In the light of the promising results of the study, the incorporation of a classification step prior to filtration should be investigated further, e.g. in tailings treatment applications.Hydrocyclones are used for various classification purposes in the mining and minerals processing industries. Hydrocyclones are applicable in dividing the feed solids continuously into fine (overflow) and coarse (underflow) fractions, which opens great possibilities for their use for two main purposes: pretreatment of slurry prior to filtration, to enable cost-effective filtration of the coarse underflow fraction with vacuum filters, and concentrating the valuable components present in ores ( The pressure filtration properties of slurries are affected by several particle properties, for instance the size and shape of the particles, the shape of the size distribution, and interactions between the liquid and the particles ( The aim of this experimental study is to investigate how classification of a calcite slurry by using a hydrocyclone would affect the filtration properties of the underflow and overflow streams, and to compare those results with the original slurry, with respect to the required filtration area for a constant amount of feed slurry processed. The average specific cake resistances and the average porosities of the cakes are correlated with particle size characteristics, and the applicability of the Kozeny-Carman relationship for predicting the specific cake resistance is discussed.  Cake filtration processes are greatly affected by the size of the solid particles, small particles being more difficult to separate than coarser ones ( where Additionally, the volume mean diameter The values for The average specific cake resistance for constant pressure filtration, where The average porosity (i.e. the volumetric void fraction) of filter cakes, where The average specific cake resistance can be related to the porosity, the specific surface area and the density of solids by using Eq. The slurry was prepared from tap water and dried industrial ground calcium carbonate powder Parfill PF H 80 obtained from Nordkalk Oy (Parainen, Finland). The solid concentration of the slurry was constant 13.0 wt% (5.1 vol%) in all hydrocyclone experiments. The liquid density was 998 kg m The hydrocyclone experiments were carried out by using a MOZLEY c124 with a body diameter of 50.8 mm by varying the size of the vortex finder and the underflow spigot. The experimental setup is presented in First, the slurry was added to the sump and pumped through the system for 15 min to let the flow and the temperature stabilize. The feed pressure was adjusted to 150 kPa by using valves 1 and 2 ( All slurries, including the feed, underflows and overflows, were filtered with a Nutsche pressure filter at room temperature. The total volume of the cylindrical filter chamber was 350 cm The influence of hydrocyclone parameters on particle characteristics is presented in   The effect of particle characteristics on the filtration behavior was investigated by plotting the average specific cake resistance The repeatability of the filtration experiments was evaluated by filtering the feed slurry four times at the pressures of 100, 300 and 500 kPa. Overall, the relative standard deviations of the average specific cake resistance and the average porosity of the cake were observed to vary from 2 to 7% and from 0.7 to 8%, respectively. In the case of average specific cake resistance, the highest deviation was observed at the lowest filtration pressure (100 kPa), whereas no remarkable deviation was observed with the higher pressures (300 and 500 kPa). The lower the pressure the slower the cake formation during the filtration, which resulted in slight curvature the linear fits of the filtration data, The effect of the width of particle size distribution is presented in  Due to the poor ability of the Kozeny-Carman relationship to predict the specific cake resistance, the influence of the finest particles on the filtration behavior was investigated. As a result of an increase in the fraction of small particles, the average specific cake resistance showed linear behavior for the overflows ( The filtration area required to obtain an industrially relevant production capacity, 10,000 kg dry solids per hour, was calculated from Eq. The calculated areas ( The second scenario was that only the underflow streams were filtered and the overflow streams were pumped to the tailings pond. The filtration areas, as well as the reduction in the required filtration areas, and the total separation efficiencies, are shown in In this study, a process comprising particle classification and filtration was investigated by using a hydrocyclone and a pressure filter. The most novel part of the study was the evaluation of the pressure filtration properties of the produced underflow and overflow streams, and comparison of the filterability with respect to the required filtration area. According to the results of the hydrocyclone experiments, changes in the diameter of the underflow spigot had a more significant effect on the particle size (