The high temperature oxidative refining of molten silver–copper alloys is accompanied by silver losses to the slag. Typically, borosilicate slags are utilized as a flux and air or oxygen is injected into the molten alloy. The majority of the copper can be selectively oxidized to copper oxide, but some silver is also lost to the slag. In this research, the mechanism of silver loss has been investigated. Firstly, TGA and DTA studies of molten silver–copper alloys were performed, in order to elucidate the oxidation processes occurring at the gas–metal interface in the bubble. Secondly, the silver losses to the slag in the high temperature refining tests were quantified. Thirdly, the slag was characterized using XRD and the morphology of the silver in the slag was examined. Fourthly, a pseudo-equilibrium model of the refining process was developed and this was utilized to suggest methods for minimizing the silver loss to the slag. Finally, possible methods for recovering the silver from the slag are discussed.Alloys containing silver and copper arise from a number of sources such as the treatment of Miller chlorides from gold refining ( Further improvements in the separation of the copper from the silver were achieved through the utilization of a slag phase and this was investigated by In the present research, the recent equilibrium studies reported in the literature and additional experimental results on higher copper alloys are utilized to provide a more in-depth understanding of the oxygen refining of silver–copper alloys. Firstly, the literature regarding the Ag–Cu–O system is reviewed. Secondly, TGA and DTA results of the high temperature oxidation of silver–copper melts are discussed in terms of the oxidation processes occurring at the gas-bubble interface. Thirdly, experimental results obtained from the refining process and a thermodynamic model, are utilized to minimize the silver loss to the slag. Finally, potential methods for recovering the silver from the slag are examined. In the oxidizing gas bubble in the refining process, the equilibrium is determined by the Ag–Cu–O system and therefore this system is of interest. First the two relevant binaries, Ag–O and Cu–O, are discussed and subsequently the ternary Ag–Cu–O system. There have been a number of studies of the Ag–O system ( The Cu–O system is more complex due to the presence of a large miscibility gap and a rapidly rising activity of oxygen as the Cu A recent version of the phase diagram for the Ag–CuO The large miscibility gap observed in the liquid state in the Cu–O system is similarly a major feature in the Ag–Cu–O system. The exact shape of the miscibility gap is still being investigated. Based on an extrapolation of their results, In addition to the three silver–copper alloys (7.5, 11.2 and 12.7 In order to elucidate the processes occurring during the oxidative refining of silver–copper alloys, portions of the Ag–Cu–O system were investigated. Both a low copper alloy (11.2 The slag–metal system was modelled using the equilibrium module of Outokumpu HSC Chemistry 6.1 ( These equations for the activity coefficients of silver and copper were utilized in the equilibrium calculations. With regards to the slag phase, the oxide species containing boron, silicon and/or sodium were assumed to behave ideally. Deviations from ideality were taken into account in terms of the activity coefficients of the copper and silver oxides, which were determined from the data generated from the refining experiments.  In order to further investigate the mechanism of loss of silver to the slag, samples of the liquid slag were taken at selected time intervals during the refining process. Also samples were obtained after the bulk metal and slag had been allowed to slowly cool. These samples were analysed for silver and copper and a comparison provides information on the behaviour of silver and copper in the slag. The results for silver and copper are shown in Earlier research has shown that the amount of silver dissolved in metallic form (AgO) in molten silicate slags or borosilicate-type glasses is relatively low (  This dependency of the mole fraction of Ag In order to elucidate the oxidation processes occurring at the gas–metal interface in the bubble, high temperature TGA and DTA studies were performed on a low copper alloy (11.2 This process continues, but at a slower pace as the temperature continues to increase. For the higher copper alloy, both the abrupt mass loss and the rate of decrease of mass above about 1250 Below about 1200  The proposed refining process consists of two major reactions: (1) a reaction between the oxygen and the molten alloy at the gas-bubble interface and (2) an exchange reaction in the slag. The four major stages in the oxidation of the liquid alloy are shown in These two immiscible liquids ( The reaction is written in the direction in which it should proceed in order to minimize the silver content of the slag. The standard Gibbs free energy change (Δ The equilibrium constant for the exchange reaction in terms of activities is as follows: If the system behaved ideally then the activity coefficients for both the metals and the metal oxides would be unity and therefore the equilibrium could be represented in terms of the slag–metal partition coefficients for silver and copper as follows: This ideal equation is plotted in The oxidation of the copper in the melt can be represented by the following equation: The standard free energy change of this reaction is given as follows ( Also the equilibrium constant for Eq. For the refining temperature of 1413 Thus, the silver losses to the slag increase with the copper oxide content of the slag. In comparison to copper oxide, silver oxide has a relatively low activity and thus its absorption into the slag is facilitated by the presence of the copper oxide ( Utilizing the activity coefficients of the silver and copper oxides, the equilibrium module of Outokumpu HSC Chemistry 6.1 was used to investigate the effect of operating variables on the silver loss to the slag. The results are presented in terms of the calculated Ag X-ray Diffraction studies were performed on the quenched and slowly cooled slags from the refining process. The XRD pattern in Photomicrographs of the same samples are shown in A number of possibilities could be considered for recovering the silver from the slag such as slow cooling, fragmentation and physical separation and/or leaching. In the liquid state, the slag could be reduced by various reducing agents such as carbon, aluminium or ferrosilicon.  During the high temperature oxidative refining of silver–copper alloys under a borosilicate slag, silver is lost to the slag. Grade-recovery curves for alloys with up to about 50 DTA and TGA studies were performed on both a low copper and a high copper alloy and the results are in agreement with previous research on the Ag–Cu–O system. These results indicate that in the oxidizing gas bubble, a silver-rich ionic liquid, containing small amounts of oxygen and copper ( These two liquids (  This reaction can occur either in the slag or at the bulk slag/metal interface. Copper can be considered to be present in the slag as Cu It was shown that the silver losses to the slag increased with the copper oxide content of the slag and this was attributed to a decrease in the activity coefficient of silver oxide with increasing copper oxide content. The Equilibrium module of Outokumpu HSC Chemistry 6.1 was used to predict the changes in the silver content of the slag as a function of the operating variables in the refining process. In general, lower copper contents in the metal and thus lower copper oxide contents in the slag, lower refining temperatures, lower oxygen potentials and higher slag masses for the higher copper alloys can be utilized to reduce the silver loss to the slag. A number of potential processes were considered for recovering the silver from the refining slag. Calculations show that reduction processes using carbon, aluminium or ferrosilicon could be utilized to recover the silver. Also, slow cooling of the slag promotes the growth of metallic particles and physical separation processes and/or leaching could be considered to recover the entrapped silver. The authors thank the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) for the support of this research.