An equiatomic quinary AlCoCrFeNi high entropy alloy (HEA) has been synthesized by mechanical alloying. Milled powder after 30 h shows good chemical homogeneity and refined morphology with a mean particle size of ∼4 μm. Solid solution phase with BCC crystal structure (a = 2.89 ± 0.02 Å) has been confirmed from XRD and transmission electron microscopy in the as-synthesized high entropy alloy. The milled alloy powder is not thermally stable. Differential scanning calorimetric (DSC) thermogram of 30 h milled powder exhibits the presence of a small peak at ∼600 °C (873 K) with a thermal shift near the peak. This thermal shift indicates the diffusive type of phase transformation in this alloy while heating. The analysis of the in-situ heating X-ray diffraction patterns at various temperatures extends support to the diffusive nature of the phase transformation. Upon heat treatment, the disordered BCC solid solution phase partially transforms to Ni3Al prototype L12 phase which precipitates at a lower temperature (350 °C (623 K)) as observed by in-situ XRD experiments. However, at high temperature annealing (575–800 °C (848–1073 K)) the evolution of a partially ordered BCC phase (B2) with lattice parameter (a = 2.87 ± 0.02 Å), and L12 phase (a = 3.58 ± 0.05 Å), along with tetragonal σ phase (a = 8.8 Å and c = 4.53 Å) are observed. Similar types of phases have also been identified after annealing and microwave sintering at 800 °C (1073 K) & 900 °C (1173 K) respectively. The transformation of ordered BCC phases along with two intermetallics such as L12 phase and σ phase suggests that the evolution of the high entropy phase in the milled condition leads to a combination of high entropy and medium entropy phases in the annealed condition.Over the last decade, high entropy alloys (HEAs) have emerged as a new class of alloys with the intriguing scientific facets, interesting properties and technological promises. Most of the conventional alloys are based on one or two major principal elements. In these traditional alloys, few minor elements are incorporated to the matrix of principal element to enhance the properties. This traditional concept of alloy formation has led to the development of alloys, which are based on a single principal element such as Fe (steel), Mg, Al, Ti, Cu, Sn, Ni-based alloys etc. Synthesis, processing and thermal stability of these traditional alloys governed the science of formation of complex microstructures, consisting of solid solutions, intermetallic compounds, disordered and ordered phases. These complicated microstructures sometimes results in brittleness and often comes with inherent difficulty in processing There is a variety of processing routes to prepare HEAs such as vacuum arc melting, vacuum induction melting, melt spinning, rapid solidification, mechanical alloying (MA), thin film deposition etc. Exhaustive literature that is available on HEAs suggests that melting and casting is the most widely adopted route for the synthesis of these alloys. Segregation and inhomogeneity in the microstructures are the main drawbacks of the casting route. Additionally, these fabrication routes are not best suited for industries due to the high manufacturing cost and limitation in final shape and size of the products The literature on high entropy alloys suggests that most of the high entropy alloys which are formed by casting route show single phase or a two-phase microstructure. Wang et al. Microwave and spark plasma sintering cater to the requirement of fast processing and refined microstructure with enhanced properties. Even though both the techniques are unrelated. However, microwave heating can be used as an alternative method of spark plasma sintering (SPS) for sintering materials. Of late, microwave heating has emerged as a new approach to sinter the high entropy alloy metallic powder samples Elemental powders of Al, Co, Cr, Fe, Ni with purity of higher than 99% and particle size of ≤45 μm (325 mesh) were used as the starting materials for study. These elemental powders were mechanically milled in the equiatomic ratio in high-energy planetary ball mill (Retsch PM 400) at 200 rpm in a wet atmosphere with a ball to powder weight ratio of 10:1 up to 30 h. Tungsten carbide (WC) vials and balls of 10 mm diameter and 7.7 g weight were utilized. The milling media with toluene as a process-controlling agent (PCA) was used to prevent cold welding and oxidation. The milled powder was obtained after an interval of 5 h. Structural and microstructural characterizations were carried out by X-ray diffraction (XRD), (Rigaku Mini flex-600 (40 kV–15 mA)), in-situ high temperature XRD by Rigaku Smart Lab (45 kV–200 mA) with Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 0.154 nm), and high resolution XRD by PANalytical EMPHYREAN (40 kV–40 mA) with Co-Kα radiation (λ = 0.179 nm), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), (FEI Quanta 200F) operating at 20 kV, transmission electron microscopy (TEM TECHNAI G X-ray diffraction patterns of the mechanically alloyed powder of equiatomic AlCoCrFeNi high entropy alloy at different milling time are shown in The SEM micrographs of AlCoCrFeNi high entropy alloy after 10, 20 and 30 h of milling are given in Thermal stability and phase evolution in this high entropy alloy were studied by differential scanning calorimetry. The differential scanning calorimetry thermogram over 50–1100 °C (323–1373 K) temperature range and scanned at 40 K/min heating rate is given in In order to understand the diffusive nature of transformations in this high entropy alloy over a wide range of temperature, the alloy was subjected to in-situ heating x-ray diffraction from room temperature to ∼800 °C (1073 K). A multiple displays of such diffraction patterns is given in XRD pattern of AlCoCrFeNi high entropy alloy after microwave sintering at 900 °C (1173 K) along with the as-synthesized alloy have been given in The SEM micrographs of the high entropy alloy sintered at 900 °C (1173 K) for 1 h are given in Theoretical density of the sintered samples was calculated by applying the rule of mixture, using theoretical densities of the individual elements. The relative density of the samples was calculated by taking the ratio of measured and theoretical densities. It has been found that relative density of two sample was 81.48% and 82.20% respectively. It can be concluded from this study that simultaneous application of pressure and temperature during sintering would lead to better density in the alloy. Microwave sintering can be used as an alternative technique for sintering of high entropy alloy materials. It has been mentioned earlier; high entropy alloys are of recent vintage in the family of multicomponent alloys AlCoCrFeNi quinary equi-atomic high entropy alloy has been synthesized by different processing techniques, and it has been reported in the earlier literature In the present study, after 30 h of milling, single BCC phase with 2.89 ± 0.02 Å lattice parameter has been obtained by X-ray and electron diffraction study. Some of the earlier studies on the same equiatomic composition have reported the formation of a BCC phase with same lattice parameter along with a FCC phase with 3.56 Å lattice parameter It has been mentioned earlier that high entropy alloy in equiatomic AlCoCrFeNi system has been reported earlier From the nature of the DSC thermogram, it appears that the precipitation of these phases takes place by diffusional transformation. However, as solute is rejected from the parent high entropy BCC phase, its solute content decreases and the precipitated phases are not high entropy phases in the strict sense of the term. Therefore, the high entropy nature of the alloy drifts from its original position. Similar phases have been observed to be precipitated after microwave sintering and after spark plasma sintering which was carried out at a much higher temperature. From the nature of the thermogram and precipitation of similar phases in a wide temperature range, it further confirms the diffusive nature of the transformation process. At this point, it is difficult to ascertain the absolute temperature of thermal stability in this alloy. Thermal stability of multicomponent high entropy alloys is in stark difference with the multicomponent bulk metallic glass forming alloys. Most of the multicomponent bulk metallic glass forming alloys show temperature defined transitions, e.g. glass transition temperature, crystallization onset temperature, subsequent transformation temperatures and melting temperature. Based on these temperature-defined transitions, several glass forming ability criteria have evolved. Additionally, the glass transition temperature and the crystallization temperature signifies the thermal stability of the glass forming alloy against crystallization. In this light, microstructural design for optimal properties has been easy. In this high entropy alloy, such temperature defined transitions do not exist which appears to be an impending difficulty in microstructural design in this alloy. Through in-situ high-temperature x-ray diffraction studies, it has been observed that the alloy starts transforming as low as 350 °C, whereas similar phases are found to be precipitating during microwave sintering at 900 °C and at a still higher temperature during the spark plasma sintering process. It has been mentioned in the earlier sections that the alloy is not thermally stable, and it undergoes a diffusional phase transformation to give rise to new phases. In the sintered sample, also similar phases are observed, and the grain boundary regions are quite wide, which may be indicative of liquid phase formation during sintering. As the alloy is multicomponent, there is a finite possibility of melting point depression. Apart from this study, earlier authors have also reported eutectoid transformation, spinodal decomposition etc The following conclusions can be drawn from the present work Equiatomic AlCoCrFeNi HEA with a single phase BCC (a = 2.89 ± 0.02 Å) solid solution has been synthesized after 30 h of mechanical alloying using high-energy ball mill. The high entropy alloy is not thermally stable. It precipitates Ni The precipitation of intermetallic phases from the parent high entropy BCC phase is diffusive in nature. It may be worth pursuing to investigate whether the product phases lead to the characteristics of high entropy alloy or not. Similar phases are observed after microwave sintering. Microwave-assisted sintering can be used as an alternative way of sintering the high entropy alloys. The authors would like to thank Profs. S. Lele, B.S. Murty, R.K. Mandal, B.N. Sarma and Dr B. Mukherjee for many useful discussions during the course of this investigation.