The results of investigation and analysis of electro-exploded aluminum nanopowders, whose surface were passivated with the following substances: liquids – nitrocellulose (NC), oleic acid (C17H33COOH) and stearic acid (C17H35COOH), suspended in kerosene and ethanol, fluoropolymer; solids – boron and nickel; gases – N2, CO2 and air (for a comparison) are discussed. The surface protection for the aluminum nanopowders by coatings of different chemical origins leads to the some advantages of the powders properties for an application in energetic systems, e.g. solid propellants and “green” propellants (Al–H2O). Aluminum nanopowders with a protected surface showed the increased stability to oxidation in air during the storage period and higher reactivity by heating. The TEM-visual diagram of the formation and stabilization of the coatings on the particles has been proposed on the basis of experimental results. The kinetics of the interaction of aluminum nanopowders with air has been discussed. The recommendations concerning an efficiency of the protective “non-Al2O3” layers on aluminum nanoparticles were proposed.Recently, aluminum nanopowders (ANPs) produced by the electrical explosion of wires (EEW) method became the deeply commercialized industrial product The results of non-oxide layers applied on Al nanoparticles passivation were discussed in the work ANPs were produced in argon, nitrogen or (N Sample 1 (commercial powder ALEX 7–0.1 8–0.1 9–0.1 10–0.1 11–0.1 Ethanol and kerosene were selected as the solvents because they do not interact with ANPs. The solution for passivation was added to the fresh powder immediately after production and the powder suspension was mechanically stirred for ∼2 After the passivation procedures all powders were stored in an open-to-atmosphere-box for 2 months in order to simulate the industrial conditions. The samples were also aged in air of ∼70% RH at the room temperature for 12 months after the first step of analysis ( The most convenient etalon for ANPs with non-oxide protective coatings discussed in this paper – is, obviously, the oxide-passivated powders, i.e. ANPs passivated by air. Their thermal properties are well-known and widely discussed The results of EDS and XRD study of ANPs are presented in The intensive ANP oxidation in air began below the melting point of aluminum (660 The results of isothermal calorimetric study of the selected powders are presented on According to TEM results, all samples had agglomerates of particles ( The specific Al content for samples ALEX, Al (Ar Stearic acid and oleic acid had the same effect on ANPs passivation – they interacted with Al. In the case of oleic acid, interaction with metal was deeper – Eleven samples produced under different experimental conditions and stabilized by gas, liquid and solid coating films have been studied (