The recent rapid progress in surface treatment techniques requires that titanium alloys should have an improved resistance to frictional wear without any loss of their high corrosion resistance. These requirements can be satisfied by producing surface layers of specified microstructure and phase composition. The paper presents the results of examinations of the structure and properties of surface layers formed on the Ti–6Al–3Mo–2Cr titanium alloy by glow discharge assisted nitriding and modified process known as carbonitriding (characterized by an alteration of the gaseous atmosphere in which the process is conducted). The investigations included: metallographical examinations, determination the phase and chemical composition of the layers, measurements of their corrosion and frictional wear resistance and scratch tests. The carbonitriding process increases the hardness and improves the wear and corrosion resistance compared to the nitriding technique.Development of new engineering branches has created the need for new applications of materials; examples may be titanium and its alloys which, because of their advantageous properties, have found a new unique application as biomaterials. Titanium is an attractive material with low specific density, very good resistance to corrosion and high relative strength, but its resistance to frictional wear is poor since it is liable to form adhesive welds and has a relatively high friction coefficient. In order to improve their wear resistance, titanium and its alloys are subjected to various surface treatments, such as e.g. thermal spraying, plasma vapour deposition (PVD) processes, anodic oxidization, electroless chemical deposition of metals, ion implantation, glow discharge-assisted nitriding and laser treatments Among the most prospective methods we can mention is the glow discharge-assisted technique which permits us to control the layer formation process with regard to both the structure and the phase composition and, thus, to modify the properties of the layers. The material examined was the alpha plus beta titanium alloy Ti–6Al–3Mo–2Cr type (5.5–6.5%Al, 0.2–0.7%Fe, 0.8–2.3%Cr, 0.2–0.4%Si, 2.0–3.0%Mo, Ti balance).The process was carried out in a universal apparatus for different types of thermo-chemical treatments under glow discharge conditions  after nitriding: after carbonitriding: The glow discharge-assisted nitriding process increased the values of the lattice constants of the TiN ( This can be attributed to the effect of carbon atoms which diffuse into the surface layer of the treated material during the final stage of the process and alter the lattice constants of the TiN and Ti  Glow discharge-assisted nitriding and carbonitriding of the Ti–6Al–3Mo–2Cr titanium alloy permits production of surface layers with good wear and corrosion resistance, considerably better than that of the untreated titanium alloy. The increased carbon content (up to 8%) in the titanium nitride layer increases its surface hardness and its wear and corrosion resistance. Glow discharge-assisted nitriding of the Ti–6Al–3Mo–2Cr titanium alloy at 850°C for 6 h gives layers of the TiN+Ti The corrosion resistance of the surface layers formed on the Ti–6Al–3Mo–2Cr alloy by glow discharge-assisted nitriding and carbonitriding is essentially affected by the surface topography and the chemical composition of the layers. It seems to be essential to analyse the residual stress state in the layers since it has a decisive effect on their properties. A modification of the nitriding process in which, at the final stage of the treatment, the composition of the gaseous atmosphere is altered, gives a further improvement of the performance properties and thus widens the application range of titanium alloys.