Objective
                  The aim of this study was to develop a new calcaneal fracture classification system which will consider sustentacular fragment configuration and relation of posterior calcaneal facet to calcaneal body.
               
                  Methods
                  The new classification system used sustentacular fragment configuration and relation of posterior calcaneal facet fracture with fracture components of calcaneal body as key aspects of main types and subtypes. Between 2000 and 2014, 126 intraarticular calcaneal fractures were classified according to the new classification system by using computed tomography images. The new classification system was studied in term of reliability, correlation to choices of treatment, implant fixation and quality of fracture reduction.
               
                  Results
                  Types of sustentacular fragment comprised type A, B and C. Type A sustentacular fragment included sustentacular tali containing middle calcaneal facet. In Type B and C fractures sustentacular fragment included medial aspect and entire posterior calcaneal facet as a single unit, respectively. The fractures with type A, B and C sustentacular fragments were classified as main type A, B and C intra-articular calcaneal fractures. The main type A and B comprised 4 subtypes. Subtypes A1, A3, B1, and B3 associated with avulsion and bending fragments of calcaneal body. Subtype A2, B2, and B4 associated with burst calcaneal body. Subtype B4 was not found in the study. Main type C had no subtype and associated with burst calcaneal body. The data showed good reliability.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The study showed that our new intra-articular calcaneal fracture classification system correlates to choices of treatment, implant fixation and quality of fracture reduction.
                  Level of Evidence: Level IV, Study of Diagnostic TestIntra-articular calcaneal fractures (IACF) under compressive load creates a sustentacular fragment (SF), fractures of posterior calcaneal facet (PCF) and of calcaneal body. The SF is a medial fragment of the calcaneal body fracture and remains attached to talus. We developed the new IACF classification as followings. Calcaneal facet fracture was defined as the fracture at the level of calcaneal facets that included displaced intact articular surface and intra-articular fracture of PCF. SF was defined as a medial fragment of calcaneal body with constantly containing middle calcaneal facet and remained attached to talus. Calcaneal body fracture components were defined as followings: avulsion fracture fragment was the fracture fragment that involves tendoachillis insertion at posterior tubercle and anteriorly extends to included PCF. Using axial CT images, the configuration of SF was identified and typed for using as the key aspect of main types of the classification. The SF configuration was typed as the followings; SF type A was a sustentacular tali fragment containing middle calcaneal facet. Type B was medial calcaneal fragment which consisted of sustentacular tali containing middle calcaneal facet and included medial aspect of PCF as a single unit. Whereas, type C sustentacular fragment was medial calcaneal fragment which consisted of sustentacular tali containing middle calcaneal facet and entire PCF as a single unit ( Using axial and sagittal CT images, subtype of main type A and B were classified by using configuration of the PCF fracture in term of intact articular surface or intra-articular fracture of PCF and the association with fracture components of calcaneal body as the key aspect of the subtype classification. By the way, main type C had no separated PCF fragment, so it had no subtype ( Subtype A Subtype A Subtype A Subtype A In the same manner of main type A, main type B IACF consisted of subtype B Radiographs, CT images, and medical records of patients who were treated for acute displaced intra-articular calcaneal fracture at our institutions between 2000 and 2014 were reviewed retrospectively. Inclusion criteria were age 18–80 years and acute displaced IACF less than 2 weeks after injury. Exclusion criteria were non-displaced intra-articular fracture, the fracture more than 2 weeks after injury, fracture associated with metabolic bone disease, pathological fracture, ankle osteoarthritis, deformed foot, and incomplete medical records or plain calcaneal radiographs or CT images. Using axial and sagittal CT images of IACF, the fracture were classified according to the new classification system ( Demographic data of patients, causes of accident leading to fracture were recorded. Main types and subtypes associated with fracture components of calcaneal body were studied. Surgical technique and implant fixation of the fractures were reviewed and recorded. Using axial and lateral calcaneal radiographs and digital Programmable Automation Controller system and measurement tools, preoperative and 6-month-postoperative calcaneal fracture parameters were measured. Gissane and Böhler angles were measured according to standard techniques. Calcaneal length was measured as a distance between anterior calcaneal process and posterior most of posterior calcaneal tubercle from lateral calcaneal radiograph. Using axial calcaneal radiographs, calcaneal varus was measured as the angle between longitudinal trabeculae of posterior calcaneal tubercle and a line drawn perpendicular to apex curve of lateral cortex of lateral malleolus minus 90°. Types and subtypes of the new classification system were performed in a 6-week interval including fracture parameter measurements by 2 orthopaedic surgeons. The data were statistically analysed. One hundred and twelve patients (mean age 36.83 years [range, 18–72 years]; 88 males, 24 females) with 126 acute displaced IACFs were enrolled. Causes of fractures were falls from a height in 92 patients and motor vehicle accidents in 20 patients. SF of the IACFs were typed as 51, 53 and 22 of type A, B and C respectively. In The main type A comprised 32, 4 and 15 of subtype A In 32 A The fractures of subtype A The subtype A At 6-month follow-up of 51 main type A IACFs, the healed fracture showed postoperative fracture parameter improvements. Radiographic calcaneal fracture scores were improved from 8.33 (4–11) to 3.55 points (0–10) ( In The fractures of 4 subtype B The fractures of 32 subtype B In subtype B The fractures of subtype B The fracture of subtypes B In main type B IACF, 40 were fixed with percutaneous screws, 7 with percutaneous plating. 6 subtype B At 6-month follow up of main type B, the healed fracture showed postoperative fracture parameter improvements. The calcaneal fracture scores were improved from 8.94 (5–11) to 4.28 points (0–10) ( In Percutaneous reduction of the fracture were performed to restore abnormal fracture parameters as subtype A At 6-month follow-up, the healed fracture showed postoperative fracture parameter improvements. The calcaneal fracture scores were improved from 5.95 (4–8) to 1.09 points (0–5) ( Statistical analyses showed that main type C intra-articular calcaneal fractures had lowest pre- and postoperative fracture scores (p < 0.05). Whereas, main type B, the fractures showed the highest fracture scores ( The study showed IACFs create 3 different SF configurations including type A, B and C. The SF type A, B and C are used as the key fragments for classifying main type A, B and C IACFs. Harnroongroj IACF classification system, the fracture is classified based on fracture components of the calcaneal body including avulsion and bending fragments as well as burst calcaneal body. In 2009, Schepers, et al reported a comparative study of 49 radiographic and 15 computerized tomographic scan classification systems. The study showed that the most prevalent systems such as Essex-Lopresti, Zwipp, Crosby, and Sanders classifications had no correlation with treatment and moderate interobserver reliability for the Crosby and Sanders classifications. The next advantage of this classification over previous classifications is about the application in the treatment of IACFs with minimal invasive surgical technique. Minimal invasive surgery is current popular technique for the fracture treatment. Pre- and postoperative radiographic calcaneal fracture scores showed the lowest fracture scores for main type C and the highest for main type B. These mean that main type C was simple fracture configuration and had the best quality of fracture reduction. While, main type B had the most complex fracture configuration and had the worst quality of fracture reduction. It could be assumed that the new classification system can provide correlation of fracture configuration of the main types to quality of fracture reduction. In conclusion, this preliminary study demonstrated that our novel classification system in term of type of SF and incorporation of PCF fracture with fracture components of calcaneal body can be used for classifying IACFs. The classification system correlates to choices of treatment, implant fixation and quality of fracture reduction that might benefit for surgical treatment especially minimal invasive surgery.