In most copper sulphide flotation processes, optimising recovery of trace elements such as gold or maximising the rejection of penalty elements such as uranium, arsenic and fluorine remains a major metallurgical challenge. This review looks at the existing and possible strategies of improving gold recovery in porphyry copper ores and rejection of penalty elements such as uranium, arsenic and fluorine in copper flotation concentrates.Froth flotation is a separation process which exploits the difference in wettability between the valuable and gangue minerals to produce two product streams (i.e. concentrate and tail). It is widely used in separating minerals such as metal sulphides, oxides/silicates, coal and industrial minerals, owing to its versatility and the ability to selectively discriminate the valuable mineral(s) from the gangue by exploiting the difference in their surface chemistry. The majority of minerals are wettable by water except for a few naturally hydrophobic minerals (e.g., talc, molybdenite, carbon, rhombic sulphur). The process of froth flotation impinges on selectively separating the minerals of interest by rendering them hydrophobic using specifically functionalised surfactants (collectors). Selectivity amongst minerals of similar surface chemistry, for example, sulphide minerals (e.g., chalcopyrite, chalcocite, bornite, etc.) is achieved by either the addition of depressants or altering the electrokinetic potential or surface charge of the particle. In some mines (e.g., Lihir Gold Mine, Papua New Guinea, etc.), froth flotation is used as a pre-concentrating step prior to pressure oxidation and leaching, whilst in others mines (e.g., Ok Tedi Copper Mine) it is used as the final concentrating step before sale. These choices are largely influenced by the geological and mineralogical characteristics of the ore and the overall objective of the mine. Every mine has its own unique problem and the method applied to address the problem in one mine is not applicable for another mine’s mineralisation. This is because each ore has a unique set of mineralogical characteristics which in turn require a unique processing route. Detailed mineralogical and liberation analysis using the best available mineralogical tools (such as QEMSCAN, MLA, EPMA and QXRD) is key to improving the process of froth flotation ( In copper ores, other valuable minerals such as gold occur in trace proportions (0.5–2 A great amount of work has been published and further research is continuously being undertaken to improve recovery and grade of gold in copper flotation circuits ( Furthermore, naturally occurring elements such as fluorine, uranium and arsenic often occur in copper ores as minor or accessory elements. High levels of these elements above acceptable limits, (e.g., 500 Porphyry copper deposits are important sources of gold in the upper crust ( Gold-copper mineral association depends on the proportion/dominance of the specific copper mineral present. For instance, an analysis of a copper mineral concentrate ( Understanding the mineralogy, liberation and association of gold as well as the associated gangue minerals in a flotation feed is crucial to optimise gold recovery. In the case of gold being a secondary product in copper flotation, mineralogical associations of gold may provide an advantage. Composites containing both gold and copper–sulphide can be recovered by targeting copper. Furthermore, gold-bearing pyrite, which is generally considered a gangue mineral, can be activated and floated so that gold can be recovered in this way ( Reduction of the concentrate grade through contamination either by mechanical entrainment or natural floatability Retarding both gold and copper flotation either by slime coating the mineral or bubble surface ( It is therefore vital to have considerable understanding of the nature of these gangue minerals in order to select appropriate depressants or dispersing-agents to prevent their flotation. Although gold mineralogy plays an important role in its recovery from copper ores, the mineralogical characterisation of gold particles (particularly, Au  In addition to mineralogy and liberation, physical parameters such as pulp density, temperature and pulp chemistry (pH, Eh, DO) also play an important role in gold and Cu-sulphide flotation. Extensive discussion of these parameters may be found in the literature ( The flotation properties of any mineral depend on its particle size and the extent of surface liberation from the host and the associated gangue minerals. It is well established that coarse particles show lower flotation recovery than intermediate-sized particles due to high particle inertia (decreased ability of the bubble to lift the bubble-particle composite to the froth zone) as well as low mineral liberation ( In copper ores, the majority of the gold particles are associated with pyrite; therefore, it is crucial to liberate gold particles from the associated host minerals for effective true gold flotation. It is mostly expected that intermediate size ranges (5–100 Floatability of free gold particle is dependent on its exposed surface composition, whether coated with a hydrophilic iron species, slime or with hydrophobic species ( In copper–gold ore flotation, the choice of collector is often optimised for copper minerals rather than gold. The occurrence of both native gold and electrum (Au–Ag) in copper ores further complicates the selection of collectors for recovering both copper minerals and gold. Silver has been identified as one of the most significant elements that can activate gold and enhance collector adsorption on to the surface during flotation ( “Any good collector can be used for free gold flotation, but organic collectors of xanthate type produce a cleaner, higher-grade concentrate than coal tar-creosote oil” (  Chalcopyrite and pyrite in the ore have the ability to interact with the collectors, xanthate and dithiophosphate, through metal-xanthate and dixanthogen formation in a similar way to gold. This creates competition in terms of collector adsorption rates among the minerals. For instance, in plants (Ok Tedi and Freeport) where the pH is controlled by lime addition, calcium ions depress gold flotation by reducing its interaction with xanthate. At very high pH values (above 12), dixanthogen, which imparts hydrophobic character on to the gold surfaces becomes unstable and metal-xanthate becomes the stable xanthate species, which favours chalcopyrite flotation. Furthermore, copper ores often contain substantial amount of pyrite that is highly floatable in the presence of copper minerals such as chalcopyrite, through galvanic interaction and copper activation. Under certain conditions, pyrite floats well in alkaline medium because of the adsorption of copper dissolved from the copper sulphide minerals such as chalcopyrite ( Copper activation of pyrite increases its interaction with xanthate which is undesirable where pyrite is the main gangue mineral as in most copper–gold ores ( The following strategies have been demonstrated in a number of studies, in both laboratory and plant, to minimise gold losses in most complex sulphide ores such as Cu–Au–Py ores:     Uranium (U) occurs in two oxidation states, tetravalent (U In some copper operations such as at Prominent Hill Mine of Australia, naturally occurring uranium is present in sub-economic levels and its recovery in the copper concentrate is undesirable owing to smelter penalty concerns. This sub-section discusses uranium–copper mineralogy and highlights factors which may promote undesirable recovery of U in copper concentrates. In copper ores, uranium can occur as discrete mineral phases (e.g. uraninite, brannerite, coffinite) while it is not known to replace Cu (II), in sulphide mineral lattices, due to the high nominal charge (U Associated with sulphide minerals (poor liberation) Entrainment Activated by Pb in the uranium mineral lattices (an issue of mineral surface chemistry) Associated with naturally hydrophobic minerals (e.g. kerogen) Understanding the grain size and size distribution of uranium minerals and their mode of occurrence in the copper ore is vital to map out and quantify the most likely factors which could promote uranium recovery. A good combination of QEMSCAN, QXRD and chemical analysis (ICP-MS) is useful for collecting such vital information. Quantification of the uranium phase speciation, grain size or size distribution to the degree of association with copper sulphides, pyrite or other floatable sulphides, and naturally hydrophobic non-sulphide minerals such as talc and kerogen is crucial for the diagnosis of penalty uranium recovery. Such information, combined with detailed liberation analysis, by size class, of uranium as well as other floatable species (e.g. sulphides) can inform the best metallurgical approach for minimising uranium recovery without compromising the copper recovery and grade. In an operating plant, mineralogical and liberation analysis of the final concentrate must be a first step since it does not only save time and effort but enables one to pinpoint quickly the problematic uranium bearing species and, importantly, highlights how they are recovered (i.e. the mechanisms promoting their recovery) ( QEMSCAN is finding increasing demand for such important mineralogical information and is currently the driver for several metallurgical plant improvements in many texturally complex and fine grained ores ( Poor liberation is one of the major factors contributing to the recovery of concentrate diluents including penalty uranium. One of the main reasons is the fine grained mineralisation of uranium minerals ( Opposed to selective flotation via particle-bubble attachment, entrainment is an unselective means by which minerals are recovered in the concentrate. Entrainment is reportedly the dominant mechanism of hydrophilic gangue recovery ( In copper mines that are processing feed as fine as 20 In flotation plants, pulp chemistry plays a vital role in selective activation of the mineral of value. Eh, pH, dissolved oxygen levels (DO) and temperature are key variables usually manipulated to effect selective flotation of valuable minerals ( Most of the copper or lead ions in solution are derived from dissolution of sulphide minerals due to galvanic effect ( Uranium oxide is reportedly floated with frother only ( Fluorine is the most electronegative and reactive element of the halogen group elements on the periodic table. Because of its reactivity, fluorine frequently occurs as compounds, mainly fluorite (CaF In some copper mines such as Prominent Hill ( In the Olympic Dam deposits, sericite contains the majority of F (1%) in the ore ( The main factors which promote fluorine recovery into copper concentrate are poor liberation (i.e. the association of fluorine-bearing minerals with valuable sulphide minerals), association with non-sulphide naturally floatable minerals such as talc, and entrainment. Understanding the mineralogical association between copper and fluorine-bearing minerals is key to optimise reduction of fluorine in the final copper concentrate. Most of the existing copper flotation plants dealing with copper ores containing a substantial amount of F have their unique way of minimising F recovery based on the ore mineralogy through flowsheet adjustment. The most successful approaches in minimising F recovery by flowsheet design and adjustment are discussed below. Ok Tedi copper/gold deposit is located in the North Fly district of Western Province of Papua New Guinea. The ore occurs as a result of porphyritic intrusions, with chalcopyrite as the main copper-bearing mineral. Bornite and digenite occur as secondary inclusions. The major impurity element in the copper concentrate is fluorine which is mainly contained in talc, phlogophite and apatite. Fluorine in the talc phase is more problematic due to the natural floatability of talc ( The Prominent Hill deposit is located in South Australia. The major copper minerals are chalcopyrite, chalcocite and bornite. Fluorine occurs in the ore body in the form of apatite and muscovite, and their recovery in the concentrate is undesirable due to smelter penalty concerns. The fluorine minerals are reportedly associated with the sulphide minerals, promoting their recovery. Strategies such as acid dissolution of the copper concentrate to remove the fluorine were not viable owing to significant amount of chalcocite ( In an ore where fluorine containing minerals are finely divided within the copper minerals, depression of these minerals can reduce copper recovery as well. Hence, for such ores, a combined copper–fluorine concentrate can be produced which is further leached to separate copper from the fluorine. The CVRD Technology Center (now Vale) developed solvent extraction–electrowinning (SE–EW) technique for treating such ores ( In some copper flotation circuits, arsenic deportment in the concentrate is undesirable as it often leads to hefty smelter penalties. Of major concern is the toxicity of this element, requiring strict guidelines in disposing materials containing high levels of arsenic. The toxicity is related to the diverse oxidation states of arsenic which defines its crystal chemical reactivity. Arsenic (As) appears in four oxidation states; (i) As Tennantite belongs to the tetrahedrite group of minerals, with the most varied chemistry of any sulphide. The general chemical formula is given in Eq. Tetrahedrite minerals are known to associate and co-exist with a much wider range of base metal sulphides (chalcopyrite, galena and sphalerite) as well as gold tellurides ( Enargite, Cu For example, in the Andean copper deposits (Chile), chalcopyrite and pyrite are the main minerals with trace amounts of tennantite and enargite. In the El Indio deposit, tennantite and enargite occur as the major minerals with trace amounts of arsenopyrite, chalcopyrite and tetrahedrite. It was found that chalcopyrite and gold were mainly associated with enargite ( Tennantite and enargite are reportedly floatable in a wide pH range, from pH 5 to 12, quite similar to other major copper minerals such as chalcopyrite ( Even after liberation, due to the similar chemical composition between the copper–arsenic bearing minerals and the primary copper minerals, the former exhibit similar flotation behaviour, thereby reporting to the copper concentrate. Therefore, in order to minimise arsenic recovery, different researchers have come out with various mechanisms of rejecting significant arsenic from copper concentrates before getting to the smelter. Some of these techniques are magnetic separation ( Challenges associated with the recovery of value trace elements (e.g., Au) or rejection of penalty trace elements (e.g. U, F, As) in copper flotation have been discussed. The major limiting factors are the inherent low grade, the finely sized mineralisation and mostly the lack of complete and accurate mineralogical/surface/morphological characterisation. Each copper deposit presents unique mineralogical characteristics, hence one method employed in one copper concentrator differs from another. However, a sound mineralogical analysis using a combination of QEMSCAN (and/or MLA), QXRD and bulk chemical analysis is vital and is the first step to address any metallurgical challenge. Some key steps for improving gold flotation are: (i) detailed mineralogical characterisation of gold occurrence (e.g. native gold, electrum, etc.), association and texture and (ii) subsequent optimisation of the collector regime (charged, water soluble, collectors for Au/Py composites and uncharged, water insoluble, collectors for free or native Au particles and Au/Cp composites) ( Appropriate particle size distribution after grinding should be targeted based on the mineralogical information in order to optimise liberation, and the recovery of both Cu and Au. Excessive grinding, or regrinding, must be avoided to prevent over-grinding of already liberated gold particles, which is detrimental to Au flotation ( Pulp chemistry (e.g. Eh, pH, DO) plays an important role in gold recovery, especially from ores containing a significant amount of pyrite. For instance, the use of lime as pH modifier (e.g., Ok Tedi and Freeport mines) must be critically monitored since over dosage can cause gold depression. An appropriate pH regime should be selected based on the ore mineralogy and collector type involved. Au recovery is also dependent on the pulp potential (Eh) as for the other sulphide minerals. Conditioning the pulp at an appropriate Eh (200–300 Identifying and understanding conditions that may passivate Au surfaces in flotation (e.g. slime coatings) is also critical in maximising gold recovery. Also, “inadvertent” Cu-activation of pyrite should be controlled and minimised to increase Cu–Au concentrate grade. Flowsheet design also needs to be adjusted to promote gold recovery. Most Cu–Au flotation circuits operate at conditions which are optimised for copper, while gold recovery may often require longer residence time in the roughers and scavengers, due to lower flotation kinetics. In a similar manner, comprehensive mineralogical and liberation characterisation of the ore, together with surface and pulp chemistry analysis, is a key step to maximise penalty uranium/fluorine/arsenic rejection. Speciation of the uranium/fluorine/arsenic bearing phases, mode of occurrence, liberation, and size distribution are important factors. Development of a sound mineralogical profile during start-up and throughout the operation is critically important. This is because process mineralogy, pulp/solution chemistry and hydrodynamic conditions all govern the deportment of the different minerals. The financial support from