Two Pt–Y2O3 composites were prepared from recycled wastes by powder metallurgy technique using two different times (8 and 24h) of low-energy mechanical alloying and their high temperature deformation behaviour was investigated by compressive creep testing at 1200 and 1573K. The creep strain of the two materials was mutually compared and the role of the milling time was identified. The material milled for 24h had superior creep resistance due to the better distribution of yttria particles. The microstructure of the Pt–Y2O3 system (material B) was analyzed by optical microscopy, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM).Platinum and its alloys are widely utilized in glass industry. The materials have to satisfy requirements like: chemical purity, good and reliable mechanical properties at temperatures up to 1773 Stabilization of the matrix microstructure at high temperature exposure is achieved by incorporating of the secondary phase particles into the matrix. Since the Pt is expensive, in metallurgy only infrequently used material, unconventional preparation procedures, using powder metallurgy techniques, are being developed to produce Pt based composites. Here, the problems of compacting, shaping, and welding have to be addressed. The optimum system seems to be Pt–Y The aim of this work is to analyze microstructure and the creep behaviour of Pt–Y The materials for creep experiments were manufactured as follows. The matrix Pt powder was prepared from Pt wastes, which were first dissolved in aqua regia. From the solution the crystals of ammonium chloride were obtained by coagulation and then they were thermally decomposed to yield the Pt powder. After refining, drying, reducing, and de-gassing, the Pt powder was milled together with 0.5 mass% of Y The experimental materials were cut to bars 5 Microstructure of the material B was analyzed. The fine-grained Pt matrix is identified by optical microscopy. Some grains are polyedric, sized to 2 The nature of the testing method (large strains accompanied by geometrical changes and decreasing stress) did not allow to resolve the typical creep stages and find the secondary (steady-state) creep rates. During the tests only decreasing of the creep rate could be observed. Particularly at higher stresses, the materials suffered very rapid deformation in the beginning of the test, probably happening completely in the primary creep regime. Then, already at considerably lower true stress levels, the creep rates decreased dramatically, so much that at 1573 Primarily, both materials were loaded in such a way, that the initial nominal stresses were 2 and 5 In order to characterize the more resistant material (material B) in greater details, it was also tested at the initial load of 15 The strain rates ( Using the Arrhenian type temperature dependence (see Eq.  The fine grained Pt matrix was identified by light microscopy. Some grains are polyedric, sized to 2 Two Pt–Y The work was supported by the Slovak Grant Agency under the project no. 2/5142/25 and by the Ministry of Science and Technology of Spain through the “Ramón y Cajal Programme” (stay of Pavol Hvizdoš).