Radial head fractures occur commonly and are often associated with adjacent elbow fractures or ligament injuries. Ring recently summarized the most common injuries associated with radial head fractures: (1) posterior dislocation of the elbow; (2) posterior transolecranon fracture-dislocation (posterior Monteggia variant); (3) medial collateral ligament rupture or capitellar fracture; (4) terrible triad injury (radial head fracture, coronoid fracture and posterior elbow dislocation); and (5) interosseous ligament rupture (Essex-Lopresti). A 21-year-old right-hand dominant male presented to our clinic with left elbow pain, swelling, and limited motion. He had fallen forward onto his outstretched left upper extremity with a hyperextended elbow while playing basketball. On presentation, he held his globally swollen elbow in a flexed and pronated position. Elbow range of motion was markedly reduced with a painful 20° arc of supination from full pronation and a flexion-extension arc from 45° to 110°. Radiographs demonstrated anterior subluxation of the radial head with respect to the capitellum and sigmoid notch ( On examination under anesthesia, forearm rotation and flexion-extension were mechanically limited. Attempted closed reduction of the radial head subluxation was unsuccessful. As the patient’s examination was difficult to interpret and there was radiographic evidence of medial joint line opening suggestive of a medial collateral ligament injury, a mid-dorsal incision was used. The patient was positioned supine, and the injured arm was placed over the chest with the elbow flexed and the shoulder internally rotated and flexed to 90°. The lateral skin flap was elevated, thus exposing the lateral side of the joint. A fascial incision was made starting proximally over the lateral column of the distal humerus and extending distally over the lateral epicondyle and joint. Care was taken to stay anterior to the origin of the lateral collateral ligament on the lateral epicondyle. As the common extensor origin was split and the proximal margin of the supinator was released, the annular and lateral collateral ligaments appeared to be intact. To visualize the radial head, the annular ligament was incised from proximal to distal, anterior to the lateral collateral insertion into it. Care was taken to maintain the integrity of the ulnohumeral ligament, which appeared to be intact. On visualization of the radial head, 1 small lateral osteochondral fragment was separated from the rim and another lateral fragment consisting of about half of the radial head diameter was impacted into the metaphysic, such that its articular surface was angulated about 45° with respect to the long axis of the radius. The remainder of the articular surface was intact and contiguous with the radial neck. The fracture-impaction was anterior on the radial head with the forearm in pronation. In preparation to repair the radial head and neck, the dissection was extended along the proximal radial shaft to accommodate internal fixation. As this dissection entailed further elevation of the supinator, the posterior interosseous nerve was visualized and protected. During the dissection along the proximal radial shaft, just distal to the radial neck, a large tendon was noted to be draped across the lateral aspect of the proximal radial shaft ( The patient was immobilized in a posterior splint and sling in 90° of flexion and full supination. At 2 weeks post-op, the sutures were removed and he started working with physical therapy on gentle range of motion. His postoperative course was uncomplicated, and at 6-months post-op ( Whether radial head dislocations occur in isolation is a point of considerable controversy. The mechanism of injury, as described by these previous authors, involves elbow hyperextension with the forearm in pronation. Based on the injury pattern observed in our case study, we believe that the injury mechanism has to explain an anterolateral radial head fracture with the forearm in pronation, medial collateral ligament injury, and biceps tendon transposition, while maintaining the integrity of the annular and radial collateral ligaments. We evaluated this in a cadaveric arm ( During our cadaver dissection, we simulated an intact lateral collateral ligament and annular ligament complex with a dislocated radiocapitellar joint by detaching the capsule from around the radial neck, which occurs in the pediatric “nursemaid’s elbow”, and also detached the remainder of the anterior capsule from the ulna, which might occur with extreme elbow hyperextension. We detached the medial collateral ligament from the sublime tubercle, further replicating the injury in our patient. After disrupting these structures, the biceps tendon could easily pass between the proximal radius and ulna, and transpose laterally with the elbow dislocated and positioned in valgus, hyperextension, and with the forearm in pronation. Then, as the cadaver elbow was reduced, the radial head easily slipped back into the annular ligament, leaving the lateral structures intact. Isolated radial head dislocations are rare, if they occur at all. Though the original radiographs could be interpreted as an isolated radial head dislocation, we believe that our operative and radiographic findings indicate that our patient had an elbow dislocation, and that the apparent radial head subluxation represented residual deformity after relocation of the elbow joint, thus owing to the deforming force of the transposed biceps tendon. Anteromedial irreducible radial head malpositioning should raise suspicion for a transposed biceps tendon. Open reduction of the biceps tendon and radial head can result in a highly functional outcome, at least in the short term. The authors report no actual or potential conflict of interest in relation to this article.