The starting material for powder metallurgy consists of small particles (i.e., powder) characterized by a size <1 Atomization is the process by which a liquid is disintegrated into droplets which then solidify. With few exceptions, any metallic element or alloy that can be melted is amenable to atomization. The fundamental principles of atomization are governed primarily by fluid dynamics, heat and mass transfer, and physical metallurgy. There are three modes of atomization in use commercially ( In the commercial production of metal powders water atomization is the pre-eminent mode; attendant capacity worldwide is at least 700000 tyr Nozzles used in water atomization are either in the form of discrete multiple nozzles or an annular slit concentric with the metal stream. Annular cone and V-shaped jet geometries are used widely. The “free-fall” configuration is common in which the liquid metal exits from the base of the tundish and falls under gravity before impingement by the jets of water. Representative operating conditions in water atomization are summarized in In gas atomization, the stream of liquid metal is disrupted by a high velocity gas (air, nitrogen, argon, or helium). Worldwide annual tonnage of gas atomized powders is much less than that of water atomized powders: about 300,000 tyr The nozzles used in gas atomization are either of the “free-fall” configuration or “confined.” The latter, used almost exclusively with annular nozzles, enhances the efficiency of the process since there is a rapid decay in gas velocity as the gas moves away from the jet. A schematic of a confined gas atomization nozzle is shown in Representative operating conditions used in the gas atomization of a nickel base superalloy are summarized in The primary commercial adaptation of centrifugal atomization is the rotating electrode process ( Powders atomized by this technique are of high purity since there is no containment of the molten metal. The powders are spherical and satellite free ( When a molten metal, supersaturated with gas under pressure, is suddenly exposed to vacuum, the gas expands and comes out of solution with attendant atomization of the molten melt. This principle is used in vacuum atomization, a commercial batch process. It is also termed The major features of vacuum atomization are shown schematically in Vacuum atomized powders are smooth and spherical with very few satellite particles in evidence. Powder size range is broad (1–500 Size is an important property of the metal powder since it dictates its utility in subsequent powder metallurgy processes. In commercial methods of atomization, empirical relations have been identified which relate the mean particle size to atomizing conditions and the properties of the molten metal. In water atomization, the magnitude of the median particle size is dictated by the pressure of the water jets. Water pressure influences water velocity and changes the size of the water droplets, and in turn the size of the metal droplets. Quantitatively, the relation between median particle size ( There is an extensive literature base for gas atomization in terms of the effect of atomizing conditions on median particle size. The dependence of median particle size on gas pressure is described by a relation similar to that for water atomization. In gas atomization, the ratio of the mass flow rate of metal to the mass flow of gas is important; median particle size decreases as this ratio decreases. For a given nozzle design, specific gas consumption (measured as the volume of gas per unit weight of powder produced) is an important parameter. Data relating median particle size ( Metal powders produced by the rotating electrode process exhibit narrower size distributions than gas atomized powders. Median particle size decreases with increasing rotational speed of the consumable electrode. Based on the mechanism(s) of disintegration of the molten metal stream, atomization models have been developed which predict the median particle size. In water atomization, In gas atomization, the conceptual mechanism of droplet formation involving the disintegration of a liquid sheet by a high velocity jet of gas is shown in It is also possible to predict the droplet diameter ( In the rotating electrode process, three modes of atomization have been identified: direct droplet formation, ligament disintegration, and liquid film disintegration ( In the direct droplet formation mode, the droplet diameter ( The mechanism of disintegration of the molten metal in vacuum atomization is complex. To date, no conceptual mechanisms or models have been developed for this mode of atomization. In addition to size, the shape of a metal powder particle exerts a major effect on its utility in subsequent powder metallurgy processes. Since the metal powder particles are produced by solidification of the atomized liquid droplets, particle shape is controlled by the relative magnitudes of the time for a liquid droplet to spheroidize under the action of surface tension forces and the time for the droplet to solidify. In commercial atomization, spheroidization times are at least two orders of magnitude shorter than solidification times. Thus, atomized metal powder particles are expected to be spherical in shape. In general, gas atomization results in spherical powders, whereas water atomized powders are typically irregular in shape. This morphology is attributed primarily to the presence of an oxide film on the droplet surface prior to solidification. The oxide film opposes the forces of surface tension, thereby inhibiting spheroidization.