Indian low grade iron ores mostly contain quartz, gibbsite, and clay as the major impurities. Depending upon the ore characteristics, in many instances froth flotation has to be used to recover the hematite and other iron oxides from the ground ores. In this context, the difference in silica and alumina content in low grade iron ores is brought to bear on the prospects of iron ore flotation. For this purpose, pure minerals like hematite, quartz, gibbsite, and clay have been used to prepare synthetic mixtures and analyzed to determine the difference in floatability. The results are compared against natural iron ores with variations in silica and alumina content. The flotation results with oleic acid and dodecylamine show better recovery of iron values in the hematite–quartz mixture as well as in the naturally occurring high silica ore compared to the hematite–clay mixture and the high alumina ore respectively. Similarly results on a variety of iron ores show that high silica content as quartz in the ore causes less hindrance in the flotation of iron ore, whereas the presence of silica as clay inhibits the flotation response of iron ore. The scanning electron microscopic (SEM) studies indicate that clay particles cover the surface of hematite, making it less selective for interaction with the collector. The surface potential studies of clay and quartz suggest that charge reversal takes place for quartz treated with dodecylamine (DDA), but for the DDA adsorption on clay, negative potential values are noted beyond a pH of 4.6.Iron ore deposits in India can be broadly classified as aluminous and siliceous. Although most of the Indian ores are highly aluminous in nature, in some mines, silica content is even higher than the alumina content. It is often seen that iron ores available in the southern part of the country are siliceous in nature, whereas the iron ores from the eastern and central parts of India contain higher amounts of clay or gibbsite and are aluminous in nature. In general, each ore deposit of India has its own unique characteristics with respect to either silica or alumina content. Therefore, based on the origin of the ore, it would require a specific beneficiation technique for efficient enrichment of iron values. The choice of beneficiation methods depends on the nature of the gangue present and its association with the ore structure. Hence, development of an efficient beneficiation method has to be essentially supported by an in depth analysis of the mineralogical association of silica or alumina with the iron minerals. Although froth flotation has been established as an efficient method to remove impurities from iron ore elsewhere in the world, Indian iron ore mines are yet to apply this technique. The reason is that most of the steel industries in India are operated by blast furnaces to which calibrated ore and sinters are fed. To ensure quality of these feed materials, Indian beneficiation plants are now adopting the flotation technique. Therefore, the importance of the froth flotation process in addition to conventional washing, gravity, classification, or magnetic separation processes has increased. It is mainly due to the market requirements for superior grade iron concentrates and rejection of lesser iron values into tailings. It is believed that beneficiation of iron values by flotation coupled with agglomeration such as pellet making will be emphasized more in future. Iron ores can be concentrated either by direct anionic flotation of iron oxides or reverse cationic flotation of silica. In direct flotation, oleic acid or its sodium salt is the preferred reagent. Several studies on oleate-hematite interactions suggest that the oleate adsorption on hematite mainly depends on solution pH ( Major iron minerals associated with most of the iron ores are hematite, goethite, limonite, and magnetite to a lesser extent. The silica and alumina bearing minerals present in the iron ore are quartz, kaolinite, montmorillonite, illite, gibbsite, diaspore and corundum. Out of these, it is often observed that, kaolinite and gibbsite are the two main alumina bearing minerals present in iron ore. Generally, iron bearing minerals and gibbsite have similar structure (Fe In order to recover the iron values from slimes, some investigations were carried out on high alumina iron ore slimes from India using a combination of hydrocyclone separation and flotation. It has been observed that, due to the fine size of the slimes coupled with complex mineralogy and the presence of locked particles, it is not possible to obtain an acceptable concentrate through the direct flotation of hematite. As most of the alumina and silica bearing minerals are associated with the finer sizes, classification of slimes with two stage hydrocycloning followed by reverse cationic flotation using amines or direct flotation with fatty acid have been carried out ( In the case of kaolinite and quartz, it has been found that the flotation behavior of kaolinite is opposite to that of silica. For example, ether diamine, regarded as a strong collector for quartz, does not induce any collector action for kaolinite at alkaline pH. Besides that, the presence of calcium and magnesium ions is also detrimental to kaolinite removal from iron ore. Similarly, sodium silicate, a good dispersant for silicates present in iron ore does not disperse any kaolinite ( Taking into consideration all the above facts, we aimed to seek a thorough understanding of the difference in the flotation response of a quartz rich and an alumina rich ore in a comprehensive manner. Flotation studies of hematite, quartz, clay, gibbsite and their synthetic mixtures have been conducted and subjected to direct and reverse flotation processes to find out the differences. Further, the studies have been extended to four types of naturally occurring iron ores having different compositions of silica and alumina with the aid of proper characterization studies to understand the underlying reason for the difference in their floatability. Flotation studies were initially conducted using high quality minerals like gibbsite, clay (kaolinite), quartz, and hematite having 98–99.8% purity to evaluate the performance of direct and reverse flotation processes. The samples of quartz and hematite were obtained from different Odisha mines, while clay samples rich in kaolin and gibbsite were obtained from Jharkhand. The quartz sample was further purified by digestion in dilute hydrochloric acid and repeated washing with distilled water to remove any contaminated iron particles. All the samples were carefully prepared by crushing and subsequent wet grinding in a laboratory ball mill (6″ The synthetic mixtures of hematite–gibbsite, hematite–quartz, and hematite–clay in 1:1 proportions were prepared for different flotation tests. In the flotation study, 150 In the second stage of the flotation study, four low grade iron ore samples were taken from four different mines with wide variation in silica and alumina content. All the samples were crushed by a roll crusher to reduce the particle size. The samples were then ground to below 100 Stereomicroscopic studies of low grade iron ore samples were carried out to identify different mineral phases. The morphology of the hematite, quartz and clay samples was analyzed using a Hitachi 3400 We have made attempts to establish the difference in the flotation behavior of the gibbsite, clay, and quartz. The particle size distribution of the clay, hematite and quartz sample used in the flotation studies is presented in  We have attempted further grinding of hematite and quartz and obtained d Synthetic mixtures of gibbsite–hematite, quartz–hematite and clay–hematite were subjected to direct flotation using oleic acid as the collector. The ratio of the components in the mixture was maintained at 1:1. The slurry pH was maintained between 7.5 and 8 throughout the experiments. Sodium silicate (500 The synthetic mixtures were then subjected to reverse flotation studies with dodecylamine as the collector. In the reverse flotation system, the grade of iron was determined by analyzing the non-float fraction. In order to extend our study to naturally occurring ores, we selected two low grade iron ore samples for reverse flotation studies. Sample-1 contains more silica than alumina while sample-2 contains more alumina compared to silica. The chemical analyses of the iron ore samples used in this study are shown in Both the samples were characterized with the help of a stereomicroscope. The results indicate the presence of hematite, goethite and limonite as the iron bearing phases while quartz and clay constitute the gangue phases. Flotation experiments were carried out with both samples i.e., the high alumina and high silica iron ore, using dodecylamine (DDA) as the collector. The flotation response in terms of Fe grade of the concentrate is shown in The flotation studies of both the ores were also studied by varying the pH of the slurry. In all the experiments, the DDA concentration was fixed at 65 The ores studied by reverse flotation were also subjected to direct flotation in order to understand the difference in their response. However, both the ores showed very poor response with equal distribution of iron values in the concentrate and tailings fraction. This is due to the presence of clay, limonite and goethite in the samples. Hence, two new low grade iron ores (Sample-3 & 4) were considered. Sample-3 contains 42% Fe and 28% SiO We have discussed the flotation response of different iron ore minerals based on silica and alumina content. The flotation studies of several samples have indicated that alumina bearing clay is highly detrimental to the recovery of iron values. It is mainly due to the coating of clay particles over the surface of hematite. In addition to that we present here a typical case for banded hematite jasper, a naturally occurring iron ore abundantly available in the iron ore mines of India. Jasper is the microcrystalline form of quartz associated with the BHJ ore. The separation of hematite particles from jasper is difficult mainly due to the coating of the microcrystalline jasper over the surface of hematite during the process of size reduction by grinding. To substantiate our argument, flotation studies of hematite particles from BHJ ore containing 29.8% Fe, 55.5% SiO A SEM EDS study of the BHJ sample was carried out in order to correlate its poor flotation performance to the texture. The difference in the flotation response of hematite–quartz mixture and hematite–clay mixtures was analyzed by interpreting microscopic evidence. The difference in flotation behavior of clay and quartz was analyzed via surface potential measurements, which is presented in The flotation response of the high alumina bearing iron ore is less impressive compared to the silica bearing iron ore. This is mainly attributed to the coating of fine clay particles on the hematite and quartz surface, which affects the flotation performance. The clay particles are very fine in nature (5 to 10 The studies of pure minerals and different iron ores with variations in alumina and silica content were subjected to flotation studies to understand the influence of these elements in flotation. The results for pure minerals indicated that quartz is better floated than clay and gibbsite. Synthetic mixtures of hematite–quartz, hematite–gibbsite and hematite–clay were subjected to direct and reverse flotation using oleic acid and dodecylamine as the collectors. In both cases, it was observed that the mixture containing silica responds very well compared to the one containing clay or gibbsite. Flotation studies of naturally occurring iron ores further established the fact that it is easier to upgrade the iron values from a high silica ore compared to a high alumina ore. It was possible to produce an overall iron concentrate containing 62% Fe with 86% recovery for a silica bearing ore, but the grade and recovery of an alumina bearing ore were found to be low. This is mainly due to the intimate adherence of clay particles to other minerals present, which hinders the attachment between the mineral surface and collector. On the other hand, quartz particles are better dispersed, which is well supported by scanning electron microscopy studies.