Extraction of Co(II) and Ni(II) from aqueous HCl solutions into organic Alamine 336–m-xylene systems were studied. Extraction experiments were repeated for three initial metal concentration ratios with total initial metal concentration of 7 g L−1, each at 1, 5 and 10 M HCl. The extraction percentage, E, in terms of volume percentage of Alamine content, V
                     e, in solvent mixture, were determined for each metal. Optimal Alamine 336 contents were reported for a single stage extraction. The amine loading factor and separation factor values were also determined in terms of V
                     e. Alamine 336 was found to be a suitable extracting and separating agent for Co(II)–Ni(II) containing solutions at 5 M HCl.Recent studies indicate that Alamine 336 diluted with m-xylene exhibits promising extraction characteristics for Co (II) and Ni(II) in their strong acidic aqueous chloride solutions ( The best known solvent extraction studies involving Co(II) and Ni(II) species were conducted with organophosphorus extractants at weak and/or moderate acidic media ( It has been reported that ternary amines are more efficient extractants for Co(II) and Ni(II) when compared to secondary and primary ones ( The chemicals, CoCl The synthetic Co(II)–Ni(II) solutions were prepared using predetermined amounts Ni(II) chloride hexahydrate, Co(II) chloride hexahydrate, distilled and deionized water and fuming HCl in order to obtain solutions at three different acidic molarities; 1, 5 and 10 M. Three initial metal concentration ratios; 3, 1 and 1/3 were prepared for each molarity value. The total metal ion concentration in each synthetic solution was fixed to 7 g L The organic phase mixtures were prepared to obtain a series of volumetric percentage of Alamine 336 in m-xylene from 1% to 85% (1, 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10, 15, 25, 35, 50, 70, 85%). The organic mixture was balanced volumetrically: 10 mL of each Co(II)–Ni(II) solution was manually mixed by shaking for 3 min with 10 mL sample of each of the extracting mixtures. A glass cylindrical separating apparatus (50 mL) with glass stopper and straight and graduated stopcock was used. The extraction system was settled at different times in order to obtain two distinct and totally clear layers. The required settling times were given in The subscript 0 denotes the initial concentration of aqueous phase whereas non-indexed concentrations are equilibrium values of aqueous phase. For three different initial [Co (II)]/[Ni(II)] ratios of 3, 1 and 1/3 each at 1, 5 and 10 M HCl acidic molarities, the modeled and the experimental results are given in Where The interpretation of S-shaped curves in It has been assumed that, the complete extraction of Co(II) is due to the rapid formation of anionic CoCl It is to be noted that the increase of initial acid molarity of aqueous phase from 1 M to 10 M yields an increase of the level of maximum metal extracted from 30% to 50% for Ni(II). Increasing The separation factor of cobalt from nickel, SF Where The results are illustrated in Present equilibrium data on the extraction of coexisting Co(II) and Ni(II) species in synthetically prepared acidic aqueous solutions with different initial [Co(II)]/[Ni(II)] ratios reveal that Alamine 336 does not display efficient extractive performance at 1 M HCl. However, the percentage of Co(II) ions extracted into organic phase exceeds 90% with Increasing the acidic molarity of the aqueous solution significantly improves cobalt extraction. However much less improvement is observed for Ni(II). Almost 40% extraction of Ni(II) is achievable with 1 M HCl condition. An increased acidic molarity of 10 M HCl can only yield slightly less than 60% extraction of Ni(II). Comparison of the present data with the results of a study conducted with similar solutions, containing only Ni(II), shows that Alamine 336 performs much better in extracting Ni(II) from Ni(II)-only solutions compared to Co(II) SF In addition, the difference between each metal's amine loading factor values and their magnitude, especially at 5 and 10 M, indicate that Alamine 336 may constitute a suitable extracting agent as well as a separating medium for Co(II)–Ni(II) solutions. In order to regenerate the Alamine 336, the removal of metallic species from the exiting organic phase may be done by the use of a basic stripping agent such as an aqueous solution of Na