The Caspian Sea, being a closed basin, shows much higher rates of sea-level change (up to 340mm/yr) than the oceans. It experienced a full sea-level cycle with an amplitude of 3m between 1929 and 1995. Its coasts therefore present an attractive physical model to test predicted changes along oceanic coasts as a result of expected eustatic sea-level rise, and to validate sequence-stratigraphical interpretations of ancient sediments. Along the wave-dominated coasts with intermediate shore-face slopes in Dagestan, low onshore bars were formed during the 1929–1977 sea-level fall. They represent minor short lived (1–2years) transgressive oscillations within the major regressional trend. After the 1977 lowstand a prominent barrier–lagoon system was formed, which during the first phase of sea-level rise (1977–1988) encroached landwards about 18m each year by washover during storms (continuous retreat). Between 1988 and 1995, however, barrier size diminished, lagoons widened and deepened, apparently due to lack of coarse-grained sediment supply (discontinuous retreat). The 1995 highstand prevented the barriers from being overstepped altogether. Sea-level fall after 1995 again produced low bars without lagoons. The Caspian Sea barrier coast demonstrates that for the formation of barrier–lagoon complexes the combination of transgression and storms is essential. Barriers may show either continuous or discontinuous development at constant rate of sea-level rise and constant offshore slope, depending essentially on the availability of coarse-grained sediments. The rate of sea-level rise as a factor in barrier behaviour cannot be viewed independently from barrier dimensions, which in turn depend on wave base depth and maximum storm wave height. Relations between (para)sequence thickness, and frequency and amplitude of sea-level change in closed basins with an independent sea-level regime may differ markedly from those in basins influenced by eustasy.Our thinking about the architecture of sedimentary basins has been revolutionised by the emergence of seismic stratigraphy and sequence stratigraphy ( The impact of sea-level change on basin architecture is largely based on reconstructions, and not on real-time observations. There are at least two reasons for this. In the first place, present-day sea-level change proceeds so slowly that it is almost imperceptible in human time scales. Trying to elaborate the effect of 10–20 Another reason for the scarcity of observational data of how sequence build-up works in reality is that we experience a highstand at present. Recent lowstand deposits or ravinement surfaces can only be studied from sonar and seismic imagery and drilling data. The only modern sequence boundary-in-the-making we can study is situated in the present-day coastal areas, at least if one considers that sea-level could still rise about 60 Numerical simulation of the effect of sea-level change on sedimentary sequences is a promising approach, but most numerical models are still 1-D or 2-D and in any case must be validated by real-time data (e.g. The Caspian Sea offers a unique opportunity to study the impact of sea-level change on sedimentary sequences in real time, as modern sea-level changes take place here at a pace of 100 times as fast as along oceanic coasts. The potential of this approach has already been advocated by The Caspian Sea can be subdivided into three parts on the basis of its bathymetry ( Although the Caspian Sea is the largest inland water body on earth, it lacks some of the characteristics of the ocean. It has virtually no tides and its salinity is only a third of that of seawater (up to 13 The Caspian Sea has been a closed basin since the Messinian ( The cause of rapid Caspian sea-level changes is much debated, but most probably related to the fact that the Volga River which supplies 80% of the inflow of the Caspian Sea, has experienced strong variations in annual discharge ( The way in which Caspian coasts react to sea-level rise is strongly dependent upon initial submarine slope ( Coastal dynamics in response to rapidly changing Caspian sea levels have been monitored extensively along a 10 Large parts of the Dagestan coastal plain are situated between −20 and −25 After the major Derbent regression and lowstand between 3000 and 1000 B.P. down to at least −34 Coastal development during the sea-level cycle between the 1929 highstand (−26 Additional information has been obtained from barriers along the western side of Tyulen’ island in the northwestern Caspian Sea. This is an isolated uplifted block geologically unrelated to the Dagestan mainland coast ( The wave regime is strongly influenced by the bottom topography of the Turali coastal section. The offshore gradient is 0.2° and the isobaths are parallel to the coastline. Usually three consecutive submarine bars occur offshore at 2, 1.4 and 0.6 Storms with wind speeds over 20 The SE storms usually provoke an increase in water level (storm surge, Between 1880 and 1929 the level of the Caspian Sea was almost constant at −25 to −26 As sharply as sea level dropped in the 1930s, it rose after 1977 ( The measurements of the morphology of the barrier indicate that during rising sea level the entire barrier–lagoon system encroached landward at an average annual rate of 18 There are several reasons for these deviations. In the first place, while sea-level rise is necessary to provide continuing new accommodation space, sea-level rise in itself cannot move a barrier landwards. That is only accomplished by shoreface erosion and washover during storms, and the frequency and magnitude of storms is not necessarily correlated with the rate of sea-level rise. This is particularly well illustrated by the developments in 1989, when a short-lived sea-level fall of 4 In the second place, some deviations appear to be systematic. Two major periods can be distinguished in the data, before and after 1988 ( From 1988 onwards, however, a different type of development occurred. While sea-level rise went on at the same pace as in the beginning years, the lagoon now started to widen rapidly up to over 200 The change in behaviour can probably be attributed to the decreasing supply of coarse-grained detritus to the barrier and the comminution of shell debris by the surf. A further supply of fresh shell debris to the coast is impeded because sea-level rise increases the distance to their original habitat, and the habitats themselves become swamped with fine detritus transported seawards during storms ( A preliminary sediment budget for the Turali section between 1986 and 1994 calculated by The highest sea level was reached during the storm surge of 13 March 1995 which reached −25.71 A cross-section through the 1995 highstand barrier at Tyulen’ Island ( After the 1995 highstand sea-level started to fall from July 1995 onwards at a rate of 24.8±1.4  The offshore gradient of 0.2° in the Turali transect is within the range propitious for barrier formation in the Caspian ( Because of the absence of tides, only wave regime is a determining factor along the Turali shore. Caspian wind regime and storm frequency remained constant during the period of observation ( The predominance of shell debris in the 1929–1995 barriers shows that sediment supply is mainly from offshore, and is being transported to the coast normal to the shore line. In contrast to the Novocaspian gravel-rich barriers, longshore drift apparently plays a minor role. The restricted availability of coarse shell detritus by increasing distance to the source area and progressive comminution is a limiting factor in further landwards barrier encroachment. Apart from offshore slope, wave regime and sediment supply, sea level appears to be the dominant variable in Caspian morphodynamics. This will be discussed in more detail in the following paragraphs. The origin of barriers has been debated already for more than a century. Some authors maintain that barriers form from drowned offshore beach ridges, others by landward transport of sand during transgression (see reviews by There is little evidence that the barriers originate from submarine bars in the surf zone. Submarine bars are constantly reworked by the surf zone processes during both storms and fair weather conditions and move shorewards during sea-level rise without changes in geometry or depth of occurrence (cf. The 1929–1995 sea-level cycle in the Caspian Sea shows that barriers are formed in three different situations: (1) during sea-level fall small bars without lagoons were formed at small reversals in the general falling trend; (2) a prominent barrier–lagoon system was present during the whole period of sea-level rise between 1977 and 1995, encroaching landwards even during a temporary stillstand in sea-level rise in 1989; and (3) small, presumably ephemeral, bars are formed on Tyulen’ Island during sea-level fall since 1995. The contrast between the limited role of barriers during sea-level fall, and their prominence during sea-level rise suggests that transgression, even if lasting only 1 or 2 Storms of course occur both during transgression and regression. The small-scale bars that formed in 1929, 1941 and 1956 and those formed after 1995 on Tyulen’ Island probably also originated by single storm events during those years, and have only been preserved in the coastal plain because they became perched above the shoreline during the subsequent sea-level fall. The transgressional barriers, however, are much larger, as they are the cumulative result of multiple storms and they bulldoze their way further upshore as long as enough sediment is available. While there is general agreement on the transgressional nature of most barriers, this is less so on their further development at rising sea level. Two models exist, the Several factors are invoked to play a role in these alternatives. In the first place it is important whether, during sea-level rise, the lagoon is being filled by additional terrigenous sediment or not. If the lagoon is being constantly filled by fluvial sediment from the mainland, this may serve as a substrate on top of which the barrier system can retreat continuously. If no additional fill is deposited, however, the lagoon tends to get deeper and wider, and with other factors (wave regime, offshore slope, sediment supply) remaining constant, there will be a point in which the available sediment is not enough to let barrier growth keep pace with the rising levels of the sea and the lagoon. The barrier will drown, and a new barrier will develop much further landwards (discontinuous development). In the Caspian case there is no additional supply of sediment into the lagoon. Because of the dry climate, the terrigenous influx is minimal except from the larger rivers originating in the Caucasus, outside the area of study. The amount of organic matter in the lagoon, originating mainly from the decay of reed, is insignificant. The second variable is sediment supply. As long as abundant sediment is available, either by landward transport during storms or by longshore currents, barriers may even grow in height and volume irrespective of whether the lagoon is being filled or not. But if the sea level has risen so far that the main sources of coarse debris such as shell banks become out of reach below the wave base or disappear because of clast downsizing, the barrier system may become sediment-starved and disappear. Along the Dagestan coast, in the period 1978–1988 apparently enough sediment was available to show continuous development. After that period, sediment supply was insufficient to maintain continuous development, and the lagoon deepened and widened, although the ultimate overstep was prevented by the 1995 reversal of sea-level trend. But the factor most commonly invoked to explain continuous vs. discontinuous coastal retreat is the rate of sea-level rise ( Complexes of progradational barriers formed during periods of stable or slowly rising sea level along late Holocene oceanic coasts have been documented for many areas in the world (Netherlands: Of course a 3-m sea-level cycle across 1 A sequence-stratigraphical interpretation following There is no evidence for a 1977 lowstand wedge, and the 1995 highstand is not marked by a maximum flooding surface, but only by the top of the 1995 barrier underlain by slightly older lagoonal deposits. Here, presumably highstands and lowstands lasted so short a time that no significant sediment wedges could be generated. The same phenomenon is seen in the Volga Delta in the northern Caspian Sea ( In the Turali example, the sediment budget of the cycle as a whole is probably nearly neutral. The whole sea-level cycle would leave no trace at all in the sedimentary record apart from the 1995 barrier and a very thin sand sheet on the basinward side of the barrier ( Parasequences of this order of magnitude can be produced by autocyclic processes in sedimentary systems such as lobe switching, or by fifth-order eustatic sea-level changes, commonly thought to represent time intervals in the order of magnitude of 50,000 Closed basins with an independent sea-level regime like the Caspian Sea must have existed in many cases in collisional settings, especially during the Paleozoic closure of the Iapetus Ocean and the Mesozoic-Tertiary closure of Tethys as the Caspian Sea itself. It is to be expected that in such basins the relation between (para)sequence thickness and the frequency and amplitude of sea-level changes is vastly different from that in oceanic basins.  Single barriers can form during regressions as a result of temporary trend reversals and/or severe storms, but larger barrier–lagoon complexes are formed only during transgressions. The rate of sea-level rise as a factor in barrier behaviour cannot be viewed independently from barrier dimensions, which in turn depend on wave base depth and maximum storm wave height. Barrier complexes in closed basins with shallow wave base and rapid sea-level oscillations may diverge strongly in size, architecture and behaviour from barriers affected by eustasy along oceanic coasts. Barriers may show either continuous or discontinuous development at constant rate of sea-level rise and constant offshore slope, in dependence only on the availability of coarse-grained sediment. Highstands do not necessarily lead to progradational barrier or delta sequences, and lowstands do not necessarily lead to lowstand wedges. Closed basins with an independent sea-level regime may show other relations between (para)sequence thickness and frequency and amplitude of sea-level change than basins influenced by eustasy. This research was funded by INTAS project 94-3382 and NWO projects 047.003.010.00.95 and 047.011.000.0. Thanks are due to Mr Gennadiy V. Rusakov of the Caspian Marine Research Centre, Astrakhan, Mr Vagab Musaev of Dagestanberegozashchita and his staff, Makhachkala, Dagestan, to Mr Pyotr Postavik of Hydromet Service of Makhachkala, and to the crews of the research vessels Metan and Tantal for field support. The paper has greatly benefitted from the useful comments of the reviewers Donald L. Forbes and Peter S. Roy. Dr C.R. Geel is thanked for his help in designing the figures.