Two-dimensional (2D) measurements of the cross-sections of polished mineral samples suffer from an overestimation of the degree of liberation known as stereological bias. Stereological bias is believed to be affected by the particle texture, i.e., the stereological bias of a simple locking particle is high, while the bias of a particle with a complex texture is negligible. However, scant work has been performed on the development of a quantitative and versatile modeling of stereological bias. We performed a series of numerical simulations: modeling particle assembly using the discrete element method; modeling the binary texture of particles by imposing phase patterns to the particles; systematical generation of 8608 types of phase patterns; liberation assessments in 2D and in three-dimension (3D) based on the error-free geometrical calculation; and stereological bias assessment by a comparison between liberations in 2D and 3D. Through these simulations, the correlation between the stereological biases of the phases and particle texture was investigated. Finally, the particle texture complexity was assessed using the fractal dimension of image intensity, and stereological bias for the matrix phase was successfully correlated with the fractal dimension and area fraction of the core phase. Fractal dimension and area fraction values are easily obtained by 2D measurements and subsequent image analysis. These results may lead to the establishment of a versatile stereological correction model that depends only on measurable 2D parameters.The primary purpose of comminution in mineral processing is to liberate valuable minerals from gangue with the coarsest particle size possible. Coarse particles reduce the cost and energy of comminution by avoiding overgrinding. An accurate assessment of liberation is important to ensure the feedback of correct information and optimize the overall mineral processing process. To evaluate the degree of liberation linear and area measurements of polished samples have been performed using optical microscopes Several correction methods have been proposed to counter stereological bias. One such method involves the following process: (1) estimating the actual degree of liberation in three dimensions (3D) by dividing the degree of liberation obtained via 2D measurements by an empirical coefficient called the “locking factor” The stereological bias of the degree of liberation depends on the particle texture Numerical simulations is an effective approach for establishing a versatile stereological correction model, because it is suitable for a parametric study. A parametric study would lead to an all-encompassing understanding of various factors affecting stereological bias. We conducted numerical simulations that combine particle packing simulation using the discrete element method (DEM) Herein, a series of numerical simulations using DEM was performed to investigate the influence of particle’s texture complexity on stereological bias. First, particles with certain size distributions were generated and packed in a cell using DEM. Second, 8608 types of 3D particle textures were systematically generated. Third, serial cross-sectional analysis of particle assemblies was performed. Fourth, degrees of liberations in 2D and 3D were obtained using a geometrical calculation; in principle, a geometrical calculation is free from analytical error, and stereological bias was calculated by comparing 2D and 3D calculations. Based on these calculations, a correlation was found to exist between the fraction of overestimated liberation by 2D measurements and the fractal dimension and area fraction of a phase domain; the fractal dimension and area fraction were obtained by cross-sectional 2D measurements and subsequent image analysis. Based on this finding, we developed a versatile stereological correction model that depends only on measurable 2D parameters. This study proposed the model, and the validation of the model has been reserved for future study. This study investigated spherical binary particles composed of the core phase “phase To ensure the randomness of the internal particle structure, the particles’ textures were modeled using the following steps.  The present study models the non-preferential breakage of binary materials composed of a core phase (phase On the other hand, stereological bias for the liberation of phase The liberation of a matrix phase, such as phase Serial cross-sectional data was obtained in the vertical direction ( For statistical analysis, the following parameters are defined. In addition, we define new indicators for the degree of liberation overestimation by 2D measurements derived from stereological bias. The difference between the degrees of apparent liberations obtained by 2D and 3D measurements for phase According to Eqs. As shown in To investigate the effect of phase   We modeled poly-dispersed phase    All indices of Eqs.  In the case of large In the case of small As In the case of small   Although previous reports have shown that the amount of stereological bias is affected by the complexity of the particle texture Computational procedure for obtaining For a cross-section of a sample, squares of Each square was divided into For small squares included in the particle cross-section (shaded area in Fifty cases of  When the particle texture complexity was relatively small ( When the particle texture complexity was medium ( When the particle texture complexity was relatively large (  It was found that the stereological bias of the matrix phase (phase A numerical simulation was performed to investigate the influence of the particle texture on stereological bias. Particles with three types of size dispersions were packed into a cell. Spherical elements “phase Serial (300) cross-sectional images were obtained, statistically analyzed, and the results of the 2D measurements were compared with the 3D original information. Various cases of particle textures with 2764 types of mono-sized phase The following results were obtained. Particles with various types of textures were generated in a random manner. The degree of apparent liberation in 2D measurements overestimated degree of liberation in 3D. Even the minimum value for the degree of apparent liberation of 300 cross-sections overestimated the degree of liberation in 3D under the present analytical conditions. The fraction of overestimated liberation of phase The fractal dimension of image-intensity surface area was applied for the quantitative assessment of particle texture complexity. The new result of this study is that the fraction of overestimated liberation of phase In future studies, we will validate the proposed model and evaluate the effects of particle shape, texture pattern, and statistical dispersion depending on the number of measured particles. We note that these results were obtained with the assumptions of equal and isotropic distribution of phase