Sodium was removed from alumina-extracted coal fly ash (CFA) by using diluted NaOH solution. The effects of reaction temperature, reaction time, and NaOH concentration on sodium removal were studied. Result shows that the sodium (Na2O) content of the alumina-extracted CFA was decreased from 20wt.% to 0.6wt.% under optimal conditions: temperature of 185°C, NaOH concentration of 50g/L, residence time of 2h, and liquid-to-solid ratio of 40 for water washing. The possible mechanism of sodium removal was also investigated using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction analysis, and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. The results indicated that NaCaHSiO4 in the residue was decomposed by NaOH to form NaSiO3 and Ca(OH)2, and then converted into tobermorite [Ca5Si6O16(OH)2·nH2O] and NaOH. The sodium obtained through the reaction in the residue was mainly combined with the silanol group and then washed with water.Coal fly ash (CFA) refers to the fine particles collected from coal-fired power plants, and has been successfully used for many years in a wide range of applications, including building material production, concrete pavement construction, soil stabilization, and mine reclamation ( Na Based on previous studies, a simple method to decrease Na CFA was obtained from power plants in Inner Mongolia, China, and the alumina-extracted fly ash used in experiments was produced from the CFA by the mixed-alkaline method, which is presented in our previous work ( The effects of the reaction temperature and concentration of NaOH on Na Slag was mixed with NaOH solution with a liquid-to-solid ratio of 10 in a homogeneous reactor with an inner nickel bomb, and then heated to setting temperature. The stirring speed was set to 42  The XRD patterns at various reaction times at 185  The overall chemical reaction that occurred during the removal of Na NaCaHSiO After the hydrothermal process, 2.2 To understand the relative mechanism of sodium removal from water wash, the status of sodium in residues was investigated via NMR and FTIR. Given that the silanol group may react with the NaOH solution, as shown in Eq. Influencing factors for removing sodium from the alumina-extracted slag were systematically studied. The optimal reaction conditions for removing Na The mechanism of sodium removal from the alumina-extracted slag was also investigated. Sodium mainly exists in the form of NaCaHSiO The authors acknowledge financial support from the