Reactive solute transport models have been broadly used over the last years to evaluate the durability of cementitious materials because they provide a mechanistic approach to cope with the complex diffusion–reaction phenomena involved in cement and concrete degradation processes. However, most of the numerical models published in the scientific literature use Fick’s law as the constitutive equation for the diffusive transport of dissolved ions, neglecting the electrochemical constraints imposed by the various ionic fluxes, which conspire against the local electroneutrality of the system.
                  In this work, the relevance of electrochemical diffusion and its impact on the nonlinear coupled phenomena concerned by cement degradation were evaluated, on the basis of its influence on the simulation of deterioration of concrete exposed to weak sulfate solutions.
                  Results obtained show that diffusive approaches based on Fick’s law may not be accurate enough for modeling the degradation of cementitious materials since, for the case considered, when ignored, electrochemical interactions in the diffusion process may lead to the inability of reactive transport models to reproduce key phenomena such as gypsum precipitation near the exposed cement surface.Over the last years, the study of concrete degradation has increasingly gathered the interest of the scientific community, in a certain measure due to the more stringent requirements of durability which are associated with the development of new materials (e.g., low-pH cements, sulfate-resisting cements, etc.) and relevant civil structures, such as nuclear waste repositories. In that context, the use of reactive transport models, capable of simulating the behavior of concrete under diverse boundary conditions has transcended the role of a mere complement of experimental studies and has become of paramount relevance in itself. Proof of this can be found in Gradually, modelers have arrived to the realization that the problem cannot be formulated entirely in terms of molecular diffusion, for then the influence of forces arising from the generation of an electrical potential due to the movement of charged particles is neglected. As a consequence of the building up of an electrical potential, ions tend to move at different speeds from what could be expected on account of concentration gradients taken in isolation. Such divergences might or might not be of importance and thus the problem acquires shades of a practical nature, which can be reduced essentially to the following terms: Are actual results so different to justify the use of more demanding, complex, models? Is it worth the effort they entail when, as pointed out in The objective of this paper is to contribute to this discussion by analyzing a problem which was already published in the scientific literature, although focused from an altogether different standpoint. Indeed, the paper which is being referred to The contact of two different kinds of water is crucial for the process of degradation to unfold as it alters the reigning equilibrium of the concrete pore solution and gives rise to the transport of aqueous species at expense of the gradient of concentration between them. The application of the mass conservation equation for a given ionic species diffusing in the liquid phase yields: As is well known, Fick’s law applies when dealing with molecular diffusion, providing the exact solution of the problem. The conceptual model that Fick’s law entails is, however, not entirely reliable when the movement of ionic species is involved, for it neglects the particular features of ionic diffusion mechanisms in liquids. Indeed, unlike neutral molecules, ions are electrically charged particles and they are subjected to various electrical forces. The charged nature of the ionic particles is at the origin of various interactions between the drifting particles (ion/ion and ion/solvent interactions). These so-called activity effects become important as the concentration of the various ions in solution increase. The electrical charge of the particles may also contribute to generate specific ion/solid interactions. Despite the relative importance of activity effects and ion/solid interaction phenomena, the most relevant feature which distinguishes ion diffusion from molecular diffusion involves the electrical coupling of the various ionic fluxes. Indeed, during the diffusion process, the different ionic species tend to drift at divergent speeds (in response to their respective concentration gradients and diffusion coefficients in the medium where the movement takes place) thus inducing electrical unbalances which conspire against the local electroneutrality of the system. Nevertheless, any local excess charge transferred by the ions movement generates an electrical field (referred to as diffusion potential) which tends to restore the electroneutrality by harmonically altering the diffusion rate of all the species involved. Diffusion transport of ionic species is therefore constrained by the electroneutrality requirement, which should hold at any point of the liquid phase. Electroneutrality is evaluated by lumping the electric contribution of all the species present in solution. This requirement is taken into account by the Poisson–Nernst–Planck equations, according to which The calculation of the chemical activity coefficient in Eq. Thus, two different approaches were outlined, namely, those provided by Fick’s and the Poisson–Nernst–Planck laws. One of the obvious advantages of Fick’s law lies on its extremely simple mathematical formulation, which has favored its use in a wide range of practical problems. In fact, Fick’s law provides accurate results for diffusive transport problems of neutral species. Its applicability could, nevertheless, be subjected to question when dealing with multi-solute diffusion problems, for the effects of electrical gradients might no longer be negligible. Both the Poisson–Nernst–Planck equations and Fick’s law will be tested in the next section in relation to the water–concrete interaction problem which was previously set up. The subject matter of the simulation is the case of a concrete slab resting on a sulfate contaminated soil. The scheme of the experiment under simulation is seen in On the other hand, the interstitial solution contained in the porous structure of the cement paste is highly charged with alkaline Na It is worth pointing out here that, since the original intention of the cited research The scope of the present work is, nonetheless, narrower, as it is focused only on a single case, where the saturated hardened paste is made of CSA type 50 cement, with a water-to-cement ratio of 0.65, and the concentration of sodium sulfate in the boundary water is fixed at 10 Calcite, gypsum, quartz and amorphous silicon, although initially absent, were also taken into account in case precipitation could take place. As shown in As reported in In the following, advantage will be taken of the capability of CrunchFlow of simulating transport by either molecular or ionic diffusion, i.e., by either Fick’s law or the Poisson–Nernst–Planck equations, respectively. As said above, the application of the latter requires the determination of the specific diffusion coefficient of each ionic species. These were provided by means of migration tests carried out by Samson et al. Results are reproduced from A total of 31 homogeneous hydrogeochemical reactions and 8 precipitation/dissolution mineral processes were considered in the modeling and are listed in A numerical simulation was carried out over a period of 20 Numerical simulations were then carried out over a period of 2500 Before proceeding to set forth in further detail the subject matter of this work, it is worth corroborating whether or not the results obtained with CrunchFlow match those reported in  On the other hand, CrunchFlow assumes that the variation of the effective diffusion coefficients in the porous medium as a function of the capillary porosity is reasonably well approached by Another source of disagreement lies in the formulation of the activity coefficients chosen in The mentioned differences notwithstanding, in view of the output of CrunchFlow as shown in The evolution of the concentration of aqueous species in the pore solution, as simulated by CrunchFlow, is shown in The statement made by Marchand et al. The precipitation of ettringite is mostly explained by the presence of aluminum in excess in the pore solution, as a result of the dissolution of hydrogarnet. Yet, once all the hydrogarnet is dissolved, the source of aluminum vanishes, which impedes the further precipitation of ettringite. On the other hand, the dissolution of portlandite and decalcification of C–S–H, for which there is also experimental evidence, induces the rise of concentration of calcium. The rise of concentration of calcium in the interstitial solution, in conjunction with that of sulfate, causes the saturation index to turn critical. A second series of simulations was performed with CrunchFlow, this time employing Fick’s law to describe diffusion phenomena. Accordingly, all species were assumed to have the same diffusion coefficient. That unique diffusion coefficient was equal to the average of the specific diffusion coefficients assigned to each of them when using the Poisson–Nernst–Planck equations.  The mineral evolution of the solid phase is shown in As can be observed, results computed by assuming that ionic diffusion can be described by Fick’s law ( This point is more explicitly illustrated in Then, operating and rearranging, the following formula is obtained: Simulations made contemplating the Poisson–Nernst–Planck equations, on the other hand, result in a global shift towards saturation. At any time step considered, points exist that are lying on the equilibrium curve, which is in correspondence with the actual precipitation of gypsum shown in A numerical simulation of the deterioration of concrete exposed to a weak sulfate solution was carried out and analyzed under the framework of two different formulations for the diffusive ionic transport in the aqueous phase, namely Fick’s law and the Poisson–Nernst–Planck equations. It was found that, in spite of some minor divergences (presumably arising from both the different constitutive relationships porosity–diffusivity and the definition of the activity coefficients used in either the original paper or the present work), the results obtained in this work are coherent and entirely comparable with those reported previously, thus providing support and confidence on both independent models. The model set-up was used to compare the performance of the two theoretical conceptualizations of diffusion transport. On comparing the performance of Fick’s law and the Poisson–Nernst–Planck equations, results show that the former fails to reproduce the precipitation of a thin layer of gypsum close to the exposed surface of concrete. The reasons behind this anomaly lie in the fact that Fick’s law tends to underestimate the actual concentration of calcium and sulfate in the pore solution (which, on the other hand, is better predicted by the Poisson–Nernst–Planck equations), thus preventing it from reaching the saturation threshold with respect to gypsum. Given that the precipitation of gypsum was corroborated by experimental studies, the preceding analysis raises the question as to which extent purely diffusive approaches are appropriate in modeling transport processes of electrically charged species in porous media in general and in cement-based materials in particular. As was proved for the case analyzed, neglecting electrochemical interactions in the diffusion process may lead to the inability of the reactive transport models to reproduce such key phenomena as gypsum precipitation for sulfate attack scenarios, because of which it can be concluded that purely diffusive approaches based on Fick’s law may not be accurate enough for modeling the degradation of cementitious materials. To that aim, in light of the results obtained, the Poisson–Nernst–Planck equations may provide a more suitable alternative framework. This work has been carried out with the financial support of the Swedish Nuclear Fuel and Waste Management Company (SKB). The authors are particularly indebted to Dr. Javier Samper and Dr. Ignasi Puigdomenech for their encouragement and suggestions. Thanks are also given to the two anonymous reviewers of this paper, whose pertinent comments have significantly contributed to improve the original manuscript.