Office waste paper constitutes a high-quality raw material for paper recycling industries; however, due to difficulties in the deinking process its exploitation is rather limited. The aim of the present study is the investigation of the impact of toner composition, printing processes and pulping conditions on the deinking of office waste paper through the flotation process. Deinking of papers printed by 21 different copiers and laser printers was tested under mild-conditions. It was attested that both the toner and the printing machine play an important role in the deinkability. The deinking efficiency varied significantly across different cases, spanning from low values (<100 mm2 specks surface per m2 deinked paper surface) to high values (>1,000 mm2 specks surface per m2 recycled paper surface). It was proved that the presence of styrene-acrylate copolymers and iron oxides in the toner resulted in reduced deinkability. In addition, slow printing speed had also a negative impact on the deinking efficiency. According to the research conducted, the removal of particles larger than 150 μm is a decisive factor in the deinking process. It was also demonstrated that the deinkability of office waste paper highly depends on the pulping conditions i.e. temperature, time and consistency. In particular, the highest deinkability was recorded when the three factors had simultaneously the highest values. Under these conditions, approximately 98% decrease in the total specks surface was achieved by flotation. The most important factor was the repulping consistency and the less important the temperature. More specifically, by increasing only the temperature, a reduction equal to 95.4% of specks surface was achieved, while by increasing only the consistency, 96.4% reduction of specks surface was achieved after the flotation process. In general, the intensity of repulping conditions resulted in decreasing toners’ specks size and therefore in increased deinking efficiency.Numerous studies had indicated the difficulty in deinking of office waste paper (OWP) which is basically attributed to the difficulty in deinking papers that were printed by laser printers or reproduced at photocopiers [ Based on several studies the deinking efficiency of OWP seems to be affected by the operating characteristics of printer or photocopier, the composition of the toner and the characteristics of the substrate for example its coating [ Most inks in powder form (toners) that are used in copiers and laser printers have thermoplastic polymers as carriers, mostly styrene-acrylate copolymers, acrylate polymers, polyesters or styrene-butadiene copolymers. Usually, amorphous carbon and iron oxides are also added as pigments. Toner particles’ diameter is approximately 20 μm (or even smaller than 10 μm in high resolution machines) while their density is between 1 to 1.5 g/cm Regarding the impact of the toner composition on the deinking efficiency, it has been reported that during the repulping process the styrene-acrylate toners (SATs) containing iron oxides, generate larger particles than iron-oxide-free toners [ Regarding the impact of the conditions of the printing process on the deinking efficiency, it was stated that the toner melting temperature [ Regarding the impact of the substrate type on the deinking efficiency, it was proved that the coated papers present improved deinkability performance [ Regarding the impact of the deinking conditions on the deinking efficiency, it was reported that increasing the repulping temperature improves the toner removal due to toner particle size reduction to the desired size range. This phenomenon is related to the glass transition temperature of toners and also to the softening of toner particles at increased temperatures [ Aiming to enhance the deinking efficiency of OWP, numerous deinking methods have been tested. In this context, ultrasound treatment had given satisfying results [ Although there are several studies regarding OWP deinking, the characteristics of OWP that affect the deinking process through flotation are not clear yet. Most of those studies are focused on how to enhance the deinkability of mixed-OWP; thus, the variations of different types of office waste paper in deinkability cannot be investigated. In addition, although there are few studies focusing on the impact of toner composition and printing processes on the deinking of OWP, they only study a limited number of copiers and laser printers. The present study is mainly focused on covering those gaps by investigating in depth the impact of both the characteristics of printing machines and of the xerographic inks on the deinking of OWP. For this purpose, the deinking efficiency of papers printed by 21 machines (copiers and laser printers) of various manufacturers and of different characteristics were studied. To the best of our knowledge, the present study is the only focusing on such a large number of different printing machines with the goal to distinguish office paper based on their deinking potential and further support the use of specific toners and of printing conditions which will facilitate the pulp and paper industry without the addition of chemicals or energy. Moreover, it was in the scope of this study to investigate the effect of repulping conditions on the deinking efficiency through flotation. In this context the impact of temperature, consistency and the repulping time on the deinkability of printed paper reproduced in a photocopier. In the following sections the methodology that was applied as well as the results and main conclusions are presented. In the following sections, the methods that were applied for the assessment of the impact of the type of toner, of the type of laser printer or photocopier and of the repulping conditions on the deinking process are briefly presented. The methodology initiated with the preparation of the OWP samples that were used for the execution of the subsequent processes i.e. the implementation of the impregnation process; the conduction of the repulping process; the execution of flotation; the papermaking procedure; and finally, the evaluation of paper optical properties. The aforementioned methodology has been thoroughly analysed in a previous study [ The procedure started with the preparation of the OWP samples. In order to enhance the quality of results, a ‘standard’ text was printed on A4 size sheets. All sheets were printed on white A4 and 80 g/m The detailed xerographic inks composition is included in the respective MSDSs. The second step involved the impregnation of the OWP samples for 10 min at 40 °C to a solution of an anionic surfactant Nalco 74090 (0.3% on dry fibre mass basis) diluted in hot tap water in order to cause swelling of fibres and as a consequence to enhance the pulping process [ After completion of the impregnation process, repulping of the OWP slurry was implemented. Repulping process aimed at the detachment and separation of ink from fibres; and was conducted in a Maelstrom laboratory pulper. More particularly, the slurry was diluted with warm tap (40 °C) water to 4.5% w/w stock concentration and added to the laboratory pulper, where it was pulped for 20 min under constant temperature [ Flotation was applied after the repulping. The mixture was transferred to the Induced Air Flotation (IAF) unit and its concentration was adjusted to 0.8% w/w. The temperature of the suspension was approximately 40 °C. The residence time of the suspension in the flotation cell was about 2.6 min and the air flow 2.5 dm The handsheets were formed using a Lorentzen & Wettre (Sweden) Sheet Former model SCA and a Laboratory Sheet Press according to SCAN-C 26–76 and SCAN-C M5-76 methods. The diameter of every handsheet was 16 cm. The handsheets were air dried for 24 h at room temperature [ Finally, evaluation of paper quality was performed based on results from measurements of paper optical properties (brightness and speck content), ash content as well as Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) analysis. In particular, brightness was measured with the Spectro Color LMG 183 colorimeter (Dr. Bruno Lange GmboH & Co. KG). Speck content determination was performed by a computer equipped with a scanner (hp scanjet 2400) and the appropriate software program Dot Counter 4.0 (Dekroniks NV) [ The paper pulp that was used in this case originated from OWP printed at C4 copier. Selection of C4 copier was done on purposed as OWP originated from this copier revealed very low deinkability. The experimental procedure that was followed is similar to the one described in Section  For example, for the cases of L5, L9, C1 and C3, the total surface of specks of the papers formed after the flotation was smaller than 100 mm Brightness measurement was used as an indication of handsheets’ whiteness. Based on the measurements of brightness no significant differences were observed among the 21 case studies. Brightness values of the deinked papers varied from 87 to 93.5% approximately. In the case of the blank tests (unprinted paper) the respective value was 94%, which further supports the fact that deinked papers present a high level of brightness. In Figs. Based on It was observed that the size and the geometrical characteristics of the ink particles that are formed during repulping had a significant impact on deinkability. Based on the analysis above, it was proved that the lowest deinkability (total specks surface larger than 1,000 mm These findings are in line with those derived by other relevant studies [ In order to further justify the impact of various parameters on the deinking efficiency, images were taken using Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). In The creation of such toners’ aggregates is mainly related to the printing process. During printing by copiers, toner particles are attached on the paper with the application of temperature (200  Figs. The total surface as well as the total number of specks varies depending on the different operating repulping conditions. For instance, the total specks surface in the case of the highest deinkability (recorded for ΘXΠ conditions) was 11 times lower than the case of the smallest deinkability (recorded for θχπ conditions). In more detail, when the three factors had ‘low’ values (θχπ), the measured specks surface of the paper was 2,295 mm The worst results were obtained in the case θχπ, while the best results were recorded for the case ΘXΠ. As it can be observed, increasing pulping consistency had the greatest impact in the deinking efficiency, while the combination of increasing repulping time and consistency led to the best result among the cases ΘXπ, ΘχΠ, θXΠ. It is worth saying that an efficient deinking is the one that achieves ink removal greater than 99% [ Temperature increase from 40 to 60 °C during repulping resulted in the reduction of the specks surface by 95.4% after the flotation process. Doubling the duration time of repulping from 20 min to 40 min, led to 93.2% reduction of the specks surface. Finally, the increase of the pulping consistency from 4.5 to 7.5% led to the best results, reducing the specks surface to 743 mm  Considering the above, it was concluded that the increase of the factors’ values during flotation, caused a decrease in the size of the large particles (>350 μm), and thus facilitating their removal through the flotation process. In the framework of this study, it was demonstrated that the deinkability of office waste paper significantly depends on the toner composition and type of printing machine. In particular, after studying 21 different laser printers and copiers, large variations on total specks surface in the final deinked papers were observed ranging from less than 100 mm It was also demonstrated that the deinkability of office waste paper highly depends on the pulping conditions i.e. temperature, time and consistency. In particular, increasing the values of those factors it was observed that the specks surface of the produced deinked handsheet was reduced. The highest deinkability was recorded when the three factors had simultaneously the highest values i.e. temperature 60 °C, duration of repulping 40 min and pulping consistency 7.5%. Under these conditions, approximately 98% decrease in the total specks surface was achieved by flotation. On the contrary, poor deinkability was recorded when the three factors had simultaneously the lowest values i.e. temperature 40 °C, duration of repulping 20 min and pulping consistency 4.5%. Under these conditions, 91% decrease in the total specks surface was achieved by flotation. The most significant impact on the increase of the deinking efficiency had the increase of the repulping consistency. It was also observed that increasing the values of those factors leads to break down of larger particles to smaller ones resulting in improved flotation efficiency. It must be mentioned that the experiments related to the investigation of the impact of repulping conditions to the deinking efficiency were conducted on OWP initially showing very low deinking potential. Based on the above findings, the collaboration of paper recycling industries with industries manufacturing laser printers, copiers or toner inks could eliminate the problem of deinking office waste paper and thus achieving significant economic and environmental benefits.