The results presented in this paper show that the abrasion resistance of WC–Co alloys can be increased by increasing the WC grain size while keeping the hardness constant, within a wide range of compositions and grain sizes. The cobalt content must be decreased in order to keep the hardness constant when increasing grain size, but the results show that the mean free path in cobalt (λ) increases with increasing grain size (d) at constant hardness, although the ratio λ/d decreases. The increase in mean free path can explain the increase in toughness at constant hardness and larger grain size observed in a wide range of alloys, while the decrease in λ/d ratio can explain the increase in abrasion resistance.It is common practice, in mining and wear resistance applications, to replace WC–Co grades of insufficient abrasion resistance with grades of higher hardness, since it is known that abrasion resistance tends to increase with increasing hardness e.g. It has been observed It has also been observed that the abrasion resistance of WC–Co can be increased by keeping the hardness constant and increasing the WC grain size A wide range of WC–Co grades have been tested for abrasion in accordance with the ASTM Standard B 611-85 The data on abrasion resistance given in hardness of WC–Co in kgf/mm mean free path in Co in mm mean WC grain size in mm Details on the experiments and calculations leading to As mentioned above, This method to increase the abrasion resistance of WC–Co would be an improvement on the present practice of increasing the hardness, only if it does not lead to a decrease in toughness. Since the toughness of WC–Co has been shown to increase monotonically with increasing mean free path in cobalt when measured by one and the same technique (different techniques have been shown to give different results The changes in mean free path can be determined by re-writing Eq. Therefore, despite the decrease in cobalt content required to keep the hardness constant when increasing WC grain size, the mean free path increases and this can explain the increase in toughness observed in a wide range of WC–Co grades when the WC grain size is increased at constant hardness It must be noted that although the mean free path increases when the grain size increases (at constant hardness), the When increasing the abrasion resistance of WC–Co by keeping the hardness constant, once the larger WC grain size has been selected it is necessary to calculate the cobalt content which would keep the hardness constant. This can be done by applying the following formula, obtained by solving Eq. This equation allows to calculate the cobalt content required when  The present work shows that the abrasion resistance of WC–Co of a wide range compositions and grain sizes can be increased by keeping the hardness constant while increasing the WC grain size and decreasing the cobalt content. The increase in abrasion resistance is explained by a decrease in the This work shows also that when the WC grain size is increased at constant hardness the mean free path increases despite the decrease in cobalt content. This explains the increase in toughness observed in a wide range of WC–Co alloys In conclusion, within a wide range of compositions and grain sizes it is possible to increase both the abrasion resistance and the toughness of WC–Co by keeping the hardness constant and increasing the WC grain size. The range of grades where this is possible does not include the hardest alloys, where mass loss is not controlled by cobalt removal but by other mechanisms, such as microfracture. The authors wish to acknowledge the support of the National Research Foundation and the Department of Trade and Industry (as THRIP). They are also grateful to Mr. D.G.F. O’Quigley, for producing the samples and generating the data listed in