Adsorption of Pb(II) ions from aqueous solution onto a low cost adsorbent—the Eupatorium adenophorum spreng has been investigated to evaluate the effects of initial lead ion concentration, contact time, pH and temperature on the removal of Pb(II) systematically. The optimal pH value for Pb(II) adsorption onto the E. adenophorum spreng was found to be 5.0. Thermodynamic parameters such as standard Gibbs free energy (ΔG°), standard enthalpy (ΔH°), and standard entropy (ΔS°) were evaluated by applying the van’t Hoff equation, which describes the dependence of equilibrium constant on temperature. The thermodynamics of Pb(II) adsorption onto the E. adenophorum spreng indicated that the adsorption was spontaneous and endothermic. Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms were used to analyze the equilibrium data at different temperatures and the equilibrium data were found to fit Freundlich isotherm equation better than Langmuir isotherm. The adsorption was analyzed using pseudo-second-order kinetic models.Many industries such as electroplating, metal-processing, paint, plastics alloy, batteries, ammunition and the ceramic glass industries and so on generate large quantities of wastewater containing various types and concentration of heavy metals. Although many heavy metals are necessary in small amounts for the normal development of the biological cycles, most of them become toxic at high concentrations. The heavy metal pollution is of greatest concern among the kinds of environmental pollution because of heavy metals’ high toxicity and mobility. It is well documented that lead is one of contaminants of industrial wastewaters and its pollution exists in the wastewater of many industries ( In wastewater treatment technology, various techniques have been used for lead ions removal. An effective method for lead ions removal is chemical precipitation with lime or alkali hydroxide. However, disposal of large quantities of sludge is difficult. The commonly traditional methods used for removal of heavy metal ions from aqueous solutions include ion exchange, electro-flotation, reverse osmosis, membrane filtration, electrochemical treatment, and evaporative recovery. These conventional techniques are costly and having significant disadvantages such as generation of metal-bearing sludge or wastes, incomplete metal removal, the disposal of secondary waste. For these reasons, there is a need for developing economic and eco-friendly methods for waste minimization and fine-tuning of the wastewater (  To our knowledge, compared with other adsorbents no information exists on the use of crofton weed, as an adsorbent for the removal of Pb(II) ions and also needs to research. For this purpose, in the present study, adsorption of Pb(II) ions onto the crofton weed was investigated systematically with the variation in the parameters of pH, dosage, contact time, the initial concentration of adsorbate, and temperature. Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms were used to analyze the equilibrium data at different temperatures. The kinetics of Pb(II) adsorption system has been studied based on the assumption of a pseudo-second order law. All chemicals used were of analytical reagent grade; anhydrous lead nitrate (Acros, Corp) was used without any further purification. Stock lead solution was prepared using anhydrous lead nitrate dissolved in distilled water. Working standards were prepared by progressive dilution of stock lead solution using deionized water.  The concentration of lead ions was determined by AAS method. The difference in concentrations was taken as the amount of lead adsorbed by the Batch adsorption experiments were conducted at desired pH value, contact time and adsorbent dosage level using necessary adsorbents in a 150 The prediction of kinetics is necessary for the design of sorption systems. The kinetic parameter, which is helpful for the prediction of adsorption rate, gives important information for designing and modeling the processes. Thus, the effects of initial concentration, contact time, and adsorbent dosage were analyzed from the kinetic point of view. Throughout the study, the effects of initial lead ion concentrations (10–50 Effects of contact time on the removal of lead ions were illustrated in The results demonstrated that at a fixed adsorbent dosage, the amount adsorbed increased with increasing concentration of solution, but the percentage of adsorption decreased. At lower concentrations, the ratio of number of metal ions to the available adsorption sites is low and subsequently the fractional adsorption becomes independent of initial concentration. At higher concentrations, however, the available sites of adsorption become fewer and subsequently the removal of metals depends on the initial concentrations. Hence, the removal of lead depends on the initial lead ion concentrations and decreases with increase in initial lead ion concentration. Effects of dosage on the removal of lead ions were presented in The pH of the aqueous solution is an important controlling parameter in the adsorption process. Earlier studies have shown that the most critical parameter in the treatment of heavy metal by adsorbents is the initial pH of the adsorption medium. Since the pH of aqueous solutions influences the solution chemistry of the heavy metals (i.e. hydrolysis, complexation, redox reactions, and precipitation), and the solution chemistry of the heavy metals also strongly influences the speciation and the adsorption availability of the heavy metals, the binding of metal ions by surface functional groups is strongly pH dependent ( The temperature is an important parameter in the context of adsorption on solid phase and has two major effects on the adsorption process. Increasing the temperature is known to increase the rate of diffusion of the adsorbate molecules across the external boundary layer and in the internal pores of the adsorbent particle, owing to decrease in the viscosity of the solution. In addition, changing temperature will change the equilibrium capacity of the adsorbent for a particular adsorbate ( A study of the temperature dependence of adsorption reactions gave valuable knowledge about the enthalpy and entropy changes during adsorption. The standard Gibbs free energy change (Δ The plot of ln Adsorption isotherm is a functional expression that correlates the amount of solute adsorbed per unit weight of the adsorbent and the concentration of an adsorbate in bulk solution at a given temperature under equilibrium conditions. It is important to establish the most appropriate correlations for the batch equilibrium data using empirical or theoretical equations as it plays a functional role in predictive modeling procedures for analysis and design of adsorption systems. The adsorption isotherms are one of the most useful data to understand the mechanism of the adsorption and the characteristics of isotherms are needed before the interpretation the kinetics of the adsorption process. Many models have been proposed to explain adsorption equilibrium, however, no general model has been found to fit the experimental data accurately under any given condition. A particular one that fits the data under one set of conditions may completely misfit under another. The most widely used isotherm models for solid–liquid adsorption are the Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms. They can be used to describe the equilibrium adsorbed metals ions and metal ions in solution. In the present investigation, the experimental data were tested with respect to both these isotherms. The Langmuir model was originally developed to represent chemisorption on a set of well-defined localized adsorption sites having the same adsorption energy, independent of the surface coverage and with no interaction between adsorbed molecules ( The linear form of the Langmuir isotherm is given by equation The essential characteristics of the Langmuir isotherm can also be expressed in terms of a dimensionless constant separation factor or equilibrium parameter, According to The Freundlich adsorption isotherm usually fits the experimental data over a wide range of concentrations ( The adsorption studies were conducted at a fixed adsorbent dosage by changing initial lead ion concentration. The equilibrium data were analyzed using Langmuir and Freundlich equilibrium models (Eqs. The plot of The plot of ln The adsorption capacity predicted by the two isotherms were compared and the corresponding Langmuir and Freundlich isotherm parameters, along with the regression coefficients ( The validity of the Langmuir model suggests the adsorption process is monolayer and adsorption of each molecule has equal activation energy. The magnitude of Langmuir constant The kinetics of adsorption describes the rate of metal ions uptake onto the Adsorption kinetics are generally controlled by different mechanism, of which the most limiting are the diffusion mechanisms, including the initial curved portion, attributed to rapid external diffusion or boundary layer diffusion and surface adsorption, and the linear portion, a gradual adsorption stage due to the intraparticle diffusion, followed by a plateau to the equilibrium where the intraparticle diffusion starts to decrease due to the low concentration in solution phase as well as fewer available adsorption sites ( Adsorption kinetics was explained by the pseudo-second-order model given by Integrating Eq. This model is more likely to predict the kinetic behavior of adsorption with chemical adsorption being the rate-controlling step. The pseudo-second-order reaction is greatly influenced by the amount of metal on the adsorbent's surface and the amount of metal adsorbed at equilibrium ( Preliminary studies on the adsorption rate showed that the removal increased with increased Pb(II) concentration. The maximum amount of lead ions was adsorbed within the first 30 Ho presented a pseudo-second order rate law expression, which demonstrated how the rate depended on the adsorption equilibrium capacity but not the concentration of the adsorbate (( From The present investigation showed that Financial supports for this work from Specialized Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education of China, Nature Sciences Foundations of Yunnan Province of China and Science Research Foundations of Kunming University of Science and Technology (Grant No. 14118011) are gratefully acknowledged.