Background
                  Osteosynthesis of femoral neck fractures is particularly indicated in patients aged under 60 years. A prolonged interval between the fracture and surgical fixation has been associated with avascular necrosis (AVN) of the femoral head. The primary objective of this study was to evaluate the association between the time to surgery and the development of complications in patients with femoral neck fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Patients with displaced fractures of the femoral neck (Garden III or IV) who underwent fixation with three cannulated screws in the inverted triangle configuration from January 2009 to December 2010 were evaluated retrospectively for the development of orthopaedic complications. Patients were divided into two groups according to the time to surgery (within 7 days or more than 7 days). Complication rates were compared between the two groups. Regression analyses were performed to assess the risk factors for complications.
               
                  Results
                  Thirty-one patients were included in the study; the duration of follow-up ranged from 24 to 50 months. The time from fracture to surgery ranged from 3 to 18 days. Fifteen patients underwent surgery within 7 days, and 16 patients underwent surgery after 7 days. There were four cases of femoral head necrosis. One patient had an associated infection; one patient experienced non-union, and another demonstrated osteosynthesis failure. There were no statistically significant differences in the overall rate of complications between the groups (p = 0.999). None of the preoperative parameters or fracture characteristics were predictive factors for complications. The only factor associated with the development of complications was inadequate fracture reduction in the anteroposterior (AP) view (odds ratio [OR] = 35.50, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 2.56 to 548.36, p = 0.008).
               
                  Conclusions
                  The interval between the occurrence of the injury and surgical fixation is not associated with the development of complications in fractures of the femoral neck. Inadequate fracture reduction in the AP view is a predictive factor for complications in these fractures.In the literature, the osteosynthesis of femoral neck fractures is controversial. Recent studies have demonstrated the superiority of hip arthroplasty compared with internal fixation in patients aged over 65 years [ The interval between the fracture and surgical fixation has been implicated as a risk factor for the development of AVN [ The primary objective of this study was to evaluate the influence of the time between fracture and surgery on the development of complications in patients with displaced femoral neck fractures who underwent internal fixation. The secondary objective was to identify the demographic and postoperative reduction characteristics that were predictive factors for complications. This cohort study was conducted at a tertiary health centre. Between January and March 2013, the charts of all patients with displaced femoral neck fractures who underwent surgical fixation between January 2009 and December 2010 were assessed for eligibility for study participation. The following inclusion criteria were applied: 1) fracture of the femoral neck classified as Garden III or IV, 2) fracture fixation with cannulated screws, 3) surgery performed within 30 days after the injury, and 4) at least 24 months of follow-up. Patients with any of the following criteria were excluded: 1) pathological fracture, 2) additional fracture in the ipsilateral lower limb, 3) non-union of the femoral neck, 4) reoperation for failure of previous fixation, and 5) death or loss to follow-up within 24 months after surgery. There were no restrictions for patient age or the presence of clinical comorbidities. The time to surgery varied according to the availability of services and patient-related factors and was prioritised as the earliest possible date. Data from the included patients were analysed retrospectively, and the following preoperative variables were recorded: age, sex, laterality, presence of comorbidities, degree of osteoporosis by the Singh index, type of fracture (according to the Garden and Pauwels classifications) and time to surgery (in days). Two surgeons from the Trauma Group performed the operations. A standardised technique was used: three cannulated screws (7.3 mm) were set in the configuration of an inverted triangle with two upper screws and one lower screw ( To compare the complication rates, the patients were divided into two groups according to the time to surgery. The primary endpoint of the study was to compare the complication rates between the two groups. The secondary endpoints included investigating the association between time to surgery and complication rate by regression analysis, and evaluating the association between complication rate and patient demographics, degree of osteoporosis, fracture classification and quality of postoperative reduction. The presence of comorbidities was considered to be a potential confounding factor that could be associated simultaneously with time to surgery and the occurrence of complications. Regression analysis was performed to study this association. The sample size was defined by the number of patients who underwent the operation in the given period; a prior sample size calculation was not performed. Statistical analysis was performed using Stata 13.0 software (Stata Statistical Software StataCorp. 2013; version 13, StataCorp LP, College Station, TX, USA). Research on the influence of comorbidities on the complication rate and the time to surgery was evaluated with logistic and linear regression, respectively. Fisher's exact test was used to compare the complication rates between the groups. Univariate logistic regression was used to study the association between the complication rate and preoperative variables to yield the odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval (95% CI). The association between the complication rates and the quality of postoperative reduction was assessed using logistic regression. All tests were twosided. A p value of < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant. Thirty-one patients fulfilled the inclusion criteria for the study. The duration of follow-up ranged from 24 to 50 months (average, 33 months). The time from fracture to surgery ranged from 3 to 18 days (average, 8.4 days). The patients were divided into two groups according to time to surgery. The first group consisted of the patients who underwent surgery between 3 and 7 days after the fracture (15 patients; average, 5.7 days). The second group included the patients who underwent surgery between 8 and 18 days after the fracture (16 patients; average, 10.9 days). The average age of the total patient population was 64.6 years (range, 46–76 years), and the majority of patients was female (71% of patients) ( The recorded comorbidities included hypertension (13 cases), diabetes mellitus (five cases), depression (three cases), anaemia (two cases), alcoholism (two cases), urinary tract infection (two cases) and gastric carcinoma (one case); some patients had multiple comorbidities. Univariate regression analysis showed that the presence of comorbidities was not associated with the time to surgery (p = 0.648) or with the complication rate (p = 0.741). The duration of postoperative hospitalisation ranged from 2 to 13 days (average, 4.2 days) and was not associated with the time to surgery, according to linear regression analysis (p = 0.579). Four patients presented with orthopaedic complications (13%). The first patient, who underwent the operation within 5 days, had surgical site infection progressing to necrosis of the femoral head. The second patient, who underwent surgery within 7 days, had collapse of the femoral neck with loss of reduction and necrosis ( Univariate logistic regression analysis also showed no association between the total number of complications and the following preoperative variables: age (OR = 0.94, p = 0.342), sex (OR = 0.79, p = 0.849), Singh index (OR = 1.00, p = 0.195) and Garden classification (OR = 0.57, p = 0.642). With regard to the Pauwels classification, complications were reported in three type III patients (30%) and one type II patient (6%), and there were no complications among the type I patients. Logistic regression analysis showed an association trend between the rate of complications and the Pauwels classification, but this association was not statistically significant (OR = 7.71, 95% CI = 0.74 to 80.93, p = 0.088). Operative time was not a predictive factor for the occurrence of complications (OR = 1.01, p = 0.320). The quality of fracture reduction was classified as unsatisfactory in the AP view in five cases (16%), all of whom had varus reduction, and unsatisfactory in the lateral view in three cases (10%). Inadequate reduction in the AP view was a predictive factor for the development of complications (OR = 35.50, 95% CI = 2.56 to 548.36, p = 0.008). The Pauwels classification was associated with inadequate reduction in the AP view (OR = 11.76, 95% CI = 1.14 to 120.97, p = 0.038), and type III fractures represented a predictive factor for inadequate reduction. Improper reduction in the lateral view was not a predictive factor for complications (OR = 4.17, 95% CI = 0.28 to 60.93, p = 0.297). The time to surgery did not predict complications in displaced fractures of the femoral neck fixed with cannulated screws in this study. Furthermore, none of the analysed demographic data or preoperative characteristics of the fractures were associated with the occurrence of complications. The only predictor of complications was unsatisfactory fracture reduction in the AP view assessed in the immediate postoperative period. Studies of the time to surgery on the prognosis of femoral neck fractures primarily assess short time periods between the occurrence of the fracture and surgical fixation. Intervals of 6, 8, 12 and 48 hours have already been assessed, and the results have been controversial [ The role of immediate reduction of femoral neck fractures has been a matter of debate. Theoretically, early fracture alignment favours the reestablishment of vascularisation by retinacular vessels, thereby decreasing the incidence of AVN [ Comparisons between patients who underwent operations before or after the 7-day period in the current study showed that even in late fixated fractures, there was no increase in complications related to osteosynthesis. In a prospective study of 52 patients undergoing fixation after a mean interval of 6 days, Butt et al. reported a 14% rate of necrosis of the femoral head and a 10% rate of non-union [ Other factors have been associated with the occurrence of complications in femoral neck fractures treated with osteosynthesis. In a retrospective study of 202 patients, Yang et al. demonstrated a higher incidence of non-union in displaced fractures (OR = 2.93), fractures with poor or borderline reduction (OR = 18.92) and fractures fixed with screws in the conventional triangle configuration (two distal screws and one proximal) compared with the configuration of an inverted triangle (OR = 2.92) [ Age, sex, Garden classification and Singh index were not associated with complications in the current study, which agrees with previous studies [ This study has some limitations. The records of patients with fewer than 24 months of follow-up were not assessed, and the reasons for loss to follow-up were not considered in the analysis. Therefore, selection bias in the inclusion of patients with complications cannot be excluded. The only clinical outcome assessed was the postoperative hospitalisation period, which was not associated with the time to surgery. However, the influence of time to surgery on mortality or other clinical complications was not evaluated and no functional clinical evaluations were performed. Other factors potentially associated with osteosynthesis failure, such as posterior comminution in the femoral neck [ The data in this study support the premise that fixation of displaced femoral neck fractures at more than 7 days from injury is not a risk factor for orthopaedic complications. The main factor to be considered in preventing complications is adequate fracture reduction, and varus reduction should be avoided. Pauwels type III fractures present an additional difficulty in achieving adequate reduction. The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.