A novel approach for the fabrication of compact stoichiometric copper indium gallium selenium (CIGS) thin-films is reported. It uses a solution of CuCl2, GaCl3 and H2SeO3, pH adjusted with HCl with LiCl as additive employing a high purity graphite plate anode and Mo sputtered glass cathode during a simplified sequential pulsed current electrodeposition which avoids impurities from the use of a reference electrode during deposition and a separate selenization step. A Cu-Ga-Se film is optimally deposited by optimizing the deposition voltage, followed by deposition of In from InCl3 solution, and then annealing of the Cu-Ga-Se/In thin-film in an Argon atmosphere at 550 °C. A single phase chalcopyrite CIGS forms with a compact morphology and well-controlled composition of individual elements. The flat-band potential and carrier density of CIGS thin-films are −0.15 V and 2.6 × 1016 cm−3, respectively, as determined by Mott–Schottky studies. The photoelectrochemical performance of CIGS films shows a photocurrent density of −0.8 mA cm−2 at −0.4 V vs. SCE, an eight fold increment compared to our previous reported value. This simplified preparation using pulse plating gives superior quality CIGS films which are promising for application in thin-film solar cells and photoelectrochemical cells.Cu(In,Ga)Se In comparison to DC electrodeposition, pulsed current (PC) electrodeposition is known to offer several advantages since it provides additional variables such as duty cycle and amplitude of pulsed current/potential. Appropriate regulation of these variables can be used for suitable manipulation of diffusion layer, grain size and nucleation. This, in turn, results in greater deposit homogeneity as well as precise control over stoichiometry and deposition rate. During the deposition of thin films of ternary/quaternary systems like CIS/CIGS, such control over the composition of individual elements is particularly crucial to obtain single-phase by controlling the formation of secondary phases like Cu-Se, In-Se, Ga-Se, etc., thereby making PC electrodeposition an attractive technique Despite the above advantages, limited reports are available on the use of pulsed electrodeposition for the preparation of CIGS thin-films. Fu et al. have explored different plating techniques including DC, pulse and pulse-reverse electrodeposition for the fabrication of CIGS thin films and reported elimination of secondary phases such as Cu In appreciation of the above, the present work proposes the pulse electrodeposition of CIGS in two steps, with codeposition of Cu-Ga-Se films in the first step being followed by deposition of In in the second step. A two-electrode system, with an additive-free electrolyte, is used and the additional step of selenization is avoided. The sequential approach presented herein minimized the use of In precursor, which is crucial given the scarcity of In, to achieve the desired composition. In addition, optimization of deposition voltage in the first stage resulted in compact phase-pure CIGS thin-films with an eight-fold increment in photoresponse over the study reported previously by our group Electrodeposition of Cu-Ga-Se in stage I was carried out using a bath containing CuCl The microstructural and elemental analyses were performed using Scanning electron microscope (SEM) (S3400N Hitachi) with an attached EDAX system (Thermo Electron Corporation). The roughness of the films was measured using profilometry (Mahr Perthometer) and the measurements were carried out using a traverse length of 5.60 mm at a minimum of 8 locations on the samples. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was employed to examine the phase constitution of the annealed CIGS films using X-ray diffractometer (Bruker's D8 advance) with Cu K Mott-Schottky plots were recorded in a 0.5 M H The elemental composition of Cu-Ga-Se films prepared at different deposition voltages, as determined from energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, is shown in The surface morphology of Cu-Ga-Se films deposited at different voltages is shown in Additionally, the CIGS films were characterized using micro-Raman spectra for phase analysis before annealing to identify the phases formed during the first deposition step. The specific purpose of the high-resolution micro-Raman studies was also to ascertain the vibrational modes of individual phases and detect any surface dispersed microcrystallites of Cu As mentioned earlier, deposition of In was subsequently carried out at −1.5 V for 10 min in stage II on Cu-Ga-Se films deposited at different voltages in stage I. A low concentration of In precursor was used to achieve the desired amount of In since the deposition was performed in a separate step. The CGS/In films were annealed at 550 °C under Ar atmosphere to form the CIGS by intermixing of the two layers. The elemental composition of annealed films, as well as the relevant compositional ratios Cu/(In + Ga) and Ga/(In + Ga) in the films are depicted in    The optimized stoichiometric annealed CIGS thin-films (CGS deposited at −1.2 V in stage I) were further characterized using XRF, HRTEM, FESEM, UV–Vis–NIR diffuse reflectance spectroscopy, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and photoelectrochemical analysis. XRF is used to infer the bulk composition and thickness of the CIGS thin-films, which are presented in In addition to the micro-Raman analysis of CIGS films shown in TEM analysis has been carried out to further confirm the inter-diffusion of In and to infer the CIGS phase formation. The transmission electron micrograph, the high resolution TEM image and TEM-EDS spectrum of CIGS particles are shown in The bandgap of optimized CIGS films is determined to be 1.27 eV, by using (   A novel sequential pulsed current approach has been employed for the fabrication of CIGS thin-films. Deposition voltage has been optimized for the co-deposition of Cu-Ga-Se films in stage I followed by deposition of In in the second stage. A convenient control over the composition of individual elements has been achieved by the suitable manipulation of process parameters. Characterization of annealed films using XRD and Raman analyses has confirmed the formation of phase-pure stoichiometric chalcopyrite CIGS phase. Raman mapping indicated the phase-pure CIGS phase formation over the entire surface. CIGS films exhibited p-type conductivity as demonstrated from Mott–Schottky as well as PEC studies. Furthermore, a significantly improved photoelectrochemical performance has been observed. This technique presents a simplified, economic and scalable method for fabrication of CIGS thin-films for solar cell applications. Partial support under the US-India Partnership to Advance Clean Energy Research (PACE-R) for the Solar Energy Institute for India and the United States (SERIIUS), funded jointly by the  Supplementary data related to this article can be found online at