Energy conservation and emission reduction in steelmaking have received significant attention owing to the high amount of fossil energy consumption and emissions. Many methods have been adopted for saving energy, among which coke dry quenching (CDQ) is a cost-effective option. In this work, a CDQ process in a steel plant in China is studied. Here, an economic efficiency index is adopted to handle the trade-off between the steam productivity and the coke burning loss. The operation data analysis indicates that the supplementary air flow rate in the CDQ operation does not follow the variation in the discharge rate of incandescent coke adequately, and this results in an increase in the concentration of combustible gas in the exhaust gas and a decrease in economic efficiency. The correlation analysis results show that it is necessary to introduce several derived variables into the data-driven model of this process because these derived variables are more useful than a few original variables for the prediction purposes. Based on these analyses, a soft sensor is proposed by integrating a nonnegative garrote variable selection algorithm with an autoregressive integrated moving average model, which provides a good solution for the real-time prediction of the economic efficiency of the CDQ process. Using this soft sensor, model-based optimization can be conducted, the performance of which is verified with a virtual implementation on the historical operation data and experiments performed in a real CDQ system. The results indicate that there is considerable room for improving the economic efficiency of this process.Energy conservation and emission reduction in steelmaking are of significant concern because of the high amount of fossil energy consumption and emissions. Many methods were implemented for saving energy in which coke dry quenching (CDQ) is a cost-effective option [ Spraying water cooling is widely used in traditional coke wet quenching (CWQ) systems. This approach results in high CO Over the last two decades, CDQ control and operation strategies were discussed in several previous studies. Given that the main steam temperature lags seriously while replenishing cold water in the temperature adjustment process, a new dual-loop PID adjustment method was suggested to achieve effective control of the main steam temperature [ However, a few challenges exist with respect to the real-time operation of the CDQ process. The first challenge involves the trade-off between the steam productivity and the coke burning loss. In the present study, an economic efficiency index synthesizing the steam productivity and the burning loss is adopted. Furthermore, real time operation of the CDQ process poses several difficult control problems including the supplementary air-flow regulation problem and unstable coke discharge as investigated by Sun et al. [ As widely-known, soft sensor is a valid method for model-based optimization operation, and a variety of soft-sensor modeling schemes were examined in different fields including multiple research studies related to the steelmaking industry. Nakhaeie et al. forecasted the concentrate grade of a flotation column with artificial neural networks [ Additionally, proper variable selection is an important step in statistical modeling. A transparent, comprehensible, and robust model can be acquired based on a well-trimmed variable dimension. It is reported that the model based on a selected subset of input variables often leads to more accurate predictions when compared with that based on the complete set of variables [ Based on an accurate prediction model, optimal operation can be realized with the help of the model-based control strategy, and this has been successfully employed in process industries. In this study, several derived variables are introduced and are revealed as more useful when compared to a few original process variables for the purpose of prediction. An NNG variable selection algorithm is combined with an autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) model to develop an adaptive scheme for economic efficiency modeling and adjustment with respect to the CDQ process. The results indicate that there is significant room for energy conservation and emission reduction. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, an economic efficiency index is introduced by synthesizing two competing aspects to handle the trade-off between the steam productivity and the coke burning loss. The existing operation of a real CDQ process is found to be unreasonable according to the analysis of the operation data. In Section The CDQ system studied in this work is widely used for recovering waste heat in steel industry. As illustrated in In this study, data with sample size 25,000 were collected from an actual coke dry quenching system in an iron and steel plant in China from May 1 to July 31, 2014. These operation data were collected every 5 min. Each process observation possesses 47 variables, 20 of which are meaningful for the economic efficiency research. As listed in In this section, an economic efficiency index is described. As widely known, the discharge rate of incandescent coke (M Given a higher air-coke ratio (F 1) Given that the temperature and the pressure of the relieved excess gas to the atmosphere are approximately 130 °C and atmospheric pressure, its discharging volume per hour is converted to normal volume as follows: 2) The discharging amount of oxycarbide per hour is 3) The amount of carbon dioxide in the supplementary air is calculated as 4) Given the assumption that the ash content is 5) The economic benefit efficiency obtained by per ton coke is calculated as a performance index, and this is also a derived ratio variable as follows: Including F In this section, the existing operation strategy for CDQ is analyzed based on the analysis of the operation data. Relationships between different variables are shown in From the relationship between M The reason for the decrease in J with the increase in M In this section, statistical analysis is performed to discover the relationship between the variables measured in the CDQ furnace, which is useful for the guidance of process operation. Subsequently, with respect to the economic efficiency evaluation and modeling, two types of derived variables are introduced, which are helpful in identifying the physical information contained in the data. In order to understand the operating characteristics of the CDQ furnace, a correlation analysis is performed to examine the relationship between the process variables and the result is shown in The steady temperature of incandescent coke (T The flow rate of the relieved excess gas to the atmosphere (F However, the analysis results do not provide explicit information on key manipulated variables and potential methods to evaluate the economic benefits. The air-coke ratio (F The correlation comparison between the original variables including M In this section, a soft sensor of the economic efficiency index is proposed by combining the NNG variable selection algorithm with the ARIMA model. Subsequently, the implementation of the model-based optimization is investigated with a virtual implementation on the historical operation data and experiments performed in a real CDQ system. The NNG method is a two-stage shrinkage method. In the first stage, the ordinary least square procedure is used to determine the initial guess of the regression coefficient for each variable. In the second stage, the shrunk regression coefficients are computed by solving a constrained quadratic programming problem. It is assumed that a set of observation data The second stage is formulated as the following optimization problem: The non-negative garrote tightens with the decrease in The prediction of In the task of the CDQ economic efficiency improvement, the prediction accuracy of this model is often not sufficient because the process dynamics are not taken into consideration. When time series correlation analysis is conducted on the NNG model prediction error The coefficients of Thus, the corrected prediction is as follows: As widely known, the process input-output relations often change with time relative to the change in process operating conditions. Adaptive models are often used to deal with the time-varying characteristics of industrial processes. In this study, the NNG regression and the ARIMA correction methods are implemented in a moving window manner. It is assumed that an observation window with Begin with Set Conduct NNG regression and obtain the regression coefficients Calculate the prediction of Calculate Calculate Solve the optimal values for Collect the Determine the optimal operation condition based on the control strategy; Collect   In order to avoid high-temperature accidents, the flow rate of the by-pass circulation gas is increased to ensure that T In order to eliminate the influence of the data in the latter case, only the data in the former group is adopted for modeling. As shown in  It is clear that the selected frequency of F As shown in For the purposes of comparison, the modeling results for two other algorithms, namely artificial neural network (ANN) [ Model Size: the number of variables selected for modeling Model Magnitude: the mean of L1 norms of regression coefficients Prediction Precision: the mean squared prediction error (MSPE) The summary of the algorithm comparison is shown in Based on the statistics analysis, over 5% of the operation data are located in the following range: Additionally, as mentioned above, the temperature of the circulation gas heading to the boiler should not exceed 980 °C. Thus, the operation boundaries are chosen as follows: In order to assure the validity of the linear model, First, the model-based optimization was examined by virtually implementing it on the real operation data collected from the plant. A comparison of the actual and optimized values of F The increased economic benefits As shown in Statistics for the data points touching the operation boundaries are shown in Next, experiments on an actual CDQ system were conducted to verify the model-based optimization scheme in real industrial applications. According to the sampling interval, online process adjustments were made every 5 min based on the optimization results. The observation window for model building was set to 8000 samples, while the prediction horizon was set to 100. For illustrating the results, 1000 samples were collected consecutively in about 3 days and a half as shown in Statistical analysis shows that the average F Based on the operation data collected from a real steel plant, the aim of this study involves exploring the increase in the economic efficiency of the CDQ system. The supplementary air flow rate of the original operation did not follow the variation in the discharge rate of incandescent coke, and this resulted in the increase in C The authors would like to thank the financial support provided by the