We present here new cellular ceramics, fibers and microspheres produced by novel and general microshaping techniques employing colloidal dispersions in solvent free radiation curable monomer mixtures. High loading, low viscosity dispersions of functional nanoparticles such as TiO2 and α-Fe2O3 and colloidal Fe(C2O4)·2H2O metal salt are achieved with comb-polyelectrolyte surfactants and/or mildly polar resins. TiO2 dispersions are spun and solidified “on the fly” by UV radiation into continuous ceramic/polymer nanocomposite fibers with dimensions below 10μm. Fe(C2O4)·2H2O dispersions provide a UV curable alternative to α-Fe2O3 dispersions which can only be thermally cured. The Fe(C2O4)·2H2O nanocomposites transform to α-Fe2O3 below 550°C. Novel cellular Al2O3, TiO2 and α-Fe2O3 articles with porosity >80% and precise replication of the pore-forming agents have also been produced from such dispersions. Al2O3 nanocomposite microspheres are produced by emulsification of the dispersions in an appropriate medium and UV curing.Radiation curable dispersions are frequently used for the fabrication of complex 3d articles layer-by-layer by employing lithographic techniques. Recently, we have developed a new class of high loading/low viscosity radiation curable Al In this paper we first present new solvent free, radiation curable colloidal dispersions of functional particles such as Fe(C Second, we investigated the radiation curing of the dispersions and subsequent transformation of the cured nanocomposites to ceramics. Due to the high UV–vis absorption of the α-Fe Cellular materials find applications in thermal and acoustic insulation, catalysis and separation, light structures, biomedicine and renewable energy applications. Over the last decades, a few fabrication routes to cellular ceramics which are based on micro-templating of pre-polymer or colloidal based materials have been developed. The next section of the paper presents Al The structure of the paper and the topics covered in this work are illustrated in  The surfactant used is a commercial comb-polyelectrolyte surfactant (Melpers4343) from BASF, Germany. Pore forming agents were polyethylene (PE) microspheres (Sumitomo, Japan) with an average diameter of 12 Glycerol (Sigma Aldrich, 99.5%) was used as a dynamic sheathing liquid for extrusion. Mazolla corn oil (Coop, Switzerland) was used as an emulsifying medium for the preparation of microspheres. SiO Nanopowders with adsorbed surfactants were produced by the procedure described previously in detail. Zeta potential measurements were used to determine the isoelectric point of the powders by potentiometric titrations of 2.5–5% dispersions by the electroacoustic method (Zetaprobe, Colloidal dynamics, Australia). The dispersions were first titrated from their natural pH in DI water to pH 10–11 (first leg) followed by titration to the pH range of 3–4 (second leg). The IEP is reported for the second leg ( Dispersions of Al Pastes for cellular materials were prepared by mixing the dry pore formers into the above dispersions in an amount of 50–83% equivalent porosity. The equivalent porosity, which is an estimate for the porosity of the final cellular material, is defined by the following equation: equivalent porosity A liquid photoinitiator (LTM, Rahn, Switzerland) in an amount of 3–5% or the thermal initiator (AIBN) in an amount of 0.5–1% (both calculated per monomer mixture) were added to the dispersions or pastes and mixed thoroughly. Dispersions and pastes containing AIBN were used shortly after the addition of the initiator. Dispersions or pastes containing the photoinitiator were kept in containers covered with aluminum foil until use. The particle size distribution (PSD) was measured with a Beckman Coulter LS230 (USA) equipped with polarization intensity differential scattering (PIDS) for reliable analysis in the submicron range. Aqueous dispersions with or without added surfactants were measured in DI water (pH ∼5). The dispersions in monomer were first diluted with DI water and then measured in a similar fashion. The PSD of the dispersions was monitored during the different dispersion steps. The PSD found for electrostatically stable dispersions in aqueous media was used as a reference for a well dispersed system. Only dispersions with PSD essentially similar to the reference are reported. Rheological measurements were performed with a rotational viscosimeter (Rheolab MC 120, PhysicaMesstechnik GmbH). Measurements were conducted at temperatures of 10, 23, 30 and 40 The extrusion system consists of 8 The die delivering the dispersion for co-extrusion (hydrodynamic tensioning) of Al Cellular Al Al Debinding of composite fibers, cellular materials and microspheres was carried out in air at 650 Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA/DTA 851, Mettler-Toledo) of the raw powders, powders with adsorbed surfactants and cured green bodies was performed in order to assess the amount of surfactant adsorbed and/or thermal decomposition of the Fe(C Ceramic and ceramic/polymer composite fibers were characterized by optical microscopy (Leica Wild M3Z equipped with micrometer) and SEM (VEGA Plus 5136 MM, Tescan instruments, Czech republic). Mercury intrusion porosimetry (MIP, Pascal 140/440, Porotec GmbH, Germany) was used up to a pressure of 2000 X-ray diffraction (XRD) of the materials was conducted with a Panalytical XPertPro diffractometer in the range 20° In this work we pre-stabilize the functional TiO  The UV curable organic media is also interesting for shaping of metal salts in their colloidal form. As will become apparent in Section The use of UV curable dispersions for extrusion/spinning processes allows much more flexibility than in conventional spinning technologies. A detailed discussion about the new spinning concepts and UV curing ‘on the fly’ can be found in an earlier work.  For a given resin and photoinitiator system, the curing of UV curable colloidal dispersions is limited by scattering produced by the particles, the UV–vis intensity and spectrum, and the exposure time. On the other hand, dispersions of semiconducting nanoparticles such as ZnO and TiO In a previous publication we have demonstrated that films of ZnO colloidal dispersions with thickness ∼100 Hematite (α-Fe One of the interesting aspects of the new method is the ability to use organic media where metal salts can be processed as colloidal entities. Iron oxalate dihydrate, Fe(C We find that a high amount of pore formers such as gases, liquids or solids can be introduced into the solvent free, low viscosity dispersions. These UV curable pastes can be conveniently shaped and cured into fibers or multilayers and subsequently be transformed into high quality cellular ceramic articles. While larger, homogeneous cellular bodies are preferably thermally cured with the use of small amount of an appropriate thermal initiator, heterogeneous multilayer articles and fibers are preferably processed rapidly by UV–vis curing. One of the differences from other gel casting related technologies   The thermal decomposition and phase transformation of Fe(C  Microspherical droplets of the low viscosity radiation curable dispersions readily form in a suitable emulsification medium under mild energy mixing conditions. Formation of stable microspheres requires a proper choice of monomer mixture and emulsification medium. The emulsification medium should also have sufficient optical transparency in the UV–vis spectrum to allow UV curing. The droplets in the emulsion such formed can then be rapidly cured to solid microspheres under flow or static conditions. Dispersions of TiO New, general and versatile technologies for the fabrication of functional ceramic/polymer cellular articles and microspheres have been developed and demonstrated for α-Al The authors would like to thank Dr. Kasia Michalow, Empa, for the help with the photocatalytic experiments.