Digitalisation in mining refers to the use of computerised or digital devices or systems and digitised data that are to reduce costs, improve business productivity, and transform mining practices. However, it remains increasingly difficult for mining companies to decide which digital technologies are most relevant to their needs and individual mines. This paper provides an overview of digital technologies currently relevant to mining companies as presented and discussed by mining journals, the media and insight reports of leading consultancy agencies. Relevant technologies were systematically identified using text-mining techniques, and network analyses established the relations between significant technologies. Results demonstrated that currently 107 different digital technologies are pursued in the mining sector. Also, an analysis of the actual implementation of digital technologies in 158 active surface and underground mines reveals a limited uptake of digital technologies in general and that the uptake increases with the run-of-mine production. Large-scale mining operations appear to select and apply digital technologies suitable to their needs, whereas operations with lower production rates do not implement the currently available digital technologies to the same extent. These minor producers may require other digital transformation solutions tailored to their capabilities and needs and applicable to their scale of operations.Mining techniques and technologies have evolved and improved over time (e.g. the introduction of explosives and the use of mechanised and motorised mining equipment during the Industrial Revolution). In the past, each technical achievement and its implementation at mine sites led to better practices and strong industrial growth. Today, the mining sector faces the implementation of digital innovations, and various terms have proliferated in the media, the internet and at conferences, describing these technological advances and associated imminent changes. In this context, authors freely use the terms “fourth industrial revolution”, “digital revolution”, “digitalisation”, “digital transformation”, “intelligent mining”, “smart mining”, or “mining 4.0”. Unfortunately, these terms are used inconsistently, although there are noticeable differences in the original definitions. For example, “digitalisation” originally refers to continuous evolution and change of particular processes and procedures based on digital technologies To date, the general direction and structure of innovative processes and the digital technologies for the mining industry as well as the influencing factors that encourage the implementation of trends have been identified In order to identify digital technologies, their importance and implementation in the mining industry, co-word analyses and text-mining techniques with suitable algorithms were applied. Co-word analysis establishes the multi- and co-occurrence of words (i.e. content relation of two keywords) and correlates the relevance of these Initially, global consulting companies perceived by the business magazine “Forbes” as leading in the mining sector were identified ( In the first step, insight reports ( In the second step, a text-mining algorithm ( A keyword list was prepared for the filtering process (Step 2.2, In the third step, the insight reports database was examined for identifying semantic relatedness between keywords. Relatedness between individual keywords helps to classify these and draw a superordinate picture of all relations of digital technologies As a first step, the unstructured papers were tokenised by non-letters and cases were standardised (Step 3.1, Every element of the pre-processed word vector from Step 3.1 was searched and filtered by the keyword vector To analyse and use Wikipedia HTML structures, the following step was designed iteratively. For every single keyword From this, the categories and internal and redirect links were extracted (Step 4.3, Keywords and the interconnections between keywords can be perceived as a vast network. The open-source program Gephi was used to visualise the network and to highlight links between keywords in the network structure. Nodes and edges are the essential elements. Here, nodes represent the specific keywords and edges show the relation between two keywords Closeness centrality ( Betweenness centrality ( This step determined the actual application of digital technologies at operating mines based on text extracts from the onemine.org database. The algorithm in Step 6 ( Typographically, the name of a mine begins in English with a capital letter. In this study, the PDFs from the paper collection were processed by the algorithm from Step 2 to detect the digital technologies within individual papers (Step 6.1, All six aforementioned steps build an overall methodology to identify essential keywords from the scalable database and to draw conclusions about the acceptance of digital technologies in the mining industry ( Co-word analyses and text-mining techniques with algorithms on the insight reports ( Steps 3 (semantic relatedness) and 4 (Wikipedia related links) were applied to determine the co-occurrence of key digital technology terms within the texts. These algorithms detected in total 1389 interlinkages between individual digital technology terms. The co-occurrence of terms is visualised as a network structure ( In addition, “artificial intelligence” ( Calculated Step 6 aimed to establish the actual application of digital technologies at individual mine sites. Filtering the onemine.org database with 25 keywords reduced 2400 publications in total to 164 relevant texts. In the filtered documents, proper names of mines were established, and 92 publications with a possible mine name citation were detected. By reviewing the papers again manually, 65 papers describing 158 mining operations could be identified. All mines are existing projects that are currently in production, have recently been closed or are evaluated to be reopened. Among these publications, notably “automation”, “real-time data”, “advanced process control”, and “machine learning” show high TO values. The recognised digital technologies were then plotted versus the Run-of-Mine (ROM in Mt/a) production for each identified mine site and versus the revenue of the parent company with multiple operations (in bn$), using a colour-based heatmap (see  In the past, technical evolutions in the history of mining were characterised by key technologies that were designed exclusively for the mining sector (e.g. the use of dynamite) or were taken from other industries and transformed existing mining practices (e.g. the innovative use of motorised equipment). Today, a simple transfer of successful digital technologies from related industries to the mining industry is often not possible due to the unique technical and geological uncertainties and special conditions in mining operations This study has shown that key digital technologies relevant for the mining sector appear to be “automation”, “robotics”, “internet of things” (IoT), “big data”, and “real-time data” (c.f. “Automation” and “robotics” are both an overall approach, for decoupling the human from technical machinery. “Robotics” deals with the development and usage of robots, whereas “automation” defines the operation of existing machines and unattended processes without human control As seen in the results section ( “Internet of things” (IoT) is an approach whereby physical objects are interconnected and able to communicate their status over the internet and be controlled remotely from any position Results of this study demonstrate that “IoT” is named in more than 50% of all insight reports. Also, The term “big data” describes a high amount of data that cannot be handled by conventional data processing and human competencies. The term “real-time data” relates to the speed, responsiveness, and timeliness of delivering data to the user. The mining industry can significantly benefit from implementing “big data” and “real-time data” analysis. In fact, predictive maintenance systems for belt conveyors or dump trucks rely on “big data” and “real-time” infrastructure, which in turn allow a better forecast of mechanical breakdowns and status as well as tracking the equipment and operators “Big data” and “real-time data” play a leading role in the current discussion ( “Artificial intelligence” (AI) has been defined as techniques that allow recreating human-like cognitive abilities to automate tasks and processes “AI” and “ML” are critical digital technologies ( “3D printing” is a process that creates 3D items from digital 3D models “3D printing” ( This study has identified a number of key digital technologies ( However, the diffusion of digital technologies in mining correlates with the ROM production date ( The adoption rate of innovations, i.e. the diffusion of digital technologies, is characterised by the following five attributes Relative advantage: This term describes how beneficial a digital technology is perceived, regardless of its benefits. For example, the mining industry expects a quantifiable reduction of operational costs (15–30%) Compatibility: This attribute focuses on the experience, needs, and values of the adopters and how the new technology fits in the existing system. Realising digitalisation in bigger mines is enhanced through the presence of already existing infrastructure (e.g. sensors and human resources). Mines are very individual systems, which are influenced by the geology and other local conditions. This does not have a direct effect on the basic digital technologies, such as “automation” or “AI”. Moreover, it influences the application of the system and the final implementation process. Complexity: The term describes how difficult it is to understand or use the new digital technology. Presently, most mining industry professionals do not have the skills and knowledge to understand and use the new digital technologies. Moreover, some technologies like blockchain require specially trained staff, and small mines do not have the resources to recruit these specialists. Trialability: This indicates to what extent a technology can be tested or experimented. Bigger mining companies often have research and development (R&D) units and financial resources for testing new technologies and systems. These R&D capacities are often not present in the corporate structure of small mines. Observability: This attribute indicates whether external stakeholders realise that digital technologies are successfully applied and used by mining companies. A mining company that uses and adapts to new technologies may be perceived as role model or early adopter. This image can be crucial for global companies that are intensively scrutinised by society. Furthermore, the observability of the outcome of new digital technologies is also important for internal stakeholders, such as the management board and other decision-makers. This helps to evaluate the feasibility and benefits of an investment in digital technologies. Therefore, there remain obstacles in the adoption of digital technologies in mining. Adoption appears to be dependent on factors such as production scale of mining operations, existing infrastructure, availability of trained staff, R&D capacities, and company willingness to lead in technology diffusion. Regardless, results of this work have shown an apparent deficit in the diffusion of technologies among smaller operations. All these factors result in a final economic consideration that significantly influences the investment in digital technologies, especially for small mining companies. With less equipment and lower production, the absolute savings are lower, so that the profitability of digital technologies is viewed critically. However, there are several mine sites that demonstrate successful and economically viable implementation of digital technologies. For example, in 2014 the Éléonore Gold Mine in Canada installed an IoT system monitoring system, which included sensors with wireless network for real-time tracking and control of the equipment ( This paper reviewed mining journals (onemine.org), the media (Wikipedia), and insight reports (top consulting agencies) and used text-mining techniques to identify the key digital technologies relevant to the mining industry and to establish to what extent digital technologies are currently adopted by industry. Results demonstrate that “automation”, “robotics”, “internet of things”, “big data”, “real-time data”, “machine learning”, “artificial intelligence”, and “3D printing” are the key technologies for the mining industry. However, in general there is a lack of technology diffusion and the diffusion of digital technologies depends largely on the ROM production rate. There is an apparent deficit in the diffusion of digital technologies among smaller operations. Larger mining operations appear to select and apply digital technologies suitable to their needs, whereas operations with lower production rates do not implement the currently available digital tools and hardware technologies to the same extent. These minor producers may require other digital transformation solutions tailored to their capabilities and needs and applicable to their scale of operations. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. Comments of two anonymous referees on an earlier version of the manuscript are much appreciated.