This paper focuses on a study concerned with reducing dust emissions from belt conveyor transfer chutes in bulk material handling plants. Several transfer chute configurations were investigated with the aim of analysing the system performance. Scale model laboratory testing was undertaken to determine the effectiveness of each design in reducing dust emission. Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) was used to investigate the flow pattern of the granular material and entrained air in each of the transfer chute configurations. To verify the feasibility of CFD for dust emission prediction, a two-phase three-dimensional Euler–Euler model was adopted to qualitatively predict the performance of six transfer chute configurations with respect to dust generation. The predicted dust emissions obtained from the simulations were compared with the scale model test results. The simulation predictions compared favourably with the experimental results, demonstrating that CFD can be used to qualitatively evaluate the performance of transfer chute designs with regard to dust emission.Belt conveyors are extensively employed to transport bulk materials in many industries, particularly those associated with mining and mineral processing. Given their widespread use the problems associated with dust emissions are becoming increasingly topical due to more stringent environmental and occupational health and safety regulations. An area of particular concern for dust control occurs during the transfer of bulk material from one conveyor to another. Conveyor transfer chutes therefore not only have a significant impact on the efficiency of belt conveyor systems, but also on the level of fugitive dust emission. Currently, the majority of dust control systems for conveyor transfers are “active”, which need external energy and equipment or suppressants. For example, many coal handling plants use process water to control dust emission, which not only results in a reduction in the calorific value of the coal per tonne as the moisture content of coal is increased, but significantly increases the potential for material handling issues throughout the rest of the plant. Often process constraints limit the amount of moisture that can be added to bulk materials, this combined with the importance of minimising water usage places a much greater emphasis on the need to develop “passive” dust control systems, where no external energy and equipment nor suppressants are required. Passive control is achieved through the efficient integration of the moving stream of bulk material with the induced air flow. In view of this, it is becoming increasingly important that the objective of minimising fugitive dust emissions is incorporated into the design of transfer chutes, along with the traditional requirements to meet throughput without blockages, and to limit both lining material and belt cover wear. With increasing computational power, process simulation has been widely used in science and industry as a cost-effective and flexible research and design tool. In general, there are two established methods for modelling bulk granular flows: the discrete element method (DEM) and the continuum method. As the names suggest, the main difference between the two methods is that the former method models every individual particle in the flow, whereas the latter is defined by the space through which the particles travel and the particles are treated as a “fluid like” continuum. The discrete element method (DEM) is a numerical method for computing the motion of a large number of particles. DEM has been proven as a powerful tool to assist engineers to design bulk handling plant ( Ideally, the flow of bulk material and the interaction between the bulk material and dust particles with air would involve an integrated approach, employing DEM coupled with CFD. While research is progressively advancing in this area ( The present work uses scale model testing to verify results obtained from numerical simulations. The commercial CFD software FLUENT was used to analyse air and particle flow in the transfer chute enclosure. The relative performance of each design in terms of minimising dust emission was predicted by analysing the air velocity and air mass flow rate. The validity and accuracy of CFD to predict dust emissions were verified by comparing the simulation results with scale model tests. In total six transfer chute configurations were analysed. These are labelled A to F and include: A — baseline case, B — baseline case with a lower removable cover fitted, C — baseline case with a lower removable cover and lower openings fitted, D — a chute with an inbuilt restrictor plate in the vertical leg in addition to the lower removable cover fitted and lower openings closed, E — baseline with a stilling chamber and lower openings closed, and F — restrictor plate in addition to the stilling chamber and the lower openings closed. All six chute configurations are illustrated in Scale model testing was carried out in the laboratory to evaluate the performance of the six transfer chute designs. Each transfer chute was placed in a large enclosure to contain the expelled dust, and at the same time minimise the influence of the control volume. The enclosure measured 2.5 To capture the dust expelled from each transfer chute during testing, sheets of plastic were laid out over the floor of the enclosure. Due to symmetry of the enclosure and each chute the plastic sheets were placed only on one side of the enclosure. To enable the relative position of dust deposition to be determined, the enclosure was divided into four collection zones. The zones are labelled A to D, and are labelled in The plastic sheets were left in the enclosure for the duration of each test and remained in place for 15 The bulk material used in the experiments was iron ore with a top size of 11.2 In addition to measuring fugitive dust levels, the air velocity at the exit of each chute was measured using a Pitot tube. The Pitot tube was positioned 50 To predict the likely performance of each transfer chute configuration with respect to dust emission the commercial CFD software FLUENT was used to analyse air and particle flow in the chute enclosure. The relative performance of each design was predicted by analysing the air velocity and air mass flow rate. Due to the high volume fraction of particles, a two-phase Euler–Euler approach was adopted to model the granular stream and air flow in the transfer chutes. A Eulerian treatment was used for both the fluid and solid phase. A single pressure is shared by the air and particles, and the continuity and momentum equations solved separately for each phase. The models and boundary conditions used in the simulation are summarised in The air is assumed to be incompressible and at a constant density, while the particles are assumed to be spherical and have a uniform density. A particle diameter of 4 To determine the most suitable mesh size for the CFD models from both computational time and accuracy viewpoints a mesh dependency study was performed. Due to the similarity of transfer chute geometries and model conditions, Chutes A and D were analysed using four different mesh sizes. A coarse mesh was created using a maximum face size of 15 Inspection of A rigorous experimental programme was undertaken to validate the results of the numerical modelling. The experimental worked involved scale model testing that consisted of fugitive dust level and air velocity measurements for a variety of transfer chute configurations. Particle size distribution (PSD) tests were conducted using sieves before each series of experiments to determine the change in particle size distribution due to degradation. All PSD tests were carried out according to The PSD results show that the fine content increased during the first four series of tests, indicating that the sample progressively degraded during each test. The PSD results for test five indicate a decrease in fine content, most likely due to lost material. In addition to PSD tests, moisture content (MC) tests were also conducted on the sample before each series of tests. Due to the nature of the testing process it is unavoidable that some drying of the bulk material will occur, however as shown in While variations in both PSD and MC were measured during the course of the experimental work, the influence of these variations between different chute configurations was minimised through the experimental procedure. The process of testing all chute configurations using the same 500 At the completion of each test the fugitive material was collected from the nominated zones within the enclosure and a PSD undertaken. To ensure that the results were not skewed by larger fugitive particles resulting from spillage, the collected material was sieved to remove all material greater than 1 To better understand the composition of the dust, PSD tests were conducted on the collected dust. Since the dust quantities collected from Chutes D, E and F were too small PSD tests were only carried out for the dust collected from Chutes A, B and C. As an example, the PSD results for the five tests obtained from Chute A are given in The total quantity of dust collected from each test and the average result for each chute configuration is shown in From the results presented in  In addition to measuring the overall fugitive dust levels for each chute configuration the outlet air velocities were also measured at the seven positions indicated in From the results presented in CFD simulations were carried out for the six chute configurations using the commercial software FLUENT. Quantitative and qualitative results will be presented in order to assess the various transfer chute configurations with regard to potential dust emission. Outlet air velocities and air mass flow rates will be analysed to provide a quantitative assessment, while particle streamlines and air vectors will be analysed to make a qualitative assessment of the relative performance of each chute configuration. As an initial step the measured air velocities were compared to the CFD results. When considering the results for Chutes A, B and C, the velocities obtained from the CFD analysis are considerably lower than the experimental data. For example, the maximum velocity for Chute A is 3.6 While there are some variances between the measured and calculated air outlet velocities, the trends between the chute configurations are consistent. Furthermore, the CFD results correlate well with the experimental dust measurements, where low outlet velocities and therefore low air mass flow rates through the chute result in less overall dust emission. In general, reducing air velocity will reduce dust entrainment. Therefore the outlet air velocity is a critical parameter to analyse, with From Different air velocities lead to different air mass flow rates. More air flow through the chute typically indicates more dust will be entrained and therefore discharged from the chute. Comparison of the air mass flow rates for the various chute configurations and the location of the expelled air is shown in Since all the chute configurations have exactly the same inlet conditions, the value of the air mass flow rate at the inlet is the same. However, there is a large difference in the total air mass flow rates between different chute configurations. The total air mass flow rate through Chute A is 0.070 Overall the relative performance of each chute configuration compares well with the experimental results. There is no direct evidence to suggest significant performance differences between Chutes A, B and C, with air velocities and air mass flow rates being comparable, which is in agreement with the experimental results. Furthermore, it is clear that Chutes D, E and F have lower air mass flow rates, therefore supporting the lower dust levels measured in the experimental work. Like the experimental results, the CFD analysis clearly highlights the benefits of a restrictor plate and stilling chamber. The benefit of the restrictor plate is evident by comparing the calculated outlet air velocity and air mass flow rates for Chutes C and D. A study was undertaken with the aim of reducing dust emissions from belt conveyor transfer chutes in bulk material handling plants. Several transfer chute configurations were investigated with the aim of analysing system performance. The research project involved scale model testing and CFD simulation. The CFD analysis was used to investigate the flow pattern of the granular material and entrained air in each of the transfer chute configurations using a two-phase three-dimensional Euler–Euler model. The predicted dust emissions obtained from the simulations compared favourably with the scale model test results, demonstrating that CFD can be effectively used to qualitatively evaluate the performance of transfer chute designs in relation to likely dust emission. The authors would like to thank the staff of TUNRA Bulk Solids Research Associates at the University of Newcastle for their assistance in undertaking the experimental work and the