A seed-assisted method enabled the fast synthesis of submicron ZSM-5 from acid-leached illite without the use of any organic templates. In addition, the effects of illite activation temperature, synthesis temperature, synthesis time, Na2O/SiO2 ratio, SiO2/Al2O3, and the amount of commercial seed were investigated. The synthesized zeolite materials were characterized by X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy, and NH3 temperature-programmed desorption. Under these study conditions, submicron-sized ZSM-5 zeolites were synthesized in a relatively short time of 3 h. The relative crystallinity of the ZSM-5 zeolite obtained was up to 115%, and the quartz impurity was kept to a minimum. Aluminium in the framework of zeolite is capable of providing acidic sites. The prepared ZSM-5 zeolite showed a slightly better catalytic performance in toluene disproportionation than ZSM-5 seeds. In addition, different commercial ZSM-5 zeolites could be utilized as seeds, including self-made zeolite crystals.ZSM-5 zeolites are widely used in petroleum refining and petrochemical applications, owing to their high thermal stability, intrinsic acidity, high surface area, and well-defined porosity [ The use of natural clay as a raw material for the synthesis of ZSM-5 zeolites is one of the most important green synthesis methods, because natural clay is readily available and very economical [ Holmes et al. [ Illite, an aluminosilicate mineral, is one of the most abundant clay resources. It can be used as an alternative material of kaolin for the synthesis of low-silica zeolites, such as zeolite X [ In this paper, the use of silica residue from acid leaching illite as a silica source for the green synthesis of high-silica ZSM-5 was explored by using the seed-assisted method. The required Si/Al ratio (from 40 to 80) was adjusted by using Al The illite minerals were collected from Changbai Mountain (Yanbian, China). The reagents used for the preparation of ZSM-5 zeolite were aluminium sulfate (Al The illite minerals were purified by the flotation process, followed by ball milling, and treatment at The procedure for synthesizing the ZSM-5 zeolite using I-SR as the silicon source without any organic template is as follows: Al X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed on a Bruker D8 diffractometer, using Cu K Catalytic reactions were conducted in a quartz tube reactor of 8 mm ID and 600 mm length under atmospheric pressure with a weight hourly space velocity (WHSV) of 3.3 h In order to synthesize zeolite, the original crystal structure of clay raw materials must first be destroyed by high-temperature calcination [ This study investigated illite at different activation temperatures (550 °C, 650 °C, 750 °C), wherein the illite was acid-leached as a silicon source to synthesize ZSM-5 zeolites. The XRD patterns of illite, activated illite, I-SR, and ZSM-5 zeolites from I-SR are shown in I-SR materials obtained at different activation temperatures were used to synthesize ZSM-5 zeolite. The XRD patterns of all samples in The crystallization kinetics were investigated at a temperature range of 150–190 °C. As illustrated in NaOH can enhance the rate of zeolite nucleation and crystal growth [ The SiO In the seed-induced crystallization of zeolites, the zeolite seeds can effectively shorten the induction period, improve crystallization, and suppress the formation of α-SiO Experiments were conducted using commercial ZSM-5 zeolite (domestic and imported) and self-made ZSM-5 zeolite as seeds under the above-mentioned optimum conditions to evaluate whether different ZSM-5 seeds could synthesize ZSM-5 zeolite. The self-made ZSM-5 is a product synthesized by industrial ZSM-5 (Zeolyst International) used for seeding. XRD patterns ( Imported seed, ZSM-5 zeolite synthesized from imported seed (denoted as ZSM-5-1), and the ZSM-5 synthesized from the self-made seed (denoted as ZSM-5-2) were selected to evaluate their catalytic performance ( The acid properties of these protonated H-ZSM-5 zeolites were studied by NH BET surface area of ZSM-5 from I-SR was slightly less than imported seed zeolites. The pore size distribution of three samples were in the range of 3–8 nm with weak intensity similarly, which was due to the poorly developed intraparticle mesopores ( The catalytic activity of above zeolite samples upon toluene disproportionation is presented in Among the three catalysts, imported seed displayed the lowest selectivity to para-xylene. As the number of times of seed recycling increased, the selectivity of para-xylene gradually increased, and ZSM-5-2 showed the highest selectivity of para-xylene (>54%). As the grain size increasing, the selectivity to para-xylene increased, which may due to the diffusion advantage of p-xylene molecules in the longer micropores [ In summary, a fast and low-cost approach for the synthesis of submicron ZSM-5 was realized by acid-leaching illite via the seed-assisted method without any organic templates. The activation temperature of the illite used was lower than that of kaolin, which reduced the energy consumption during high-temperature treatment; the optimum activation temperature of illite was 650 °C. The optimal conditions required to obtain ZSM-5 with a high relative crystallinity and low quartz impurity were determined to be 3 h at 170 °C with 9 wt% imported seeds using the following molar ratio: 1Al This work was supported by the