High velocity oxy fuel (HVOF) and cold spray techniques have been used to form oxidation resistant hard coatings for bond coat application for gas turbine blades. Though both techniques accelerate powder particles with high kinetic energy, the coatings formed differ considerably in their microstructures. In the former, high pressure is created by burning gases such as acetylene, propane or kerosene at high pressure and generating high temperature (3500 to 4500°C) in the gun. This gives high acceleration to powder particles which melt and deposit on substrate layer by layer with splat cool mechanism. On the other hand, large kinetic energy (KE) is generated in cold spray by passing carrier gases such as He or N2 through a converging–diverging nozzle, with a lower gun temperature of around 500°C. Here the particles are not liquid droplets because of lower temperature and the deposition mechanism is not a splat cooling, but a high impact of solid particles, which results in plastic deformation, making a very adherent coating.
                  In this work, CoNiCrAlY powder was used. Presence of Al creates suitable deformation properties on impact. The powder was deposited on 316L SS substrate using HVOF and also by cold gas dynamic spray (CGDS) deposition process. In the latter, there are two processes, which give two different kinetic energies, depending upon the gas used, nitrogen or helium. The latter gives much higher KE. The deposited coatings were characterized and subjected to wear and oxidation studies. One of the interesting results was that the oxidation resistance of CGDS coating was much superior to that HVOF coated stainless steel with low wear rate and better friction behavior.In the last three decades, extensive research has been undertaken to improve the efficiency, durability and overall performance of gas turbine engines. To protect hot-sections of power generation components of gas turbine engine, thermal barrier coatings (TBCs) are widely used. Conventional TBCs consist of a MCrAlY alloy (where M stand for Co, Ni) bond coating for oxidation resistance and a ceramic top coating for thermal insulation (mainly YSZ) The feedstock material chosen in this study was a commercially available CoNiCrAlY alloy powder with a nominal composition as given in The CoNiCrAlY powder was cold sprayed with supersonic velocity onto 316L substrate using a spray gun with converging–diverging nozzle at ASB Industries, Ohio. The powder was fed through a high-pressure hopper, mixed with the preheated gas in a mixing chamber inside the gun, and was deposited at a very high pressure on to 316L stainless steel substrate of size 300 HIPOJET-2700 HVOF machine, courtesy of M/s Metallizing Equipment Co. Pvt. Ltd., Jodhpur, was used to coat CoNiCrAlY powder using nitrogen as carrier gas. Oxygen/LPG flame was used, with LPG flow rate, maintained at 70 LPM and oxygen flow rate at 270 LPM. The powder feed rate during the coating was 36  The XRD analysis of CGDS and HVOF coatings as shown in The measured coating thickness was 320–360 Mechanical properties such as hardness elastic modulus and depth of penetration were measured for CGDS and HVOF coating using nanoindentation. Higher values of hardness and reduced modulus for CGDS coatings confirm relatively dense coating, compared to the corresponding HVOF coating. The oxidation behavior of the coated stainless steel with CoNiCrAlY powder, using CGDS and HVOF process, in air was studied at 900  A somewhat similar results of the oxide formation can be seen for the CGDS coating with N This confirms slightly higher oxidation rate of CGDS coatings deposited N  Wear and friction studies were carried out on as-sprayed coatings, after polishing up to 1 The wear rate falls drastically after 316L SS is coated with CoNiCrAlY coating. The reduction is almost 40% for HVOF coating and 85% in case of CGDS with He and about 60% in case of coating deposited by CGDS with N2 as carrier gas. Effect of load is quite alarming. The wear rate is quite high at higher load of 15 There is also a change in the mechanism of wear which changes from ploughing to adhesive wear at higher loads. The coefficient of friction variation is also very significantly improved at low loads; however at higher load of 15  In the case of coatings, an example is shown for HVOF coated specimens in It can therefore be concluded that CGDS is a superior method to form hard coatings which also show tremendous improvement in wear and friction. This is mainly due to high hardness, low porosity and highly dense coatings compared to HVOF coatings. Further such coatings also have improved oxidation resistance at high temperatures which is mainly due to retention of more aluminum on the coating surface compared to that on HVOF coatings. Higher aluminum present results in quick formation of alumina oxide which protects it from further oxidation. This work therefore confirms the use of CGDS coatings for making hard and wear resistant coatings which can also be useful for high temperature applications.