Let xi be the sieve opening with index i. By numbering the sieves from top to bottom in decreasing order by size: Let m In what follows, we will refer to the biggest grains as We use, for fines: If we make sure that  The higher the distribution rich in ends, the lower the module k. The measurement in granulometry is made: in the sieves between 100 in an optical microscope between 0.5 by classifying the settling in a fluid between 5 there are automatic equipments that give the granulometry of a bulk solid by using optical properties of its suspension in water. This property (see increases with the product’s fragility; decreases with the product’s Mohs hardness. 1) Fragility: The product does not bear the slightest strain without breaking (brittle product). Deformations imposed in mills are very quick, about 0.1 2) Mohs hardness: A solid can scratch another solid that is less hard (see A hard product in the Mohs sense is generally difficult to grind. Ores with a hardness that is less than or equal to 5 are considered soft, for example, bauxite, clay, magnesite, phosphates, iron oxide pigments, sulfur. Ores with a hardness greater than 6 are abrasive for grinding surfaces. They are considered to be hard when they come to grinding. The opposite of brittleness is plasticity like modeling clay or beeswax. The way to transform plasticity into brittleness is to cool the product, for example, by cooling it with ice or in extreme cases by plunging it in bubbling liquid nitrogen. In terms of energy used, the suitability in grinding of a bulk solid is quantified by its Bond Index. This index (which is energy per unit mass of bulk solid) All comminution equipment function correctly if the product is dry. When a product is moist, it can become sticky and limit the capacity according to each device. Hardness using Mohs scale (see  Crushers operate generally by compression. However, some crushers operate by collision (hammer crusher). Grindstone mills often lead to compression grindstones (track mills with whose axle is), while certain grindstones lead to shearing. Rod and ball mills operate by collision and by shearing. Autogenous mills encapsulate three types of action: collision, compression and shearing. Attrition mills (vibratory or non-vibratory) operate as their name indicates and, in addition, by collision, just like micronizer. For crushing pieces or grinding hard products (Mohs hardness greater than 7), compression between two solid surfaces is used or even shearing between two solid surfaces sliding one against the other. For soft products (Mohs hardness less than 4), we use collision on a solid surface. This is the situation for hammer, pin, ball or rod mills. For plants or plastics, slicing with fixed knives on a revolving shaft is used. 1) Crushing: Hard products:  Soft products: For flows of up to 300 ton.h 2) Grinding: Hard products: For flows of 20–500 ton.h Soft products: For up to 10 ton.h From 10 to 50 ton.h From 50 to 300 ton.h 3) Autogenous mill: It replaces the crusher-mill combination and delivers a product whose average size is not less than 300 or 400 4) Mills for ultrafines: Flow in some of this type of equipment could reach 10 ton.h Hard products: Gas jet equipment processes alumina or mica.  The attrition mill and liquid shearing equipment is suitable for pigments and dyes, especially for the paint industry.  In Gaudin  The bulk solid is completely dry and does not have many fines. It is the simplest situation and the product to be processed simply passes through the device by coming out with a size distribution such that, for example, 80% by mass has a diameter less than the specification d The divided solid is almost dry but the slight moisture that it does have makes it sticky and it adheres to grinding surfaces. It must be watered during milling (and especially crushing). A wet solid can be dried by having it circulate in the mill: superheated vapor; hot air. The fed solid was dispersed beforehand in a liquid (often water) after, for example, physical or chemical processing. This dispersion is called a pulp or a slurry. This type of milling is known as wet milling as opposed to dry milling described in (1). The solid is thermo-sensitive. This could lead to cooling as all milling is accompanied by heat emission. The coolant could be: dry, cold air; in wet operation, the presence of water is enough to absorb the heat released and, therefore, to control overheating. A soft solid could not be milled properly in this state. Cryogenic cooling will make it breakable, brittle and therefore easily milled. The moderate presence of fines, in humid way, increases the capacity by giving the pulp viscosity, which prevents particles that are trapped between two balls from escaping. On the other hand, if the pulp is too viscous, it acts as a cushion between balls and reduces the milling efficiency. As a result, dilution must be increased if the amount of fines increases.  An amorphous pectin “cement” that maintains cohesion between cells. This layer is a cellular secretion that is made of protopectin, which is a copolymer of galacturonic acid and its methyl ester. Pectic cement could contain lignin in a proportion that increases with the plant’s age. It results that, wood could contain up to 40% lignin. Contrary to protopectin which depolymerizes with heat, lignin is temperature insensitive. A cellulose envelope that is equally insensitive to heat. It is a cellular secretion. The water-permeable cytoplasmic membrane. The cytoplasm which is also called the cell body. Cytoplasm includes transparent hyaloplasm that is mainly composed of water. Inside the hyaloplasm, there are inclusions which are basically vacuoles and plastids. Vacuoles, plentiful in the flesh of fruits and rare in seeds, are pockets of aqueous solutions of sugars, acids and salts. This is where we find beet sugar and cane sugar. The vacuole membrane is semi-permeable. For water, osmosis laws apply. For solutes, crossing the membrane is done by a preliminary combining with protein carriers called permeases. In other words, the simple chemical potential, gradient does not express translate into the transfer of solutes but only the transfer of water. Vacuoles give the cell turgor phenomenon that we will examine further. Plastids and inert enclaves. These enclaves could contain: starch (amyloplastids), found in seeds; proteins: hard wheat (rich in proteins) is used for making pasta and soft wheat (rich in starch) used to make bread; lipid droplets (in oilseeds); pigments (chloroplasts contain chlorophyll); inorganic corpuscles; air (especially in some plants growing in softwater like milfoil, or even in some oilseeds).  the cell nucleus; various inclusions that we will not mention. Parenchyma: It is the connective tissue that forms the ‘flesh’ in fruit, roots and stems. Extracellular air: There could be air pockets in the parenchyma between cells. As such, in an apple, the volume taken up by air could reach 20–25% of the fruit’s volume. In peaches, air volume gets to 15% and only 1% in potatoes. Mechanical resistance in the cellulose layer of the cellular membrane defines the nature of fracture surfaces of the parenchyma after deformation and fracture of the pectic cement. If the cellulose layer is only slightly resistant, the cellular membrane breaks and liberates the cell contents and, particularly, the sweet juices of its vacuoles. This is the reason why some fruits taste sweet when chewed. If, inversely, the cellulose layer is resistant, the cell will remain intact during fracture because cracks in the pectic cement will spread among themselves. The fruit will then have a mealy taste. Air inclusions in oilseed cells are obstacles for oil or miscella migration. A thick cell membrane also makes oil extraction difficult. If cells are small in size, the flow of oil or miscella between them will be much more difficult because the permeability of a porous medium is inversely proportional to the grain diameter squared.  Let us write, with the help of chemical potentials, the liquid–vapor equilibrium of pure water: π is the tension of pure water vapor at a temperature T. More specifically, this relationship can be written as: P Let us now write the equilibrium between the surrounding atmosphere and the liquid in the vacuole, where water has a molar fraction x, and pressure in the vacuole being P P  a Subtracting component by component in P RT[Ln a From: Let us set: P Practically, the turgescence pressure could reach 15 bars. To measure this pressure experimentally, we use a hygrometer that gives the relative humidity ε of the surroundings, kills the cells by freezing them and then measure water activity a As such, a plant placed in a dry atmosphere will wither because its cell vacuoles empty their water as the turgescence pressure is low.  An increase in temperature to 90 coagulates protein inclusions and precipitates phosphatides; these products are no longer carried in the juice or in oil, which improves quality; kills bacteria as well as hydrolyzing enzymes that generate fatty acids (that gives oil a bad taste). If a higher temperature is maintained during extraction, the viscosity of juices, oils or miscella will be reduced and extraction is easier. Temperature alone has no effect on cellulose and lignin. Mutual cohesion of cellulose chains (which is a polysaccharide) of the cellular membrane is due to transverse hydrogen bonds involving OH groups from the cellulosic molecule. However, water establishes the same type of bonds with its OH groups to the detriment of bonds between chains. The outcome is that the cellulosic membrane swells. Basically, it is well understood that wood swells with humidity and that cotton (which is pure cellulose) easily fills with water. The uncoupled cellulose chains can allow for non-polar organic liquids to pass, that is liquids without any affinity for cellulose. The cellulosic membrane will act as a porous membrane in a way that: moderate humidity will open “pores”; excessive humidity will fill pores and prevent hydrophobic liquids (solvents, oil) to pass through the membrane similar to how a blotting paper that is filled with water is oil impermeable. This is why hydrothermal processing of oilseeds is followed by drying before oil extraction.  The peptic cement being softened, the plant tissue acquires plasticity and this explains the possibility to flatten oilseed flours to microscale. It is also the reason why cooked vegetables and fruits are much softer than in their raw state. These two operations, separately or together, kill cells. The selective permeability of membranes disappears and penetration by foreign substances becomes possible, as well as making the exudation of internal substances easier. Rocks, earth and sand in plants and seeds lead to untimely material wear and their presence is detrimental to the quality of the final product. Plant debris (bracts, leaves, twigs from mechanical gathering) decompose during storage because, if there is an excess of moisture in seeds, there is fermentation and overheating. Storage must then be ventilated (wheat, cotton). Metallic debris could lead to sparks that may generate fires and even an explosion. Preliminary scrubbing is a form of separation that can be done: by a pneumatic path; by screening; by a hydraulic path (washing); by a magnetic path.  Green peas being poured into an ascending air current will have any dust carried away. Air currents carry away light hulls of oilseeds, plant debris and, of course, dust. It is possible to separate debris from hulls and kernels by placing the product in a drum swept by air and wit turning bats. 2) Screening: Almonds are denser than hulls and pass through the plane of the screen if the screen has a reasonably sized opening. Stone debris are denser than almonds and could equally be separated by screening. 3) Washing: Washing is not suitable for fruits and vegetables and is avoided for seeds. Spinach and asparagus are immersed in a turbulent water current that removes earth and sand. Water may be chlorinated. In a gutter, water pulls out peas and leaves the earth and sand behind. Light plant debris float in a tank full of water. Plants could be rinsed under a water jet in a rotating drum. Citrus fruits are brushed during washing. A detergent solution bath removes pesticides from apples. 4) Magnetic scrubbing: A magnet placed in a different direction attracts ferrous-based debris. There are two types of magnets: the turning drum with continuous debris separation; the plate that is cleaned manually. We can distinguish:  rolling oilseed almonds; cutting sugar beet chips. 1) Grinding: This operation can take place using a hammer or a disc mill. The capacity of a hammer mill is much higher but it does not grind as fine as a disc mill does. We can then obtain the nectars of certain fruits directly. With more general milling of entire apples, hard debris remain which ultimately make the pressing operation which produces juice, easier because they avoid clogging the product bed. Coffee is ground in mills with grooved cylinders and the grain size achieved is approximately between 0.4 and 0.8 2) Rolling: Diffusion theory in a thin plate shows that the Fourier number increase is inversely proportional to the plate thickness squared. This means that, during solvent extraction, depletion of the product will be made easier if it is shaped into thin plates. Filtration theory shows that the pressure required for a liquid to pass through a plate increases proportionally to the plate thickness. Pressing theory makes use of this fact. For these reasons, there is every advantage to processing particles of product into thin plates, but a third reason is that the porosity of a bed of loose plates is much greater than the porosity of a bed of spheres. The interstitial spaces that are then maintained make it easier for the liquid phase to circulate as much during pressing as in solvent extraction.  The two cylinders turn at different speeds and the faster cylinder pulls the product to the surface. The thickness of oilseed flour flakes or even the fineness of cereal flour is adjusted by acting on the gap separating the surfaces of the two cylinders. Cereals which are slightly moist give little mutual cohesion when milling flour grains, while oilseeds, with preliminary moisture added, are transformed into micro-flakes that are relatively coherent and that do not break down into independent particles. Oil, still enclosed on the inside of cells, but having been partially exuded under cylinder pressure, can help with flake cohesion. Oilseed flour production using smooth cylinder mills is about 0.6 ton.day 3) Cutting: For the same reasons as oilseed flour, sugar beets are fragmented into chips (cosettes) before sugar extraction. Chips are shaped like tiles with V-shaped sections, the height of the V ranges between 2 and 6 All fruits have at least one seed made up of an almond and enclosed in a hull. The hulling operation is made up of separating the almond and the hull and it is important in the oilseed industry. The most popular equipment used for this operates under three distinct principles: collision that bursts the seed;  abrasion. 1) Cutting equipment: A recent type is made up of a drum with knives turning on the inside of a fixed cylinder (the concave) also holding knives on a fraction of its perimeter. The gap between the drum and concave is adjustable, which helps to control the fineness of fragments obtained. This equipment is used for cotton. Another type of equipment (used for sunflower) is made up of a disc with a vertical axle with radially fixed blades fixed and inclined in relation to the disc’s surface. The product is fed from the top, subjected to blade action and is projected to the periphery by centrifugal force. It is collected in the bowl that holds the disc. Rotation of the disc axle is also the bowl’s axis of symmetry (immobile). The product flows by gravity along the wall of the bowl and it is collected at the tip of the cone. Equipment with knives are collision devices. 2) Squirrel Cage Husker: A collision device that can be used for sunflowers. The rotor is a squirrel cage that projects seeds against a cylindrical stator equipped with longitudinal channels on one part of its perimeter. 3) Centrifuge Husker: This system is used for rapeseeds and it is called a desheller. Seeds are placed in the center of the rotor, ejected along the grooves of the latter and projected against the cylindrical target surrounding the rotor. Here, the seed undergoes only one collision. The rotor rotates at 3,000 rev.mn 4) Disc Husker: This equipment operates by squeezing and shearing. Seeds are placed in the center of the two discs that are facing each other. The two discs turn at different speeds and they are streaked radially. Seeds are squeezed and ejected to the periphery by a centrifugal force. The face of each disc is slightly conical to allow for placing the product in the center. The section This equipment is suitable for cotton and sunflowers. 5) Roller Husker: The seed is broken down between two grooved rollers that squeeze and shear seeds because they do not turn at the same speed. Soya can be processed in this way. 6) Abrasion Husker: It is used for chestnuts. Potatoes, which have a spheroidal shape and are prone to collisions, are peeled in a turning chamber with abrasive walls, just before their usage. Yellow peaches, carrots, turnips and salsify are peeled by immersing them in a hot alkaline solution (95 Onions are peeled by twisting, that is using a very hot air current. Green peas are extracted by threshing them in a drum. Sugar cane fractionation requires two steps: passing through the cane-cutter; reduction and disintegration in the hammer mill. Canes slide on a metallic tablet inclined roughly 30° horizontally on the top of the cane bed. A perpendicular horizontal axle, turns in the same direction as the canes. This axle has six knives on a circle, with 5  In both cases, the power consumed is approximately 20–25 Cane then goes into hammer mills that tear the tissues. The rotor, on a horizontal axle, turns at a speed of approximately 1,000 rev.mn The power consumed is, even here, from 20 to 25 The appearing density of the prepared bagasse depends on the production location and varies from 200 to 350 Fruit generally contains a nut (kernel) surrounded by pulp. Separating the pulp from the kernel takes place in the depulping machine (also called dekerneling machine in the olive oil industry). This equipment is made up of a cylinder with perforated sheet metal or even a type of squirrel cage with bars. In the inside of the cylinder or the cage turns a shaft covered with pallets or bats. The ferrule (cylinder or cage) turns to generate centrifugal acceleration. The shaft with pallets also turns. The difference in respective rotation speeds is marked, in such a way that the product is subjected to significant and repeated collisions. The shaft with pallets could even turn in the opposite direction to the ferrule. The slurry that contains the pulp goes through the ferrule and kernels are removed at the opposite end of the feed. The tomato juicer operates on the same principle.  The stoning machine acts as a preliminary operation in making jams (peach, apricot, tomato) or nectars. Even though no fruit is involved, dried tobacco leaves are subjected to a threshing operation to separate ribs from the parenchyma.