Commercial supply, from several steel manufacturers, of low-silicon non-grain-oriented electrical steel was monitored over a span of several years. A total of 51 samples were selected—selected from many hundreds on the basis of large differences in magnetic properties, but absence of significant variations in chemistry (other than differences in silicon percentage). The selected samples were analyzed for crystallographic texture and for grain size.
                  The data were carefully analyzed to bring out the effects of metallurgical variables, namely silicon %, grain size and crystallographic texture, on the magnetic properties using explicit functional relationships as well as artificial neural network (ANN). Among the explicit relationships, power law relationship appears to offer a best fit between magnetic properties and the metallurgical factors. ANN approach to the relationship, however, brought out predicted values with least error.Though less ‘talked about’ than their more illustrious counterpart—the grain-oriented electrical steel In a motor manufacturing industry, the cheapest and the most common grade of lamination steel, the so-called zero-silicon or low-silicon grade Over a period of several years, magnetic properties of low-silicon lamination grade were monitored. It is important, at this stage, to introduce the concepts The crystallographic textures and grain sizes were also estimated for the selected samples. Measurements were obtained both at mid-thickness and near the surface, and an average value of these two sections was considered as representative for the respective sample. Conventional metallography and image analysis was used for grain size measurements. At least 200 grains were measured at random using standard linear intercept method. A Panalytical MRD system was used for measurements of crystallographic texture. X-ray ODFs (orientation distribution functions) were obtained by inversion of four incomplete pole figures using the program MTM–FHM The metallurgical factors considered for the present study are grain size, texture factor and percentage silicon, while the magnetic properties considered are permeability and watt loss. In order to estimate inter-relationships between these variables, linear statistical correlation coefficients ( As shown in Eq. An attempt was also made to find explicit empirical relationships (e.g. linear, power and exponential) between magnetic properties and metallurgical factors by minimizing the error between experimental and predicted values of magnetic properties. In such analysis, however, errors are normally assumed to be associated only with the magnetic properties. The metallurgical factors are taken more as sacrosanct. In reality this cannot be true. To expand this further, the concept of ‘geometric mean regression’ was used Attempt was also made to predict the magnetic properties for varying metallurgical factors using artificial neural network (ANN). To provide a comparative data set for the ANN ‘fit’, both magnetic properties and the metallurgical factors were scaled between 0 and 1. A generalized regression neural network from MATLAB (referred as GRNN) neural network tool box was used  Though linear statistical correlation factors, as in As mentioned earlier in The typical processing of non-grain-oriented electrical steel involves liquid metal processing, including continuous or thin slab casting, hot and cold rolling An increase in permeability and in watt loss was observed with decrease in silicon content. An increase in Si content is expected to increase resistivity and correspondingly reduce watt loss, while increased Si content is linked to reduced magnetic induction and a drop in permeability The effect of grain size on watt loss can be divided in terms of hysteresis and eddy current losses The role of crystallographic texture is based on the relation between crystallographic direction and magneto-crystalline anisotropic energy The relative effects of the metallurgical factors on the magnetic properties is reflected on the so-called linear statistical correlation values, see Watt loss and permeability reduced with drop in silicon content, while increase in grain size (till an optimum grain size) and in texture factor [(0 Among the explicit relationships, between the magnetic properties and metallurgical factors, power law appears to offer the best fit. Relationships obtained by ANN, however, offered the least error. The authors would like to acknowledge the National Facility of Texture and OIM at IIT Bombay for texture measurements.