The experimental discernment of TCIs (topological crystalline insulators) and other Dirac materials in recent times, has opened a new platform for their applications in spin-electronics and quantum computing. A very promising material in thermoelectric and photovoltaic applications, namely SnTe, has been increasingly investigated by band engineering, however, there is not sufficient verification of any band-crossing characteristics or evolution of Weyl nodes yet. In this present study, we investigate a novel class of possible substitutional solid solutions of Sn, Te, and P of varying compositions by density functional theory, where specific crystal symmetry elements may allow the existence of robust topological states. With fine tuning of chemical composition, one can also locate the existence of Dirac-like nodes at certain points of the Brillouin zone from preliminary first-principle calculations. Apart from simulations, synthesis and structural examinations of Sn-Te-P, were also conducted. The structural analysis of a representative member of this system was also carried out with the help of the simulated XRD patterns, to indicate the existence of a new phase during synthesis in a condensed system combustion.Topological insulators In contrast, Weyl semimetals Initially, most of the research for TIs and other Dirac materials was focused on a theoretical framework, however, recently, many of those predicted materials were realized experimentally. Some of the examples are SnTe SnTe is emerging as an attractive option for applications such as thermoelectric devices, photovoltaics, photodetectors, and IR detectors. The band-gap of SnTe can be engineered by changing the particle size. SnTe, normally exhibits a band-gap of ∼0.18 eV that can be changed up to ∼0.80 eV. Although many different TI materials and Weyl semi-metals have been proposed and synthesized experimentally, the perceived toxicity of constituent elements can restrict their use and hence limit the applications. Hence, the author's goal for this paper is to develop new Dirac materials that exhibit the similar fascinating non-trivial topological properties without using environmentally unfriendly precursors. For SnTe, some modifications have been done by substituting the Sn atom with metallic impurities such as Mg (Sn A possibility of topological phase transition exists between two distinct TI phases but under the prerequisite of bulk-edge correspondence. Under this assumption, the band-gap must close at the phase transition point. This is mainly due to need to retain the quantized value of topological number unless the gap is closed The discovery of crystalline topological insulators was a landmark in condensed matter physics and furnished good prospects in spin-electronics and quantum computing In this search for new and modified TCIs, SnTe was the first material discovered to possess topological properties In recent years substitutional solid solutions of IV-VI semiconductors like Pb In our present study, we investigate a novel class of possible substitutional solid solutions of Sn, Te and P, where certain determined crystalline symmetries allow the preservation of these metallic states on the surface. It is interesting to note that this system of Sn, Te, and P may form a substitutional solid solution due to their congruency in electronegativity and atomic size. During the investigation of topological states in such a semi-metal, the fact that the role of P in transition metal monopnictide (TMMPs) TaP, NbP and NbAs helps in violating the inversion symmetry acted as our inspiration to study these classes of compounds Tin powder (purity ∼ 99.8%) was purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Red Phosphorus of purity∼ 99.9% was procured from Alfa Aesar (USA). Tellurium lump (∼12 mm, 99.9999% metals basis) was obtained from Alfa Aesar (USA). For the experimental synthesis of these substitutional solid solutions of Sn, Te and P, a sealed quartz ampoule of 10 cm length, an inner diameter of 1.0 cm and a wall thickness of 0.1 cm was used with the above-mentioned elements as precursors. Sn, Te, and P in the starting stoichiometric ratio of 0.5,1 and 0.5 (Sn A Rigaku –Miniflex benchtop X-ray diffractometer (Cu Kα radiation) was used for acquiring the XRD pattern. Analysis of diffraction pattern and peaks was done using a PDXL powder diffraction analysis software suite. We used the 2θ range 20–80° for the XRD measurement. The simulation of the XRD pattern for the different compositions of Sn, Te, and P was carried out using PowderCell 2.0. The experimentation of the XRD was executed by using the space group, atomic positions and lattice constants as inputs for constructing the initial structure. Cu was chosen as the anode material for diffraction and the diffraction was carried out over the same 2θ range 20–80°. The full width at half maximum (FWHM) was taken as 7 and a fixed slit system was used for the investigation. Scanning electron microscopy was performed using an FEI NOVA NANOSEM High-Resolution Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope. An emission current of ∼15 μA and accelerating voltage of ∼ 3 kV were used for most of the measurements. Energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS) mapping was conducted for elemental analysis, using an Oxford EDX detector unit attached to the SEM. The General Gradient Approximation (GGA) with Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange-correlation functional Spin-orbit coupling was adjusted into our calculations due to the presence of Te by setting the spin parameter to A limited memory Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno (LBFGS) algorithm was employed in order to achieve structural optimization. We used the maximum number of steps in the optimization as 200 with the maximum step size as 0.2 Å. For the lattice relaxation, the convergence criteria was set to 0.01 eV A In the inspection of a novel class of crystalline topological insulator that breaks time-reversal symmetry, yet preserves topological states, we have to focus on such crystals with a deficiency of mirror plane symmetry. We have investigated an interesting narrow-band semiconductor SnTe, which after substitution of P in different stoichiometries, results in the formation of substitutional solid solutions of Sn-Te-P of varying compositions. The resulting symmetry operators and space groups of the substitutional solid solutions presumably render specific crystalline symmetries and hence permits the topological protection of metallic states. Hence, systematic calculations have been performed to investigate the intrinsic features of the electronic and topological ground states for these substitutional solid solutions. SnTe crystallizes in rocksalt crystal structure (FCC) [see All the resulting crystals of Sn There might be points not located along the high-symmetry directions, where the winding of the conduction and the valence band can materialize. Thus arises the necessity of calculating the band-structure throughout the entire Brillouin zone. For this, we have chosen the entire Brillouin zone route of The band-structure of SnTe exhibits that of a typical narrow band semiconductor (See  Electron density difference indicates the difference between a standard electron density and the real DFT computed electron density. Basically, these plots show us the difference between the faked superposed atomic densities from the density of a molecule. We perceived two distinct phases in the sealed quartz ampoules as a result of the condensed system reaction; one being the bulk crystal (predominant phase) settling at the bottom of the quartz ampoules and the other being the needle-like network of crystals which formed on the upper portion of the quartz ampoule walls. These needle-like crystals will be studied and investigated in a separate report. A vivid description of the experimental setup along with the synthesized material has been represented in An X-ray diffractogram was also taken for the bulk crystal (see In this investigation of a novel system of Sn-Te-P, it was observed from the first principle calculations that there is significant variation in the crystal structure, space group, and band-structure compared with pristine SnTe. It was also observed that all the resulting crystals of Sn