The extraction of lead from a galena concentrate in nitric acid solutions with additional hydrogen peroxide was studied taking stirring speed, temperature, hydrogen peroxide and nitric acid concentrations, and particle size as dissolution parameters. The dissolution curves followed the surface chemical reaction controlled shrinking core model over the whole range of parameters, except at high nitric acid concentrations where the reaction was diffusion-controlled. The activation energy of 42 kJ mol−1 and a linear relationship between rate and inverse particle size support the reaction controlled dissolution mechanism. Hydrogen peroxide addition accelerated the reaction compared with nitric acid alone. It was concluded that the dissolution process is favourable, since the acid consumed for oxidation of galena can easily be regenerated in the same reactor by means of hydrogen peroxide.The mineral galena, PbS, is the most important sulphide lead mineral and is generally treated pyrometallurgically. However, lead smelting faces difficulties with respect to environmental regulations. Therefore, the hydrometallurgical recovery of lead from galena may be a promising process with environmentally inert elemental sulphur being formed instead of sulphur dioxide, ( Sulphate hydrometallurgical systems are well studied because of the availability and low cost of sulphuric acid, in addition the relatively low solubility of lead sulphate results in better selectivity for lead. Chloride systems are based on the temperature dependence of lead chloride solubility or formation of soluble complex ions in concentrated chloride solutions. However, it has been reported that neither chloride nor sulphate systems were acceptable to industry, mainly due to the low solubility of lead sulphate and chloride in water. There are also various studies on the dissolution of galena in nitric acid solutions or nitrate media with or without oxidants ( Although a large number of papers have examined galena oxidation ( The nitric acid can be regenerated in the same vessel by adding an oxidizing agent, thereby decreasing acid consumption. Hydrogen peroxide is a strong oxidant and environmentally safe reagent as apart from water no other reaction products generated during the dissolution of sulphide minerals. This present study gives the results obtained from a kinetic study of galena leaching in nitric acid solutions containing also hydrogen peroxide at mild conditions. The effects of stirring speed, temperature, nitric acid and hydrogen peroxide concentrations and particle size on the kinetic parameters of galena dissolution were investigated. A galena concentrate sample was obtained from the Koyulhisar complex sulphide ore concentrator in Sivas, Turkey. The sample was sieved into three size fractions (0.045–0.075, 0.075–0.106 and 0.106–0.212 mm). Chemical analysis of each size fraction is given in The dissolution experiments were carried out in a closed, thermostatted, 1 L stirred glass reactor. After adding 500 mL of hydrogen peroxide and nitric acid at the desired concentrations into the reactor and attaining temperature, 1.0 g of the galena sample was added. Samples of solution were withdrawn from the reactor at various time intervals up to 150 min and lead concentration was determined using flame atomic absorption spectrometer. Each experiment was repeated at least three times and arithmetic mean of the results was used for evaluation of the experimental results. To resolve the effect of stirring speed on the rate of galena dissolution, experiments were carried out at various stirring speeds under constant conditions. The rate of galena dissolution was found to be independent of the stirring speed. However, a slight decrease in the rate was detected when stirring speed was increased to 600 min The experiments achieved to determine the effect of temperature on galena dissolution were carried out in the 23–60 °C temperature range in solutions containing 0.5 M HNO The fraction of lead extracted after 50 min was 0.74, 0.87 and 1.0 at 40, 50 and 60 °C, respectively. By using the rate constants derived from the slopes in It has been generally accepted that a diffusion-controlled process is characterized by being slightly dependent on temperature, while the chemically controlled process is strongly dependent on temperature. The reason is that diffusion coefficient, In order to determine the effects of hydrogen peroxide concentration, the experiments were performed by varying the initial H Similarly for nitric acid, experiments were performed using five different HNO  In order to determine whether the nitrogen oxide converted to nitric acid or not, pH change during the leaching was monitored and it was observed that pH of the solution did not significantly change in the course of the experiments performed at various temperatures. However, observing the pH change during leaching at various HNO The effect of particle size on the rate of galena dissolution was examined by measuring the reaction rates for three different size fractions (0.045–0.075, 0.075–0.106 and 0.106–0.212 mm) at 50 °C in solutions containing 1.0 M H The dissolution of galena with hydrogen peroxide in nitric acid was studied. On the basis of the results, the rate of galena dissolution was independent of stirring speed indicating that the oxidation reaction was not controlled by diffusion in the aqueous phase. It was found that there is a linear relationship between the rate constant and the inverse of particle size, confirming that the dissolution kinetics follows the shrinking core model with the surface chemical reaction as the rate controlling step. Increasing the hydrogen peroxide concentration increases galena dissolution, and increasing the nitric acid concentration, up to 0.75 M for this study, accelerates galena dissolution. Empirical orders of the galena dissolution reaction with respect to hydrogen peroxide and nitric acid concentrations were 0.61 and 0.92, respectively. The activation energy was found at 42.26 kJ mol This study was supported by The Research Foundation of Selcuk University.