Ten patients (11 feet) with severe, high-velocity, open injuries to the midfoot were treated with uniplanar external fixation. The mean patient age was 38 years. Five wounds measured >10 cm, and 3 had extensive degloving of the foot extending into the lower leg. All had grossly comminuted fractures of the tarsal and metatarsal bones: 9 patients had a fractured cuboid; 6 had a fractured navicular; 7 had a fractured cuneiform; and all had metatarsal fractures. Lisfranc joint dislocations were present in 7 feet, and intertarsal dislocations were seen in 3 cases. Six patients underwent split-thickness skin grafting, and 1 required a myocutaneous flap. The average duration of fixator use was 9 weeks (range, 6–15 weeks). Clinically, patients were evaluated 1 year after fixator removal for any residual pain in the foot, ability to stand on tiptoe, presence of a limp, deformity of an arch, and range of motion at the ankle, subtalar, and metatarsophalangeal joints. Each parameter was graded as good, fair, or poor. All patients had sensate plantigrade feet, with 2 patients who experienced pain on weight bearing, 5 who had difficulty standing comfortably on tiptoe, and 2 who limped because of pain. Three patients exhibited flatfoot deformity, whereas 4 had cavus deformity. All demonstrated stiffness at the midfoot and restriction of subtalar and forefoot motion, with 5 also having restricted ankle motion. Radiographically, all fractures were healed at the time of follow-up; 4 were malunited, with 1 demonstrating ankylosis across the tarsometatarsal joint. These results suggest that crush injuries to the midfoot often result in persistent morbidity despite early comprehensive management with external fixation.Nav, Mt 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 Phal 2, 3, 4, 5 Cub, Nav, Cunie 1, 2, 3 Mt 2, 3, 4 Cub 2, Mt 3, 4, 5 PP ×1 Nav, Cub, Cunie 1, 2, 3 Mt 3 Nav, Cub, Cunie 1, 2, 3 Mt 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 Cub, Cunie 1, 2, 3 Mt 5 Cunie 1, 2 Mt 2, 3, 4, 5 Cub, Cunie 2, 3 Mt 4, 5 Cub, Lat cunie Mt 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 Cub, Nav, Mt 2, 3, 4 PP 1 Crush injuries to the foot are categorized as serious injuries and potentially can lead to amputation. A complex combination of soft tissue and bony injury may occur with multiple fractures of the tarsal and metatarsal bones, resulting in an unstable foot. Initial management includes wound debridement, anatomic realignment of the foot, stabilization of the fractures, and soft tissue coverage ( Traditionally, fractures and dislocations have been reduced by open or closed methods and maintained by multiple smooth Kirschner wires or screws augmented by plaster immobilization ( Despite a comprehensive treatment protocol for patients with crush injuries to the foot, functional results are not uniformly good ( The management of severe injuries to the foot with external fixation is minimally invasive, thereby reducing further devascularization ( Ten patients (11 feet) who presented to the emergency department with severe midfoot injuries were included in the study. All patients were seen by one of the authors at presentation; patients with complex midfoot injuries were identified and recruited. A complex injury was defined as an open, high-velocity injury to the midfoot, with unstable fractures or fracture dislocations that involved more than 1 level, were severely comminuted, and were associated with extensive soft tissue damage. Isolated fractures of the calcaneus, talus, and simple closed fractures of the remaining tarsal, metatarsal, or phalangeal bones were excluded from this study. After an initial general assessment and resuscitation, details were collected regarding the type and mechanism of injury to the foot. A complete clinical evaluation of the patient was performed with special attention to the foot. Assessment included the condition of the skin, the extent of the soft tissue injury, contamination, bony injury, and a neurovascular evaluation of the foot. The wound was copiously irrigated with saline solution and covered with a sterile dressing. All patients were checked for tetanus prophylaxis history and received antibiotic coverage. Anteroposterior (AP), lateral, and oblique radiographs of the foot were obtained to identify the bony injury, type of fracture, extent of comminution, and displacement and evidence of any subluxation or dislocation. The pattern of injury was identified depending on involvement of the medial and/or lateral columns. At the time of surgery, the wound was adequately debrided and irrigated. Fractures, dislocations, and subluxations were identified and reduced. All fractures and dislocations were reduced by either direct or indirect manipulation. Open reduction of intraarticular fractures was performed whenever possible to achieve anatomic reduction. Initially, Kirschner wires were used to stabilize the fractures/dislocations, and the foot was held to length by an assistant while the external fixator was applied. The external fixator was constructed with Kirschner wires and connecting rods. The connecting rod was threaded and had clamps for attachment to the Kirschner wires. Using this device, compression or distraction could be achieved by rotating the threaded rod. The frame of the external fixator was built by first passing 2 Kirschner wires in the safe zone of the calcaneus ( Radiographs were taken intraoperatively to check for accuracy of reduction according to the following radiographic criteria: 1) congruity of the midtarsal and tarsometatarsal joints on AP, lateral, and oblique views; 2) continuity between the medial aspect of second metatarsal with the medial aspect of the second cuneiform (Lisfranc joint); and 3) continuity between the medial aspect of the fourth metatarsal with the medial aspect of the cuboid (Lisfranc joint). Displacement of less than 2 mm was considered acceptable. All wounds were reevaluated after 48 hours and redebrided if necessary. Patients with skin and soft tissue loss were treated with split-thickness skin grafting or vascularized free-tissue transfer. Plaster splints were used in patients with additional ankle or leg injuries. Patients were allowed active ankle and metatarsophalangeal joint range-of-motion exercises immediately after surgery. Postoperatively, AP, lateral, and oblique radiographs of the foot were obtained and reassessed with the same criteria. Any loss of reduction or incongruence of the joint surface was noted, and an attempt was made to re-reduce the fracture or subluxation during subsequent wound debridement. The fixator was kept in place for a minimum of 6 weeks or until adequate soft tissue healing was achieved. The frame was removed 2 weeks after satisfactory soft tissue healing was obtained. After fixator removal, all patients were kept nonweight bearing for 3 weeks and then allowed partial weight bearing with a protective boot and arch support for an additional 6 weeks. All patients received comprehensive physiotherapy and gait training. One year after fixator removal, all patients were assessed in the follow-up clinic by one of the authors. Clinical and radiographic evaluation was performed using the following parameters. Residual pain, ability to stand on tiptoe (stability), limp, deformity of the arch (assessed with footprints and differentiated into cavus or flat feet), stiffness (assessed by the ability to pronate and supinate the foot), and range-of-motion measurements of the ankle subtalar and metatarsophalngeal joints were recorded. For each parameter, the results were graded as good, fair, or poor as described in Ten patients (11 feet) who sustained an injury to the midfoot were studied. The mean patient age was 38 years (range, 25–55 years), and 90% were men. All patients had high-velocity injuries due to road traffic accidents. The injury and treatment profiles for all patients can be found in One foot had an isolated lateral column injury, and the remaining had involvement of both the medial and lateral columns. All cases had fractures involving 1 or more tarsal bones. Nine patients had fractured the cuboid, 6 had fractured the navicular, and 7 had fractured cuneiforms. All patients had at least 1 or more metatarsals fractured, with 3 having fractured all the metatarsal bones and 3 having concomitant phalangeal fractures. Seven patients had Lisfranc joint dislocations, and 2 patients had midtarsal dislocations with disruption of intercuneiform and naviculocuneiform joints. One patient had a dislocation of the second, third, and fourth metatarsophalangeal joints. Ten feet required biplanar fixators (on either side of the foot) to support both columns, and 1 patient required stabilization of only the lateral column. Eight feet required additional Kirschner wires to stabilize the fractures. Eight feet required more than 1 wound debridement. Six patients received split-thickness skin grafting, and 1 required a myocutaneous graft to obtain coverage. The average duration of time the fixator was maintained was 9 weeks (range, 6–15 weeks). A longer duration of fixator application was required in patients with large and severely contaminated wounds. Two patients required additional plaster splinting for associated injuries to the ankle and leg. Two patients developed pin tract infections, which were managed by local wound care topical antibiotics. None of the infections were severe enough to require pin relocation. One patient developed compartment syndrome of the foot that required fasciotomy and skin grafting. At 1-year follow-up, all patients had functional feet, all wounds had healed, and all fractures had united. All patients were able to ambulate with full weight bearing, except 1 patient, who was kept partial weight bearing because of a concomitant ipsilateral femur and tibia fracture that required multiple surgeries. No patient developed complex regional pain syndrome. Eight patients (9 feet) reported no complaints of pain (a good outcome), 2 had moderate pain on weight bearing (a fair outcome), and no patient experienced rest pain. The 2 patients who had pain with weight bearing exhibited a malunion of midtarsal and metatarsal fractures. A modification in their shoe gear helped to reduce their symptoms. Six patients were able to stand on tiptoe comfortably (a good outcome), and 5 could stand on tiptoe with difficulty (a fair outcome). Seven were able to walk comfortably (a good outcome), 2 were able to mobilize with some pain (a fair outcome), and 1 patient was still nonweight bearing because of associated injuries. Seven patients (64%) exhibited some degree of arch deformity. Three of these exhibited a flatfoot deformity, 4 had a cavus deformity, and all were rated as having a fair outcome. All patients with flatfoot deformity had double-column injuries associated with Lisfranc joint dislocations and at least 3 metatarsal fractures. In those patients with cavus deformity, 3 had sustained an injury to both the medial and lateral columns and 1 had an isolated lateral-column injury. In terms of ankle joint range of motion, a poor outcome was observed in 2 patients who demonstrated gross restriction of ankle motion, and 3 patients had some restriction in motion (fair outcome), with the remaining patients demonstrating good ankle joint motion. All patients exhibited some stiffness of the subtalar and midfoot joints: 4 patients had gross stiffness (poor outcome) and 2 patients were considered to have a fair result, with the remaining rating a good outcome. Of the patients who demonstrated significant stiffness, 3 exhibited a malunion of the tarsals and metatarsals, with residual abnormal configuration of cuneiforms, cuboid and navicular, and 1 patient had spontaneous fusion across the Lisfranc joint. All patients had restricted metatarsophalangeal joint range of motion, with gross restriction seen in 4 patients (poor outcome) and moderate restriction seen in the remaining 7 (fair outcome). Radiographic assessment at 1 year after fixator removal showed that all fractures had united; 4 patients demonstrated a malunion of metatarsal and tarsal bones. Eight feet demonstrated congruence of all joints, whereas 2 patients demonstrated minimal incongruence at the Lisfranc joint. These 2 patients had initially demonstrated severely comminuted cuneiform and cuboid fractures, and it was difficult to clearly assess the joint line in the postoperative images. One developed a malunion across the Lisfranc joint, with bony ankylosis between the base of the metatarsals and the respective cuneiforms. It was noted that larger wounds required the fixator to remain in place for a longer duration and had a greater potential for residual pain with weight bearing ( In severe injuries to the foot, the severity and pattern of injury play an important role in determining the outcome. Appropriate wound management, stabilization, and early soft tissue coverage all contribute to decreasing the potential morbidity ( Incomplete or loss of reduction of the fracture and dislocation frequently results in permanent disability in the form of chronic pain, persisting deformity, and difficulty with shoe gear ( Although ring fixators play an increasing role in treating such complex injuries, we observed that adequate stability to the foot could be provided with a uniplanar bilateral external fixator ( The use of an external fixator eliminates the need for additional plaster immobilization ( Up to 21% of crush injuries to the foot result in amputation because of either uncontrollable deep sepsis or massive injury ( Pin site infection is known to occur with the use of external fixation in up to 37% of cases ( Chronic pain after crush injuries to the foot can result from neuroischemia, direct trauma to the peripheral nerves, and intraneural or extraneural fibrosis. Direct trauma to the nerve may also cause chronic neuritis, which can trigger a sympathetically mediated pain syndrome ( Nemec et al ( In our series, 49% of cases demonstrated good results and 14% fared poorly. These results are similar to those of Myerson et al ( Consideration should be given to the patient’s bone quality, age, cognitive ability, psychological tolerance, and compliance level when deciding on management of these injuries. With these factors kept in mind, the surgeon should be able to select the patient for whom external fixation will yield a superior result ( This case series demonstrates that crush injuries of the foot are associated with prolonged morbidity, and initial management should be directed toward skeletal stabilization and early soft tissue coverage. The use of external fixation is less invasive, can achieve adequate stability, and provide good access for wound management without compromising stability. However, arch deformity, stiffness, and restriction of subtalar, midfoot, and toe joint motion occur despite appropriate early management.