Clarithromycin (CLA) is an important drug used to treat various bacterial infections, while its effective bioavailability is limited by the poor water-solubility of the CLA molecule. Subcritical water (SBCW) processes have been demonstrated to be a new promising alternative for the preparation of drug nanoparticles with enhanced dissolution rate. In this work, we reported ultrafine CLA nanoparticles via anti-solvent precipitation in subcritical water, with detailed studies on the effects of operating parameters. The corresponding particle morphology, and dissolution rate properties of the CLA nanoparticles were characterized through scanning electronic microscopy (SEM), Fourier transform infrared spectrophotometry (FT-IR), powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) and dissolution tests. Under optimized experimental conditions, which was using 1.5mL of SBCW at 150°C as the solvent and 15 of aqueous PVP solution (0.4wt%) as the anti-solvent, uniform sub-50nm sized CLA nanoparticles are obtained. According to the dissolution testing, the ultrafine CLA nanoparticles exhibit very high dissolution rate (over 85% at 60min) compared with that of raw CLA (10% at 60min). Our results suggest that as-synthesized ultrafine CLA nanoparticles via anti-solvent precipitation in subcritical water are promising for efficient therapy.Clarithromycin (CLA), a broad-spectrum macrolide, is primarily used to treat various bacterial infections, such as strep throat, pneumonia, skin infections, Lyme disease, and just to name a few Subcritical water (SBCW), which is held by pressure (up to 70 In this work, we reported ultrafine CLA nanoparticles via anti-solvent precipitation in subcritical water, with detailed studies on the effects of operating parameters. The various processing parameters, such as the temperature of the SBCW solution, regular water (as anti-solvent), were investigated. Non-toxic and biocompatible PVP was used as stabilizers during the anti-solvent precipitation to prepare sub-50 The clarithromycin (≥ The morphology studies were performed using a JEOL JSM-6360LV scanning electron microscope (SEM). Typically, a glass slide with the sample was fixed on an aluminum stub using double-sided adhesive tape and sputter coated with Au at 50 The setup of SBCW apparatus is similar to our previous reports with some modifications Typically, the micro reactor (MR) had an internal volume of 6.4 The dissolution tests for the drug powder were carried out using a dissolution apparatus (D-800LS, Tianjin, China) through the USP Apparatus II (paddle) method To investigate the effects of temperature to the synthesis of CLA nanoparticles, various experimental conditions were used to prepare the CLA nanoparticles ( The formation of CLA nanoparticles by the SBCW process were depicted in  Previous studies on poorly soluble drugs have demonstrated that particle size reduction can lead to an increased rate of dissolution and higher oral bioavailability In order to determine the component of CLA nanoparticles obtained by using PVP-assisted synthesis method, XRD and FTIR of raw CLA, raw PVP and NanoCLA/PVP were measured. According to the XRD patterns in The dissolution profiles of the raw CLA ( The uniform CLA nanoparticles were successfully prepared using the SBCW process. The effects of SBCW solution temperatures, anti-solvent temperatures and PVP mass concentrations on the mean particle size and size distribution of CLA were investigated. By increasing the SBCW solution temperature (up to 170 We are grateful for financial support from the