Ground-penetrating Radar (GPR) and Electrical Resistivity Tomography (ERT) have been fruitfully employed for archaeological purposes. An area at the Pancorbo medieval site in Burgos (Spain) has been jointly explored by GPR and ERT in the search for the buried remains of the Pancorbo medieval village.
                  After data collection, quality control and merging, a shallow depth of interest was identified and studied in detail. 3D resistivity simulation, considering sensible geometrical structures of the targets helped discover anomalies present in the area. On the other hand, visual GPR inspection was considerably enhanced by trace energy attribute analysis which provided a plan view of the existing anomalies. Two posterior archaeological excavations have a very good correlation between the identified anomalies and the excavated remains. The survey also provides hints for the continuation of the excavation.The Pancorbo Castle (Burgos, Spain) has been during the high middle ages a main axis in the Castilla County, south of the Ebro river, which was at the origin of the posterior Castilla Kingdom ( Ground-penetrating Radar (GPR) and Electrical Resistivity Tomography (ERT), have been selected as adequately and cost effective tools for the preliminary exploration of the site. Both can provide quick on-site approximate results, enabling modifications of the survey planning in almost real time and fast operation in broad, topographically demanding areas as was the selected study site. Ground-penetrating Radar (GPR) has been widely employed in non-destructive evaluation for many different engineering purposes: concrete reinforcement testing, pipe location, landmine detection, shallow depth geological investigation, hydrogeophysical studies, forensics and criminology, civil engineering and prevention of geological hazards ( Modern GPR antennae work at central frequencies in a wide range from 10 Although GPR allows certain features to be identified already in the field, some signal processing is usually needed ( Electrical Resistivity Tomography (ERT) is largely used in subsurface applications, for example in hydrogeology ( ERT profiles have been performed using the multichannel Advanced Geoscience SuperSting R8 ( The Pancorbo Castle lies at the left side of the Oroncillo river, above the modern village of Pancorbo in Burgos (Northern Spain), at the bottom of the Pancorbo gorge, a natural defile of extraordinary historical relevance (see The archaeological ensemble contains three units: the castle itself, on top of an almost inaccessible calcareous outcrop (696 Twenty six GPR 40 Although the use of frequency antennae with less than lower 500 The GPR profiles were downloaded and imported into REFLEXW™ ( Six 41 After a quality control step to filter noisy data (error higher than 3%), only less than 2% of the measurements from the Wenner-Schlumberger profiles ( Subsequent inversion was performed using the commercial software Earth Imager 2D ( The data collected over 2D profiles give, after a 2D inversion process, an image where targets are assumed to lie inside the vertical cross section containing the surface profile. But this neglects both the true 3D nature of the real sought targets and the chances for them to be located underground off the measured profile. 3D ERT modelling with the BERT software ( One representative 2D true resistivity section has been obtained for each measured profile after having considered non-uniqueness issues by careful examination of the variation of the resistivity distribution with different parameters in the set-up (different initial models, inversion methods or regularization parameters). These 2D resistivity cross sections are shown in their correct 3D position in The shallowest two meters, examined also by the GPR survey, present a heterogeneous resistivity distribution in the range between 100 and 2000 Ωm. Comparison between ERT and GPR images is only possible -due to the GPR vertical span- to an approximate depth of two meters. On the other hand, all GPR profiles show similar features: (i) a uniform and almost horizontal initial part (about 10 The increase of penetration depth in these GPR anomalous zones is consistent with a higher resistivity, and the complex texture is explainable due to an accumulation of decimetre-size stones. This kind of anomaly is reported by several authors in literature ( Coincident ERT and GPR profiles show anomalies in the same zones ( The anomalies in radargrams have been qualitatively described as having a relative increased penetration depths and “complex” texture. To characterize them in simple but more objective manner, the concept of trace energy is used ( The energy of each trace is assigned to the plane coordinates of its horizontal position in the study area. Three anomalous areas where identified on this plot as candidates for excavation by absence of alternative plausible explanations, referred to as areas 1, 2 and 3. A big excavation was performed in area 3, to analyse its structural appearance, and a smaller one was devoted to check the connection between areas 1 and 2. These excavations (see In the excavation of area 3, three buildings dated between XIII and XV centuries have been found which very clearly follow the geometry of the geophysical anomalies. In the second excavation, the remains of other two buildings have been found, still not exhaustively studied. Based on these considerations a new archaeological more intensive survey will be carried out. A combined GPR and ERT survey has been carried over at the Pancorbo site in Burgos (Spain). Besides the standard data collection and processing techniques, 3D numerical simulations for ERT and trace energy attribute analysis for GPR, have helped identify the presence and geometrical structure of underground archaeological remains. The ERT anomalies predicted by the numerical simulations showed a very good correlation with the trace energy anomalies of the GPR data. The correspondence between ERT and GPR make it possible to replace the acquisition of more expensive and cumbersome ERT profiles by faster and cheaper GPR profiles in the exploration of broader areas in this site. The results of the geophysical exploration confirmed the suspected archaeological potential of the area, provided an informed choice as to where two exploratory trenches had to be excavated and gave clues about new possible targets. Remains of buildings and ceramic pieces have been found at the selected places and a new more detailed archaeological survey is being devised to refine the site exploration. Furthermore, the very good condition of the hidden remains supports the hypothesis of an abrupt abandoning of the place and further supports the information that this may be the last Jewry of Pancorbo whose inhabitants have been expelled by the Catholic Kings in 1492. This research was supported by the project “Peasant agency and social complexity in north-western Iberia in the medieval period” (