Several mechanisms contribute to changes in the performance of oxide copper heaps. These include physical, biological, chemical and thermal interactions between sulfuric acid and the formation of soil particles. A series of experimental studies was conducted by simulating the column leaching process in the laboratory. The leaching of selected gravel and crushed copper oxide ores from two copper mines was carried out to measure their permeability and strength. The influence of effective parameters on gravel clogging was studied and the clogging coefficient was estimated with time. Furthermore, the ratio of particle reduction (RPR
                     ) caused by acid seepage was evaluated and an equation for the internal friction angle of ore particles over time was generated. The present study shows significant reductions of gravel permeability (28% after five months leaching) and friction angle of ore particles (25% after eight months leaching). The effects of sulfuric acid flow on the hydro-mechanical properties of oxide copper heap soils could enhance the accuracy of slope stability design and drainage layers design in industrial heap leaching systems.Heap leaching is one of the mineral processing techniques whereby a heap of low grade ore is leached with various solvents to extract precious and base metals. Since the 1950s, it has been practised for the extraction of copper, gold, silver, and uranium ( In heap leaching, most of the solvent percolates as vertical flow channels due to gravity. The zones between the networks of channels are occupied by the semi-stagnant solvent due to the interplay between gravity and capillary forces. If the ratio of gravity to capillary forces will be around one, the solvent is stagnant (held up) between the particles. The increase in stagnant liquid holdup could increase the clogging ( The heap leaching process is simulated at laboratories by column leaching tests. The column dimensions in these tests have considerable ranges depending on the aim of each test. The ratio of the column diameter to the maximum soil particle size should be between 8 and 12 in order to reduce the wall effects ( Clogging coefficient is defined as the ratio of permeability before leaching and permeability after leaching. It consists of physical, chemical and biological characteristics and is important for designing heap leaching systems. A good estimation of these coefficients can be obtained by performing tests on leached samples. Clogging takes place on the top of the heap layers due to particle size segregation. Moreover, clogging is formed in the filter layer, drainage layer and the collection pipes due to the movement of fine particles which may be formed after disintegration. The effective parameters in clogging formation are: particle size distribution, constituent elements, solvent flow rate, aeration, liquid holdup and added reagents and their parameters such as pH ( The slope stability of heap structures has a considerable economic and environmental importance. Shear strength is the most important ore property that can affect the heap capacity and slope stability ( The internal friction angle of soil usually decreases when fluid flows through it. For example, leaching of sands by fresh water can cause a reduction in the friction angle. This reduction is between 1° and 3° in different sand types, for friction angles between 28° and 38° ( In this study, the effects of sulfuric acid flow were investigated on permeability and strength parameters of particles in the heap (drainage gravel and ore particles). Column leaching systems were filled with crushed copper oxide ore and drainage gravel samples. The samples were leached in the cells by sulfuric acid. Direct shear, slake durability, constant head permeability and particle grading tests were performed on the leached samples. The effects of leaching on friction angle, slake durability index, and permeability were studied. The effective parameters of clogging such as leaching duration and the concentration of calcium in the leached particles were investigated and the clogging coefficient was determined. The designed column leaching system consisted of two parts, leaching cell and permeability cell ( The leaching cell was irrigated with acid from top and the pilot flow rate was 2 × 10 Crushed copper oxide ore leaching with pilot acid flow rate is a time-consuming process in a laboratory. The acid flow rates were increased to speed up the leaching tests. Therefore, four types of column tests were conducted with acid flow rates equal to the pilot acid flow rate, and 10, 15, and 20 times the pilot rate for equivalent one month leaching duration. The equivalent leaching duration of each experiment was obtained by multiplying the real duration of test to speed ratio (  In all the column leaching tests, the solvent was sulfuric acid with a concentration of 3 g/L and a pH of 2. The acid flow rate was constant during leaching tests. In the following column leaching tests, two types of particles were used, namely, the crushed copper oxide ore particles and the drainage gravel. The crushed copper ore samples were extracted from Meydouk copper ores (0.39% oxide copper). These samples were crushed (−25 mm) and then agglomerated with acid using an acid to ore weight ratio of 5%. The specific weights of these samples before and after agglomeration were 1.34 g/cm Additional tests were carried out using the leached crushed copper oxide ore samples collected from Sarcheshmeh heap. The samples were leached in the heap for two or four months at the same flow rate. The specific weight of these samples after agglomeration was 1.75 g/cm To study the effects of sulfuric acid leaching on crushed copper oxide ores or drainage gravel, the following tests were performed during or after the leaching tests. To investigate the effects of clogging on permeability of the gravel sample, the constant head permeability tests (ASTM D2434-68) were conducted using one of the permeability cells for one month leaching duration (Test A). This test was not carried out for the Test B (i.e. during leaching period) to avoid any disturbances of clogging formation between the gravel particles and only a permeability test was performed at the end of leaching test. Due to the low percentage of calcium ions present in the gravel and the crushed copper oxide ore samples ( To study the effects of leaching by sulfuric acid on internal friction angle of copper oxide ore samples, the direct shear tests (ASTM D3080) were carried out at different leaching durations. Two sets of direct shear tests were performed using the leached samples of the Meydouk and Sarcheshmeh mines of Kerman province of Iran. The first set of experiments was conducted on the samples of both mines for a specific weight of 1.75 g/cm To investigate the effect of acid flow rate on the internal friction angle, acid flow rates were increased in additional column leaching tests for equivalent duration of one month. Then, the direct shear tests were performed on leached samples and the results were compared. Sulfuric acid leaching on the disintegration of particles was studied using slake durability index (based on Gamble's classification, 1 and 2 slake durability cycles) for leached and non-leached samples at different acid flow rates and leaching durations ( The results of the constant head permeability tests during a month leaching (Test A) are shown in The percentage of calcium was increased in the gravel sample during the leaching test by adding lime.   It seems that the increase of permeability at the beginning of the leaching test could be due to the movement of fine particles by acid seepage. Permeability was then reduced due to the formation of physical and chemical clogging. Also, the movement of fine particles from the leaching cell to the permeability cell due to acid flow would increase the clogging formation. In the leaching tests, fine insoluble particles could be formed due to chemical reactions. These particles would precipitate in inactive flow pathways where local flow rates are very small ( It was observed that by increasing the acid flow rate, chemical clogging can be decreased while physical clogging was increased. The color of the out-flowed liquid changed from green to brown, which could be due to decreasing the chemical reactions and increasing the particles movement. Chemical clogging decreased because the possibility of chemical reactions was reduced at higher flow rates. The precipitation of both the fine particles and the formed insoluble particles was decreased at higher flow rates. However, physical clogging was increased due to greater movement of fine ore particles. Clogging formation may be decreased or increased with the increasing acid flow rate. This depends on the summation of the physical clogging and the chemical clogging with increasing the flow rate. The reduction of particles percentage of in grain-size distribution curve during leaching could be due to physical movement and chemical and/or biological disintegrations. To assess the effects of fluid flow on the particles, the ratio of particle reduction ( The  The modified friction angles of Meydouk crushed copper oxide ores during sulfuric acid leaching were shown in It is concluded from Test E was used to study the effect of column height on the results of column leaching tests. Comparison between the results for different heights (  Considering the above results, the decrease of copper oxide ore’s friction angle with time due to sulfuric acid leaching should be taken into consideration to improve the accuracy of slope stability analyses. The slake durability indices were decreased after leaching in all the samples. These reductions were greater for higher leaching durations. The rate of reduction is related to the disintegration of particles. Greater reduction thus implies more disintegration of particles. The slake durability indices of leached samples with different acid flow rates in equivalent one month leaching were almost in the same range based on gamble’s classification ( In this paper, the effects of sulfuric acid leaching on the strength parameters of copper oxide ores particles and permeability of gravel were investigated. The heap leaching process was simulated with column leaching tests to obtain the leached samples in different leaching durations. The friction angle was reduced after increasing the flow rate compared to the pilot flow rate. The modification factor was introduced for friction angle of the leached ores at higher flow rates than the pilot rate. The slake durability index was almost constant after increasing the flow rate. It is possible to increase the flow rate and replace the equal leaching duration without any modification for determining the slake durability index. Overall physical and the chemical clogging processes may be decreased or increased with the flow rate and thus flow rate must be considered in clogging tests. Internal friction angle and slake durability indices of the tested ores were reduced by 25% during the leaching process. A time-dependent equation was obtained between the friction angle of the crushed copper oxide ores particle and the leaching duration. The friction angle reduction during leaching should be considered in the design of heap slopes in order to increase accuracy of design and safely considerations. Industrial heaps have a number of different layers of ore. Although these layers are similar in nature, they are under different leaching durations and their friction angles are thus different. This also should be considered in slope designing of industrial heaps. The final reduced friction angle can be used for all layers of heap in long-term slope stability analysis. The ratio of particle reduction ( The authors express sincere thanks to