Electric arc furnace dust is generated as a result of the remelting of automobile scrap in an electric arc furnace (EAF). Typically, the major metal values in the dust are zinc and iron, but numerous other metals can be present, some of which are hazardous. Recycling of the dust for metal recovery has a number of advantages and in this paper, the differential speciation of the metals via chlorosulphation was investigated. The process was simulated using a thermodynamic model, which was developed using the Equilibrium module of HSC Chemistry® 7.1. The effects of operating parameters, on the equilibrium compositions of the reaction products were determined and the optimum conditions were established. At a temperature of 800 °C, 95% of the zinc oxide was converted to gaseous zinc chloride, containing less than 1% iron. About 90% of the calcium oxide was converted to calcium sulphate and 98% of the iron could be retained as iron oxide. These thermodynamic results provide a framework for future experimental test work.Electric arc furnace dust is generated during the remelting of automobile scrap in an electric arc furnace (EAF). Typically, about one to two percent of the charge is converted into dust in the EAF steelmaking process (  Generally, three different options can be considered for dealing with the dust: (1) disposal, (2) recycling by incorporation into a material or a process and (3) recycling for the recovery of the metal values ( Numerous techniques have been proposed and tested for the recycling of electric arc furnace dust, but very few have been successful ( In pyrometallurgical processes, reactions are carried out at high temperatures under reducing or oxidizing conditions. The common reducing agents are: carbon (C), carbon monoxide (CO), hydrogen (H Potential oxidizing agents in pyrometallurgy are oxygen and chlorine, while sulfur can act as either a reducing agent or an oxidizing agent. Under somewhat reducing conditions, sulfidation has been explored as a method to convert some of the metals such as copper and nickel into sulfides, which can then be separated by incorporation into a matte phase ( Therefore, the purpose of the present research was to investigate the pyrometallurgical reaction of a typical electric arc furnace dust with a multicomponent gas containing sulphur dioxide, oxygen and chlorine. Under these conditions some of the metal oxides will be sulphated, while others will be chlorinated and still others will remain as unreacted metal oxides. This differential speciation can be utilized to advantage to facilitate separation during the process itself and also in subsequent processing and in this way, metals other than zinc can potentially be recovered. In this work, a thermodynamic model was developed using the Equilibrium program of HSC 7.1® ( To further understand the potential of the chlorosulphation process, a thermodynamic model was developed using the Equilibrium Composition module of HSC Chemistry 7.1® ( The elemental dust composition employed was as follows: 0.49% Al, 9.77% Ca, 1.21% Cu, 32.11% Fe, 1.91% Mg, 1.99% Mn, 0.65% Ni, 26.80% O, 3.47% Pb, 0.66% S, 1.60% Si, and 19.36% Zn. All of these elements were considered to be present as oxides, except copper and nickel, which were assumed to be present as sulphides (NiS and Cu To understand the reaction of the dust with multiple reagents such as chlorine and sulphur dioxide plus oxygen in the chlorosulphation process, it would be useful to first investigate the reaction of the dust with the individual reagents. In the chlorination only process, the major objective would be to convert the more valuable zinc, copper and nickel into volatile chlorides, and thus separate them from the remaining less valuable oxides. Both thermodynamic and experimental studies have been performed on the chlorination of pure zinc oxide and also the zinc oxide in electric furnace dust ( In the sulphation only process for electric arc furnace dust, the objective is to convert the valuable metals such as zinc and copper into metal sulphates, which can subsequently be separated by dissolution in aqueous solutions. Again, both thermodynamic and experimental results have been performed on the sulphation of pure zinc oxide and zinc oxide in electric arc furnace dust with conversions of about 95% ( These results demonstrate that in both the chlorination only and the sulphation only processes, the majority of the reagents are consumed by calcium to form calcium chloride and calcium sulphate, respectively. Therefore, although some zinc and copper chlorides and sulphates form, their amounts are limited. Also, for both reagents, there is minimal formation of either iron chloride or iron sulphate and the majority of the iron is retained as iron oxide. For these reasons it would be useful to investigate the simultaneous chlorination and sulphation of EAF dust, as in a chlorosulphation process. Additionally, since the thermodynamic results available for both chlorination only and sulphation only, are in general agreement with the experimental results available in the literature, then it would be predicted that the thermodynamic results for chlorosulphation would provide a good simulation of the actual process for EAF dust. Based on the above discussion, a preliminary overall reaction can be proposed for the chlorosulphation of electric arc furnace dust in a closed system as follows: where M = Zn, Cu or Ni and N = Ca, Mg or Mn. Here, zinc, copper and nickel are converted to their respective gaseous chlorides, while calcium, magnesium and manganese are converted to their respective sulphates. Theoretically, the hematite remains unreacted. Based on the present dust analysis and this overall reaction, the stoichiometric requirements for sulphur dioxide, oxygen and chlorine would be 0.360 kmole/100 kg of dust, 0.180 kmole/100 kg of dust and 0.326 kmole/100 kg of dust, respectively. During the chlorosulphation process, the zinc oxide is converted to gaseous zinc chloride and can be separated. The calcium oxide is converted to calcium sulphate and the iron is retained as iron oxide, As a result of this differential speciation, separation of these and other species could be feasible in subsequent processes. Zinc, calcium and iron are the major components in the dust and are therefore of particular importance. In addition to zinc, the behaviours of the calcium-bearing and iron-bearing species are of significant importance. The behaviours of the iron-containing species are shown in Based on the above discussion it would be advantageous to achieve the following three objectives: (1) lower the optimum temperature for the formation of gaseous zinc chloride (2) increase the amount of zinc oxide converted to gaseous zinc chloride and (3) minimize the formation of gaseous iron chloride. The optimum temperature for the conversion of zinc oxide to gaseous zinc chloride is primarily determined by the partial pressure of the gaseous zinc chloride, which can be lowered by diluting the gas phase, for example by adding nitrogen or argon. In effect, this simulates an open system. It would be expected that of the various gaseous reagents added, the amount of chlorine should have a significant effect, since increasing amounts should promote the formation of gaseous zinc chloride. Since chlorine additions have a significant effect on the conversion of zinc oxide to zinc chloride and also on the formation of gaseous iron chlorides, then additional investigations were carried out. Also of importance is the behaviours of the gaseous iron chlorides, since any iron present in the gaseous zinc chloride would be considered as a contaminant. After chlorine, oxygen would be expected to have a significant effect on the conversion of zinc oxide to zinc chloride. To further investigate the effect of oxygen,  Iron is a contaminant in the zinc chloride and therefore it can be seen that a major factor of importance in the chlorosulphation process for EAF dust is the balance between the amount of gaseous zinc chloride formed and the amount of gaseous iron chloride formed. For a zinc recovery of 92%, the iron content of the dust is about 0.5%, while for a zinc recovery of about 95%, the iron content is about 1%. By choosing a limit for the amount of iron in the dust, then it is possible to determine the optimum conditions for zinc chloride formation and also the behaviours of the other species of interest such as copper and nickel can be delineated. Choosing the iron content of 1% and therefore a zinc recovery of 95%, the corresponding oxygen addition is 0.22 kmole/100 kg of dust, which is just slightly higher than the stoichiometric requirement of 0.18 kmole/100 kg of dust as given by Eq.    A number of alternative and lower cost reagents can be considered as reactants in the chlorosulphation process. Instead of pure chlorine, calcium chloride or magnesium chloride and also ferric chloride can be considered. However, in addition to providing chlorine, these reagents also bring additional calcium, magnesium or iron. Also, sulphur plus oxygen, or ferrous or ferric sulphates are potential substitutes for sulphur dioxide. For the case of the iron sulphates, additional iron is added to the system. Again a reaction can be utilized to describe the process, using as for example, calcium chloride and ferric sulphate as follows: As another example, the reaction of the dust with both ferric chloride and ferric sulphate can be considered as follows:  A thermodynamic model was developed for the chlorosulphation of electric arc furnace dust, using the equilibrium module of HSC Chemistry 7.1. For the stoichiometric requirements and in a closed system, 89% of the zinc oxide was converted to gaseous zinc chloride at 1200 °C, while the majority of the calcium, magnesium and manganese oxides were converted to sulphates. The majority of the iron could be retained as iron oxide. For a simulated open system, nitrogen additions lowered the reaction temperature and for a nitrogen addition of 8 kmole/100 kg of dust about 85% of the zinc oxide could be recovered as gaseous zinc chloride at 800 °C. The effects of the amounts of chlorine, oxygen, sulphur dioxide and oxygen plus sulphur dioxide were investigated. At 800 °C for chlorine additions above the stoichiometric, the zinc conversion increased. However, increasing chlorine was associated with increasing iron in the gaseous zinc chloride. On the other hand, for oxygen and sulphur dioxide additions both below and above the stoichiometric, the zinc conversion decreased. Increasing oxygen additions resulted in a decreasing iron content of the gaseous zinc chloride. For the stoichiometric requirements for sulphur dioxide and oxygen and at 800 °C, a superstoichiometric chlorine addition of 0.6 kmole/100 kg of dust and a nitrogen addition of 8 kmole/100 kg of dust, the zinc conversion was about 95% and the iron content of the gaseous zinc chloride was about 1%. Although a large proportion of the copper could be recovered as gaseous copper chloride with the gaseous zinc chloride, only a small amount of the nickel could be recovered as gaseous nickel chloride, due to the high stability of nickel ferrite. A number of alternative reagents were investigated such as calcium chloride, ferric chloride and ferric sulphate. In addition to providing sulphur dioxide, oxygen and chlorine, these reagents contained additional elements, which needed to be accounted for in terms of reagent consumption. In general, the results were similar to those for the pure gaseous reagents but the equilibrium was shifted somewhat because of the differing composition. The thermodynamic model predictions demonstrate that under the optimum conditions about 95% of the zinc oxide can be converted to gaseous zinc chloride, containing about 1% iron. Also about 95% of the iron can be retained as iron oxide and about 90% of the calcium oxide is converted into calcium sulphate. Thus, the zinc chloride is separated during the chlorosulphation process, while the differential speciation of the iron and calcium could facilitate subsequent separation. The author would like to thank the