Xanthates enhance the separation of valuable metals from minerals in hydrometallurgical processes. They degrade to structurally related decomposition products under the chemical and physical conditions in flotation processes, which minimizes the extraction recovery of metals. To monitor low quantities of the decomposition products, the flotation process requires sensitive, qualitative, or even quantitative controlling.
                  The goal of the present research was to develop a sensitive separation method for on-line monitoring of the degradation of collector chemicals in the waters of a gold concentrator plant. To that end, an on-line coupling of capillary electrophoresis with a pressure-assisted field-amplified sample injection (PA-FASI) was developed. The purpose of the overall system set-up was to fortify concentrations during sample introduction in order to study xanthates and thiocarbonate directly in flotation waters during the process. The system developed from these methods was reliable and reproducible, enabling detection of below 10mgL−1 quantities for ethyl and isobutyl xanthates as well as for isobutyl thiocarbonate.background electrolyte solution capillary electrophoresis limit of detection (ng limit of quantification (ng pressure-assisted field amplified sample injection ultraviolet ultraviolet–visible spectrophotometry Fourier transfer infrared spectroscopy nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy high performance liquid chromatography diisobutyldithiophosphate diisobutyldithiophosphinate ethyl perxanthate ethyl xanthyl thiosulfate ethyl xanthates isobutyl xanthates isobutyl perxanthate isobutyl (mono)thiocarbonate potassium ethyl xanthate ethyl thiocarbonate ammonium ethyl perxanthate tetrabutylammonium ethyl xanthyl thiosulfate Danafloat™ 507 3-(cyclohexylamino)propane-1-sulfonic acid photodiode array detector unknown compounds length of separation in capillary (m) total length of capillary (m) electrophoretic mobility of the species ion (m apparent mobility of the species ion (m electroosmotic mobility (m detection time of the species ion (min) detection time of the electroosmosis (min) applied electric voltage (V) Froth flotation improves the extractability of minerals. In aqueous processes, thiol collectors in particular are important flotation chemicals. They are additives, which improve metal extraction from, for example, sulfide minerals. In process waters, thiol collectors are the chemicals used for selectively separating hydrophobic minerals from hydrophilic ones. Xanthates, dithiophosphates, and dithiocarbamates are different classes of thiol collectors, each compound forming different surface products on different minerals ( However, in mineral processing systems, xanthates tend to decompose and to produce different types of degradation products, which may in turn decrease the xanthate concentration. The degradation thus decreases the recovery of metal extraction and disturbs the process productivity ( According to the literature, the most popular technique used in the determination of xanthates has been ultraviolet/visible/infrared spectrophotometry (UV/VIS) In previous years, capillary electrophoresis (CE) was used for various purposes, such as for the determination of metals without complex formation and for the quantification of inorganic compounds in environmental waters and food ( Only two articles have been published which describe the use of CE in analyses of flotation chemicals; In the present study, we focused our research on the monitoring of the decomposition products of ethyl xanthate – especially ethyl thiocarbonate, ethyl perxanthate, and ethyl xanthyl thiosulfate – by using CE coupled with an UV/VIS spectrophotometer. The method was thereby optimized and implemented without any sample preparation for the various types of process waters generated at a concentrator plant. Then, the monitoring system required a new sample introduction technique, which was based on PA-FASI. The optimized method was applied to the flotation water monitoring of a gold concentrator plant. Potassium ethyl xanthate (KEX, purity 85%, CH The chemical 3-(cyclohexylamino)propane-1-sulfonic acid (CAPS, purity >98%), used for the preparation of the electrolyte solution, was obtained from Sigma–Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). The pH adjustment was made with sodium hydroxide, which was prepared from NaOH pellets (purity >99%, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). Pure water was prepared from distilled water by using Elga Centra R 60/120 (from Elga Veolia Water Solutions, Marlow, UK). The capillary electrophoresis separations were made with a background electrolyte solution (BGE) of 60 The xanthates and thiocarbonate were analyzed using a Beckman Coulter P/ACE MDQ (Fullerton, CA, USA) capillary electrophoresis instrument. Detection was done with a photodiode array detector (PDA) at 214, 225, and 301 The CE separation method was validated using the initial data from the published method ( Firstly, to optimize the CE separation method for laboratory-scale mode, the water samples from the process were collected from the thickener overflow and from the tailings pond at the concentrator plant (Vammala, Finland). The samples were filtered with hand-operated 45 Secondly, the actual samples came from the gold concentrator plant (owned by Dragon Mining, Sastamala, Finland). The ore for gold processing originates from both the Orivesi (Finland) and the Jokisivu (Finland) mines. The ores are periodically processed in the concentrator in separate cycles. The sampling and measurements were collected between June 18 and 20, 2013, when the Orivesi ore was treated at the plant. At the beginning of the industrial flotation process, the ore is crushed, grounded, and floated in rougher and scavenger flotation stages. After thickening and filtration, the gold concentrates are collected for further treatment. The flotation reagents are added to the cyclone feed hopper ( The samples of the present research were collected from ten different sites of the process. These were the cyclone underflow, cyclone overflow, rougher concentrate, scavenger concentrate, thickener overflow, thickener underflow, filtrate, concentrate, tailings, and rod mill discharge. Later, when the chemical dosages for the rougher and the scavenger flotations were modified, several new samples were collected from both the rougher and the scavenger cells ( Sampling was done by personnel of the plant. The volume of the process waters for laboratory experiments was 1 The electrophoretic mobility ( Electrophoretic mobilities of the studied species were identified by using ethyl xanthate (EX) as the migration index marker. All the results were calculated with at least six replicates and three repetitions. Ethyl xanthate and its accompanying detected degradation products were identified separately with the optimized capillary electrophoresis method. All the decomposition species were detected in one CE analysis. The results showed that ethyl thiocarbonate could be monitored with high reliability, because its identification and detection were undisturbed by the flotation waters of the sulfide ores. However, the studies indicated that ethyl thiocarbonate was not as stable in aqueous solutions as in the solid products. Fresh stock solutions were thus frequently prepared to prevent degradation. Furthermore, ethyl perxanthate was the other somewhat stable compound: it was stable in process waters containing the chemicals and the ore, but was labile in pure water. It decomposed in its solid form in less than a week but was stable in water solutions for several weeks. Thus, after being freshly synthesized and washed, it was dissolved into water. Ethyl xanthyl thiosulphate was suitable for capillary electrophoresis analyses when dissolved in acetone rather than in hydrophobic diethyl ether ( The xanthates and xanthate degradation products were analyzed by means of simultaneous concurrent signal monitoring at 214, 225, and 301 The results showed that ethyl thiocarbonate was detected as one signal at wavelengths of 214 and 225 The separation of ethyl xanthate and its decomposition products was studied in the process product mixtures. The compounds were detected in the order of ethyl xanthyl thiosulfate, ethyl perxanthate, and ethyl xanthate. Ethyl thiocarbonate ( Ethyl xanthates were used at concentrations of 1–5 The sample matrix content varied among sampling locations, but the changes did not impact the repeatability of the developed method. Therefore, the CE method developed with real process waters could also be applied to fresh waters from various process sites. Isobutyl xanthate was the collector chemical employed in the real process at the gold plant. Because selectivity and sensitivity were validated with the ethyl substitutes, the system featured optimal adjustment for the ethyl series chemicals. The decomposition products of isobutyl xanthate were thus also identified alongside those of ethyl xanthate, because the functional groups are identical, and the detection signal correlated similarly with the concentration changes when they were identified in the process samples. The ethyl xanthate and its decomposition products in the plant were evaluated based on the experiments performed in the laboratory. In The tailings and cyclone waters contained all the studied compounds ( From the separation profiles, one unknown compound (UK 2) could be identified in all process samples by using the peak mobility and retention time. UK 2 emanated a high intensity at 225 The occurrence of xanthates and their degradation products at different process sites was compared to the occurrence of isobutyl thiocarbonate, chosen as the reference component because it was present in all the waters in detectable amounts ( The dosage amount and timing of the xanthate influenced the detection of the degradation products in the process waters. The xanthate was tested from the rougher and the scavenger concentrates after the dosing ( Xanthates tend to degrade into various degradation products during the flotation process. These products may have multiple harmful effects on the flotation results. Detection and identification of the degradation products are crucial to a better understanding of the flotation process. Capillary electrophoresis demonstrated excellent suitability for the separating and monitoring of xanthate and its degradation products in the process waters of a gold concentrator plant. Simultaneously, in the real-time processes, CE was suitable for the detection of other soluble chemicals, such as collectors, with high accuracy and repeatability. The authors would like to thank Outotec for financing this study. Dragon Mining Ltd is gratefully acknowledged for providing the opportunity to study the method used in this study at the Vammala Gold Concentrator Plant (Vammala, Finland) and for sending their process waters to support method development.